They say space is the future, out among the
countless billions and billions of new worlds
in our galaxy, but a journey needs a path
or road, so what sort of roads will we build
in space?
Underneath almost every house or building,
humble or grand, is a foundation and often
a driveway to a road, power lines, water lines,
sewer, telephone, cable, internet, and more.
There are roads and rails, highways, airports
and train stations, pipelines and high voltage
cables, cell phone and Wi-Fi networks.
Sea ports, water treatment facilities, power
plants, hospitals, schools, police and fire
stations, banks and ATMs, mints and now even
crypto mines, parks and walkways, software
updates, hiking and biking trails, and so
many more.
These are but a sample of the infrastructure
that our civilization on this planet runs
on, and I thought we would ask what that looks
like at the interplanetary scale, as our civilization
spreads out to the other major planets, moons,
and millions of minor planets and asteroids
orbiting our shared Sun.
At the core, infrastructure is the facilities
or systems that serve some place, be it a
tiny village or a whole country, and which
are needed for its economy, homes, people,
groups, and businesses to function, or at
least to function as they are.
We can obviously function without the internet,
I still remember a time before it and am only
42, but it’s hard to imagine our civilization
functioning without it anymore and I don’t
think it really would be the current civilization
without it.
Maintaining the internet or platforms like
wikipedia or youtube in space would be no
mean feat, but it would be just as vital as
now, and includes whole new problems.
One of the ironies of space is that this era
of instant communication is likely to be a
short-lived period, unless we find some method
of communicating faster than light, which
is in contradiction to our current understanding
of physics.
In such a case, as the volume of inhabited
space increases, we might return to an earlier
era where messages were carried by ships and
a response would take several weeks.
Fortunately, everything in this solar system
is still inside contact times shorter than
what was routine in most nations prior to
modern telecommunications.
The basic ability to pass information between
people and groups is perhaps the most foundational
aspect of infrastructure, and so we can imagine
the whole solar system being knit together
to one degree or another, much as Earth has
been in recent centuries, though hopefully
more peacefully, respectfully, and productively
than has often been the case.
This would not seem as much an option at the
interstellar scale, let alone at the galactic
level, and we may contemplate those scenarios
more another day but it’s beyond our current
scope.
It is also impossible to detail every bit
of infrastructure we have now on Earth, even
briefly, in a single episode, let alone everything
a new interplanetary civilization might need,
but our goal today is to talk about some of
the more unique, vital, or interesting ones.
Some may never come to pass, some might only
exist far ahead in time or only now for a
century or two before being primarily replaced
by something better, much as canals are mostly
a thing of the past.
For instance we may one day build enormous
tethers directly connecting huge orbital rings
along planetary orbital paths to allow direct
physical travel on a train between planets.
More on that later, but something like that
would come long after more simple approaches
such as the Aldrin Cycler, a large space station
or even converted asteroid that orbits on
a path that routinely takes it past two planets,
like Earth and Mars, allowing transport between
them by hitchhiking along.
So, today we’ll be contemplating everything
from simple early systems like the Hohmann
Transfer Cosmic Train Schedule to swarms of
constructs so big they would dwarf the Earth
itself, and to do that in a single episode,
we’ll often reference other episodes we’ve
done like the Megastructure Compendium where
we discussed a given structure in more detail,
some of which eclipse entire stars or solar
systems in scope.
And if those sound like fun, make sure to
check them out afterward and hit the like
and subscribe buttons for alerts when more
mind-bending content like them comes out.
Now, there are a lot of ways to view infrastructure
but we probably ought to start with the basic
ones for getting us off Earth or other high-gravity
planets and sadly that’s probably not rockets,
cool though they are.
If you’re looking to move millions of people
to orbit and back every single day, and millions
of tons of cargo, thousands of ships slamming
through the air at hypersonic speeds is not
your optimal way to do that.
Rather that’s where concepts like space
elevators and orbital or tethered rings come
into play, or mass drivers or skyhooks or
rotovators or launch loops.
Now, we have detailed all of these in either
our upward bound series or megastructures,
with most having their own dedicated episode,
so we will just summarize operation and role
for now.
The Space Elevator is the most commonly known
megastructure for getting into space and it
is a very long tether, tens of thousands of
miles or kilometers long, and it not only
gets you up to orbital space but whirring
around at orbital speeds, or even above it
at highest altitudes.
Contrary to their common portrayal, it is
not necessary to have a space elevator leave
from the equator, assuming you instead have
multiple tethers meet up from both hemispheres
at the same station or waypoint that itself
is over the equator.
This is handy as the amount of traffic they
can handle at the same time is very limited
by tether strength and it is a very long journey
to Geosynchronous orbit or higher.
This also means one could leave directly from
a city, rather than an equatorial port.
As the vehicles climbing them are not rockets,
they also could be departing direct from cities
without noise or damage issues – they could
easily include a parachute in case they fell
off.
The same is true of climbers on the elevator
cables up to an orbital ring.
This would allow you to skip the journey of
tens of thousands of kilometers to GEO altitudes
in favor of a journey of just hundreds of
kilometers to LEO altitudes.
You are not at orbital speed when you reach
the top of the elevator, just at orbital altitude,
but you can then launch from there by using
a mass driver, circumventing the atmospheric
drag or need for a large rocket, and saving
vast amounts of money.
A Tethered Ring would be at an even lower
altitude - just tens of kilometers above the
earth’s surface.
With a Tethered Ring the mass driver for space
launch is installed on the ground and the
ring supports an evacuated tube that vehicles
travel through to avoid air drag issues within
the densest part of the atmosphere.
With all of these approaches, the Mass Drivers
tend to operate on the same fundamental premise,
we use a long track to accelerate the vehicle
up to orbital velocities electromagnetically.
When launching from a planet with an atmosphere,
like Earth, we either install the entire mass
driver above the atmosphere (as is the case
for Orbital Rings or Lofstrom Loops) or we
install the mass driver on the ground and
use the active structure to support an evacuated
tube (as is the case for the Tethered Ring,
or one supported by space towers).
We’ve discussed many variations of these
systems and others like spaceplanes, along
with their science and pros and cons, in other
episodes, again principally in our Upward
Bound series, but it always comes back to
a simple paradigm.
Rockets are your covered wagons for reaching
the frontier, once you have and are building
that frontier up, that’s when you start
getting in to space in your equivalent of
freeways and railroads.
I’m most partial to tether-based systems
and inertially supported active structures,
in particular, as they require no new science
or materials, though better magnetic shielding,
energy production, or superconductors sure
help.
They allow a tether of mundane carbon fiber
or Kevlar or several other strong substances
to drop down, or at an angle, to potentially
any city or airport on the planet and for
a conventional, though airtight, tram-like
car to run up that tether – or multiple
tethers for redundancy – to the ring in
the upper atmosphere.
That ring is held up by seeming magic, but
in fact it’s the mundane physics of active
support and conservation of momentum for Orbital
Rings or the Tethered Ring.
The Tethered ring, which seemingly paradoxically
hangs itself in the air from the ground, feels
like magic on first glance too, but this is
no different than a guy wire to a tower but
works because the planet is a sphere.
In both cases a ring can be placed at many
locations, not just the equator, but the equator
is easier for an orbital ring.
Cables, or “Jacobs Ladders” (as Paul Birch
referred to them) down to the ground can anchor
it against precession, allowing us to tilt
the thing to run on a path over any two spots
on Earth we feel like, and all that’s between
them, and near them too since we can also
put tram lines out to the sides to run down
at an angle, allowing one ring to service
a wide ribbon of land around the planet.
Another ring just a few hundred feet high
or lower can cross the first, connect by a
cable to it, and service a different ribbon-ring
of the Earth at a different angle, and more
rings can be added as need until you have
fast space access from any place on the planet,
and from any point on the planet to another.
They are very sturdy cables.
You can run a power cord along those to a
groundside reactor, or have solar panels hanging
off the side, or maybe even beam energy in
from space-based solar satellites.
That energy powers the climbers, which may
move at whatever speed they like up the tether
for a trip of tens of miles or kilometers.
I’d imagine they would speed up after getting
away from cities and above local landscape
and air traffic, but likely would not exceed
Mach 1, just to minimize engineering issues
and local noise problems.
So, you might spend 10 or 20 minutes getting
to the ring.
Once there you can essentially travel along
the ring in the vacuum of space to reach a
destination halfway around the planet in under
an hour.
Note that Transit on a Tethered Ring transit
system would be slower that an Orbital Ring
transit system, since you would be traveling
at subsonic speeds through a high-altitude
helium or a hydrogen filled tube.
But since the speed of sound in low-pressure
helium is around 3500 km/h, and for hydrogen
it’s 4500 km/h, you would still be able
to travel at 3-4 times the speed of air travel
today.
On an orbital ring it's limited only by the
acceleration people are comfortable with,
which includes the centrifugal force of turning
around the planet.
It’s hard to say what your time to the local
station would be or from your terminus station
to your final destination, or transfer times
at each layover, but it makes a very plausible
case for transfer from any spot on the planet
to another, door to door, in only a few hours.
Cheaply too, for a person or for cargo.
That’s what’s awesome about these ideas,
not just their space launching capacity, allowing
millions of people and millions of tons of
cargo to move to and from orbit every day
and cheaply, but potentially allowing millions
or billions of people and tons of cargo to
move around the planet in a fraction of a
day for a fraction of modern costs.
As part of our interplanetary infrastructure,
these systems also offer massive economic
boons to the planet, ours or any we settle,
and that’s why I like them, along with cheap
orbital launch requiring no new science.
It’s much easier to fund, build, improve,
and maintain a space launcher that also has
vast and direct benefits to us down here on
Earth.
You leave LA and are in London or Tokyo 2
hours later to visit the family for the weekend
or attend a business trip.
You can live in New York City and commute
half an hour to the orbital ring in space
you work at each day, and still be home in
time for dinner.
Ultra-safe, ultra-reliable, ultra-cheap.
On already airless worlds, which is most of
them, such transport systems are much easier
to install.
Indeed, most airless worlds have very low
gravity and they are easy to burrow through
or build tall structures up from.
And yet, it is likely going to be a long while
before we can build these structures.
Some new asteroid mine or dome on Mars is
unlikely to have the people and resources
to justify a lot of infrastructure of this
type.
That said, we should be mindful that our own
enormous modern infrastructure would be unimaginable
even a couple centuries ago.
When cobbling a road was something requiring
work gangs of dozens to make the bricks and
lay them for even a short stretch, having
a paved driveway to your own house was a mark
of extreme wealth that even most mansions
lacked.
Technology and automation makes it vastly
easier to create infrastructure, and so it
might not be that absurd to imagine an underground
vacuum tunnel directly to the average person’s
house in centuries to come.
And it’s certainly easier to do on airless
rocks with low gravity.
So too, transforming those rocks into vast
habitats where we have literally built everything
including the ground under our feet may not
be so difficult in a civilization with superior
automation and power production…
indeed they may not need to get much better
than we are right now, just a bit more practiced.
There are tens of millions of minor planets
in our solar system, ranging from rocks a
hundred meters across that might become a
village, or family space farm, to those which
dwarf even large nations and which might collectively
be transformed into far more living space
than what we have on Earth.
In early days on Earth, humans tended to take
advantage of local natural shelter like caves,
and built homes later, and Earth itself is
like that, a handy but not terribly efficient
use of mass for living space.
A given mountain might have enough caves to
let many hundreds shelter during bad weather
or cold seasons and even be expanded to house
thousands by digging them out, but you could
take that same rock and build untold millions
of homes.
In this same way, asteroids and smaller moons
can be turned into huge amounts of artificial
living habitats, such as O’Neill Cylinders,
and other pieces of infrastructure like extensive
solar collectors or titanic orbital industries.
Many an asteroid, essentially a lifeless mountain-sized
rock floating in space, may get its beginning
as an asteroid mine and use its income over
many decades or centuries to transform that
lifeless rock into a small nation with a more
diverse economy.
But what about travel between all those rocks?
Here we have a number of possible options
that range between your covered wagon and
your airport or freeway.
You might one day need or have the resources
for something ultra-fast, but earlier on you
start simple and low energy, and in many cases
will keep to that, much as our own biggest
shipping vessels carrying non-spoilable goods
like metal ore or oil tend to move not much
quicker than old sailing ships, in an era
where supersonic travel is possible.
The Hohmann Transfer is an example of a very
low energy and slow move – at least by interplanetary
terms – that we use nowadays to get spacecraft
from point A to point B, and it never looks
at all like the straight line we usually think
of as the quickest way between two places.
Everything orbiting the Sun does so at a specific
speed and energy and the further from the
Sun you are, the slower you orbit, both in
terms of your raw speed and, since your orbital
path is much wider, the period it takes you
to get there.
For instance, Mars is about 154% further from
the Sun than Earth is, and moves at 81% of
Earth’s speed around the sun, 15 miles per
second instead of 18.5.
As a result, it must cover 154% of the distance
around the Sun while doing it at 81% of the
speed, this results in a year of 188% longer
than our own.
But it also means something leaving Earth,
while it will lose speed moving away from
the Sun’s gravity, needs to be moving at
the right speed to reach Mars but also not
so fast as to need to burn much fuel to enter
an orbit of Mars.
That spacecraft will also accelerate as it
approaches that planet, pulled on by that
gravity, so your range of speeds to avoid
flying right past that planet and slingshotting
off at a new direction rather than entering
orbit is smaller than one might think.
This is true of essentially every cosmic body
we want to send spacecraft to.
It is even harder in the case of asteroids
because they have so little gravity.
Little fuel is needed to escape from them,
but entering orbit around one requires extreme
patience and precision.
However, every planet or minor planet has
optimal launch windows that allow for patient
and minimal fuel use to get to them.
There are usually a few options too, depending
on how much fuel you’re willing to burn.
The most fuel efficient is called the Hohmann
Transfer Orbit and in the case of Mars, it
is 517 days in orbit, half spent traveling
there for 259 days.
Travel between Earth and every other object,
and also between those other objects to each
other is possible and in general we call this
the cosmic train schedule.
We can also aid some journeys by traveling
to other planets first in multiple steps and
slingshots, and potentially aiding these with
various megastructures like rotavators or
mass drivers or energy or particle beams.
But this is how we travel now, or sometimes
using one of the slightly higher fuel burn
options.
Getting to Mars with people is a rations and
radiation issue, so speed matters.
There are options for traveling to Mars faster
at different paths and speeds, they tend to
require more fuel or different types of prototype
engines.
But one handy thing about planets with atmospheres
is that you can aerobrake away excess speed
on arrival, so you don’t necessarily need
to burn fuel both up and down from your cruising
speed.
It is very likely that some asteroid mine
in the Belt may have to wait for good windows
to ship ore and metals to Earth.
They might find a slow, low-fuel option to
be profitable even with faster options available.
After all, does it matter if you’re mining
for centuries at a steady and expected rate
and shipping metal back to a commodity market
that can easily forecast demand and uses most
of that demand for titanic structures that
probably take decades to build?
One slightly superior option is to either
build a large space station or find a small
near Earth asteroid and nudge it onto a more
elliptical orbit that regularly passes by
your two objects.
In the case of Earth and Mars, and the basic
Aldrin Cycler, this is typically a bit over
a two year orbit that permits a Earth to Mars
trip of 146 days and the same on the way back.
Much of that time in between each leg is spent
out further past Mars.
We can arrange similar cyclers to other bodies
too, like Earth to Jupiter or Mars to Venus
and so on.
It’s not hard to imagine these sorts of
cycler craft, potentially several to the same
destinations on different schedules, serving
a major infrastructure role, even in energy
abundant interplanetary civilizations.
In theory you can get to Mars in mere days
with sufficient energy, and pretty much anywhere
in the solar system in a few weeks, by accelerating
at 1 gee, and flipping over at the half point
to decelerate - turn and burn maneuvers as
it is sometimes called.
This is popular in sci-fi, but in practice
it is hard to imagine anyone being that wasteful
with fuel, and moreover that’s not a limit
since you could accelerate at a higher rate.
It would just be uncomfortable for most humans,
and unhealthy if you went too high.
Infrastructure such as large propulsive lasers,
or energy beams, that reflect off ships’
light sails, or power relativistic ion drives,
might allow economical travel around the solar
system at speeds an order of magnitude higher
than planetary orbital speeds, which means
travel paths closer to straight lines and
journey times of weeks or months rather than
years or decades.
We can also skip on rocket fuel and launch
at very high speeds from larger orbital rings
or very long linear accelerators like a mass
driver.
One built out beyond Geosynchronous altitudes
could launch ships at those sorts of speeds
too, though slowing down at the other end
probably could not be accomplished by landing
on such a strip.
Shooting a bullet down a barrel is a lot easier
than catching one in a barrel, even if technically
possible.
There is a standing concern on whether an
accelerator like this can switch its electromagnets
fast enough to push it at the higher speeds,
but my friend Phil Swan from the Atlantis
Project came up with a neat solution of using
turning screw shafts down the length as opposed
to using the normal switching system, and
as best as he, I or anyone else I know who's
looked at it can tell, it seems to circumvent
that problem.
If you’d like the details, I’ll link to
his presentation on the topic, and his channel,
Space Infrastructure, discusses many of the
ideas in greater depth.
Phil, incidentally, came up with the Tethered
Ring design and ran the new Interplanetary
Infrastructure Session that inspired this
episode at our most recent International Space
Development Conference hosted by the National
Space Society.
Space is big and needs big ideas from smart
folks to tackle it.
Conferences, like the ISDC, are great places
for people to share and discuss them, and
it’s a very great honor to be serving as
the National Space Society’s president.
Just like getting to run this show and our
social media forums and helping to introduce
these ideas to others who might one day help
make them.
I know they can seem enormous and unbelievable
at times, like towers taller than freeways
are long or giant rings that hold themselves
in the sky, and some might turnout to be impractical,
but I never cease to be impressed by what
people come up with and how often we make
those dreams a reality.
Some of those dreams come from conferences
like the ISDC, some from online forums like
the ones we have on facebook, reddit, and
discord, and it’s inspiring to see so many
of them.
In the long term we might even build orbital
rings of various diameters around the Sun.
We could travel between them on cables that
resemble the spokes on a bicycle wheel.
But the ends of these spokes would not be
directly attached to the rings but would instead
couple magnetically to them and glide over
them.
A system comprising hundreds of rings built
about a million kilometers apart, all interconnected
with free-floating spokes, and outfitted with
lots of maglev tracks and mass drivers, might
become the interplanetary equivalent of a
terrestrial interstate highway system.
Vehicles could race up from Earth’s surface,
out to a ring, up a tether, to another ring,
and out and over, and over, until coming to
a stop on Mars, or Jupiter or Venus or even
Pluto.
A sufficiently advanced civilization, even
without FTL, probably has some very high-speed
options available if they’re transhuman
or post-biological, like beaming over a copy
of someone’s brain at light speed or whole
data copy of their body, although probably
very compressed.
That’s something we discussed more in our
episode on Teleportation.
But speaking of beaming, I think this becomes
a more dominant part of system infrastructure
as you get bigger.
You have the whole Sun’s power output to
work with, trillions of times what we currently
use, not to mention managing its waste heat
and moving it around to where it’s needed.
Spacehabs are likely to have their own constellations
of sunlight collectors and pushing beams,
to facilitate slowing or speeding ships visiting
them, and to power their own industry, agriculture,
and civilization.
Very complex networks, which may require complex
coordination too, may exist throughout the
solar system for beaming energy and pushing
ships around safely and efficiently.
Same for information.
They may also need individual archives or
libraries, on every habitat, or share them
with neighbors, or have a mix, storing some
websites locally and others further away at
bigger nodes.
We do have the option of moving a lot of power
and communication around this solar system,
and potentially finding ourselves having to
lay physical cables down like fiber optics
just to avoid having the solar system flooded
with comm traffic and power transmission.
In the short-term though, one thing we have
to keep in mind is that simple size is not
a very good indicator of effort to build.
A solar collector the size of this planet
might mass a lot less than a single mountain
or minor asteroid, being so thin.
And so too would a solar shade or mirror that
blocked or reflected sunlight.
For that matter, you can also use power beams
for terraforming efforts.
But for scale, we should also keep in mind
that in the future a lot of production might
be about designing an object then having machines
build it, so that complexity matters more
than size.
Indeed for many things this is already true,
and it lets us contemplate planet-sized projects.
I think it is very likely that places like
Mars and Venus will adjust their temperatures
by having large numbers of such mirrors or
shades either in orbit or at their LaGrange
points, and you can also use this to artificially
alter apparent day length.
That’s handy on a place like Venus or Mercury
where the sunrise is something that happens
every several months, not every day.
These sorts of ultra-thin shades or mirrors
allow us to terraform even super-hot planets
or concentrate sunlight to warm even planets
so cold air turns into a liquid.
But perhaps more importantly, those Lagrange
Points become major locations of Infrastructure
as the solar system grows.
Especially the L1 and L2 points.
For any two orbiting bodies, like the Moon
and Earth or Earth and Sun, there’s a point
directly between them, usually much closer
to the smaller of the pair, where the gravity
of that smaller body decreases the pull of
the larger one just enough to make a spot
where the orbital period is the same as the
smaller body has.
Normally the closer to the Sun you are, and
the greater the Sun’s gravity, the faster
your orbital period must be, but right there
at the L1 point it’s just a little diminished
to be just right to lag behind and travel
with Earth.
On the other side of Earth you have the L2,
where Earth’s gravity combines with the
Sun to make gravity there just a bit stronger,
resulting in a faster orbital period, and
one that keeps up with Earth.
These are a bit under a million miles from
Earth toward or away from the Sun, or 1.5
million kilometers.
These are not points of no gravity, just diminished
or increased gravity in one direction, the
Earth opposing or lining up.
Something similar happens at L4 and L5, which
each form an equilateral triangle with Earth
and the Sun, 60 degrees ahead or behind us
in orbit.
L3 is on the exact opposite side of the Earth
from the Sun, 180 degrees ahead in orbit,
sometimes called the Counter Earth location.
All these points are very handy locations
for infrastructure, like those designed to
bring in energy or manage incoming sunlight,
or are just handy for staying near Earth.
None of these are stable, requiring station
keeping, and every two-body system has them,
some more stable than others.
L4 and L5 for instance are places that should
orbit just like Earth, as should anything
on that path, but if we put something at,
say, 30 degrees out from Earth, not 60, it
would be tugged ever so slightly toward Earth
until eventually falling into it.
It does not take much to stop that though,
and a secondary effect of various mirrors
and shades and power collectors is that they
do act like solar sails, a simple and weak
but effective means of moving a ship or providing
station keeping for a large station or habitat.
That means we can put a lot of things in this
area, expanding out from Earth and those L4
and L5 spots, and you can connect those together
with physical tethers to not only provide
easy transport, power, and data lines, but
also to balance out the tugging forces to
need even less net station keeping.
You might keep doing this until you end up
with a ring of stations all around Earth’s
orbital path, even as Earth’s own orbital
region and Cislunar space filled up with large
space habitats, providing land and living
space, and farms and ecological preserves,
tens of thousands of times more than earth
has now.
We sometimes call this a planet swarm, as
opposed to a Dyson Swarm, a vast collection
of habitats near a planet that are something
like its suburbs, and you might construct
a direct physical tether out from this to
all those habitats or space farms and solar
collectors that were forming on Earth’s
orbital path, potentially forming what we
nickname a Terran Ring, a huge ring or torus
of megastructures around the Sun that rotate
with our planet, and which it along with its
swarm of habitats look like some gemstone
on that ring.
All of the places could be physically connected,
under known science, running power and data
or people and cargo on vast trunk lines dwarfing
any highway we’ve ever built, and potentially
home to quadrillions, none of whom feel cramped
as it would have a far lower population density
than modern Earth.
This may be the natural in-between state that
forms between an early space faring civilization
and an eventual Dyson Swarm encompassing that
whole star and reaching the end of what I
think the term Interplanetary Infrastructure
could contemplate.
A civilization already so immense, if still
small compared to a Dyson Swarm, that it would
need to keep whole oceans moving through its
cisterns to drink, and ships the size of cities
or railroad trains as long as continents to
move its cargo around.
And if it’s hard for us to contemplate infrastructure
at such a scale, and how impressive it is,
it is almost impossible to imagine what feats
and wonders the civilization built upon it
might accomplish.
To build all those enormous pieces of Interplanetary
Infrastructure we discussed today will require
vast amounts of raw materials and ideally
we would like to harvest those from Asteroids,
and while we’ve discussed that process before,
I thought it would be interesting to explore
the life of an Asteroid Miner, to ask what
that would be like and what folks might be
motivated to that career.
That’s out now exclusively on Nebula, our
Streaming Service, where we release a lot
of Bonus Content, extra episodes and extended
editions, and where every regular episode
of the show also comes out ad free and a few
days early.
By signing up for Nebula at https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
and using code isaacarthur you get access
to bonus content like Life as An Asteroid
Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters,
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will, Conformal
Cyclic Cosmology, Colonizing Binary Stars,
and more.
Using my link and discount it’s available
now for just over $2.50 a month, less than
the price of the drink or snack you might
have been enjoying during the episode.
However, this month, September 2023, you can
also get a lifetime membership to Nebula,
for as long as both you and Nebula exist,
for $300.
Which goes to developing more and bigger Nebula
Originals and platform improvement, and if
you sign up using my code, isaacarthur, a
third of that goes directly to the channel,
and I’ll place the link for that option
in the description right under the normal
one.
Either way you join Nebula you get access
to all our content early and ad free, including
the audio only podcasts, and access to tons
of bonus content from our show and many other
amazing creators.
As I mentioned during the episode, the National
Space Society’s track on Interplanetary
Infrastructure at ISDC 2023 inspired me to
write this episode and particularly conversations
with Phil Swan, who ran that track and did
several of the tethered and orbital ring animations
we had up today, and if you’re interested
in learning more about that or playing with
the actual computer model those graphics came
from to build your own rings, you can learn
more at ProjectAtlantis.com
We talked about Megastructures a lot today
and I think that’s a very appropriate way
to end our 9th year here on Youtube, as our
first episode, Megastructures in Space, Science
& Science Fiction, came out on September 17th
of 2014, and we’ll be celebrating that 9th
Anniversary of SFIA this weekend in our Scifi
Sunday episode The Fermi Paradox: Fallen Empires,
where we’ll try to contemplate what the
ruins of ancient galactic empires and megastructures
might look if floating around the galaxy a
billion years later.
Then Thursday, September 21st, we’ll start
year 10 off by asking how we can mine atmospheres
like those on Venus or Titan, or even Gas
Giants and Stars.
After that we’ll close out the month with
our Livestream Q&A on Sunday, September 24th,
and then on the 28th we will have an exploration
of what traveling the galaxy as an adventurer
or lone wanderer will be like in Have Space
Suit - Will Travel.
Then we’ll jump into October to explain
what Vacuum and Zero Point Energy are, on
October 5th, and then we’ll have an episode
not on spaceships, but the factories that
will make them, on October 12th.
And to continue today’s topic of infrastructure
and industry in space, stay tuned for our
next Sci Fi Sunday, on October 15th, where
we’ll contemplate entire planets turned
into giant factories, in Forgeworlds & Industrial
Planets.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
