This episode is sponsored by Curiosity Stream
Maybe invading aliens won’t show up with
laser-guns blazing, but instead making an
offer we can’t refuse.
Almost as soon as alien life began showing
up in fiction, the notion of an alien invasion
came up too, which probably speaks volumes
about humanity’s mindset.
Of course caution of the unknown is a wise
idea and evolution encourages that, since
in general nature is not a friendly place.
Interestingly most early fiction assumed parallel
evolution, aliens who looked and acted a lot
like us, so it would make sense they might
have designs on our planet as a place to live
or conquer.
But as we’ve noted on the channel before,
even if there was some parallel or convergent
evolution, it’s not very likely they’d
be biologically similar to us enough to breed
with us or look just like us.
But evolution might drive them to have fairly
similar mindsets about many things.
It’s hard to be a technological civilization
if you aren’t curious by nature, and hard
to have a chance to have the stability and
numbers for a civilization that can in turn
develop technology if you aren’t fairly
aggressive and expansionist in some fashion.
This doesn’t necessarily mean you went around
murdering or conquering your neighbors, expansionism
might take on the form of actively pursuing
trade and peaceful unification, but it’s
hard to imagine an interstellar civilization
arising without such motives.
Treating humans as probably average, until
we know otherwise, you’d expect as many
to be more violent than us than the reverse.
But invasion isn’t necessarily violent,
nor would a civilization that abhors violence
necessarily hesitate to use it for specific
reasons.
But what would motivate an invasion?
The default answer is resources, because that’s
what motivated many human-on-human invasions.
But we can more or less rule that out as the
motive for aliens to invade us, because basic
physics and astronomy tell us there are easier
places to get raw materials from than Earth.
It is true that a resource-hungry civilization,
out to swarm every free system and ascend
the Kardashev scale, would consume the Earth
along with everything else in the Solar System.
But a civilization doing that would leave
very visible evidence that so far astronomers
haven’t spotted anywhere, and it would be
nearly impossible to miss.
We explore that topic in great detail in our
Dyson Dilemma 2.0 episode.
For our purposes today we’ll also rule out
global extermination, as any interstellar
species wanting to kill off rivals and not
caring if they wipe out biospheres in the
process can not only far more easily do that
without ever landing any forces on that planet,
but would have no reason to wait for evidence
of intelligence before doing so.
It would be so much easier to send probes
out regularly around the galaxy to do flybys
of probable life-bearing worlds and strike
as soon as you found one, or even just stay
at home and hunt for fertile worlds by telescope.
As we’ve noted before, exterminating a galaxy
is a fairly simple process if you’ve got
a decent head start.
So a plausible remaining motive for an invasion
is if Earth’s got something that isn’t
available elsewhere or is pretty rare.
We also need to ask why they want it and if
there’s any easier way to get it than an
invasion, and what sort of invasion would
work best.
For instance, imagine you’ve got a culture
that’s really into art.
Such a civilization might be very interested
in what Earth has to offer in that regard,
but unless they specifically have a big taste
for art made during crisis, like a war, attacking
us to take ours or encourage us to make more
would seem rather silly.
Particularly when they could just land and
acquire it peacefully, or even just covertly
sneak in to get copies or even the originals,
replacing them with fakes we probably wouldn’t
be able to tell were fakes.
Let me put a caveat on that though, since
we’re mentioning copies.
One obvious reason to smash a planet rather
than land troops is to suffer no casualties
of your own, but they quite probably would
not care about that.
Not only does interstellar travel imply access
to a huge power source that makes devastating
worlds rather easy, it generally also implies
access to technologies that let you circumvent
dying in battle.
Like very good automation or access to artificial
intelligence or mind uploading.
So they can probably land a factory on any
random asteroid in our solar system and prepare
an overwhelming ground invasion force there
on the spot, made up of intelligent war machines
they view as expendable, or who can be backed
up and copied if they don’t view them as
expendable.
You’re also not really going to care about
the energy and resources used down on the
ground.
It’s often tricky to really wrap one’s
mind around the sheer scale of an interstellar
civilization.
Even just in the classic space opera sense
of some empire with thousands of worlds under
its banner.
But when we contemplate it more realistically,
you’re talking about civilizations that
would probably be able to defeat us with just
a handful of people, and who probably outnumber
us by millions or billions or even trillions
to one.
They are going to have a whole range of options
available for achieving their mission, many
of which might be whole orders of magnitude
harder than some others, but which are all
so easy for them that they don’t care.
It’s like a billionaire off traveling to
see a place he’s considering building a
factory and deciding which diner or fast food
joint he’ll grab lunch at; even if he is
frugally minded, finding out that Place X
is 30% more expensive than Y for a hamburger
is a total irrelevancy to him.
It’s a little humbling to think of some
other civilization invading our planet and
considering it so easy that it’s a trivial
expense, but realistically if we tangled with
even a Kardashev 2 civilization right now,
one that’s merely full developed its own
home solar system into a Dyson Swarm, not
some sprawling galactic empire, they’d have
so much manpower that they’d have niche
jobs or obscure hobbies with more people performing
it than we had total population.
So not only does that mean a classic invasion
is very much on the table, it also means they’ve
got the kinds of resources on hand that could
supply a planetary invasion force as easily
as we could fund a small war memorial, something
that could also easily be crowdsourced.
I mentioned earlier the notion of an art-obsessed
culture invading for art, especially if they
liked art made under the influence of stressful
conditions like a war.
That might be a weird and rare trait for an
entire civilization to have, but it need not
be their entire civilization.
They could back an invasion merely from the
tiny portion of their population that was
into that style of art or some other uncommon
trait or cause, like a militant ecological
group that went around wiping out intelligent
species before they disrupted their ecology.
That said, it raises the question of what
the rest of that civilization is doing.
They probably don’t casually let small factions
of their civilization roam the galaxy wreaking
havoc, and other factions or bigger factions
might have first dibs on that planet.
Of course it is very hard to enforce law over
light years of distance, especially if you’re
limited to sub-light travel, which you probably
are.
If some colony ship left toward that planet’s
area under false pretenses or changed its
attitudes in transit, they can accomplish
their objective long before you hear about
it or can do anything.
We talked about the difficulty of dealing
with exactly that sort of problem in our Smug
Aliens episode, for cultures following some
parallel to the Star Trek Prime Directive
of non-interference in primitive civilizations.
Though it’s also worth noting that the reverse
is good motivation for an invasion, folks
who specifically believe in interfering with
primitive civilizations and conquer them for
their own good, because they engage in some
behavior the invaders view as morally repugnant.
We see that in many sci-fi stories too, alien
visitors who arrive to peacefully or forcefully
make us stop killing each other or other Earth
species or polluting our world.
More to the point though, most Earth Invasion
fiction tends to ignore that if you’ve got
one species near you, it means you ought to
have a ton more not much further away who
probably need to be factored into the equation.
Math would indicate that if you’ve got a
technological species arising within, say,
200 light years of Earth, than you ought to
have at least a hundred more within 1000 light
years, since that volume is 5 times wider
and contains 125 times as many stars and planets.
That’s a lot of potential allies and enemies
and feathers you probably don’t want to
ruffle, and even if your species arrive there
first and could get them under your thumb
or wipe them out, you’ll know the next layer
out will have even more such civilizations,
many forewarned of your intent, who also have
time lag on their side.
You will eventually reach a point where even
species who were just figuring out how to
bang rocks together to make fire when you
were launching your first spaceships now have
spaceships themselves, whereas your primary
research and development is so far behind
your expansion front that your tech and software
updates are tens of thousands of years old
before they get to your vanguard.
Go far enough in any direction and you’ll
run into an enemy as big and advanced as you,
since you’re invading through time, not
just space.
In this regard, all interstellar warfare is
an uphill battle for the aggressor, because
they are always running behind in time, and
everyone will always see them coming.
The further you travel from home, the more
likely you are to run into someone just as
old or older than you, and the longer someone
younger than you had to match your head start.
Particularly as the newest round of victims
have good motives to transmit everything they’ve
got in terms of technology, tactics, and intelligence
to your next potential victims, who can do
the same.
Back on Earth, everything is pretty two dimensional,
your potential enemies aren’t rising with
the cube of distance, and communication happens
pretty rapidly, yet it’s still rather hard
to play the eternal conqueror card for a host
of reasons, many of which will still be in
play in space.
Very few conflicts, especially nowadays, are
really one-on-one.
You’ve got interested third parties, internal
dissension, collaborators, and allies who
want to be on the winning side or who are
happy to kick the feet out from whoever is
winning, even if they dislike the other team
more.
You can’t just go invade your neighbors
without any consideration of what your other
neighbors or your own people will think of
it, nor employ any means necessary to achieve
the task.
Everybody is watching you and you can expect
the same to be true in space.
They might not find out what you did for a
century or two, but they’ll know.
Not even necessarily through telescopes either,
it might be common practice to have neutral
third parties hanging around trailing fleets
or watching borders, flat out daring those
they watch to try blinding their eyes and
to suffer the consequences.
This is another reason why we’d not expect
invasion to take on the classic form.
Once your official status with your neighbors
is “We take what we want from anyone we
can, screw your opinion”, you are in a very
bad spot diplomatically and militarily, because
you’ve just given different civilizations
who have little in common something big in
common, a cold and logical reason to beat
the snot out of you.
Even those who approve of that sort of bully-tactics
are likely to jump on you too, since they
approve of those sorts of bully-tactics.
Indeed, given the implied mindset of the aggressor
species, they’d probably be rather concerned
about what their own rivals at home would
do to them, now that they have an excuse.
None of this requires your own rivals or those
other civilizations to care about Earth at
all, but odds are a good many of them would,
and adding some flyspeck of a planet to your
empire of a million suns probably isn’t
worth it.
You are always going to know, with mathematical
certainty, that no matter what you do, you
will eventually end up surrounded on every
side by an equal or superior force, if you
follow that path.
Even faster than light travel probably won’t
help, though a time machine might.
But again, there are many ways to invade,
many of which might be less likely to provoke
responses from third parties.
Just as an example, if one of your border
colonies or some rogue faction invaded Earth,
you could step in with loud apologies and
point out that it took you centuries to find
out and act, and at this point you couldn’t
really punish the original aggressors or easily
disentangle them from their conquest, so you
sent in your own occupation force to sort
things out and the new hybrid civilization
there wants you to stay and wants to be in
your empire.
Obviously you can’t play that card over
and over again, since you may take as a given
that all your neighbors have large brains
and long records.
Even if you’re constantly changing tactics,
the simple fact that you keep growing your
borders is going to eventually get you accused
of that.
But if you are expanding by a hybrid route,
basically inviting new civilizations to join
your empire, that’s a lot less likely to
provoke a militant response from everyone
else.
It still could though.
Let’s imagine one way of doing that.
I show up to new system and say hello and
offer them technology and assistance in exchange
for something worthless to them, or outright
valuable to them to begin with.
I might request ownership or extended lease
on an asteroid and permission to reposition
it near Earth, to serve as a spaceport and
embassy, and slowly entangle myself with their
economy and culture by offering advisors and
experts and to train their people too.
That’s not exactly nefarious, though you
could easily go that route.
Imagine you offer to upgrade their communication
systems and then offer communication devices,
with which you brainwash them all.
Heck there’s a good chance if you have that
technology you already used it on your own
population, but your various neighbors might
too, to one degree or another, as brainwashing
comes in a lot of flavors and degrees, as
we discussed in our brainwashing episode.
Interstellar travel takes a long time, so
while sending in wave after wave of expendable
killbots is faster than this sort of infiltration
approach, you probably don’t care that much.
It took you centuries to get there, who cares
if it takes a few decades to do the job on
arrival?
So, we talked about how motives to take over
Earth are fairly limited, as it needs to be
something unique to Earth unless you’re
simply doing the constant land grab approach,
which we already mentioned seems counter-indicated
by both the lack of anyone doing it right
now and what your neighbors would do if they
saw you doing it.
So what motives have we got?
What has Earth got?
Unique species, to be sure.
No matter how big the Galaxy is, and no matter
how common life is, each world is going to
have a pretty unique ecosystem and that’s
likely to be something a lot of civilizations
will prize.
For those that do, that is absolutely a motivation
to get your hands on a planet, it’s just
that it’s not really one for a classic invasion.
If I were a xenobiologist arriving at Earth,
I could just park in orbit, say hello, explain
I wanted detailed DNA samples and zoological
and botanical records, and that I’d trade
information for information.
If I wanted more information than was available,
or actual samples, the blueprints for just
about any single device on my ship is easily
valuable enough to Earth to pay for an entire
new economic sector just for acquiring what
I came for.
Heck even if I outright told them I was banned
by law from giving them any technology more
than a decade in advance of what they had,
that is still a great deal.
Now I didn’t have to do that, since odds
are one of the blueprint on my ship is for
some self-replicating killbot that if dumped
out my airlock would be quite capable of taking
over that whole planet, quite possibly without
actually killing anything either, because
those killbots probably also have pinpoint
targeting ability.
Again it’s really hard to guess how advanced
civilizations make war, we might guess they
have stun weapons or one’s capable of delivering
precise force to not kill, but they might
easily cheerfully shoot everyone with very
smart bullets full of nanobots that just resurrected
people shortly thereafter, viewing it as nothing
worse than hitting a pause button or whacking
them with a stun baton.
And for that matter, for Earth specifically,
at least of the current era, I could probably
just ask for it even if I flat out said I
couldn’t give anything in return.
Or not ask, and just slip down and acquire
it covertly.
As we mentioned in Secret Aliens, if I want
a big sample of human DNA, I could just abduct
a postbox full of hundreds of letters rather
than abducting hundreds of people.
This same reasoning applies to anything we
currently have.
Almost all of our art and entertainment and
history is digital these days, and they presumably
would be pretty good at hacking computers,
not that they really need to be since most
of that is all over the web for public consumption.
Where it isn’t or isn’t recorded in high
enough resolution for them, they could get
their own scans.
Those smart bullets I mentioned a moment ago,
full of replicating nanobots, would presumably
work just as well for scanning something like
Mount Rushmore to take its pattern down to
the micrometer for reconstruction elsewhere.
Now while you could, if you value originals,
probably sneak off with the Statue of David
or Van Gogh’s Starry Night, leaving a replica
behind, I think trying to haul off Mount Rushmore
and hide it with a replica might tax the innovation
of even an advanced civilization.
I just have difficulty imagining they’d
attempt to invade us or exterminate us as
an alternative.
Though that’s hard to say, again alien psychology
and all, they might think killing us all in
our sleep and uploading us into some simulation
of Earth was a benevolent act, in which case
they would then have the original Mount Rushmore,
but that objective doesn’t square with that
pathway, since it implies you view copies
as rather valuable too.
Needless to say they aren’t invading for
manual labor, they could use robots for that.
They might for creative labor, but I’m thinking
whatever value they’d have for our unique
perspective would be eroded by enforcing it
at gunpoint.
I doubt you get great poems or songs or paintings
by sticking a gun to the artist’s head.
That might be good for a less violent and
outright invasion, but since you’re doing
it for that unique perspective, you probably
would consider the cultural impact of even
a benevolent and friendly assimilation rather
damaging to your end goal.
This is one of the problems we have with alien
invasions, same as alien visitors, it’s
not that they don’t have some motivations
for it, it’s just that anytime we put together
a scenario we can always think of a better
path, so long as we keep in mind that the
all-out approach, while possible, has to include
that reminder that the Universe is not just
them and us and that they’d know that at
least as well as we do.
We don’t know if there are any aliens nearby,
personally I doubt there are, but if they’re
invading us then they know aliens are near
and presumably common, even if we’re the
first they ever encountered.
Whatever scenario we look at has to have a
motive for it that makes sense, it has to
not have any other clearly easier and better
approaches, and it needs to take into account
that if you have 2 civilizations in a region,
you have many more not much further off, who
will be interested in what goes on.
So I am a species that enjoys hunting a lot,
particularly intelligent prey.
Spending centuries traveling to a planet with
intelligent life just to hunt there is quite
a stretch, when options like virtual reality
or cloning and raising prey at home are on
the table, and when you know it’s likely
to be viewed by your other neighbors badly.
Similarly, conquering a primitive planet,
directly or more through economic domination,
just to open a new market for goods, would
be peculiar when you can build or terraform
new worlds for your own people, when you can
probably sell goods to other worlds without
doing it at gunpoint and making hostile trading
partners and also angering your other neighbors.
You’re unlikely to ever have to take by
force things like information, be it history
or genetic information, not when trade offers
it cheaply, costing you nothing, but more
unique or physical things might be more easily
obtained by threat or use of force, and realistically
that costs you little too, we won’t repeat
just how one-sided a fight between modern
Earth and any interstellar civilization would
be, but things like this are much more likely
to provoke other civilizations and leave at
best an angry native population, who later
on will have the technology to cause you problems,
as they’ll eventually gain access to your
technology, or someone else’s who decides
to engage in proxy warfare with you by arming
your conquests.
Unless you wipe them out or outright brainwash
them, both of which are likely to provoke
reactions.
Interestingly one of the most logical routes
then, if you have to worry about a lot third
parties reacting to you, is probably to race
around to primitive worlds introducing yourself,
and acting as a genuine friend, knowing you
will be judged by history, yours, theirs,
and everyone else who spies on you, which
is probably everybody else.
This is least likely to backfire or provoke
militant reactions.
It’s also likely to be a common practice
in most interstellar civilizations since before
they were interstellar.
People often portray an alien galaxy as brutally
Darwinian, but it is worth remembering that
all these concepts vital to our own civilization,
friendships, alliance, mercy, family, etc
are all manifestly products of evolution and
if not necessarily prerequisite for the sorts
of large and stable civilizations that can
develop powerful technologies, probably would
be pretty common, or have parallel analogues
that were.
 
This is a strategy one can use where you don’t
need to hide that your motives for visiting
a new world aren’t entirely altruistic,
because none of us values our friendships
less because we know most of them have aspects
or origins that included pragmatic reasons.
Go around visiting primitive new worlds, curing
diseases and hunger and helping them spread
out to the stars and protect themselves, and
you’ve made very long term allies and in
a way that’s not likely to get you attacked
or expose you to retribution down the road
like using subversive tactics or overt brainwashing
might.
So in this regard, an alien invasion is actually
quite plausible, but as these things go, it’s
a lot better than them showing up over your
major cities with death rays or brainwashing
beams.
We looked at a number of possible scenarios
for Alien Invasion today but barely scratched
the surface, I’m sure everyone was thinking
of many more as we went along and of course
our goal was more about discussing how we
should examine such scenarios to see if they
made much sense than any specific scenario.
If you’re interested in some more, there’s
a fun documentary called World War A: Aliens
Invade Earth over on CuriosityStream, which
like we try to do here on SFIA, seeks to explore
the topic in a serious and scientific way,
but have some fun while doing so.
Curiosity Stream is a subscription streaming
service that offers over 2400 documentaries
and nonfiction titles from some of the world’s
best filmmakers, including exclusive originals,
and from some our top thinkers, like Stephen
Hawking and Michio Kaku.
You can get unlimited access starting at just
$2.99 a month, and for our audience, the first
30-days are completely free if you sign up
at curiositystream.com/isaacarthur during
the sign-up process.
So we looked at how our own single little
world might be invaded, and how overwhelmingly
one-sided the fight would be if it was us,
nowadays, versus someone capable of interstellar
travel, even if just because of the sheer
energy available to anyone who can engage
in such travel.
Next week we’ll ask ourselves what sort
of things, natural and artificial, might be
a threat to interplanetary or even interstellar
civilizations, rather than lone worlds like
ours.
The week after that we’ll take a new look
at one of the technologies that might provide
the kind of power needed for space travel,
and what the challenges and rewards are if
we ever master Fusion Power.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to support the channel,
visit our website to donate or look at some
of the SFIA merchandise you can get.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
