This episode is brought to you by World Anvil!
 
Here on SFIA we like to say that if Brute Force 
isn’t working, you are just not using enough.  
If a spaceship propelled by detonating nuclear 
bombs doesn’t count, I don’t know what would.
 
So welcome to 2022 and the start of our Eighth 
Season here on Science and Futurism with Isaac  
Arthur, and I am your host, Isaac Arthur. 
I thought we should start the dawn of this  
new year by looking at the first Spaceship Design 
that offered a realistic chance of sending a human  
colony to a new solar system alive and intact. 
That is Project Orion, initiated in the 1950s, and  
we will ask what upgrades and modifications modern 
technology might make Project Orion even better. 
 
So we’ll be focused on essentially four things 
today. First, a brief explanation of how Project  
Orion works, along with an equally brief tour 
of the history of it and some of its sibling  
projects. Second, how to scale it up to be bigger 
and more efficient. Third, how to scale it way  
down to be cheaper and more viable to launch. 
And Fourth, some hybrid scenarios, like using  
atomic bombs to slow a ship at the destination 
but pushing beams or lasers to speed it up.
 
Now the entire Orion Project revolves around 
a few pivotal concepts. The first of those is  
that whether we’re talking fission or fusion or 
even matter to energy conversion like antimatter,  
the power involved at the nuclear level is 
millions to billions of times higher than  
what chemical fuels release. As an example, almost 
every chemical fuel, or our best modern batteries  
for that matter, is somewhere in the tens to 
low hundreds of millions of joules per kilogram.  
Body fat for instance is about 37 Megajoules per 
kilogram, sugar and carbs about 17 megajoules,  
gasoline about 44. Whereas a kilogram of uranium 
fuel runs about millions times that range, fusion  
loosely about ten million, and matter to energy 
conversion is roughly a billion times denser than  
chemical fuels, at 90 million-billion joules 
per kilogram, from Einstein’s famous E=mc².
 
To bring that into focus, Little Boy, the 
bomb dropped on Hiroshima in 1945, released  
63 Trillion Joules of Energy on detonation, and 
weighed just under 5 tons at 4400 kg, or 14.3  
Gigajoules per kilogram. That includes all the 
housing and conventional explosives in the bomb,  
which was a very primitive and inefficient device, 
and yet it still pushed out 100 times the energy  
per kilogram that hydrogen fuel could have, 
our most energy dense chemical rocket fuel.
 
This led to it being seriously contemplated as 
a possible spaceship propellant as early as 1946  
by Stanislaw Ulam, the co-designer of the 
first thermonuclear weapons with Edward Teller,  
though the notion had been played with before, 
even written about by scifi juggernaut Robert  
Heinlein in his 1940 short story “Blowups 
Happen” that somewhat predicted fission  
bombs before the Manhattan Project even began.
This leads to problem two, nuclear bombs are  
awesome power sources but give their energy off 
way too fast, in a near-instantaneous detonation,  
whereas nuclear reactors propel a spaceship by 
using their awesome power to either heat up a  
gas and shoot it out the back or to generate 
electricity for running something like an ion  
drive, to magnetically propel an ion stream out 
the back or generate a beam of light that acted  
as your rocket flame. You obviously lose 
a lot of efficiency converting the nuclear  
reaction into electricity and have a lot of heavy 
equipment you have to carry around for that task,  
but an electric ion drive or photon rocket 
can make for a very good spaceship.         
 
Another option would be super-heating 
a gas to use as a propellant.  
This certainly works to create an engine better 
than a classic chemical rocket, but not by as much  
as you’d think from those million-fold energy 
densities, because the entire reactor and any  
exchange materials have to be built from real 
materials, which melt at certain temperatures.  
It’s hard to get a rocket flame to temperatures 
of 10,000 Kelvin if your entire apparatus melts  
at 2000 Kelvin. And the hotter the gas, the 
faster it pushes a rocket. Nuclear level  
temperatures permitting ships to reach fractions 
of light speed tend to involve temperatures  
of millions of Kelvin, like we find in the 
cores of stars where nuclear fusion occurs. 
 
The smaller the atom or molecule serving 
as propellant, and the hotter it is,  
the faster a rocket can go by using it. Hydrogen 
atoms coming out at stellar temperatures  
are something we can produce and something that 
lets you make ships propelled by them get up to  
reasonable interstellar speeds. Unfortunately 
we can’t rapidly produce them inside ships or  
reactors without melting them, and we basically 
produce them by setting off a nuclear bomb…  
which is something you usually would not 
want occurring in or near your spaceship,  
it tends to void the warranty.
This was all well known to scientists  
at the time working with the notion of nuclear 
reactors on spaceships. There were no treaties  
about nukes in space at the time, and we 
worried less about radation safety back then.  
Nuclear engines looked good but not nearly as 
good as a bomb would. See our episode the Nuclear  
Option for more discussion of where the science 
led there, with ion drives and photons rockets.
 
Now Project Orion came later but for the next 
decade the notion of using nuclear spaceships got  
explored a lot, especially with the development 
of the hydrogen bomb, the first of which,  
Ivy Mike, massed a huge 74,000 kilograms, 17 
times as much as Little Boy, but generated an  
incredible 10.4 Megatons of explosion, 700 
times more than Little Boy. As a reminder,  
many of these devices weigh tons, but we measure 
explosive yield in the equivalent weight of TNT,  
10,400,000 tons in this last case, many 
packed supertankers worth. It can get a  
bit confusing at times which is why I 
often use joules of energy instead. 
 
The Mark 21 Bomb design, famous 
from Castle Bravo’s TX-21 Shrimp,  
would mass a mere 8000 kilograms and have a 
yield of 18 megatons, 75 million-billion joules,  
1200 times the yield of Little Boy for less 
than half the mass of the overall device.  
That’s nearly 10 Trillion joules per kilogram of 
total nuclear device, a hundred thousand times  
better than our rocket fuels. The entire Apollo 
16 mission, the most fuel heavy Apollo mission,  
came in around 30 trillion joules, or just 
3 kilograms worth of that nuclear device. 
 
And since most of an orbital rocket launch’s 
fuel is going into lifting its own fuel,  
basically a kilogram of a nuclear device would 
let you get a modest-sized spaceship to and from  
the Moon on one kilogram of bomb.
With two obvious problems… first,  
detonating bombs in our atmosphere is 
politically and ecologically non-viable.  
Since most of a rocket’s fuel is for getting out 
of that atmosphere, a chemical rocket and a second  
nuclear drive for use further from Earth is less 
awesome as an option, though still very handy.
 
Second, and it’s the big one, we can’t really make 
a one-kilogram nuclear bomb and we can’t make it  
detonate slowly, over a period of a few hours. 
Now we can actually make bombs in that size zone  
but we’ll come back to that later. Nuclear bombs 
generally are way more efficient the bigger they  
are, more energy per kilogram of fuel and device, 
making for higher final speeds and by large  
margins. The smallest nuclear device ever actually 
made, the Mark 54, was a single kiloton device,  
weighed only 51 pounds or 23 kilograms, and that’s 
only a yield of 180 Gigajoules per kilogram,  
better than Little Boy but only about 2% of 
Shrimp and other thermonuclear bombs of the  
50s. Nonetheless, that’s still more 
than a thousand times energy denser  
than even hydrogen rocket fuel, and a single 
kiloton bomb is a lot more viable as a fuel. 
 
How does this get done? Inside an atmosphere 
you’re trying to ride a shockwave but up in space  
your bomb is producing a ton of gamma radiation 
which is only getting absorbed by the device, not  
the air around it, so there’s no real shockwave, 
just a massive release of radiation akin to a  
neutron bomb. So you need a great big tough – and 
massive – shield behind your ship to protect you  
from the radiation and convert that radiation into 
kinetic energy. This is where the pusher plate,  
or various accordion designs, or front-mounted 
parachute designs, come in to absorb the blast,  
then convert that violent jerk into a slow push 
or pull on the actual main inhabited part of the  
ship. Or basically the blast kicks the pusher 
plater forward into a giant spring system,  
which then slowly relaxes back into 
place, and that near instant hit  
translates into several seconds of 
acceleration up in the crew module. 
 
We’ll get to ways to improve that, but the basic 
idea then is that you detonate the bomb as close  
to the pusher plate as you can without breaking it 
so as to waste as little of the blast as possible,  
and you just rinse and repeat. Closer 
is better, and a bigger pusher plate in  
width lets you detonate further away while 
absorbing more blast, but the plate needs  
to be strong too. Operation Plumbbob for 
instance tested this concept with a one  
ton steel plate pushed by a nuclear blast under 
it, after which they never found the plate. 
 
This is where project Orion comes in, 
headed up by Ted Taylor and Freeman Dyson,  
who any channel regular knows the work of, as 
he’s a legend on this show, but their project  
came in 1958 and five years later ended with the 
signing of the Partial Test Ban Treaty of 1963.  
That treaty might have greatly aided the mission 
of peace, but sadly did a lot to limit nuclear  
research. We could devote an entire episode to 
just discussing that project and Curious Droid did  
a good video on that topic a few years back.
The report released by General Atomics in 1959  
offered three basic sizes for Orion spacecraft, 
the Satellite, the Midrange, and the Super Orion,  
massing 300 tons, 1-2000 tons, and 8 
million tons for each. Needless to say  
that latter is eye-poppingly large, 
8 Million Tons of ship and fuel,  
and it is suitable for an interstellar arkship 
and is the version most often being referenced,  
along with various improvements that were added 
later. It’s thousands of times more massive than  
the satellite or mid-range, and tends to grab 
all the focus from the public and scifi writers.  
Those other smaller versions though tend to be 
more of interest for folks actually in the field  
because they’re a lot more practical and might 
actually get funded in their lifetimes. 
 
Many other in-between sizes of ship were also 
proposed at various times, including some designed  
to launch from Earth itself into orbit, which are 
very economical ways to move a ship from Earth to  
other planets using only atomic bombs, but we’ll 
bypass those today because while they might  
see use on other planets for early colonization 
periods, I just can’t see us using them on Earth.  
Mind you, launching Orion ships on 
Earth is not some cataclysmic event,  
but I think we would only be okay with testing, 
building, and using these if we were expecting a  
cataclysmic event. Like we needed to get people 
off Earth to some other world before a doomsday  
here occured. This is also essentially what 
the Super-Orion design is for, though it  
is typically envisioned as being assembled 
and launched from Orbit or far from Earth.
 
Super Orion designs might permit us to move whole 
cities to other solar systems at about 1% light  
speed, but we don’t need to move that many folks 
or go that fast to get around the solar system,  
and Super Orion ships costs on the order of 
the entire US economy for a year to build,  
at least circa the 1950s. The smaller ones cost 
way less and work very well for colonizing our  
own solar system from infrastructure on the Moon 
and in Earth orbit and Cis-Lunar development. 
 
While tests were done, obviously it didn’t 
get built in their lifetimes for the folks  
on Project Orion, that 1963 treaty basically 
ended the project. Things shifted to more of  
a theoretical basis since experimentation was 
heavily curtailed. Nonetheless at this point we  
have a spaceship engine and design that could 
permit relatively fast missions from Earth’s  
orbital volume to other planets and even to 
other solar systems. It's not been built,  
it's expensive, it's big, but it's all entirely 
proven concepts and we have a lot of areas we have  
gotten better at in the 60 years since the project 
shut down and that’s what I want to focus on.
 
One big thing folks often argue against is 
that since it is nuclear bombs folks will  
never be okay with such a ship being built. 
I hear where they’re coming from but that’s  
a very generation and culture specific viewpoint. 
They can be handled fairly safely so long as you  
limit the ships to not coming closer to Earth than 
Geostationary with actual control of those bombs,  
and for the tiny yield ones, even low orbit 
unauthorized use is not exactly cataclysmic  
though definitely a good reason to have orbital 
defenses and intense monitoring in place. 
 
One option that might help too would 
be the Project Medusa approach,  
which replaces the pusher plater to the rear 
with a giant sail to the front that the nuke  
gets detonated in and the ship gets pulled by a 
tether. This lets you detonate your nukes further  
from the actual planet while the ship is still in 
low orbit or even stationary, like it was sailing  
off a space tower or orbital ring. Such tethers 
could potentially be thousands of kilometers long,  
coming in from angles like cords on a parachute. 
Folks might feel more comfortable with nuclear  
ships in Cislunar space if the detonations 
were only occurring above geostationary,  
and you could potentially have the nuclear 
magazine and launcher kept outside that space too.  
The bombs for use further from Earth could 
be sent by railgun from orbit or the Moon to  
rendezvous with the ship once it's safely far 
from Earth, or even sent as multiple packets. 
 
It's not that I think folks would ever come to 
love nuclear bombs and feel safe around them,  
it's more that I think we’ll be comfortable using 
them constructively when every country has them  
and any asteroid miner with the right 3D printer 
gear and robots can spit some fission bombs out  
without anyone knowing – building nukes in secret 
on Earth in your basement is a lot harder to hide.  
I am hardly a fan of encouraging nations to 
build nuclear arsenals but I generally see the  
approach of preventing nuclear proliferation 
as a losing strategy in the long term,  
though effective currently. If they’re much more 
available, then all the fears of their legitimate  
use resulting in proliferation are redundant and 
you might as well use them for productive ends,  
since doing so no longer increases the risk 
of anyone getting them for destructive ends. 
 
There are a ton of productive uses of nukes too, 
besides for spaceships, indeed our entire episode  
on High-tech Search and Rescue was written on a 
dare that I could come up with a valid reason to  
use nukes in search and rescue… and I didn’t come 
up with a single reason… I came up with four.
 
So the smaller ones might have a role in 
colonizing the solar system and sp let’s  
examine improving those first. As mentioned, 
Project Orion is the big original project,  
but there were a lot of successors who worked 
on it without being able to do any testing.  
One is Mini-Mag Orion, or Miniature Magnetic 
Orion, from around the turn of the century  
that suggested doing fission with a magnetic 
field compressing the fissile material. 
 
Normal reactors are slow and nukes are fast 
because we rapidly compress the fissile materials  
so that every neutron made gets sucked into 
neighboring compressed uranium or plutonium to  
cause that chain reaction in microseconds. Every 
neutron emitter and absorber is closer together,  
so virtually every neutron is absorbed and 
quickly, this causes the explosion. However,  
a magnetically compressed fissile material 
might let you bridge that gap between slow  
reactor and hyperfast bombs. Most of the 
weight of smaller bombs is the conventional  
chemical explosive used to detonate them, and 
discussions of minimum critical mass are always  
in the context of such implosions. Expected 
yields would be as low as 50 gigajoules,  
about 4 seconds worth of the power emitted by 
rockets during the launch of the old shuttles,  
and about a dozen tons of TNT equivalent, rather 
than the thousand tons or kiloton TNT equivalent  
of the smaller nuclear bombs. You can make 
a much smaller orion device and potentially  
a pretty efficient one, for a fission-only 
version, by being able to bypass all the  
chemical explosives and the sizes needed for 
critical mass of a conventional nuclear bomb.
 
Now I love Mini-Mag and would 
love to see it get developed more,  
it holds a lot of promise as both a propulsion 
system and a weapon system and could potentially  
be ramped up to creating micro-fusion bombs too, 
but development of it is probably not going to get  
lots of interest in funding in the near future as 
it's not really super-tempting as a power supply.  
It also runs parallel to a lot of looks at using 
magnetic confinement for fusion too. So I think it  
will get explored but sadly not sooner than later, 
it's got a lot of potential. Magnetic confinement  
or compression of fusion fuel is also present in 
the Project Daedelus and Longshot variations.
 
Another approach is to use bombs, just make 
them a lot smaller. Suitcase nukes are mostly  
a myth – the W54 warhead was still 23 kilograms 
and easily detectable so not something you’re  
sneaking it in a classic suitcase, but we can 
make them smaller. We’ve pretty much maxed out  
conventional explosives but nukes are made out of 
weapons grade uranium or plutonium mostly because  
of cost. There’s more to fission than Uranium-235 
or Plutonium-239, as we looked at in the Future  
of Fission and its companion episode the Future 
of Thorium, and last I checked Californium-252  
had the lowest Critical Mass, at 2.7 kilograms, 
versus 10 kilograms for Plutonium-239 and 50 for  
Uranium-235. Californium-252 only has a half-life 
of 31 months and has to be made by first making  
Curium from Uranium-238, which is fairly expensive 
at hundreds of thousands of dollars per kilogram.  
But then you have to turn that curium 
into Californium-250 by alpha bombardment,  
then into 252 by further neutron bombardment. So 
very expensive to produce currently compared to  
U-235 or Plutonium, but that could change. 
As a reminder, aluminum used to be hugely  
expensive, rivaling precious metals, then we made 
cans out of it when it got cheaper. One problem  
though is that bombs using materials with short 
half-lives might not work well for an interstellar  
ship, since its bombs will decay before arriving 
and thus can’t be used to slow the ship down.
 
Uranium-233, incidentally, has a critical mass 
of only 15 kilograms, which is the reason that  
sometimes comes up as a worry in concerns about 
Thorium for nuclear proliferation. Certain  
technological pathways might make U-233 very easy 
to produce and refine, which might make it very  
handy as an alternative to plutonium or U-235 for 
off world nuclear power and propulsion scenarios.
 
Now there’s a couple other things that could 
make light-weight Orion variations viable  
but some also work for the bigger version 
too. As an example, the basic pusher plate  
design is a big flat plate on a big huge 
spring or accordion system because, frankly,  
that is a system which is hard to screw up and 
can take a lot of abuse and still work, which is  
handy for something you are repeatedly nuking. The 
upside of a big metal plate is any of its surface  
vaporized off in a given detonation is basically 
acting as a rocket flame giving some push too.  
Alternatively something more like a piston 
head shove by the blast into a cylinder of gas  
which compresses and slows it is very susceptible 
to pressure compromises and leaks busting out. But  
that is an option, and so for that matter, in the 
very big version even larger than Super Orion, is  
detonating the bomb inside a big pod of gas that 
blasts out the back of the ship as a rocket burst.  
As we’ll see when we get to enlarging the Orion 
design, at big enough scales even a nuclear blast  
is simply no different than the little explosions 
in your car engine that drive the pistons.
 
Incidentally you can use excess bombs as a 
normal power source, though most of the time your  
best approach is to either recycle the fissile 
material into a normal power plant or for fusion,  
set the bombs off in enormous underground 
cavities that are scaled up pistons basically,  
or use a molten salt working fluid to detonate 
the bomb in. This concept was explored more in  
Project Pacer in the 1970s but I can really only 
see it being used in a case like an Orion-style  
spaceship moving at about 1% light speed or less 
either being used for Oort Cloud settlement or  
deciding it needed to stop mid-journey and instead 
settle some deep space ice ball like a dwarf or  
rogue planet instead of continuing onto a solar 
system with a nice sun providing solar power.
 
I wouldn’t rule that out though, the thing 
about Super Orion scale ships is they are  
often envisioned as gambles to save 
humanity from something ruining our  
solar system and some hastily built version 
without prototyping sailing through deep  
space at half a percent of light speed needs a 
thousand years to get to even Alpha Centauri,  
so spotting some rogue planet with extractable 
resources part way through that journey would seem  
very likely to result in a detour and powering 
that colony or temporary base on solar obviously  
isn’t an option at that point. Whereas it's fairly 
easy to dig big underground piston-cylinders  
inside low-gravity bodies like a dwarf planet.
One other scenario for small ships is antimatter  
catalyzed fusion, which requires a source of 
anti-matter, and a way to safely store it,  
but if you can produce and store it then tiny 
little bits of antimatter can be used to catalyze  
much larger fusion explosions, letting you 
translate micrograms of antimatter into  
multi-gram fusion explosions producing yields that 
are still manageable like the MiniMag approach.
 
For raw efficiency, a pusher plate can also 
be replaced with something more akin to a  
parabolic dish where the detonation happens at the 
focal point of the reflector – this incidentally  
lets you use nukes for ridiculously high power 
focused communications. It’s not really ideal for  
propulsion since the point of the pusher plate 
is to absorb the blast while slamming forward,  
but a combination of plate and adjacent parabolic 
dish could be used to let you gather up energy  
released on perpendiculars to the ship’s direction 
of motion for other uses, like making electricity.  
This also parallels the forward parachute 
approach we see with the Medusa variant.
 
An awful lot of all this energy is being lost 
as heat too, such as in that big spring setup,  
and that can potentially be reused for electricity 
or even re-emitted somewhat directionally to add  
thrust. Heat in space can be moved around a 
ship normally by convection and conduction,  
big radiator systems, but can only leave 
the ship by radiating away as infrared  
photons – or visible light if hot enough - and 
you may be able to arrange your radiators to  
spit more photons out in one direction than in 
the reverse direction, providing net thrust. 
 
Now as I said earlier we have contemplated 
using nuclear reactors to power light production  
as a rocket engine, this is a photon rocket, 
and photons of light do indeed have momentum  
and can push a ship. This is exactly what you’re 
doing with gamma radiation with those bombs and  
the pusher plate. It would work even better if we 
had a material which reflected gamma rays instead  
of just absorbing them but we do not at this time 
and I’d be rather skeptical about their creation.  
When a photon hits something and gets absorbed, 
that object gets the photon’s momentum added to  
it, slowing it or speeding it. When instead the 
photon reflects, it heads back in the opposite  
direction with the same but opposite momentum, 
and the thing it hits will have absorbed twice  
the momentum instead. So reflecting photons is 
preferable when they come from an outside source  
like the sun or a laser or a nuclear blast.
Laser propulsion is of interest to us  
and we will come back to it shortly as a 
means of enhancing a normal Orion drive,  
but we do have something called a bomb-pumped 
laser, which is basically a single use laser  
powered by a nuclear detonation, and which can be 
coming as something reflectable rather than gamma  
rays. One of perfect efficiency could be dropped 
out behind a spacecraft, detonated, and have its  
beam hit the pusher plate or sail and bounce 
off, which is at least an order of magnitude  
better in terms of propulsion than detonating 
a bomb behind a plate that absorbs it. 
 
You won’t get anything even close to that 
efficiency but for hypothetical discussion  
it seems worthy of note, and bomb-pumped lasers 
were a major feature of Project Excalibur,  
an X-Ray Laser system intended for ballistic 
missile defense. X-rays are also hard to  
directly reflect but we have some tricks 
that would permit us to use it this way,  
and so too, in a big enough ship you could 
just do bomb-pumped laser out the back of it,  
though firing a laser from a ship as a means of 
propulsion does not allow you to reflect it and  
gain that extra momentum, which hardly matters 
if it's gamma and you cannot reflect it anyway.
 
Now those pusher plates are slowly losing layers 
of material with each blast vaporizing some off  
and it being made of layers which raises 
some hybrid options. As an example,  
a pusher plate made of many layers of graphene 
would have something like a billion sheets per  
meter of plate thickness, and pusher plates are 
definitely things made in meters of thickness,  
not thin sheets. However, much as a book can be 
thick while paper is thin, we might imagine a  
solar sail many kilometers wide, for reflecting 
sunlight or outside light beams, that could be  
folded up to serve as the much smaller pusher 
plate. And these things are both massive affairs  
compared to the payloads of their ships so getting 
double-duty out of one makes a lot of sense.
 
A solar sail setup like project Medusa potentially 
works well with a pushing laser but a foldable  
solar sail that can be squeezed into a pusher 
plate after being used could let you push the  
ship to far beyond Earth before it began using 
its bombs, using solar powered orbital lasers to  
create pushing beams, which can also probably be 
used to tear that ship apart if the folks on board  
start contemplating wicked uses for their bombs 
instead of as fuel. Hitting a ship with a beam  
gives you lots of options including ridiculously 
high-resolution and high-powered scans of the  
space between you and it and nearby, in case 
they decided to machine gun their nukes back  
home to Earth, and you can just vaporize them en 
route back, the bombs, and the rogue ship both.
 
Nice added safety feature, but instead 
we could use that big sail and lasers to  
skip the bombs in the first step, accelerating 
the ships to a higher speed before using bombs  
to either speed up a bit more or entirely to 
slow down at the destination. This lets you use  
time-sensitive tamper proof detonators on your 
nukes too. Indeed you could use a smaller Orion  
craft near the end as a vanguard for your Super 
Orion Ship to carry a big solar array into the  
destination star system to power a pushing laser 
to help slow the big main ship or fleet down. 
 
Fleets also offer the option of doing things like 
firing a nuclear device out of a rail gun from  
one ship to go behind another, if for instance 
a vanguard ship was running low on warheads as  
it slowed. We explored this and other types 
of tandem use approaches, like with lasers,  
and with Orion and with Fusion, in our Generation 
Ships series, episode two, Exodus Fleet.  
That series talks a lot more about generation 
ships, building, flying, and living on them,  
and even scaling up Orion style ships to run 
on things like artificial novae or supernovae.
 
Now can we do Orion today? Yes, absolutely and 
frankly I think it's past time we modified the  
various testing treaties to at least allow 
joint testing of atomics for propulsion  
off Earth. There’s a lot of reasons, some valid 
and some not, for worrying about the safety or  
viability of an Orion approach to propulsion 
but they are the only propulsion system we  
currently have that could definitely be built and 
definitely allow us to get to another star system  
or do a real full fledged sustainable colony 
on another planet in our own system in short  
order. It’s also the best approach for 
handling dino-killer and bigger asteroids,  
especially as one could machine gun its excess 
h-bomb fuel into the asteroid in question.  
But it can be used for none of those 
roles if we haven’t got real hands-on  
experimental data and prototyping.
All right, to close out for the day,  
how big could we plausibly make an Orion-sized 
ship these days and how would it run? I’d say a  
total crash project of the kind we sometimes 
envision if we expected the end of the world  
and people unified to work on it might allow us 
to throw together something on the smaller O’Neill  
Cylinder side of things, running on supplies 
of fissile fuel for interior life support,  
that could probably let us get a hundred 
thousand people off toward a solar system,  
or maybe half a dozen scaled down ones of only a 
few thousand each sent to multiple solar systems,  
combined with solar-powered pushing lasers to 
get them moving, to perhaps 5% of light speed. 
 
In a more controlled fashion, same basic tech 
but deployed decades from now when we have a  
developed orbital infrastructure and resources 
coming in from the Moon and/or Near-Asteroids,  
we could probably be launching a few 
of these 8 megaton Super Orions a year.  
However, let me note that a cylinder 
habitat built with some durability in mind  
is probably running you about a megaton 
per square kilometer of interior area,  
and is likely making up only about 10% of 
this ships overall mass since you’ve got  
the bombs and the shielding and plate and 
probably hydroponics in no or slow-rotating  
smaller stations. So honestly if we’re talking 
an interstellar ark ship intended to bring, say,  
10,000 people in suburban style with lots of that 
used for ecosystems and zoo space, then think on  
an order of a few kilotons of ship per person, and 
only a couple thousand folks on a Super Orion. 
 
Those absolutely scale up though, and again 
we get better efficiency the bigger our nuke  
and the bigger our ship, so my hunch would 
be that a Super Orion would be the small  
and bargain size for an interstellar ark. Not so 
for interplanetary colonies or trading vessels,  
though big mega-freighters trying to bring 
Ice in from deep space to Mars for instance  
might dwarf even interstellar arks and 
you can move big icy bodies by careful  
Orion-style detonation of nukes on one too. 
Will we ever see them? Very hard to say, there’s  
an assumption that almost any scenario that gets 
us working fusion as a power source would make the  
Orion concept Obsolete but that’s not necessarily 
true. A big and efficient fusion plant might not  
transfer into one than could be used in starship 
propulsion or anything small either, but might  
be awesome for creating transuranic elements 
like Californium-252 on the cheap or for simply  
up-gunning your economy so much you could 
churn out the ships and bombs to run them. 
 
In either scenario, or if fusion turns out to be 
that technology that’s 20 years in the future and  
always stays on that distant horizon, then the 
Orion Spaceship concept, with some modifications,  
is the one that will take us to the stars. 
And it can do it too, the same nuclear bombs  
that scared whole generations into fearing the 
end of our world and the twilight of our species,  
may hold the keys to humanity seeing the 
Dawn rise on a million alien worlds.
 
So we are into a new year now and we have some 
announcements, notes, and episode schedule that  
we’ll get to in a bit but one of those notes 
is on just how much information we had to cut  
out of today’s script just to get it shortened 
enough for a single long episode. Another part  
of that though was how many other things came to 
mind as I wrote the script and one of those was  
that not only can nuclear bombs potentially 
take us to new worlds, they can be used to  
help us forge them too. And we will be examining 
that topic, with a focus on nuking Mars till its  
blue and green, at the end of this month.
Speaking of forging new worlds though, odds are  
good if you’re a show regular you’ve spent a lot 
of time daydreaming about strange new worlds and  
peoples and maybe tried your hand at writing some 
science fiction or fantasy or have played in a RPG  
like D&D or modded a video game. If not they are 
great ways to spend the winter months, cooped up  
inside but with your mind soaring to strange new 
worlds of your own construction. But if you have,  
then you probably have had that worldbuilding 
effort grow in complexity till you needed notes  
and wanted to share it with others, and probably 
been frustrated with how much time got spent  
organizing those or learning some software to 
help develop them, or maybe even lost them. 
 
I doubt it would surprise any show regulars 
that I’ve experienced that a lot myself and  
always wished there was a good world building 
software that was easy to learn and comprehensive,  
and when I first saw World Anvil, the 
award-winning worldbuilding toolset, I was  
both amazed someone finally made that software and 
irritated my own gaming group was going on hiatus,  
but it didn’t stop me from exploring all the 
features like map notes and map connecting,  
history, timeline and genealogy building, and 
wiki-like crafting options. It’s great for DMs and  
folks wanting to let their audience peak into the 
novel’s setting more collaboratively as it does  
have a free version and also has ways to monetize 
your content on platforms like Patreon, Kofi,  
or your own storefront, and you can share that 
content selectively to keep secret content hidden.  
They also have an amazing collection of great 
tutorial videos so not only can you learn how  
to use World Anvil but so can anyone you’re trying 
to introduce to it, though it is very intuitive. 
 
World Anvil offers wikipedia-like 
articles for your world setting,  
interactive maps, timelines, an RPG Campaign 
Manager and a full Novel-Writing Software,  
all the tools you’ll need to run your 
RPG Campaign or write your novel,  
and never lose your notes again! If 
you’d like to give World Anvil a try  
and let it help you forge new worlds, just 
click the link in this episode’s description!
 
I was mentioning my gaming group going on 
extended hiatus a moment ago and I wanted  
to give a shout out to my best friend Bill on the 
birth of his first daughter Evelyn in December.  
Bill and I served together in the Army 
and have been like brothers since 2004,  
and us and some other close friends used to 
play D&D back then even when we were in Iraq,  
and he and I kept that up even when he got 
out to college to become a history teacher  
and still do to this day. I was contemplating on 
that 18 year friendship how much he and a lot of  
my other army brothers helped shape this show, 
as so many of the concepts and examples I’ve  
used in episodes here first got crafted and 
honed chatting about those ideas with them.
 
There are a lot of folks who helped make this 
show in one fashion or another, and this episode  
in particular is one such example as we have 
a lot of forums and groups either directly  
attached to this show or loosely affiliated and 
one of those approached me around a year back  
about this topic and I suggested they might 
try writing a collaborative outline or draft,  
and they did and it was comprehensive and ran 30 
some pages. I didn’t even try trimming that down  
in favor of writing from scratch with the paper 
fresh in my head and it really drove home to me  
how much more we could do on this topic, and also 
how grateful I am for getting to work with so many  
amazing and talented folks not just on this 
episode or this show but down the decades.
 
Speaking of more on this topic, we will be having 
that episode on Nuking Mars Green at the end of  
this month, and one on Nuclear Transmutation in 
March that I just got done recording, but we have  
plenty more topics for this month beginning next 
Thursday with a return to the Alien Civilizations  
series to look at the concept of civilizations 
going into hibernation. Then we’ll be having  
our mid-month Scifi Sunday episode on the classic 
scifi trope of Telepathy. After that we return to  
Civilizations at the End of Time Series for a look 
at the Big Rip, the cosmological model that might  
see the Universe torn to shreds trillions of times 
sooner than we normally expect things to end.
 
Now if you want alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to the  
Channel and hit the notifications bell, and if you 
enjoyed this episode, please hit the like button,  
share it with others, and leave a comment below. 
You can also join in the conversation on any  
of our social media forums, find our audio-only 
versions of the show, or donate to support future  
episodes, and all those options and more are 
listed in the links in the episode description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great new year!
