While we continue our search for Earth-like
planets with oceans and continents and nitrogen-oxygen
atmospheres, we now have reason to believe
that there may be super-large planets with
oceans and thick atmospheres which may be
able to support life even without sunlight.
A critical concept in our search for extraterrestrial
life is the idea of a Goldilocks Zone, the
region distant enough from a given star where
a planet would be not too hot or too cold
but just right.
Usually we calculate this off of an approximation
of how much sunlight a world of around Earth’s
mass would need to not have its oceans evaporate
off, for the inner boundary, or likewise,
freeze solid, for the outer boundary.
Needless to say, this presupposes that life
is using water rather than something more
exotic, like ammonia or mercury, but the other
half of that is that it is assuming a roughly
Earth Mass world.
In recent years we’ve discovered a much
wider variety of larger planets than our solar
system is home to, and we’ve begun realizing
it’s possible to have planets potentially
ten times more massive than Earth that could
have oceans and thick hydrogen atmospheres,
and thus might have liquid water at very unexpected
distance from stars, indeed possibly in deep
space, floating around as a rogue planet,
and this category is being named Hycean Planets,
as a blend of the words hydrogen and ocean.
Now, while that term is new, the basic concept
is not.
We discussed it way, way back in our first
season episode Rogue Planets in 2015 and it
has been discussed as a general notion among
astronomers, and in science fiction for a
good deal longer.
It got more interest as the Kepler Space Telescope
was letting us spot many enormous new planets.
As we spotted more exoplanets and got real
data, we were able to refine our ideas and
rule out some options.
Our basic concept here is that very large
and insulated planets could have liquid water
even with little to no sunlight warming them.
And now, with the James Webb Telescope, which
can see objects in certain temperature ranges
better than anything we’ve previously had,
particularly those at the temperatures that
water would exist rather than just ice; so
we may be able to start spotting such planets.
Now, how is it that such worlds are warm even
when distant from their star?
The key here is that as every planet forms,
it gains a lot of heat energy.
This is from everything falling together,
and for context, it takes several times an
object's weight in rocket fuel to give it
enough kinetic or motion energy to get it
away from Earth, and any object falling toward
Earth must take on a similar amount as it
falls, and when it hits, all that energy is
turned into heat.
The more massive the planet is, the more energy
each object has as it falls towards it.
Earth itself has a vast amount, somewhere
between 224 and 249 million-trillion-trillion
joules, and that’s how much energy it would
take to vaporize the planet, death-star-style,
which is roughly a week of the Sun’s entire
energy output.
And as much energy as hits Earth from the
Sun in roughly 30 million years.
This total energy is called the gravitational
binding energy, and generally this rises with
the square of the total mass and falls off
with the radius.
Loosely speaking, a sphere twice as wide will
have 8 times the mass as a similarly-composed
planet, as volume rises with the cube of radius
or diameter, so a planet with the same density
or makeup as Earth but twice as wide would
have 8 times the mass and double the radius,
and thus a gravitational binding energy of
8-squared divided by two, or 32 times that
of Earth, or 32 times the initial heat energy.
Alternatively, a planet that is twice as wide
has 2-squared or 4 times the surface area
for heat to radiate off of and cool the planet.
So that larger planet would lose heat 4 times
faster but it has also got 32 times the heat
energy on formation.
Essentially it’s a bucket with a hole in
it, and the hole is bigger so leaks faster,
but the bucket is much bigger so it takes
longer to drain, as it just has so much more
water in it, or heat in this case.
That’s simplified of course, for instance
the Sun is filling a planet with heat via
sunlight, and things radiate heat faster when
they are hot vs when they are cold, and indeed
it goes with the fourth power of temperature,
so something 10 times hotter is leaking heat
energy into space 10,000 times faster.
The very smallest red dwarf stars are typically
ten times as hot as Earth and about 100 times
the surface area, and thus about a million
times brighter than Earth.
They have a vast amount of gravitational binding
energy too, around a hundred million times
what Earth has, and of course it’s also
producing heat in its core by fusion.
Fusion is an amazing source of power, and
it is what runs stars, but before we knew
what it was, we assumed stars merely were
glowing hot because of their sheer mass and
heat of formation, and while this will give
you the wrong age for a star, it’s still
an enormous value, in the tens to hundreds
of millions of years.
And Earth’s own molten core isn’t from
sunlight, it’s from all that initial heat
and the decay of radioactive particles like
uranium.
Critically though, a big object doesn’t
leak heat at the temperature its core is – Earth’s
for instance, is hotter than most stars’
surfaces, including our own Sun.
Rather, they leak at the temperature the surface
is, and so you get a rapidly cooling surface
on planets until they get a temperature at
an equilibrium with the energy radiating from
the hot center, radiating from that surface
into space, and including the sunlight they
get.
These days, most of Earth’s energy is coming
to the surface from the Sun, which was fainter
in the past while Earth itself was still much
hotter in its core and lower layers, though,
even then the Sun provided the overwhelming
supermajority of surface heat.
Lots of things can add an insulative effect
too, a wider planet for instance will have
heat reach the surface from the center slower,
and ice, clouds, or various other surface
and atmosphere factors can also add insulation.
Key point for why this topic has renewed and
gained vigorous interest these days is that
we have only very simple models of predicting
the thermodynamic situation on planets, especially
ones we don’t know the composition of, and
as our database has grown along with real
measurements of surface temperatures and masses
of planets, we can do better.
Some things we expected turned out wrong or
off by a bit, and other surprises came up.
As an example of that, we know tidal locking
– where a moon or planet shows the same
side to the planet or star it orbits all the
time, like our own Moon does to Earth – is
very strongly controlled by distance.
As a result, virtually every Moon is tidally
locked to its planet, but we figured most
planets in the goldilocks zone of dimmer red
dwarfs would need to be so close they were
tidally locked.
Newer data and better modeling though has
inclined us to think that oceans and atmospheres
might act like a lubricant to keep the planet
from grinding down to a relative halt in its
spin as it orbits a planet.
Thus it would take longer for the lock to
occur.
But it is likely that Earth-sized planets
around the dimmest of red dwarfs would still
be tidally locked, eternal sunshine on one
side, eternal darkness on the other, and with
only a thin twilight band ringing around the
planet between its poles, where various effects
like ‘libration’ would cause noticeable
variation in lighting.
Now, bigger planets take longer to tidally
lock, and it's rather hard to say when a planet
mostly composed of gas and liquid like our
gas giants is actually locked, since the surface
is fluid.
However, we would still expect these Hycean
Planets, if close enough to the dimmest of
red dwarfs – which is also the most common
type of star – to lock eventually, and the
neat thing about them in this case is that
the planet would still be habitable on the
dark side.
This particular class of planet is getting
nicknamed a Dark Hycean Planet, and while
that references the side facing away from
the Sun, it’s worth noting that such planets,
if they have a surface of ocean or rock below,
it is probably buried under so much atmosphere
and ocean that it’s dark even on the side
eternally lit by sunlight.
Now, this is no great bar to life existing.
We still don’t know where life began on
Earth, maybe in tidal pools, maybe in phosphorus-rich
inland mud pools, maybe in impact craters
where comets crashed that already had life
on them.
There are many other options too, but the
lead candidate for some time has been deep
sea ocean vents, far below where sunlight
can reach.
We generally believe that life began there
about 3.7 billion years ago, about a billion
years after Earth formed, and for many millions
of years did not run on photosynthesis.
Even when it arrived, this was a different
photosynthesis than the cyanobacteria which
we believe emerged around a billion years
later, but it was using sunlight nonetheless,
and this abundant power source fueled a much
larger and richer ecosystem.
One so rich that the detritus of it can sink
down in the oceans as marine snow, far from
sunlight, and run an entire extra ecosystem
of creatures that eat that organic waste,
or each other.
If the tidally-locked Hycean Planet is warmer,
or sunlit on one side, we will inevitably
get currents carrying warmth and dead life
to the darker regions, akin to marine snow.
However, a planet larger than Earth with great
deep oceans and a great big hot core, could
potentially support life on that dark side
too.
Or even in deep space, where the planet is
slowly cooling over the eons but has large
steady belts of liquid water in which life
could dwell.
Water itself is not a good thermal insulator,
part of why it is handy for use as a coolant,
but snow and ice are better.
Ice is generally about as good an insulator
as concrete, while snow is much better and
roughly parallel to wood, but again, both
are better than water and ice – normal ice
anyway - floats on water, meaning you can
maintain liquid ocean well underneath a colder
protective layer of ice, keeping things warmer.
This is even easier if there’s a thick layer
of hydrogen and helium above as an atmosphere.
But that’s also part of the problem, our
default model shows surface temperatures might
be as high 200 Celsius or 400 Fahrenheit,
and those are probably not favorable conditions
for life.
What we’re looking for is those Hycean Planets
without such high surface temperatures.
And those should exist, but the other half
of the problem is that these planets interest
us principally because they are large.
We’ve discovered many thousands of exoplanets
in the last quarter of a century and virtually
all of them are either very large or very
close to their Sun, and the overwhelming majority
are both.
Our detection methods work better for big
objects or ones close to their star, and more
so for both, and this means lots of planets
that are as big as Jupiter and as hot as Mercury.
I don’t believe we’ve found any extrasolar
dwarf planets yet, things like Pluto, but
they will probably outnumber every other type
of larger planet combined.
A Hycean Planet though is one we could plausibly
detect now and have many candidates for.
And one close to a red dwarf star – the
most numerous type of star – not only might
be very easy to find lots of, but also could
have some astronomically visible biosignatures.
As an example, some chemicals don’t survive
ultraviolet light very long, it tends to be
rough on chemical bonds.
Every star has a characteristic spectrum,
typically with a peak in a given color range
based on its temperature.
Our Sun for instance peaks in blue-green,
not the yellow that folks would expect, and
the dimmer red dwarfs typically peak in infrared
with only a small portion of their light in
the visible range, and very little in blue
or violet, let alone ultraviolet.
Their light is still white; mind you, most
incandescent light bulbs give off light in
the same general range as red dwarfs.
Hotter Stars, those in the F, A, B, and O
ranges, give off far more ultraviolet light
as a percentage of their emissions, and planets
in the habitable zones of these worlds would
generally not have the atmospheric signature
of any chemical that disassociated from ultraviolet,
whereas those chemicals would have very long
atmospheric dwell times around red dwarfs.
Such being the case, they’d be of higher
concentration and much easier for us to spot.
Nitrous oxide is one of those chemicals we
would expect to find as a byproduct of life,
but unfortunately, it doesn’t last long
under ultraviolet light.
So a red Sun and a thick atmosphere both give
it much better odds of being able to grow
to astronomically detectable concentrations,
and a Hycean world around a red dwarf is thus
both a planet we’re very likely to spot
in quantities and where nitrous oxide and
many other chemicals that might be biosignatures
are easier to spot.
What’s more, those signatures would be visible
even in the interstellar void, on a rogue
planet, so long as the temperature is still
high enough for them to be a vapor.
Nitrous oxide for instance has a boiling point
of -88 Celsius or -127 degrees Fahrenheit,
and a freezing point only a few degrees cooler,
-91 Celsius or -132 Fahrenheit.
But that means that it will be a vapor on
any planet warmer than that and we would expect
any Hycean Planet, even out in deep space,
to be above that temperature.
So for the purpose of finding alien life,
Hycean planets represent a potentially low-hanging
fruit of detection, as we expect them to be
numerous, easy to detect, and likely to preserve
telltale signs of life in their atmospheres
if they have them, particularly around red
dwarfs, which are the most numerous type of
star, indeed outnumbering every other kind
combined.
Of course, if such planets are numerous, it
behooves us to have a plan for colonizing
them, and the methods we use will depend a
lot on whether or not they have any surface
rock or surface ice.
Which raises another type of common planet
of a similar size to Hycean Planets, which
are Ice Giants.
In the past we classified Uranus and Neptune
as Gas Giants but we tend to feel the term
ice giant fits them better, and this is also
the area in which we get the term ‘Mini-Neptune’,
and is an example of how we’re still a bit
primitive and limited in our planetary cataloguing
and typing.
On top of that we also have icy moons, which
will often have liquid layers or pockets,
and those are going to be super-common out
in the cosmos, so we’ll save discussion
of them for another day.
For now let’s ask what is an ice giant,
why are Uranus and Neptune examples of them,
why isn’t Saturn one, and what is a mini-Neptune
anyway?
First, it is worth noting that while Uranus
and Neptune are 14 and 17 times more massive
than Earth, larger than the range we expect
for Hycean Planets and Super Earths, which
we tend to assume maxes out after about 10
Earth Masses, Uranus and Neptune are still
tiny compared to Saturn, at 95 Earth Masses,
Jupiter, at 318 Earth Masses, or HR 2562 b,
which is on the hazy edge between Gas Giant
and Brown Dwarf and masses several thousand
times what Earth does, and more importantly,
hundreds of times what Uranus or Neptune do.
So, it isn’t really surprising that planets
that are widely separated in mass will have
different characteristics.
One of those characteristics is how massive
a planet needs to be in order to retain its
hydrogen and helium during solar system formation.
The overwhelming majority of particles out
there are hydrogen and helium but they are
very light and very easily stripped and blown
away by solar wind once a star ignites.
The colder a planet is, the less ultraviolet
light its star gives off, the stronger is
the magnetosphere, all of these factor into
how well hydrogen and helium will remain behind,
as do many other lesser variables.
But the biggest factor is the sheer mass and
gravity of the planet.
We call a planet an ice giant, rather than
a gas giant, when it contains a much higher
portion of heavier elements than we would
expect it to have, meaning the solar wind
stripped a lot of free hydrogen and helium
off of it.
Uranus and Neptune are only about 20% hydrogen
and helium by volume, whereas Jupiter and
Saturn are both more than 90% hydrogen and
helium.
In this context, “Ice” would include frozen
water but also includes other volatiles like
ammonia and methane, also common on comets
and icy moons, whose miniscule gravity tends
to be bad at holding on to free hydrogen and
helium, even when there’s no appreciable
sunlight and solar wind hitting them.
We didn’t know Uranus and Neptune were low
on hydrogen or helium until recently, as they
are covered with a thick atmospheric shell
of it, and estimating their composition required
a lot more data and superior modeling.
And of course they still have way more than
Earth has.
They also wouldn’t have begun with such
a low ratio of hydrogen and helium, but have
lost it over time, and are now principally
Oxygen, carbon, nitrogen and sulfur.
Which makes them intensely valuable as a resource
for getting the main materials for life, as
those along with hydrogen and phosphorus are
the big 6 that you and I, and every other
organism we know of, is made from.
Hydrogen is by no means rare on Uranus or
Neptune either, as to phosphorus, that’s
a bit rare everywhere, and we examined that
shortage and its possible implications on
the Fermi Paradox, the big question of where
all the aliens are, in our Phosphorus Problem
episode from a couple years back.
We also discussed colonizing gas giants in
our episode Colonizing Neptune, where we introduced
the concepts of 2 megastructures, the Neptunian
Chainsaw and the Chandelier City.
Ice giants are fascinating places to colonize
and are also great sources of raw materials
for space habitats like O’Neill Cylinders,
for providing the building blocks for life.
However, they do not represent a good candidate
for life the way Hycean Planets do, as there’s
no decent chance for water oceans there.
This brings up mini-Neptunes, which is what
Hycean Planets would generally have qualified
as examples of in the past.
A Mini-Neptune is not simply a smaller version
of an Ice Giant but does share the trait of
having lots of hydrogen, helium, and ices,
and also presumably having a significant rocky
and metallic core.
The term ‘gas dwarf’ as opposed to ‘gas
giant’, has also been tossed around, and
that can potentially include some worlds only
around as massive as Earth, like Kepler 138-d,
which is more like the density of Pluto, making
it about the same mass as Earth but half again
as wide.
Earth, incidentally, is the densest planet
in the solar system, and denser than our sun
or any moons either, though there might be
some small metallic asteroid that’s denser
than Earth, at the moment it holds that title,
of densest, out of thousands of known and
measured solar objects.
So, the lower threshold for a mini-Neptune
or gas dwarf might be even less mass than
Earth and the upper threshold is more likely
objects about twice as wide as Earth, and
the real dividing line would depend on a lot
of factors.
As I said, Hycean Planets would have fallen
into this category before and I would expect
it to be one that gets a lot more sub-categories
carved out of it and to have overlapped with
many others.
Now, would we colonize these planets?
Well, channel regulars already know the answer
is ‘Yes’, we’ve got plans for colonizing
everything up to and including giant stars
and black holes.
Many of the planets in the mini-Neptune range
will essentially be ice planets somewhere
in between Earth and a big version of Pluto,
and that would constrain what you can do in
terms of terraforming since warming up a planet
mostly made of frozen water, ammonia, and
methane isn’t going to leave you much solid
material left behind.
We discussed some modified or transhuman scenario
for such planets in our look at Colonizing
Pluto, but for humans and normal Earth life,
except maybe penguins, life here is inside
large insulated domes or caverns.
Probably with walls made of some strong and
thermally insulative material like vacuum
walls or aerogel.
The gravity is likely to be adaptable, not
too much lower than Earth or too much higher,
and it would be as easy to make those contained
environments as comfortable as Earth and as
any other space habitat, but such a planet
isn’t likely to be in its star’s habitable
zone or it would have melted away, especially
in terms of any surface regions, and adding
solar mirrors to increase the temperature
or alter the day length isn’t going to work
out well, as it’s a giant ice cube, albeit
one with a large rocky mass inside it too,
probably a molten one.
Some might just happen to be in the range
where we could melt them off and ship off
those volatiles and have a nice Earth like
planet left behind that we could heat with
solar mirrors or shove closer to its star.
Indeed we have a category of planets called
Cthonian Planets, that might include such
ice giants or other worlds who ended up too
close to their star and were left like Mercury,
a hot, dense airless planet.
So your goal is to get close to the star but
not too close, and that will depend on both
the star’s characteristics and the planet’s.
A hot bright star for instance might be better
handled by using solar mirrors that didn’t
reflect ultraviolet to help warm the world
and minimize atmospheric stripping.
The Hycean Planet though is our case where
we expect to have oceans and a very wide range
of distances from their star in which they
could be warm enough for life, having enough
gravity to maintain that hydrogen envelope
even while being warmed up and hit by solar
wind.
To live on one of these probably means domes
too, as the air pressure nearer the surface
is likely to be way too high for humans and
our household animals and plants.
We might strip some atmosphere off then terraform
them, as opposed to living in submarine cities,
or bring in deep sea marine life already used
to high pressure.
Unlike living on airless planets though, with
pressurized domes, here you would need your
environment to be like a submarine, lower
pressure than its surroundings.
And this might include not just habitats floating
on the sea but those floating under the sea
or even floating in the sky by buoyancy, as
we often envision for the clouds of Jupiter
or Venus.
Each of these represent very different scenarios,
and where chambers are concerned that have
to survive higher pressure, size is not your
friend, for making great big bubble habitats
with individual chambers, each kilometers
wide, but many touching bubbles, much like
a foam of bubbles in the sink or bath, works
fine, and super strong materials like diamond
could allow some enormous ones.
They are also enormous planets and might have
some enormous critters native to them, or
that we might engineer to live on them, and
that could include not just giant whales or
kraken but possibly giant floating gasbag
creatures milling around the sky.
All in all, maybe not the favorite place to
build a copy of Earth, but possibly some interesting
places to visit, and as they may turn out
to be the easiest place to detect life on,
they might be where our first interstellar
probes and scouts travel too.
One of our barriers to understanding exoplanets
is gathering data for better models, but another
is designing those better models and trying
to predict the conditions on other planets
from minimal data, which is no easy task and
as more and more planets get found, likely
in their billions, it is something that we
will probably need to adapt Artificial Intelligence
and Neural Networks to help with.
If that sounds like something you might want
to make a hobby out of, or even a profession,
our friends over at Brilliant can help you
get a better understanding of world-changing
technologies like AI and neural networks.
Brilliant’s visual, interactive approach
is engaging and makes STEM concepts actually
stick, with helpful explanations along the
way that never leave you guessing.
Whether it's computers, science, or math,
you’ll never regret having a better understanding
of how they work, be it for professional development
or just because you’re a casual curiosity
seeker interested in knowing more about our
world or the Cosmos.
Brilliant focuses on interactive and hands-on
learning, and breaking big important concepts
down into understandable and interactive pieces,whether
its basic algebra or neural networks.
With thousands of lessons and more being added
each month, Brilliant can help you reach your
goals.
In just 15 minutes a day with bite-sized lessons,
you can master topics that you once thought
impossible, so you can help pioneer new innovations.
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own
pace, learn on the go, and learn a little
something new every day.
To get started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or click on the link in the description, and
the first 200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
We have a lot of ways we come up with episodes
for the show, sometimes by poll, sometimes
on a personal whim, and often by suggestion
of one of our regular editors, so if you enjoyed
today’s topic, you can thank Briana Brownell,
one of our regular editors here who helped
come up with and prepare today’s script.
If you’d like to suggest an episode topic
yourself, we will be having another Youtube
Poll for a few topics after today’s episode
and you’re welcome to comment on that poll
with new episode ideas, which I’ll review,
and we’ll probably do a poll or two on those
in a week or two as well, or I might just
see some I like and do them on whim.
Speaking of future episodes, we have a lot
of episodes coming up, starting with our mid-month
Scifi Sunday episode, on February 12th, where
we’ll look at the concept of Super Soldiers.
Then in two weeks will continue our discussion
from last fall about Time Wars with a look
at Multiversal Warfare and the implications
of some of the crazier aspects of Quantum
Mechanics.
And two weeks from now we’ll take a Journey
to Alpha Centauri.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
