One day humanity may settle countless worlds,
but could any nation hope to govern multiple
planets or even star systems?
Most of us grew up on classic space opera
science fiction where multi-planetary empires
are a staple of the genre and usually it’s
a sprawling empire composed of many hundreds
or even thousands of worlds spread over the
galaxy.
Often these are all connected by warp-capable
ships or wormholes or jump gates or some other
means of FTL, Faster Than Light travel and
communication.
We’ll discuss those today too but as channel
regulars know, we’re not very optimistic
about FTL ever happening.
Most examples of ‘theoretically possible
FTL’ that we hear of in science are more
accurately described as situations where we’re
pretty sure the method is impossible but haven’t
been able to prove beyond any reasonable doubt
that it is, rather than there being any actual
evidence it could be done.
I’m a physicist and I don’t think so,
and I don’t know any colleagues who do,
but most of us would love to be proven wrong.
Your default warp drive runs on negative matter,
so do stable wormholes, and that’s a material
allowed under math but for which there’s
no evidence that it exists and no real expectation
it does either.
Much as we don’t expect to find a negative
dollar bill or a negative gallon of water,
outside an accounting chart or spreadsheet.
We could be wrong, but if we’re not, does
that spell the end of our dreams of empires
of many worlds?
The good news is no, and we’ll cover several
cases today, but let’s start with that classic
flaw of space opera.
First, our galaxy has something like half
a trillion stars in it and most will have
planets that are at least as terraformable
as Mars or Venus.
Sci-Fi writers are often horrible at scale
and even writers known for their scientific
accuracy like Isaac Asimov tended to really
lowball the number of planets and population
we expect in a settled and FTL capable galaxy.
Both Asimov’s Foundation series and Frank
Herbert’s Dune, two of the most influential
sci-fi series out there, both have a human
empire of a few million worlds at most.
To their credit, we didn’t know how many
stars were in the galaxy at the time as only
the brightest stars could be seen, and most
are a lot dimmer than our Sun.
We also didn’t have much expectation about
how often an Earth-like habitable planet in
the Goldilocks zone would exist, but even
using the estimates from their era, they should
have been coming up with more like a billion
worlds instead.
That number is fairly vital to Drake’s Equation
and SETI, the Search for Extraterrestrial
Intelligence, as it gives us the number of
low-hanging fruit worlds where complex life
might emerge on its own or where we might
be able to settle without vast effort or some
of the higher-tech and more inventive approaches
to settling planets we’ve developed since
then.
We don’t know what that number is yet, partially
because we don’t know how to define it.
We can’t give a precise estimate of how
likely a star is to have a planet with 80%
or 90% or 101% of Earth’s mass, but even
if we did, we don’t know how close to Earth’s
gravity and composition a planet would need
to be for comfortable and easy terraforming.
Or to have complex native life.
The number of Earthlike planets around such
stars obviously varies.
If 80% of Earth’s Mass is good enough, that's
a huge difference than if even 101% is too
much and 99% not enough.
There’s also that question of how close
to their star they need to be, and we can’t
assume Venus’s orbit is too hot just because
the Venus we know is a molten nightmare.
Venus's weirdly long and backward day is likely
the result of a huge collision, not its proximity
to the Sun, and it's thought this is the prime
factor in its horrible conditions.
Meanwhile, a planet decently more massive
than Earth out at Mars distance might be habitable
too.
The most conservative calculation I’ve seen
on the matter in recent years was 300 million
from Steve Bryson’s team at NASA Ames, and
that was their conservative figure of assuming
only 7% of the 4 billion most sun-like stars
in this galaxy would have the right planet
in the right location, their high-end figure
was 10 billion.
This estimate is more generous with which
stars to include and what percentage would
have good planets.
Time will tell which end of that range reality
landed at.
Though I would tend to say for colonization
purposes that value was still very low.
Higher technology always helps but the most
powerful colonization tool in our current
kit is to scatter either shades or mirrors
at a planet’s L1 or L2 Lagrange point, or
in orbit of the planet, or moon, to add or
subtract sunlight reaching that planet or
to give it more terrestrial day night cycle
of 24 hours.
We’ve discussed that option on many occasions,
most recently in our episodes on Statites
& Lagites in January or the Lagrange Point
Settlement episode from later that month,
and the simple reality is building and maintaining
one is no small feat but vastly smaller and
easier than sending off a colonial ark ship
to another star or terraforming a planet,
or even para-terraforming a planet with domes.
That basically widens your goldilocks zone
to anything as close to the sun as Mercury
out to further than Saturn and renders the
type of star a lot less important, since that
same approach can provide magnetic shielding
from coronal mass ejections and other atmospheric
stripping processes.
As well as adjust the spectrum of light to
filter it to something more preferable.
Such being the case, rather than having maybe
one in 100 stars be suitable for life and
maybe finding a decent planet around 1 in
100 of them, we would expect at least 1 in
10 stars and probably better than 50/50 able
to provide at least one decent planet to at
least para-terraform.
Meaning we’d expect something on an order
of 100 billion habitable systems.
But even that 1 in 100 stars with 1 in 100
having a good planet would still imply 40
million prime planets being available in the
galaxy, and that tends to be our classic space
opera setup with an assumption many belong
to some alien empire or you’re only in part
of the galaxy or that some worlds are lost.
What it also means is that if you’ve got
a star kingdom of a dozen planets, they might
all be in the same star system.
But more importantly, there are 60,000 stars
within 100 light years of Earth and if only
1 in 10,000 was habitable, that means you’ve
only got around 6 systems with one planet
we could colonize that could get a signal
to us in under a century.
Alternatively, most of those 60,000 stars
probably have multiple planets that we could
at least para-terraform and you might easily
be able to get an empire of a million worlds
stuffed into that volume, which itself isn’t
even a millionth of the galaxy’s total volume.
It also means you can be getting dozens if
not hundreds of planets within several light
years of Earth.
And that’s all without factoring in artificial
habitats like O’Neill Cylinders or including
minor and dwarf planets in the count or rogue
planets between systems.
Now we can debate if it is plausible to have
an empire stretched out over several light
years and we’ll return to that point, but
let’s get four caveats in right from the
outset.
First, as we just mentioned, there are a ton
more worlds to consider when we start including
larger moons, bigger minor planets, artificial
habitats, and interstellar rogue planets.
Most science fiction settings tend to act
like an entire settled planet is one small
county or modest city anyway, and that most
mighty star empires of a million worlds from
space opera act like they’ve got maybe a
couple hundred actual planets.
Given that, I think it makes it worth noting
that you could have such large empires packed
into just a handful of light years.
Which brings up the second caveat, that an
awful lot of places have stars far more closely
packed than our area does.
Even ignoring places like the galactic core,
where you might pack thousands of stars into
a volume smaller than the one surrounding
us before you’d get to Alpha Centauri, we
have lots of star clusters where you might
have hundreds or thousands of stars within
a dozen light years of each other, each home
to several planets.
And there are thousands of clusters like that
and plenty more places where stars are packed
a lot tighter than here.
Or looser for that matter.
Third, any place that has ships able to move
back and forth between star systems – even
just at modest sublight speeds – also could
set up shop on objects too far from their
sun to be running on a solar economy.
Perhaps they’ve mastered cheap and abundant
fusion energy, in which case every dwarf planet
or icy body of note in their outer system,
be it their Kuiper Belt or even Oort Cloud,
should end up with some sort of outpost on
it.
Maybe it’s only a lone rotating habitat
orbiting the snowball or buried under the
ice there, home to just a few thousand folks,
but it could as easily be millions, and whichever
the case, that’s many millions of such communities
out on the fringe of most systems.
Fourth, those outskirts will be much closer
and denser, if generally smaller in quantity,
around most systems as most of them are red
dwarfs with somewhere between half and a tenth
of our Sun’s mass.
Planets and outer bodies can pack in much
closer on such systems while bigger stars
might easily have a dozen planets in their
normal habitable zone.
Now I did specifically title this episode
multi-planetary empires and on this channel,
we limit that to meaning big planets, Earth,
Mars, gas giants and so on, while we tend
to use the term ‘world’ to refer to settled
moons, bigger asteroids and minor planets,
or larger habitation megastructures, in addition
to Earth-like planets.
So, we’ll be focusing on actual planets
in the remainder of the discussion but that
doesn’t mean we have a future in which those
other smaller but far more numerous minor
worlds are non-existent or even big players.
Indeed, odds are good that by sheer quantity
they’ll hold the vast majority of humans.
They just wouldn’t tend to be the highlights
on the map, so to speak.
It also has to do with the continuity of empires
over big distances.
We tend to talk about the difficulty of maintaining
contact and control on some colony at Alpha
Centauri or Tau Ceti and how difficult that
would be and how it would take years to get
help to them in event of a major disaster
or rebellion.
But beyond it being unlikely a whole planet
would rebel out of the blue or suffer any
planet-wide disaster, a planet is not a star
system.
In Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle’s classic
novel “The Mote in God’s Eye” we visit
the New Caledonia system, which contains two
major planets, New Ireland and New Scotland.
The system is a local interstellar capital
of that region of humanity’s current empire,
the second one of note, and when the first
empire fell into civil war that nuked Earth
into oblivion, one of the planets remained
loyal while the other rebelled and the two
fought over it for a long time.
It is not hard to imagine a planet around
a distant star rebelling or seceding from
its capital, especially when that capital
might be tens of years of travel or even communication
time away and the same for any neighbors.
It’s a bit different if you have a colonized
solar system of several different major planets
and tons of lesser worlds orbiting that star
and many more in the depths of interstellar
space scattered every few light years.
There’s also no compelling reason to assume
all those planets got settled by the same
group of colonists, or even that any single
planet did.
Let’s say tomorrow a few thousand interstellar
ark ships magically dropped into our hands
along with a few space towers to move people
back and forth to them easily.
Each ship can hold ten thousand people and
happens to have a nice star chart with entries
for every local star and planet of note.
This is a thought experiment, so we don’t
care how we got the ships, as we’re really
just trying to look at this from the perspective
of our civilization a couple centuries down
the road with better automation for ship construction
and improved space capability.
I have no idea how we would divide those ships
up, maybe one for each country and then divide
the rest proportionally by population or some
subtly veiled equivalent to military muscle,
but there’s no reason to send each of those
ships to a different solar system or why a
country with, say, five ships, would want
to send them all to one system with five planets.
Or even that a planet with five decent continents
might not get five ships from five separate
but reasonably friendly countries sending
folks.
Or that some country back here with a few
ships but little interest in space might not
sell ships, or some of their passenger slots,
to countries or groups or individuals.
Iceland, population 373,000, might end up
with a ship but have no interest in trying
to come up with 10,000 citizens to load, and
might sell it to the US or Canada or keep
it but only send a contingent of a few hundred
and an appointed governor while selling off
slots of 100 people or less to various other
groups.
There’s a galaxy of billions of planets
out there, but they can all be colonized eventually
and in the meantime those closest are best,
and some better than others, and one small
continent of an Earth-like planet is probably
more prized earlier on than an entire planet
like Mercury or moon like Ganymede.
And of course, once the ship gets to the destination,
it can turn back around, return to earth,
and grab more people, to go there or to another
colony planet further away.
Point being, of the 131 stars, brown dwarfs,
and sub-dwarfs currently identified within
20 light years of Earth, that could be thought
of as our neighbors on our border, nobody
is likely to be in a position to casually
claim the entirety of one of them and in a
way that can stick for the several centuries
that would be needed for them to grow their
own numbers up to something that might colonize
that system rather than some small bit of
it.
We might see things negotiated or fought out
of course, but it’s a lot more likely we
would see several settlements scattered across
a system and those may or may not have any
shared history, culture, or early government
with each other.
Nor are the mighty nations of Earth, who all
share just one planet, going to be very sympathetic
to colonies complaining that someone else
setup on another continent, let alone another
planet in the system.
Even if they did, let’s say the US in a
few centuries sent a colonial fleet to a system
that planted several colonies there on various
worlds, what odds those all have the same
grievances or issues with Earth centuries
down the road?
Why would all agree to band together and flat
out leave?
Why not one of them or maybe a few, or maybe
one doesn’t rebel from ‘Earth’ but just
the US and joins Japan or France instead?
And what is the grievance?
Probably they weren’t built with any intent
of seriously taxing them down the road and
they probably rely on Earth for new data,
science, and entertainment.
The harder it is to send troops to some place,
the lower the expectation you can get taxes
out of them, and the harder it would be to
guarantee a certain level of trade – though
new settlements do tend to have strong trade
relations with the country their settlers
came from due to similar language and cultural
norms, all of which will probably fade through
time.
But the default downfall of big galactic empires
in a no-FTL situation isn’t how far away
the entire civilization is but how far away
its neighbors are.
If you’ve got a hundred settled planets
within a few light years of you, several of
which are within light hours, you not only
have a reason for trade and relations, but
a real concern that even if your homeworld
or sector capital doesn’t send troops, if
you rebel one of your neighbors might instead.
This hardly means maintaining a multi-planetary
empire is easy, but it does mean it has some
things working in its favor against the overwhelming
vastness of space and time.
We also tend to assume colonization of other
stars takes place because we’re growing
and looking for elbow room, albeit probably
not with great urgency as we’re not likely
to see super-huge families become the norm
again anytime soon, so we sort of trickle
out into space, but that dynamic shifts a
bit if we get radical life extension.
All of a sudden you can have kids when you’re
100, or 200, and aren’t in a rush to start
a family but also have no cap on when you
have to finish adding to one.
That sort of shift is likely to see a rise
in growth rates and with an intent to longer-term
solutions, and if you don’t have an expiration
date you can contemplate getting on board
an arkship for a few decades much more easily.
Particularly since you might do it while frozen
if you don’t want to be awake, as generally
speaking the technology needed to restore
someone from cryo is similar or even slightly
more advanced than what you need to turn back
the aging clock.
All of that is debatable of course but tends
to strike me as our most plausible scenario
for the future, by plurality if not majority,
assuming AGI doesn’t just murder us off
to replace us, and in either case you have
a civilization where folks with no real cap
on their longevity are trying to settle space.
I’d make the case that folks who live for
centuries are probably going to be at least
a little more willing to consider being part
of an interstellar nation when many of the
original colonists come from Earth and are
still alive and kicking and probably very
influential there.
And the same back on Earth, where a lot of
your senior leadership, no pun intended, probably
have siblings or children still alive and
off on those colonies who they keep in loose
contact with.
And you still have that issue of not being
able to casually rebel when several of your
neighbors can get fleets over to your planet
quickly.
And it isn’t like you could organize a planet
wide rebellion quickly or quietly either.
Not unless your planet was so sparsely populated
that it only had maybe a million people on
it, tops, and then you really do have to worry
that Earth, or your local sector capital,
can be sending armadas with more troops in
them than you have people.
You do still have the problem of time lag
for a representative style of government.
If we imagined a cluster of space with 500
major worlds jammed into a 10-light year radius.
If that’s evenly distributed, then not only
do some folks have a 10-year communication
lag to hear about what happened back at the
capital – assuming it’s actually at the
center – but the median delay is 8 years.
250 of your 500 worlds are 8 or more light
years away, since over half of the volume
of a sphere 10 light years in radius is in
that last two exterior light years, while
only an eighth of the volume and stars are
in the 5 light year sphere stretching halfway
out.
Keep that in mind as it tends to imply a rising
limit.
If you find out that statistically your rate
of rebellion or secession attempts tends to
rise linear to your distance from the capital,
so that about 1 of those 250 outer worlds
was rebelling every year, then if you double
the diameter of you imperial blob, your new
outer half at 16-20 light years out contains
8 times as many worlds who are each twice
as likely to jump ship, so you’re putting
more like a score of rebellions down a year
now, not 1, and while you’ve got 8 times
as many worlds supplying ships and troops,
they are taking longer to get to each hot
spot and coordinate orders.
But they probably are not coming from your
home world.
These are actual planets which might have
several garrisons and fleets each, even when
underdeveloped.
And probably none are thinking about going
their own way seriously until they have hundreds
of millions of folks and feel like they can
be supporting their own navy to fend off neighbors.
It’s probably worth noting that in a lot
of futuristic contexts ‘taxes’ aren’t
exactly redundant but aren’t really your
motivation for control either.
Even nowadays most countries are not really
looking to add territory by conquest and people
to increase your taxes because you generally
spend almost all of those on services and
infrastructure for those folks.
In a post-scarcity civilization, or a near-equivalent,
while raw materials for the long-term interests
you still, your citizens probably aren’t
really super-motivated about adding one more
golden back scratcher to their collection
by taxing the miners of some godforsaken rock
harder.
Those miners on that rock probably have considerably
more luxurious lives than we do nowadays even
on some distant barely settled colony.
Rather your motivation is probably simply
control of those around you.
That might be entirely despotic, or it might
be something more democratic where colony
planets are viewed as dangerous in isolation
where some crackpot group or underregulated
researcher might be playing with brainwashing
viruses or rogue self-replicating AI.
If your region of space just suffered a Hegemonizing
swarm attack from some reckless colony they
might decide their new motto for fledgling
planets should be “Welcome to the empire…
or else”.
It obviously isn’t hard to imagine classic
space empire tyrannies and I don’t want
to just cheerfully handwave that option away
as there’s nothing inherent to technology
and prosperity that makes despots vastly less
likely to pop up.
They also have some impressive technologies
available, potentially like a brainwashing
virus they can unleash or any of the sheer
brute force mega weapons we’ve discussed
over the years.
Your maximum empire radius might be built
around how much time lag a colony needs between
them and your megaweapon to pull off a rebellion,
rebuild, and build a defense to outlast it
or a megaweapon of their own for reciprocity.
And you might not be willing to build copies
of that doomsday device away from your capital
where rebel generals might decide they would
like to be lords of a smaller star kingdom
of their own, and they can choose which way
to point that space cannon you built them.
Things get easier with FTL of course, we’ll
be looking at Stargates and similar FTL two
weeks from now and will deep dive that effect
on a civilization more then, but it makes
any modern form of government viable again.
Whereas a planet 10 light years from Earth
electing a senator then presumably has to
ship that person to Earth, which is likely
to take more than 10 years, and so you need
to start imagining some very long terms even
compared to the longevity in office most US
senators tend to have, 10 of them served over
40 years, but then again life extension technology
might add to that a lot, or encourage term
limits.
I can’t really imagine a planet feeling
that their representative dispatched to the
capital decades ago and receiving orders a
decade old is really serving their interests
all that well, and 10 light years is not a
big size for an interstellar empire, and a
quarter of light speed would be a respectable
rate of travel for a ship, so that would be
a 50 year lag from the day they got elected
to when they sent back their first report.
50 years ago, the Senators from my state of
Ohio were former astronaut John Glenn and
Bob Taft 2, not to be confused with Bob Taft
1, who was also our senator, or Bob Taft 3,
Ohio’s governor 20 years back.
It’s not terribly uncommon for the kids
of politicians to go into politics either
and end up holding their parent’s seat one
day, but it would be a bit amusing if we imagined
a multiplanetary empire that didn’t have
life extension or cryo – and again the latter
strongly implies the former – and sent its
politicians off in a generational ark ship
back to Earth.
Or opted for some type of elaborate cloning
or duplication.
We saw that in the Foundation TV series, with
Emperor Cleon, one of the few innovations
that wasn’t in the book that I actually
liked.
And that raises the notion of aristocracy
or monarchies too and they don’t seem particularly
favored or disfavored at the multiplanetary
level.
I could imagine a loose confederacy of worlds
that wasn’t much more than a trade and defense
arrangement having legal counsel and lobbies
back on Earth with some firms known for their
longevity and stability.
There is a law firm out of Kent in the UK
that’s been in continuous operation since
1570, almost half a millennium ago, and we
might see folks skipping on democratic representatives
in favor of some group like that which they
can just send dated and general instructions
too and otherwise represents their interests.
Or they may use some sort of AI as their representative
or spokesperson.
Or use a brainwashing virus on someone elected
to be that spokesperson to ensure loyalty.
Ultimately, I can make a case for just about
any system of government working, it’s just
an uphill effort in the absence of FTL and
some types might have a harder lift both operating
and justifying their existence.
And even tyrants typically need to convince
their lieutenants and viceroys they should
stick with them rather than become their own
sovereign power or join another team.
We should also note that while some methods
of governance or economics probably objectively
work better than others, post-scarcity civilizations
can probably get away with running systems
they like better simply because their sheer
abundance permits a lot of waste and abuse
without breaking the wheels.
For any nation to exist, rather than be a
collection of smaller states, it must serve
a purpose and by default that tends to be
shared defense, and in this maximum range
sort of context, whatever range allows meaningful
shared military support is also one in which
shared defense is plausible.
If an ally can’t support me usefully 10
light years away, then an enemy has those
same sorts of constraints to invade me.
The same would apply for trade, no mutual
arrangements, regulations, or treaties serve
a point if the distance is too far to allow
regular trade.
Those can be stretched out for vital things,
so a treaty banning the development of some
self-replicating murder machines might be
in place or some agreement to a galactic standard
for weights & measures and interstellar language
or time & date is plausible too.
Likely as not that would be a host of people
speaking in a variety of different native
tongues that were automatically translated
into some standard language nobody other than
computers & interstellar lawyers actually
spoke then translated into the recipient’s
language.
Or everyone uses Earth time and keeps doing
it even though Earth itself manually adjusted
its orbit to exactly 365 days.
There’s also no guarantee every planet in
each system would be part of that same empire,
which may or may not have assets in other
star systems too.
It wouldn’t be hard to imagine in the year
4000 AD that Sweden still had the same borders
as nowadays but also had a hundred major asteroid
colonies, modest chunks of territory on Mars
and Venus, one of the moons of Neptune, a
dozen major Oort Cloud colonies, and was the
patron and de jure ruler of a dozen planets
scattered around some of the nearer stars.
Same, the King of England is still king of
a lot of various countries with their own
parliaments and who do not turn to him for
much guidance, and that post may still exist
for ages to come and you could easily have
millions of planets out there who sincerely
viewed themselves as members of that realm,
so long as nobody wearing that crown or over
at Number 10 Downing Street tries sending
them any orders.
Throw in FTL and the game shifts a lot, and
it is also not hard to imagine most of the
galaxy getting settled before someone back
here in the core worlds finally figures out
FTL.
That’s a common enough plot, early colonization
done by slowboats and them getting caught
up on by faster ships invented back home during
their slow voyage.
If that happened, somebody might decide to
launch a great crusade to reunite all of humanity
into one big happy family… or else.
And you also have to consider scenarios like
multi-planetary empires literally being physically
linked by site-to-site transporters or wormholes
or just vacuum trains running on active support
tethers and moving at hundreds of kilometers
per second.
Peter Hamilton has worked with this concept
in quite a few of his novels, Night’s Dawn
and the Commonwealth Saga in particular come
to mind, and we encounter it in Larry Niven’s
Known Space and Ringworld setting too, and
many others.
You might even build or move planets into
a shared solar system to cut down on lag times
and clear that space around the vacated star
for intense starlifting and disassembly.
As to what qualifies, it would probably be
whatever the minimum was because somebody
will declare they are one as soon as they
can make a decent claim on it and that will
probably stick.
But I think you would need to do a bit better
than being one of our larger modern nations
with a large base on the Moon and Mars.
Nonetheless I would imagine the first of each
of these will probably be just a handful of
centuries down the road and with several of
them basing themselves off Earth and only
controlling a modest fraction of a handful
of other planets, moons, and major asteroids
in the solar system.
I’d bet on at least half a dozen such entities
that had large holdings not just on Earth
but Mars and the Moon.
I tend to think places that control the entirety
of not just one system but several nearby
it are more likely to first emerge in smaller
star clusters we settle in a few thousand
years and which spill out from whatever settlement
there first took off, in an era where spaceships
are easy to make and where most unclaimed
stars are far enough away that nobody from
Earth wants to try but few of the colonies
closer to them have grown enough to want to
send their own.
But for those first multi planetary empires,
I would guess quite a few of the existing
countries around nowadays are still around
then, and maybe some of us are still around
then too if life extension takes off.
Who knows, maybe your homeland will be a multi-planetary
empire one day, and maybe you’ll be there
to see it.
We explored the practicality of multi-planetary
empires today but not what they do or who
they are, and tomorrow, for April 1st, 2024,
no fooling, we’ll be releasing our Monthly
Nebula Exclusive, Galactic Beacons, to discuss
one such project huge stellar empires might
create and to ask how those would work, what
types there are, and why you would or wouldn’t
make them.
And if you haven’t already seen it, this
month NEbula Exclusive, Crystal Aliens, continues
our recent discussions of alternative chemistries
for life we had in our episodes ammonia based
and silicon based lifeforms.
And again, Crystal Aliens is out now exclusively
on Nebula, our streaming service, where you
can also see every regular episode of SFIA
a few days early and ad free, as well as our
other bonus content, including extended editions
of many episodes, and more Nebula Exclusives
like last month’s episode Topopolis: The
Eternal River, January’s Giant Space Monsters,
December’s episode The Fermi Paradox: Hermit
Shoplifter Hypothesis, Ultra-Relativistic
Spaceships, Dark Stars at the Beginning of
Time, Life As An Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners
on the Moon, Space Freighters, Retrocausality,
Orch Or & Free Will, and more.
Nebula has tons of great content from an ever-growing
community of creators.
Using my link and discount it’s available
now for just over $2.50 a month, less than
the price of the drink or snack you might
have been enjoying during the episode.
When you sign up at my link, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only
get access to all of the great stuff Nebula
offers, like Crystal Aliens and Galactic Beacons,
you’ll also be directly supporting this
show.
Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, and with
all the exclusive bonus content, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
We’ll get to the upcoming episodes in just
a moment, but on the topic of things coming
up, this year’s International Space Development
Conference, ISDC 2024, will be in Los Angeles
May 23rd-26th, and it’s looking to be an
exciting and informative event, including
an appearance by William Shatner to receive
the Heinlein Award.
I’ll be there and if you live in there area,
I hope you’ll come by and say hi, but if
you have some free time then, we always need
volunteers, especially to help with the NSS
Space Settlement contest, where we usually
have a couple hundred student finalists from
around the world giving presentations on their
space settlement designs and needing a little
shepherding.
If you’re interested in volunteering, in
any capacity, I’ll leave a link in the episode
description, isdc.nss.org/volunteer-at-isdc/
So that’s it for this month but join us
as we start April off on the 4th with a discussion
of space based solar power and several other
clean energy options from space that might
be able to help us power not only our orbital
infrastructure, but Earth itself, including
options like Earth’s own magnetic field.
Then on the 7th will return to the Fermi Paradox
to ask if the reason why we don’t see expanding
alien civilizations is because they eat their
own colonies, in the Cronus Scenarios.
After that, we’ll have a look at Defending
Earth, be it from asteroids, aliens, AI, astronomical
explosions, or just mundane human threats,
possibly including rebellious space colonies.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you’d like to donate or help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content
like Crystal Aliens, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
