When we look up into the night skies, 
all we see is absence and silence,  
but could our galaxy be a dark forest full 
of hidden predators waiting to consume us?
So, welcome back to another Scifi Sunday here 
on SFIA, where we take concepts in science  
fiction and examine them in light of known and 
theoretical science. Today we’ll be examining  
the notion of a mostly silent and hostile 
galaxy as we see in many science fiction works,  
from H.P. Lovecraft’s Cosmic Horror works 
featuring old monsters like Cthulhu preying on  
the galaxy, to modern takes on the work, like 
Alastair Reynolds’ Revelation space series,  
and Cixin Liu’s trilogy “Remembrance of Earth's 
Past”, whose second novel, the Dark Forest,  
popularized one of the Fermi Paradox Solutions 
we’ll be discussing today, though it's worth  
noting the specific fermi paradox solution in 
question was discussed at least as early as 1983  
by another excellent scifi author, David Brin.
Now we will be discussing a few variants of  
quiet and hostile galaxy’s today, including 
the Berserker Hypothesis, named for another  
great scifi series by Fred Saberhagen, and this 
is hardly our first look at the Fermi Paradox.  
Indeed we did a short episode on the Dark forest 
and its use of Game Theory 4 years back when  
I first started doing the occasional “Bonus 
Episode” beyond our normal Thursday episodes,  
which quickly evolved into our mid-month scifi 
Sunday, and back then the bonuses episodes were  
about half normal length so I always felt 
that episode rushed the topic and focused  
too much on the math, and so was glad the 
audience asked for a follow up on the topic. 
Now, the Fermi Paradox is the big question of 
why in such an enormous and ancient Universe  
we don’t seem to see any alien civilizations 
and discussions of reasons why come in so many  
varieties that for most of this show’s history, 
our two longest episodes, each over an hour long,  
were given over to simple summaries of the 
more popular solutions. Indeed, since the  
most recent of that pair was done in 2016 it is 
probably past time for an update for that too,  
and it probably will need to be longer.
It’s a giant topic and one with no clear  
answers but generally the main discussions 
break into contemplating Loud vs Quiet Aliens.  
We did a deeper dive on the notion of Loud Grabby 
Aliens in that episode late last year and today’s  
topic is more about the Quiet Aliens variety.
As a reminder, Loud Aliens are distinguished by  
possessing these 3 characteristics: They expand 
into a galaxy fast, they last a long time,  
and they make visible changes to those areas 
they reach. They may or may not expand beyond  
their own galaxy or skip primitive planets but 
the key characteristic that distinguishes them  
from other types of civilizations is that they 
essentially leave a very detectable presence,  
by being big, visible, and long lasting.
We call that Loud, since the usual context  
for discussions in the 1970s and 80s when most 
of this was first getting seriously discussed  
revolved around listening for radio communications 
and signals. “Glaringly Obvious Aliens” is perhaps  
a more appropriate term, and they are the 
low-hanging fruit of the Fermi Paradox and  
their apparent absence is one of the main reasons 
for the Fermi Paradox. By default that’s what we  
think we should expect to see in a universe as 
old and as large as this one, ancient, giant,  
and very visible civilizations, because it’s what 
we want to do, go out and explore and colonize new  
worlds and put up big beacons and billboards 
advertising them for visits and immigration,  
and just keep on doing that in an ever-expanding 
wave until the stars themselves burn out. 
If anybody like that exists, probability indicates 
they had to have started at least several tens or  
even hundreds of million light years away from 
us and started recently enough that we still  
would not have seen the signals and light from 
them. And this version of the Loud Aliens model,  
which takes on the name Grabby Aliens, assumes 
we would count as the newest example of that,  
just getting ready to expand out, and tends to put 
an upper limit on how many civilizations are in  
our universe currently as several thousand. Which 
sounds like a lot but still means you would not  
expect to have even a single one in this galaxy 
with us and indeed, that you would have to search  
several thousand galaxies to have a decent shot 
at finding the home world of such a civilization. 
Though of course it works on the notion that 
the speed of light is a limit on travel and  
communication and that generally means 
no unified galaxy-sized civilizations,  
let alone sprawling multi-galactic ones, 
just an endless sea of local civilizations  
arisen from a shared homeworld but divergent 
and locally focused, and that’s something to  
keep in mind for today as we discuss Quiet and 
Hostile aliens. We don’t really think there  
can be unification on policies or enforcement 
of them unless such a policy is essentially a  
mathematical certainty everybody converges on, no 
matter how different in outlook they are… which  
is why options like Dark Forest Theory rely on 
math such as game theory for their functioning. 
Now, loud aliens are defined by being fast 
expanders, relative to the age of the galaxy  
anyway, where ‘fast’ might mean ‘took millions 
of years to crawl across the galaxy’, and the  
same relative notions apply to being long lasting, 
because a civilization that blows itself up in a  
few thousand years of technology might seem stable 
to us but would be a brief bright flash on the  
galactic stage, a Hiccup Civilization to keep to 
the loud and quiet analogy. Hiccup civilizations  
are only briefly and dimly visible so can exist 
without us seeing them, but only to a certain  
density, loudness, or duration. If they pop up 
too often or loudly or longly, we’d spot some.  
A civilization which is neither of these, 
expanding not at all or ultra-slow,  
or enduring but a brief time, is a Quiet Alien. 
As would be one that left little evidence  
they existed. Any one of those three traits 
being missing, fast-expanders, long-lasters,  
galaxy-changes, and you get a quiet civilization.
The default solution to the Fermi Paradox  
throughout most of the 50’s and 60’s was that 
since there weren’t any Loud Aliens around that  
either we were somehow blind to them or in denial 
to their existence, or that they were the Quiet  
Type and usually this was attributed to those 
first two options, expansion and durability.  
The Paradox is named for Enrico Fermi, who 
helped design nuclear weapons and who died  
before the Space Race, and took the reasonable 
view at the time that space travel to colonize  
other worlds was probably not realistic and 
that civilizations probably blew themselves  
up eventually and thus were hard to hear from, 
again just a quick Hiccup or nothing at all. 
Which is a pretty decent answer but 
seemed less convincing as time went  
on and we hadn’t blown ourselves up or even 
developed that capacity – to my knowledge no  
nation has ever obtained or even seriously 
sought sufficient atomic weapons stockpiles  
to pose a real threat to human survival, just 
the current civilization which might take a  
couple centuries to restore itself after a full 
scale war if it happened. And with good reason,  
it’s of no real strategic value and it's insanely 
expensive to maintain that level of weaponry. 
Atomic stockpiles were mostly about ensuring that 
if your enemy attacked first and had some unknown  
but plausible advantage, like their submarines 
or bombers were sneakier than you thought,  
you would still have enough weaponry to deploy 
yourself to hurt them too badly to effectively  
launch an offensive war against you. They’re 
just too beat up and busy tending their own  
wounds to try to invade and conquer you.
This is part of why folks often refer to  
nuclear weapons as defensive, and the other piece 
of that equation that often gets left out and  
will also matter for today is that it is not a 
them versus us situation with no other players.  
If the world really was NATO versus the Warsaw 
Pact, and those had truly represented totally  
loyal and willing participants, then maybe 
invading your enemy by dragging your battered  
body over there to finish the job might work, but 
most of the planet was not in either alliance and  
neither alliance was without its share of internal 
feuds and suspicion about their allies, their own  
internal rivalries, or their neutral neighbors.
This is a critical point to remember when  
contemplating scenarios involving alien 
civilizations or what a race of robots that  
we made might do in relation to us, because 
it's not plausible, especially with aliens,  
that you would have a simple scenario of us 
versus them and no one else involved or aware. 
So, with the apparent absence of Loud Aliens we 
see thoughts shift to various versions of Quiet  
Aliens, one who either don’t expand or don’t 
expand much or don’t last long if they do,  
or both – and that short duration might 
be something like ascending to another  
plane of existence voluntarily rather than 
just blowing each other straight to hell. 
We tend to assume the ability to colonize 
space eliminates the short duration issue,  
as you don’t have all your eggs in one basket, 
so some are bound to survive and thrive and lay  
more eggs. However we also have the notion of 
the Von Neumann Probe or Von Neumann Chicken,  
as a response to the idea that sending 
manned ships on colony missions that  
might take centuries only to arrive at 
lifeless worlds, might stop colonization.  
The Von Neumann probe is a robot that arrives 
in a destination solar system, scans around  
it while latching onto some asteroid or moon and 
extracting resources from it to build facilities  
in that system and copies of itself to go on to 
other systems. This became a popular notion as  
we sent folks to the Moon but only briefly and 
we turned to robot missions for decades after. 
This is the Hart-Tipler Conjecture of the Fermi 
Paradox, that you can rely on self-replicating  
robots to go do your exploring and maybe your 
colonizing too, at least laying the groundwork,  
but if the robots can come out then you can 
have them send tight-beam signals home and  
just litter the galaxy with them, sending out 
new waves if needed, to replenish those which  
might be failing to replicate or report 
over time, or failing in some other way.  
The absence of any of these von Neumann Probes, 
says the Hart-Tipler Conjecture, strongly  
contraindicated any civilization having existed in 
this galaxy before us. This is what makes objects  
like Oumuamua especially interesting, this being 
the interstellar asteroid some speculated might  
be an alien probe, or a damaged one, that 
passed by our inner system some years back. 
Which takes us to the Berserker Hypothesis, 
the Dark version of the von Neumann Probe,  
where someone has intentionally or 
accidentally unleashed probes on the  
galaxy that attack other spaceships or even 
other primitive planets. Personally I like  
the notion of someone having sent a second 
wave of probes out with updates and patches,  
with orders to remove or replace any probes they 
encountered lacking those new directives, like  
the importance of leaving any planet alone with 
signs of life and just attacking other ‘probes’  
lacking the right directives or IFF beacon. Thus 
getting you the result of endless mutant waves of  
probes attacking each other with some occasionally 
attacking primitive planets or less primitive ones  
where they’ve got basic space travel and ‘probes’ 
of their own, lacking the right beacons or IFF. 
Now, as I mentioned at the beginning, the 
Berserker Hypothesis draws its name from  
the Berserker Space Opera series featuring 
ancient doomsday weapons left over from some  
interstellar war between two apparently 
extinct alien races, whose monstrous  
asteroid-sized killing machines survived them, 
wiping out one side then turning on the other,  
and devastating the galaxy until modern 
times, where humanity, called the Solarians,  
fight back against them, or sometimes collaborate 
with them, in order to save their own necks. It’s  
a great series that ran from the mid-60s all the 
way to Saberhagen’s death in 2007, and explores a  
lot of the now well-known tropes of robot on human 
warfare, and it’s a great bit of vintage scifi. 
In terms of the Fermi Paradox itself though, it 
became the blanket term for solutions involving  
von Neuman probes mulching the galaxy, and for 
whatever reason humanity has been left alone but  
not for much longer. We will get our answer 
to the Fermi Paradox when we find out it's  
our turn to join the long list of victims 
of such probes since they were first made. 
To quote David Brin’s 1983 paper, The Great 
Silence, “There is no need to struggle to suppress  
the elements of the Drake equation in order to 
explain the Great Silence, nor need we suggest  
that no [intelligent aliens] anywhere would bear 
the cost of interstellar travel. It need only  
happen once for the results of this scenario to 
become the equilibrium conditions in the Galaxy.  
We would not have detected extra-terrestrial 
radio traffic – nor would any [intelligent  
aliens] have ever settled on Earth – because all 
were killed shortly after discovering radio.” 
And there are definitely elements of that at 
work in many great space operas thereafter,  
like the Wolves or Inhibitors from Alastair 
Reynolds’s Revelation Space. But to work as  
a solution it has to overcome some problems.
First, you do need someone to have been stupid  
enough to do that in the first place and 
while we can all roll our eyes and chuckle  
at how plausible that is, I think that might 
be exaggerated. I don’t know anyone who works  
in artificial intelligence that doesn’t speak 
of it as intrinsically dangerous if not used  
cautiously and doesn’t know all the tropes from 
science fiction about it getting out of hand so  
we shouldn’t just take as a given that someone 
is going to be smart enough to make AI and yet  
stupidly and blindly miss some red flag and that 
there’s no way for others to catch it or react. 
Second, a moment ago I suggested that they 
may have ‘oopsed’ by sending probes out to  
eliminate flawed and obsolete ones, and that’s 
basically to leave the door open to lots of  
different strains of what’s essentially 
a galactic virus and thus explain why  
they generally didn’t attack primitive 
planets. This matters for two reasons,  
one being that you hardly need to wait for 
radio signals to find life, Earth should  
have been easily identifiable as life bearing for 
billions of years now to anyone in this galaxy,  
and improvements in astronomical capabilities 
to find exoplanets has seriously damaged the  
concept that aliens are lurking in space waiting 
for signs of life in the form of radio signals.  
The other half of that is if none of these probes 
attack primitive worlds or even technological  
ones, just spaceborn items, then eventually 
folks could work to clear the problem up and  
probably broadcast loudly to exchange options or 
battleplans for removing the probes from space,  
including their own counter-probe IFFs so 
other aliens knew not to attack those ones. 
As we move to discussing the Dark Forest theory, 
it’s good to have that reminder that cooperation  
is often advantageous and that secrecy is 
implausible. Anybody who was making a concerted  
effort to wipe out all primitive alien life in 
the galaxy could have done so simply by being the  
first on the scene willing to do it, because while 
alien life might not have universal signs of its  
presence on planets, it's unlikely there would be 
countless unpredictable signs of life worlds would  
exhibit. You kill every world with high oxygen 
content in its atmosphere, until you encounter  
other anomalies, like unnatural methane content, 
and then you probe that, see it indicates life,  
and add that to the extermination script.
This doesn’t even require that the species  
doing it be prone to colonizing space themselves. 
Indeed, one reason a species might be considered  
‘quiet aliens’ is that they don’t want to 
surround their homeworld with tons of space  
colonies because they figure they’d just be 
producing tons of dirty mutants on the border,  
in possession of advanced weapons. So, they 
just launch the berserkers out there, and  
with open orders from the get-go to send detailed 
photos and scans back of every planet they see,  
followed shortly by endless waves of planet 
wreckers, probably relativistic kill missiles,  
see the Megastructure Compendium for details.
It is possible over time they would die off or  
rescind the orders, or that they did have a big 
internal space civil war with their colonies,  
and the winners countermand the orders in whole 
or part, or the berserkers get conflicting  
orders and so on. Galactic Scale Timelines and 
distances leave lots of room for confusion and  
chaos. And that includes the possibility that they 
eventually fell apart and we don’t see any probes  
or berserkers around because that mission ended 
a billion years ago and life is just re-emerging  
on the galactic scene from the inferno of that 
time. Or the Supercluster scene, we could be in  
a pocket of the Universe where someone released 
those doomsday devices billions of years before  
Earth ever arose and distant observers refer to 
our region as the equivalent of some bombed-out  
apocalyptic wasteland only a madman or fool 
would seek to signal, let alone colonize. 
Note that all of these cases still involve 
leaving a big footprint on the galactic scene,  
which was our third qualifier for being 
a loud alien. Expands fast, lasts long,  
and changes its environment, which is true whether 
you’re terraforming a barren planet with plants  
and blue skies and clouds or planting mushroom 
clouds on peaceful primitive paradise planets. 
The idea that you might get out into the 
universe, fast to move and long to last,  
and yet not leave a trace, tends to come up only 
in the context of hiding. And this is where we get  
the Dark forest Theory. Again, today we’re going 
to avoid a deep discussion of the Game Theory Math  
usually attached to the idea, see our episode from 
4 years back if you want that, but the notion is  
that the galaxy, and the Universe in general, 
is not some cheerful place where we’re going to  
meet aliens and sometimes be friends and sometimes 
enemies but eventually friends and give each other  
hugs and maybe even intermarry somehow. Rather, 
it’s lots of civilizations that are mostly afraid  
that contact with other civilizations is going to 
bring their downfall and inevitably concludes that  
their only path to survival is to keep quiet, 
and maybe kill anyone else they see, or even  
trick them into making a noise so others descend 
on them, like some sacrifice to the Dark Gods. 
The reasoning here is not bad, on first 
inspection. It cuts against the grain  
of most of us raised in modern times and on 
classic scifi, but the odds don’t seem to favor  
us ever benefiting from contact with aliens, 
except in some kind of vague existential way.  
If you’re patient and cautious, you’ll figure 
out science and technology just fine on your own  
and while alien contact might expedite that and 
also introduce you to countless new types of art,  
that only happens if they don’t kill you and 
also choose to share. If they don’t share,  
then it's better to survive and just keep 
coming up with new art and experiences on  
your own world. Additional colonies really just 
make for additional ways to accidentally expose  
yourself and the assumption is that you would 
never be able to successfully make yourself  
safe by open and large defense, others would 
get you before you got big and powerful enough.  
For my part I find that last 
part debatable at least. 
The Game theory aspect essentially boils down to 
assume you have nobody able or willing to talk  
and needing to make decisions in isolation and 
an incomplete knowledge of the galaxy and other  
species in it, and each having three options: 
One, Take no action, Two, inform others of your  
existence in some fashion, Three, Destroy Any 
Civilization known to you. And then in a galaxy  
of many civilizations, some new ones arising each 
‘round’ while others remain in play from prior  
rounds, and the decision keeps coming up. It is 
assumed you are making efforts to watch for those  
around you and to improve your own technology 
and resources where you’re feeling able and safe. 
So millenia one, Don’t Act, Alert Other, or Kill 
anyone you detect, Millenia two, if you’re alive,  
act again, Millenia three, and so one, out to 
billions of years or rounds. And the reasoning  
here is fine enough if you only have those 
three options and those circumstances, staying  
quiet and killing anyone who does stick their 
head up does work, on paper, and in that math. 
Game Theory is an amazing tool that also gets 
misused a lot, because it's mostly about actions  
you should taken when you’ve a very clear set of 
limited choices and no real ability to negotiate  
or discuss options with someone else, hence 
the Prisoner’s Dilemma where two criminals  
are given the option of ratting each other out 
and both choose to do so rather than keep quiet,  
when told in isolation from each other that they 
will get a couple years of prison if they both  
stay quiet, presumably on some lesser charge, 
but no prison time if they admit to the crime  
and finger the other perp. It’s a good example for 
explaining the math but since it is necessarily  
simple as a learning tool and involves criminals 
I tend to feel it encourages folks to think of  
game theory as sociopathic and binary. It’s 
not, it's just the simple example being used  
to illustrate limited choices that have to 
be made with no intel on the other actors or  
a chance to discuss it with them. And that is 
reasonable enough at first glance when viewing  
the galaxy as a dark forest full of unknowns.
The Problem is, it is no such thing. It’s a very  
brightly lit place where stealth is incredibly 
hard and nobody would ever believe that they  
live in a galaxy of ancient genocidal predators 
and just got lucky and missed by them. We didn’t,  
Earth has shown astronomically visible telltales 
of Life far longer than we have had fire and  
technology, and our civilization was obvious as 
a technological one from orbit for a lot longer  
than it takes for a message to leave a probe left 
to watch us and get back to some base or planet a  
thousand light years away where someone is making 
a judgment call on whether or not to whack us.  
Trust me, we didn’t hide from anyone, let 
alone some determined watcher, stalking the  
galaxy to murder all rivals. And nobody else would 
really expect that either, they would be asking  
how they’d murder the galaxy and make sure they 
missed no vengeful survivors, and they would have  
the same math and science we have. Or presumably 
better, making it even easier to spot exoplanets  
with signs of life and send a probe of theirs for 
a flyby or a protracted observation period, or to  
shove a big asteroid off-course into that planet.
And the notion that they’d be afraid to be spotted  
doing that and be seen by others doesn’t 
work, because it's assuming you can’t hide  
some system of tight-beamed relays with 
orders to self-destruct if captured or  
damaged but that you could have somehow hidden 
your entire civilization and also backwards in  
time to before you had such technology, or to when 
your primitive ancestors crawled out of the seas. 
Again, it kind of changes our parameters here when 
we include those options. It also takes a huge  
jump in logic to assume everybody is going to do 
this, even if it turned out to mathematically make  
sense, which again it does not. Our math example 
had 3 options, do nothing, alert others to your  
presence, or wipe out someone you found, and it is 
assuming you not only can wipe out an civilization  
that speaks up but believe you can from the moment 
you pick this strategy, with 100% confidence,  
in addition to assuming you think you could 
successfully hide and not have been seen  
before that. Neither of those seems plausible 
and yet if either fails, the math does too. 
Now, if folks ignored it anyway and colonized 
space, then someone might come by and kill them,  
but if everyone is trying to lie low, 
it’s a big leap to assuming that anyone  
is going to be willing and able to roll up to some 
emerging interstellar empire and take them down. 
On the one hand, we’d tend to assume some 
secretive alien race that had been lying  
low for a millions years would have weapons 
that could crack reality open but that’s a big  
assumption considering how fast that science and 
technology have been rolling out for us thus far,  
and if they’ve gone and taken a thousand star 
systems and have emerging Dyson Swarms around  
them by the time you get an alert a thousand 
light years away and can send a reaction,  
you would have to be worrying that you 
just took a potshot at a giant who is  
going to walk on over and clobber you now.
It's not that there aren’t some scenarios where  
everyone agrees to remain fairly quiet and not 
expand much, we usually call that Self-Quarantine  
Hypothesis and it operates on the notion that 
nothing good comes from anything but the most  
basic and distant diplomatic exchanges and that 
because of growth rates and time lag issues,  
you almost have to attack at the first sign 
of massive and rapid expansion. After all,  
the human population quadrupled in just 
one century, and we are not particularly  
fertile as critters go. In galactic terms, some 
civilization could go from our size of a bit under  
10 billion to a multisolar empire of Dyson Swarms 
numbering quintillions in little more than the  
time that it would take to get colony ships there.
A few thousand years isn’t much time for a  
galactic reaction in a no-FTL Universe, let alone 
a diplomatic exchange, so in a scenario like that,  
your best bet is to tell everyone that any 
expansion beyond their home solar system or  
maybe the nearest thousand stars is forbidden 
and the punishment is immediate attack.  
This process works far better if you actually do 
tell people before they get underway, which means  
you all put up big beacons telling everyone 
who you are, what your borders are, and what  
the policy and reasoning is. This by definition 
though makes you loud aliens, the kind primitive  
civilizations with early radio astronomy and 
basic space travel, luke us, can’t possibly miss. 
The problem there, and as with others, is that it 
is assuming universal policies in an environment  
that doesn’t encourage or permit lots of 
discussion. Now, Dark Forest itself doesn’t  
require discussion but it also only makes sense 
if the various civilizations murdering each other  
follow a fairly limited selection of possible 
moves, which again is great in game theory,  
especially this sort of simple case, but 
reality doesn’t put those limits on them. 
Let’s say I’m trying to sell this strategy to 
congress or parliament, we’ll call them the  
Steering Committee. What’s the first question? How 
do we know anyone out there is hostile? Well the  
response is that we don’t but need to assume that, 
and the follow up is “For how long?”. We’re new  
to space so cautious first steps make sense, but 
caution isn’t the same as agreeing to an eternal  
policy of waiting in terror for real data, and I 
think most folks who would qualify as ambitious  
and competitive – which tends to describe a lot 
of leaders – would inherently abhor this approach. 
Not all species might act the same – that’s what 
we call non-exclusivity – that certain behaviors  
can’t be assumed to be universal amongst 
space-capable civilizations. We can assume  
math and rocket science are pretty universal to 
space-capable civilizations, and probably game  
theory too as a result, even though its invention 
comes after experiments with rockets and might  
not be required or super-obvious. Nonetheless, 
whether or not a civilization likes baseball  
or hot chocolate really should have no bearing on 
their ability to get spaceflight, one might argue  
their access to coffee does, but by and large 
it’s hard to make the case any given behavior  
is exclusive with spaceflight unless it’s really 
critical to inventing and improving spaceflight. 
Some folks do make the case that since you almost 
have to have nuclear technology and the Bomb,  
a certain capacity for coexistence and peace with 
others is required, but I’d merely say that was  
more probable rather than exclusive. Same, I’d 
tend to say a knack for controlled ambition and  
cooperation strongly helps a civilization get 
into space but it’s a real stretch to assume  
that’s all you’d encounter, versus something like 
a Hive Mind or any number of other scenarios we  
can’t think of but that would still result in 
expansionist behavior or a strong urge to it. 
Going back to our Steering Committee. What is 
question three? Maybe, “How do we avoid being  
detected by others?” and at this point someone 
will say “I’m sorry it's too late for that,  
we were probably detected millions of years ago by 
our nearest neighbors.” You could propose that all  
effort must be turned toward building an ark 
ship or doomsday bunker on Mars from which a  
hidden remnant of humanity could stowaway, and 
this might even get approved as a backup plan,  
even though its assuming the aliens are too 
stupid to assume we might try this if we had  
the resources and technology for an ark 
ship. It’s still a tactic worth trying,  
just not one likely to have our generals 
saying “Yes that will save us for sure”  
More likely though someone will say “Oh good, 
if they’ve known about us for millions of years  
they probably aren’t particularly 
hostile, they maybe even like us.” 
I think we could argue that’s wrong too, that 
them knowing of us and doing nothing obviously  
benevolent or malevolent tends to imply either 
‘they’ don’t actually exist, that no civilizations  
in this galaxy arose till we did, or that they 
are firm followers of some Star Trek-like Prime  
Directive. See that episode for more discussion 
of that option, and the many problems with it. 
But if the scientists then follow up by 
saying “No, they must see us dead for their  
own protection, it's mathematically required” I 
think that’s going to get a lot of skepticism and  
frankly I don’t think it would matter how firmly 
they could prove that. You’re essentially arguing  
the best answer to having neighbors here on Earth 
is to nuke them before they decide to nuke you.  
There’s a finite chance Luxembourg might one day 
decide to build a doomsday device and use it,  
so we must blow them up first, math says so. As 
we mentioned early in our discussion of nukes  
and the cold war, that sort of logic has its own 
flaws but really only applies to cases where it  
is you and us and no interested third parties.
In our case, if we’re assuming the response of  
aliens to detecting other civilizations is 
to immediately attack, which, incidentally,  
isn’t a super subtle way to operate if you’re 
trying to hide, we probably want to ask how they  
came to the determination that acting hostile to 
the point of unprovoked genocide was a safe move,  
inside a galaxy they already believe has 
older civilizations lurking around who for  
whatever reason didn’t already kill them. 
Again, we can’t just ignore that logical  
flaw of assuming everyone didn’t know you 
existed till you sent out radio signals. 
I think you would want to be very certain you 
were safe before launching a murderous strike  
on neighbors and keep in mind this capability is 
assuming it is possible to launch such efforts.  
Which implies it was possible to launch colony 
ships, but which also implies it was possible to  
launch probes. Your interstellar probes don’t have 
to be a big giveaway you exist, they can be built,  
at some cost of efficiency and speed, to change 
their direction or to zig or zag to target star  
systems, so that anyone picking it up wouldn’t 
be able to tell where it came from originally. 
It could then send a very narrow and weak laser 
signal back not to home but to some discrete  
relay. Indeed, you might send a cluster of a 
dozen probes out that would all explode from such  
a relay at different angles to explore various 
systems. Your relay could just be set to explode  
after those flyby’s are complete and the signals 
sent back to it at light speed, long before anyone  
could see them and fly out to pick it up. They 
know someone made a probe but really have no  
idea who or from where and even if it might be 
one of their own colonies if they have them. 
So maybe you are quiet for a while, but 
after you’ve explored a million systems,  
which you might have done within a few thousand 
years of landing on the Moon, and found nothing,  
what’s to stop you exploding out into the galaxy?
Then the next question, “What stopped them from  
exploding out into the galaxy, 
and why shouldn’t we now?” Also,  
since our probes worked, shouldn’t we take for 
granted other civilizations built them too and  
deployed them and drew these same conclusions?”
And so on, and that’s fundamentally the other big  
flaw of Dark Forest Theory of the Fermi Paradox, 
it’s assuming static behavior over huge swaths  
of space and time with changing actors. At a core 
level it’s meant to explain the apparent silence,  
and it doesn’t really give good reasons why 
anyone would remain indefinitely silent.  
Particularly given that any real attempt at 
stealthing an entire civilization is bound to  
inhibit their ability to grow in strength, 
which should be the default evolutionary  
objective and which, unsurprisingly, 
is also a very good survival strategy. 
Not every critter follows the path of being big 
and menacing certainly, but it would seem a fairly  
common one for those who came to dominate a 
planet and get technology, and they probably  
have millenia of interaction with their cousin 
civilizations on their homeworld where hiding was  
not seeing as either possible or desirable, same 
as we don’t have any hidden empires here on Earth…  
though of course they might just be very good 
at hiding I suppose, those chuds and morlocks. 
In the end, it’s not that we should assume alien 
life is friendly and the galaxy is a safe place,  
but rather that it is very likely they could 
be inherently hostile or inherently friendly,  
and the problem is there’s just no reason 
we shouldn’t already know by now which.  
But in the absence of that knowledge, the right 
strategy isn’t necessarily to hide and cower and  
sneakily murder off any civilization we can. For 
my part I’d rather protect our territory by just  
openly saying its ours rather than hiding on it 
and murdering anyone who unwittingly entered it,  
and I’d rather we just sent out probes and if we 
get reports back things are empty, go and claim  
them, and if not, say hello to whoever is there.
Afterall, if they have left us alone all this time  
it would seem strange to kill us for knocking on 
their door, especially if they hadn’t bothered  
posting a no trespassing sign of some sort. 
That’s the strategy life on Earth tends to use,  
mark your territory because doing so does warn 
others you exist but the odds of getting into a  
fight which you might win or lose but will likely 
be injured by does go down, as your competitors  
and you are necessarily somewhat risk-averse, even 
if you lose the element of surprise by doing that,  
you avoid many more conflicts that have a 
significant risk of harming you.. That’s  
how things work here in the dark forests on Earth, 
and it's much easier to temporarily hide a single  
predator in a real forest than to hide an entire 
planet for eons among the bright sea of stars.
So today we were talking about the possibility 
of Hostile Alien invaders lurking in the shadows  
unknown, waiting to leap out and attack as soon 
as they find out we exist and where we are,  
but you don’t have to go to another world or 
wait for aliens to come here to experience  
that. Just use the internet long enough 
and someone is going to try to hack you,  
scam you, or cheat you. This is where a 
Virtual Private Network can be your first  
and best line of defense, because you can move 
your web traffic so it's going through another  
server which can be in entirely different 
countries. Maybe it’s some hacker targeting  
you for various forms of phishing, or some 
agency limiting what you can watch or how  
much you have to pay to purchase something 
online based on your country of origin. 
You don’t need to justify why you don’t want 
people snooping on your location or IP address,  
if you’re tired of having your privacy taken 
away and your data exploited, NordVPN can help  
you take back control and protect yourself.
NordVPN is a fast and easy to use 1-click VPN,  
but NordVPN also has tons of alert and protection 
features to help protect you from attacks like  
phishing or ransomware or Malvertsing. Enjoy 
extra security features and a great virtual  
private network that encrypts your data and can 
send it through any of their 5400 servers in 59  
different countries, to protect your privacy and 
keep you safe. You can check out their website to  
learn all the benefits NordVPN offers, just go 
to NordVPN.com/isaacarthur to get a 2 year plan  
plus a bonus gift on top. It’s risk-free 
with Nord’s 30-day money-back guarantee!
So we’ll get to the schedule in just a moment 
but as interesting sidenote for both long time  
fans and newer ones wondering about the ‘accent’ 
or speech impediment, I had started getting speech  
therapy sometime back in season 3, this is season 
9 now, when the show stopped being just a casual  
hobby and had gone on pause for 2021 with all the 
life changes from getting married and moving and  
forgot to restart until I was taking my youngest 
son, who is 4, in for a speech evaluation of his  
own. For those who have been following that, 
Sarah and I decided to adopt 3 young kids who  
are siblings a few months back and we can’t post 
their names or photos till the formal adoption  
process is complete later this year, which 
irritatingly means I have to refer to my 4 year  
old son as “Boy 2” in videos and social media.
Anyway it reminded me I’d meant to start my  
speech therapy back up, but it being over a year 
I started with a new therapist who specialized in  
the Letter R, and we’re on the video call for all 
of one minute before she says “You have a tongue  
tie, I can already tell, its the only logical 
reason you still can’t pronounce this letter after  
so many years of effort” and I really have lost 
track of all the hundreds of hours of practice and  
thousands of dollars of therapy involved to date. 
So I went in this morning to a specialist on that  
and she instantly diagnoses it as that too and 
says “Three months exercise therapy and surgery  
at the end and it’s all done. No more problems 
with the Letter R, oh and it will probably fix  
most of your sinus congestion issues too”.
I mention it, beyond just wanting to vent,  
because I do write and record these episodes 
about 3 months out, except for the sponsor read  
and these outros, for instance it is January 6, 
as I speak these words, for a January 15 episode,  
which had its main segment recorded back on 
November 5th. So if you start noticing any  
voice style mismatches between the main and outro 
sections of the videos, possibly starting in a few  
weeks, that would be why. I’m a little torn 
right now on whether or not to record any of  
our other pending scripts at the moment or just 
wait and see how things go, and we are recorded  
on episodes up till mid-march right now.
Anyway, speaking of upcoming episodes, this  
Thursday we’ll be considering the possible fates 
of the Universe, looking at the Omega Point, an  
idea for how life might survive and thrive to the 
very end of time itself, a controversial theory  
including possibly resurrecting our ancient dead. 
We’ll also have a companion bonus episode over on  
Nebula for that too, looking at Conformal Cyclic 
Cosmology and ways to write messages between older  
and younger iterations of our Universe, as well as 
check if anyone already has written such messages.  
Both of those just came out early on Nebula 
too, as I usually release Thursday episodes on  
Sunday afternoons there, and Sunday episode on 
Thursday morning, basically one episode early. 
Those episodes contemplate ways civilizations 
might endure even the death of stars and the end  
of time, and two Thursdays from now we’ll look at 
an option for reaching those stars, as we consider  
the possibility of using asteroids as spaceships, 
both interplanetary and interstellar. And the week  
after that we’ll consider how to terraform new 
worlds once we arrive at them. Before that though,  
two Sundays from now, January 29th, we’ll have 
our monthly livestream Q&A, at 4pm Eastern Time,  
where you can submit questions in 
our chat and have them answered live.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch 
all of SFIA’s episodes early and  
ad free on our streaming service, 
Nebula, at nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
