This episode is sponsored by Audible
In the centuries ahead, humans will explore
and visit every corner of the Earth and Solar
System.
It’s tempting to hope that technology will
somehow protect us from serious accidents.
But if history is any guide, the technology
that allows this exploration facilitates bigger
accidents… and in more dangerous and remote
places.
Every year our first responders to emergencies
are called upon to perform countless thousands
of rescues in life and death circumstances,
and with a very high rate of success compared
to prior years.
This indicates a trend of both better safety
and better recovery efforts, which we can
confidently attribute to better technology
and better training all around.
More knowledge allows us to better utilize
what we have, as well as enabling us to develop
new and better equipment, and is the penultimate
tool of both your survival while you wait
for rescue as well as search & rescue efforts.
The ultimate tool of course is courage.
In dangerous situations, the will to survive
is the most important part of making it through
a crisis, and on the opposite side, the will
of rescuers to jump onto a sinking ship or
into a burning building represents extraordinary
bravery and puts the lie to the cynical notion
that humanity is cowardly or selfish.
Every year, countless first responders put
their lives and health on the line to rescue
folks.
That’s something to keep in mind for later
this month, as the US Senate recently passed
a resolution naming October 28th First Responders
Day.
I doubt I’m alone in feeling this is well-merited
and long overdue, and I wanted to dedicate
this episode to those first responders and
every Good Samaritan who has stopped to help
when they could have just walked or driven
by.
I often get asked about how I always manage
to be so upbeat and optimistic about the future,
and folks like that are a big portion of it.
Through willpower, courage, and curiosity
we can overcome just about any situation.
Of course it is also our curiosity which so
often gets us in trouble, and which will doubtless
put us in even more perilous places and give
us even more dangerous activities we’ll
need to be rescued from as we venture into
ever more inhospitable parts of our world
and beyond.
But we are who we are, and our habit of sticking
our necks out has benefited humanity as a
whole, if often not the folks who did it.
You wouldn’t need a smart drone that can
dive deep into oceans and worm its way into
fissures to bring a hapless diver an emergency
air tank; nor would you need one to deliver
thermal protection and food and water to a
mountain climber stranded on an icy mountain
peak, unless enough people found themselves
in these dangerous life and death situations.
I wanted to start with the topic of safety
gear first, those garments and gadgets that
give someone in a dangerous situation better
odds of survival, or even removes the need
to be rescued.
As we noted a couple weeks back in our Space
Suits episode, improvements to those in terms
of increased comfort and versatility might
become as commonplace as firefighting gear,
or even become a staple of day to day clothing
and accessories.
Knowing what and where something has happened
is critical to a fast response, and I’d
not be surprised if in the next decade or
two it becomes customary to wear health monitors
and personal GPS tags whenever doing anything
dangerous or in a remote area, or even at
all times.
If we can open up a log, hopefully secured
and encrypted to ensure privacy of course,
to see where someone has been, we’ll be
in a much better position to organize a rescue
party, even if the monitoring equipment has
been broken or removed.
Time is often critical to search and rescue,
we want to do everything we can to minimize
how long it takes to find a person in danger
and maximize how long they can hold out or
even enable them to find their way to safety
on their own.
Just as we have smartphones replacing cellphones,
we might find the ubiquitous first aid kit
itself being replaced by something smarter
too.
But all equipment, smart or not, is useless
if you don’t know what to do with it.
Survival and first aid kits need instructions
and the less familiar with their use someone
is, and the more stressed out and panicked
they are, the more detailed and clear those
instructions need to be.
We would benefit from training with smart
first aid kits, which is really all about
repetition, so we’ll be able to remember
how to use the new tech properly, even when
panicked and distracted.
Now the ideal scenario is a phone that can
be stuck into crisis mode and brings up a
doctor or survival expert who can see what’s
going on and tell you what to do till helps
arrives, but in the absence of that you need
something that can respond to voice commands
and has the relevant data on hand, especially
in remote locations where coverage may be
spotty.
Improvements in voice recognition and command,
in image analysis, and in general improvements
in processing and memory, might mean everybody
would be carrying around not only a library
of medical data in their pocket but a useful
capacity for diagnosis and treatment.
And indeed we do have some decent forerunners,
the Red Cross for instance makes a first aid
app and if you haven’t got that or something
similar on your phone, you’d be wise to
schedule in grabbing one of those and taking
at least a few minutes to familiarize yourself
with it.
Doubtless those mobile apps will improve with
time but I think it very likely that normal
first aid kits and survival kits will start
including more electronics and machinery in
them in years to come.
With better robotics and AI we might have
first aid kits that could tell if someone
was injured and go into action to treat them
properly.
So too, there are limits as to how fast humans
can be moved to a place to rescue someone
and they are far slower than what a local
machine might achieve.
As an example, we could hypothetically get
rapid response teams anywhere on the planet
by dropping them right from orbit, but re-entry
is a process of around 20 minutes even once
you’re over the right spot to start your
descent.
Even dropping from a stationary orbital ring
isn’t much faster.
However, we wouldn’t want our drop pods
carrying emergency teams to simply fall, that’s
slow.
No, we would do better to accelerate them
and then decelerate them as fast as we could,
same for an aircraft or ground vehicle heading
to the destination.
If you’re curious, a plunge at 5 gees, about
what most folks can handle without passing
out, followed by a hard braking using fuel
or a very good parachute at the same acceleration,
would let you cover the distance from the
International Space Station to ground – 250
miles or 400 kilometers – in just 3 minutes.
We talk a lot on this channel about things
like spaceplanes, mass drivers, launch loops,
and orbital rings as a way to get folks and
cargo into space cheaply, but that same technology
used groundside could potentially let a single
station in any region, be it on the ground
or in orbit, send a team to an emergency at
rapid speed.
Incidentally with constant acceleration your
travel time rises with the square root of
distance, so quadruple the distance, double
the time to get there, a hundred times the
distance, ten times longer to get there.
400 kilometers in 3 minutes, 1600 kilometers,
or a thousand miles, in just 6 minutes.
Of course our atmosphere gets in the way of
things like that, as would water or rock for
folks underwater or in a cavern or mineshaft,
but explorers or colonists on some airless
planet can realistically expect aid pretty
darn quick from any base on that planet or
ship in orbit.
However, that aid might not necessarily be
from people there in the flesh.
A major principle of first aid is not to turn
one victim into two, so if you can avoid putting
the rescuer in dire risk that’s always a
good thing, and doubly so if you can get a
robot there faster anyway.
It might make more sense to fire a pod out
of a rail gun that can handle way higher accelerations.
If you can pack a robot and supplies into
a pod that can handle 500 gees, not 5, you
can keep that cannon loaded all the time and
fire it in mere seconds, and potentially fire
it at speeds well in excess of even orbital
velocities.
On arrival it unpacks and an expert runs the
robots by telepresence, though not by on-site
AI.
I put that caveat on there because if your
artificial intelligence is that good that
you can make robot doctors then you don’t
need to be firing anything to a rescue site.
If you’ve got robot doctors you’ve robot
factory workers who can build robot doctors
and that means they might be so dirt cheap
that any person is likely to have their own
posse of drones and gear hanging around them.
Same applies for any technology that would
let us simply download skills right into someone’s
head so they could act as a surgeon or survival
expert for someone nearby or themselves.
If you’ve got that technology, odds are
everyone has already downloaded it as part
of their normal childhood.
Whoever coined the phrase “search and rescue”
clearly wanted us to understand how much of
rescuers’ time and effort go into just trying,
and sometimes failing, to find the people
they intend to rescue.
If the rescue-ees aren’t wearing trackers,
it sure would be nice if the rescuers had
one of those “life-sign detectors” that
always seem to be on spaceships in science
fiction, but the writers tend to be rather
vague about how those work.
Such a device doesn’t have to only detect
humans, especially on some barren moon or
planet where you don’t have to worry that
you’re getting a false positive on a cow
or something.
But what do we emit that would identify us
as human, or at least as something alive,
and can be detected from a distance?
It might vary a lot on circumstances.
We all give off infrared energy, generally
around 100 watts of it at a wavelength of
about 10 microns.
Lots of things can spread that frequency out,
everything from clothing – or a thermal
blanket – to simple foliage being in the
way or the atmosphere blurring or distorting
it, but in many cases you could find someone
by their infrared heat if you’ve got the
resolution and processing power for it.
If you’re search zone is a square ten kilometers
wide, taking a photo where each pixel is just
a meter wide is a hundred million pixels you
need to analyze for a possible infrared heat
signature, flag all your hits and then check
each out in more detail.
This method works great in space when dealing
with a moon or asteroid or airless world,
alternatively you couldn’t use something
that worked on sound in such environments,
but that might work very well on Earth.
But there’s a lot of ambient noise and trying
to pick up a heartbeat from that is a very
dubious proposition.
You’ve probably heard about new Search and
Rescue drones that can pick out a heartbeat
from a person even if they’re buried under
meters of rubble, but this is actually done
with microwaves, and is a good example of
space technology finding a use back here at
home.
NASA and DHS worked to put the concept together
and it is very similar to ground penetrating
radar.
There’s a pretty distinctive motion and
pattern to a beating heart or breathing whereas
rubble does not move, and the radar can go
through the stone fairly well and give you
reflections from which you can build a 3D
image.
A second later if that image has altered,
that’s motion, and again fairly specific
motion for breathing and heart beats.
This is light speed so if you ramp up the
power and receivers you could potentially
be doing this detecting from orbit.
And since it is using low-powered microwaves,
it’s possible it’s the sort of thing we
could patch cellphones to do not too far down
the road so that a ton of volunteers in a
remote area or in a city that had a building
collapsed could potentially help rapidly scan
that zone.
I also would not rule out major improvements
in microphones on smart phones allowing everybody
to network in to pick out noises.
With enough processing power and enough microphones
you can potentially pick out all sorts of
stuff.
Same if you’ve got access to those phone
cameras and very good image processing.
We might call this notion Crowd-Sourced Search
& Rescue, but there’s a long precedent already
of crowd-sourcing our search, rescue, and
relief efforts, however this might be something
we could setup to be near-instantly activated
and automated, which would be kinda handy.
Kinda creepy too but the bad news about technology
like this is that it’s kind of inevitable
you’d be able to generate ridiculously accurate
and invasive data on folks, awesome for search
and rescue and detecting crimes but definitely
raises the scary specter of Big Brother watching
everything you do.
And I hate to say there’s no way around
that capacity existing, you deal with that
either by controlling how such data is collected,
stored, sorted, and accessed, or by counter-technology
like having a microwave reflective coating
in your clothes or walls.
That is obviously a double-edged sword if
you find yourself buried under those walls
or kidnapped and locked in a shielded dungeon.
As always with technology, it solves a lot
of problems but often gives us some new ones
too.
That same sort of awesome detection and data-sorting
capacity, while great for S&R, also helps
on the prevention end and the best emergency
is the one that never happens.
You’re a lot less likely to be buried in
an avalanche while skiing or mountain climbing
if some radar system is scanning the slopes
and compiling and processing that to detect
one ready for collapse and knows exactly where
to whack it with a drone or sound blast to
cause a fairly controlled and minor avalanche
instead so it’s safe for people to walk
on.
Same, if someone falls down a well or shaft,
we can excavate a lot faster if the digging
tool is wired into a ground radar and computer
that’s constantly picking out the next safe
scoop.
On the rescue end, while St Bernards are cute,
some bullet drones that can slam through snow
and ice to right next to you and blow a bunch
of air bags open to cocoon you is a lot better,
and that potentially works well down in shafts.
As is a tiny drone that can worm its way through
rubble pulling a small air hose or compressed
oxygen tanks to a victim before they suffocate
or get them food and water and a microphone
and speaker so they can talk and hear and
not go insane with panic while we get them
out.
A drone carrying a skinny but ultra-strong
tether of Kevlar or graphene might be great
for looping around someone in a flood or sinking
undersea or drifting away in space, so we
can grapple them and winch them in.
Or even in the air.
Right now if a plane starts going down in
a crash we can’t do anything from outside
but offer advice, if you could get tethers
or nets latched onto one very quickly, you
might be able to safely bring it down.
Speed being everything, there are occasions
where some bullet or missile might be just
what we need for a rescue.
If a plane is dropping, it’s still usually
going subsonic and has some kilometers to
cover before the crash, the same technology
that might protect us from missiles, point
defense systems, might also be employed to
rapidly and automatically fire pods full of
parachutes or airbags or solid rocket boosters
at a plane within seconds of the pilot or
onboard computers slapping the panic button
or air traffic control detecting a terminal
trajectory.
That might work on cars on a freeway too,
as an alternative if people don’t warm up
to self-driving cars.
You can’t automate the vehicles but you
sure can automate that highway so that the
guard rails and asphalt and ditches all blow
airbags or have cannons along the median machine
gun a car with compressed gas air bag bullets
and presumably do the same on buildings or
bridges for if folks fell or jumped off.
You’d want really precise automation on
that though to avoid blowing kilometers worth
of traffic into cocoons if someone just swerved
off the road, but I like the self-driving
car option better.
Personally I trust a computer more than my
own driving but more importantly I trust it
more than the driving of someone drunk or
busy texting, but I’m generally of the opinion
that technology is more about giving us what
we want than what is necessarily best for
us.
That’s important in this context because
a lot of search and rescue happens because
someone was being rather reckless and telling
someone they ought not climb a mountain with
minimal safety gear or take a submersible
down to look at a deep ocean trench is often
not going to stop them from doing it.
Humanity’s curiosity and courage are two
of our most admirable traits in my opinion
but stupidity and foolhardiness often masquerade
as them and can be difficult to tell apart
even for a wise man, who are darn rare and
usually acquired that wisdom by sticking their
nose in a bear trap and lucking out a few
times.
I’m usually considered a pretty cautious
individual and I know in my own case, and
in the case of most other cautious folks I
know, that we acquired that trait after sticking
in pennies in a wall plug a few times.
Most of us have done something that would
nominate us for a Darwin Award and that’s
why we rush out to save folks even when they’ve
brought it on themselves.
That will be a lot more challenging as we
move away from Earth, a very dangerous place
but still the safest one in the Universe for
people.
How do you rush out and rescue some asteroid
miners a million kilometers or more from the
nearest help where they might all have asphyxiated
before their emergency signal even reaches
you?
How do you run off to help some colony on
a planet orbiting an alien sun a century of
travel away?
A lot like hunting for survivors of a shipwreck
a century ago you’re relying on them staying
alive for a long while on their wits and improvised
solutions, but while we tend to write off
cases like that as impossible to help, I think
you’d still try, just manage your expectations
and plan with reason in mind.
A little imagination helps too.
I had a bet going before I wrote this episode
if I could come up with a legitimate reason
to use an atomic weapon, death ray, or relativistic
kill missile for search or rescue and we did
come up with all of the above.
Setting off nukes to save people might seem
a bit crazy and over the top, although I’m
pretty sure SFIA regulars have a rather high
threshold for that after enough episodes,
but there’s actually a ton of occasions
where it does make sense.
Tsunami, hurricanes, or earthquakes can potentially
be dealt with by precision application of
huge amounts of energy as can asteroids on
a collision course with Earth.
So too, firing off nukes in a diamond around
some ship or escape pod wandering through
debris can potentially vaporize that debris
without hurting the vessel.
But on the search end of things, often passive
detection of looking around isn’t enough
and you need active detection, the difference
between a flashlight and radar versus a low-light
camera for instance.
At the scales involved in space, blowing a
nuke off in an area is a very good way to
get a large flash to illuminate your search
in whatever spectrum you are looking in, and
you can pack substances around the warhead
that will absorb the radiation and re-emit
it in particular detectable frequencies.
Good way to make an impromptu lighthouse or
serve as the deep space equivalent of a flare
gun.
We also have ship designs that use atomic
bombs as their propellant, see the Nuclear
Option or Spaceship Propulsion Compendium
for details, and a good way to rescue a ship
that’s plowing through space at high speeds
is to basically send them a warhead with a
pusher plate attached to it, and a relativistic
kill missile carrying one as it’s payload
could be fired out after even interstellar
ships moving at a high fraction of light who
had their fuel tanks rupture light years from
home.
Needless to say, a laser built to serve as
an anti-asteroid vaporizer or a death ray
for leveling cities also makes a very handy
deep space flashlight or radar for hunting
after lost ships.
Very powerful lasers are also handy for cutting
and vaporizing your way through rubble to
get to someone too.
The key on all these things, especially the
high powered or ultra-fast ones is precision
of course, since a miscalculation could end
up burying, burning, or crushing the person
you’re trying to rescue.
Another key thing is that with good automation
you can use a quantity over quality approach,
by flooding an area with search drones or
having them stationed at high density so some
medical rescue robot is attached to every
telephone pole.
There are of course far more options for things
to go wrong in space than we could cover today,
and we’ll explore options like what to do
to handle a dome on Mars cracking open or
someone blowing a giant hole in the side of
space habitat in future episodes on catastrophe-proofing
civilizations and high-tech doomsday preppers,
and we’ll look at some more of the far future
disaster options and how we can avoid them
and react to them if they do happen.
Daring survival stories are pretty common
in all genres of fiction, and doubtless long
predate even ancient tales like Homer’s
Odyssey, and certainly are popular in science
fiction, with many great classics, but great
stories about the folks looking to find and
rescue folks are a lot less common outside
of detective mystery novels where the person
being sought fell afoul of a criminal rather
than a natural disaster or ill luck.
One of the things I especially like about
the novel “The Martian” by Andy Weir and
its film adaptation is it not only gave us
a pretty realistic story of a man surviving
against the odds, but the folks back home
at mission control working against the odds
to find and rescue him and folks risking and
sacrificing a lot to try it.
No crazy villains or aliens or handwaves or
contrivances, just realism and determination,
so it’s an easy pick for our book of the
month.
If you’ve seen the film, the book is even
better, and the narrator of the audiobook
does an excellent job with the performance
too, a good narrator can make a good book
even better, and it’s a great book to begin
with.
You can get a free copy of The Martian at
Audible.com/Isaac or text Isaac to 500-500.
Audible offers a 30 day free trial, but each
month you’re a member you now get a free
audiobook and 2 audible originals, and those
credits rollover to the next month or year
and stay yours, along with any books you got,
even if you later discontinue your membership.
And with their convenient app, you can listen
on any of your devices and seamlessly pick
up where you left off, whether you’re listening
at home, commuting, running errands or off
jogging or at the gym.
Audible makes it cheap and easy to access
a vast collection of amazing stories on any
device.
Of course one day such a device might be even
easier to access as we develop seamless and
intuitive mind-machine interfaces, and as
mentioned, we’ll be looking at those next
week, both the advantages and challenges ahead
of us for developing and safely using such
technology.
A point we’ll make next week is that such
technologies are almost inevitable for us
at this point, it’s just a matter of when
and which methods we can most easily develop
and feel comfortable using, but advances in
technology might not be inevitable even when
possible, and in two weeks we’ll be going
back to our Fermi Paradox Great Filters Series
to examine the idea that advanced civilizations
in our Universe might be rare not just because
the planetary conditions and evolutionary
pathway to intelligence might be rare, but
because many civilizations might not pursue
technology.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to support the channel,
you can visit our website to donate, or just
share the video with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a safe week!
