Historian Arnold Toynbee once said Civilization
is a movement, and not a condition,
a voyage and not a harbor.
When it comes to civilizations on century
long interstellar voyages,
this is very true indeed.
So today we will be beginning our look at
generation ships and how they might help us
colonize the galaxy.
We have four episodes planned for that over
the next few months and today we will begin
with the basics, including examining why you
would use this approach and reviewing what
the other options are.
The origin of the Generation Ship concept
comes from an essay published 90 years ago
by J.D. Bernal, also known for the Bernal
Sphere, one of the space habitats we discuss
here a lot though not as much as the O’Neill
Cylinder.
At the time of its writing, science fiction
was really just beginning to bloom as a genre.
Of the Big Three: Isaac Asimov, Robert Heinlein,
and Arthur C. Clarke, none of them would publish
a story for over a decade yet.
Asimov and Heinlein very rightly were in our
first year of SFIA Books of the Month, sponsored
by Audible, and as we close out that first
year with our twelfth winner, it is very appropriate
that be Arthur C. Clarke’s 1973 novel, Rendezvous
with Rama, which tells the tale of mankind’s
encounter with an alien Generation Ship.
You can pick up a free copy of “Rendezvous
with Rama” and also get a 30-day trial of
Audible, just use my link, Audible.com/Isaac
or text Isaac to 500-500.
Generation ships, also known as Interstellar
Arks, work on the principle that the stars
are so far apart that you could never reach
them in a single lifetime, and back in 1929
when Bernal wrote his essay, we did not have
any spaceflight, and only very simple rockets
and equations for them.
That essay, “The World, the Flesh & the
Devil”, which I’ll link below, is ironically
one I’d never read till around a year ago,
but channel regulars will notice a lot of
familiar concepts in their earlier stages
there, complete with discussion of sailing
into deep space using solar sails.
In the absence of powerful lasers or atomic
rockets, any such ship, destined for even
the nearest stars, would take a near eternity
to arrive.
A ship moving at just 1% of 1% of light speed
would take 40,000 years to reach the nearest
star and that’s the kind of speeds modern
spacecraft tend to achieve and what the rocket
equation, already known in Bernal’s era,
would suggest as a maximum limit at the time.
Right from the start we knew about the major
problems.
Such a ship was in no way possible at that
time, 3 years before we discovered the neutron
and began considering atomic energy as a power
source, there was simply no way such a ship
could survive the journey with an intact biosphere.
No chemical fuel could keep plants lit and
habitats warm for those immense journeys.
To add to that, you need a very large ship
to maintain any diverse ecology for future
colonization and to support enough people
that they didn’t all start growing third
arms from inbreeding.
Many solutions were proposed for this, some
effectively abandoning the generation ship
notion entirely, but this is when the seed
was planted.
That of course was the purpose, to colonize
and seed other planets.
As to the why, I think most folks know the
obvious ones already, they range from not
wanting all of humanity’s eggs in one basket
to just an extension of our desire to wander
and explore, the pioneering spirit.
These all sound good, but there’s a big
difference between traveling around the galaxy
at warp speed and voluntarily getting on a
ship that will be the final resting place
for you and your next dozen or more generations
of descendants.
These are trips lasting so long that even
if you are the hundredth such ship to launch
you still won’t have heard back from the
first one yet to know if they succeeded or
died horribly.
So, while it gave us a potential pathway to
the stars, it didn’t seem likely anyone
would choose to follow it.
Indeed, this was the obvious solution to the
Fermi Paradox back when Enrico Fermi first
suggested it, and he didn’t regard it as
a paradox at the time.
Such ships simply were not realistic at that
time, Fermi died in 1954, quite some time
still before we even went to orbit, let alone
our own moon.
So while a species might colonize its own
solar system, the idea of getting to others
seemed like something limited to science fiction.
Yet it got discussed a lot in science fiction
and with many serious and science-based solutions
to the various problems.
Many of those, again, didn’t involve generation
ships at all.
We discussed the five major types of interstellar
colonization vessels way back at the end of
season 1, and added a sixth variation the
following year.
In order, those were Methuselah Ships, Sleeper
Ships, Generation Ships, Seed Ships, and Gardener
Ships.
We’ll be adding some variations to those
as we move through this series and talking
about when or if each of these options, or
a combination, will be most effective.
We will also be asking ourselves, next episode,
if a lone ship is really a good idea, or if
you should be employing a fleet, and if so,
should that be a fleet moving together or
strung out in a long line, with a vanguard
arriving first followed by waves of vessels.
But on a long voyage through deep space, with
new generations being born, you no longer
have volunteers and many skill sets might
be lost.
Initially that was a bigger concern.
Remember, Bernal’s essay predates any electronic
computers.
Even once we had them, for most of the 90
years since Bernal’s essay, computer hard
drives were little better than books at data
storage, either in terms of data density or
ability to resist damage.
So it was thought that generation ships would
have had to carry real books.
But even with modern data storage allowing
us to carry the sum of all human knowledge
in one’s pocket, skills with no purpose
can get forgotten and are hard to relearn
just from records.
There's not much call for a geologist on a
space ark after all.
Yet with each new advance in technology, new
approaches to making generation ships viable
or offering an alternative have arisen.
So let’s review those basic designs and
how they vary from a Generation Ship and why.
Each has its strengths and weaknesses and
seeks to address some problem of the basic
generation ship or exploit some new technology
that’s been discovered or proposed since
the original concept.
The first, the Methuselah ship, approaches
it from the standpoint of having life-extension
technology.
It doesn’t get around the long time the
crew must endure, but it does get around the
problem of generations.
The people who get on board such a ship can
be assumed to be volunteers, and ones with
a clear idea what they need to do, and the
skills and technology for it.
Methuselah ships get around the problem of
the crew being unwilling, after the first
generation, or unskilled, because the first
generation is still around, indeed there may
not be any future generations until they arrive.
With limited resources on a small ship, breeding
more folks on the flight is maybe not a good
idea, but if you did, those additional folks
or replacements would still have living ancestors
who raised them and know what needs doing,
all the way till the final destination.
Additionally, a Methuselah Ship implies a
level of medical or nanotechnology that can
help deal with concerns about long term space
voyages, both the hazards of space travel
and the genetic and ecological issues.
Such folks are presumably either genetic wizards
or masters of cybernetics and nanotech after
all.
Our next type was the Sleeper Ship, which
is poorly named in some respects, since you
are dead not asleep, so tomb ship might be
more apt, but Sleeper Ship still conveys the
intent.
Everybody gets frozen, unless you’ve got
some magical stasis technology, and thawed
out on arrival.
Or almost everybody does, a ship needing a
crew or maintenance in flight might keep to
a generation ship approach for a small crew
with a vast number of frozen colonists.
Alternatively they might wake pilots and maintenance
personnel for a few years each, either waking
the whole team for a few weeks to assess the
current state of the mission and do some repairs,
then freezing them again for a few years before
waking them again, or keep shifts, where a
thousand year journey might have a hundred
crew teams, each thawed out for a decade before
going back to sleep.
Animals and plants for terraforming are kept
on ice the whole mission.
In this way, the Sleeper Ship avoids both
unwilling passengers born during the flight,
and loss of skills in future generations.
This seems ideal but for two problems.
First and most obviously, it has been over
half a century since the first person was
cryo-preserved, and we still lack the technology
to thaw out and re-animate humans.
Incidentally the first was Professor James
Bedford in 1967, not Walt Disney who was never
frozen, but was cremated, and nobody’s really
sure how that rumor started.
As I mentioned back in Interstellar Colonization,
the technology to resurrect people long frozen
is probably the same as to keep them alive
without aging, since it requires massive cell
repair, so if you can do a sleeper ship, you
can do a Methuselah Ship.
This does not mean you wouldn’t do a sleeper
ship though, as keeping a ship and its passengers
alive for the whole trip is demanding in resources
and energy, whereas keeping people frozen
in interstellar space is rather easy, and
such a trip is also presumably fairly boring
too.
However, the second problem with cryo is that
things which are frozen are not in a magic
bubble in which time does not pass.
Even ignoring the damage done while freezing,
decay still happens.
What’s more, no matter how cold you make
someone, it will have no effect on atomic
decay.
Many of the substances in our bodies are radioactive,
particularly Potassium-40, hence the overblown
concerns about banana radiation.
I’ve seen some varying figures for the total
doses of radiation we get just from our bodies,
not external background radiation, but I’ll
go with the 0.3 milliSieverts per year from
the Health Physics Society, and its only about
a tenth of the total most of us get from background
radiation overall.
You’d need about 10,000 times that to get
a lethal dose.
However, if you’re frozen, isotope decay
is still occurring, and without the usual
repair mechanisms to keep things in check.
Using the HPS data, if you freeze someone
for 10,000 years they’d get a lethal dose.
Just from the various radioactive materials
in our own bodies.
So there are limits as to how long you can
keep people frozen, unless you are reviving
them periodically to fix that damage, assuming
you even can.
Indeed, space is not exactly known for its
lack of radiation either, so your timeline
is a lot shorter unless you are very well-shielded.
To keep people frozen longer, you either need
to be able to repair them with nanotechnology
while frozen, which might be rather difficult
considering nanotech isn’t immune to the
cold either, or again you have to wake them
up and let repairs occur.
Which is okay if you are cycling personnel
to run and repair the ship, just waking folks
every few centuries to do a couple years of
work and heal up before being frozen again.
No indefinite frozen voyages though, freeze
folks for a few millions years of travel to
another galaxy and they’ll all wake up thoroughly
dead.
Our third type, the classic generation ship,
we’ll skip for now.
Type 4, the Seed Ship, essentially is a robot
that arrives in a system and terraforms a
planet.
It can be used as a speedy vanguard to ships
with colonists arriving later or in more high-tech
forms, and could potentially grow everything
and everyone there.
Depending on your technology or inclination,
it might simply prepare the location for more
thorough terraforming, or just growing plants
and insects, or even animals, or people it
raises and teaches.
Having a vanguard is an example of why you
might use a fleet, arriving in bits and pieces,
and it is likely that even single colony ships
would at least send fast probes ahead to do
detailed flybys of various planets and to
confirm the target is ideal for colonization
or look at some neighboring ones the ship
could divert to if it wasn’t or as emergency
alternatives.
However a seed ship could potentially grow
people without minds, be that cloned but mindless
bodies or androids, into which colonists’
minds could be uploaded.
And this brings us to our fifth one, the Data
Ship, which is essentially abandoning biology
entirely in favor of simply bringing self-replicating
machines and data, including digital copies
of minds.
These two types, Seed Ships and Data Ships,
have merged a bit as concepts as technology
improved, because a Seed Ship planning to
grow people or build androids is essentially
a data ship, and more to the point, information
can be sent at light speed, so neither needs
to carry much data.
A tight-beam, high bandwidth laser can be
shot at the destination to coincide with when
the ship is expected to have arrived and gotten
the basic colony apparatus in place.
Thus getting around some of the concerns with
data storage for very long flights or everything
being very out of date when it gets there.
Moreover, DNA can be stored digitally and
printed, so a Seed Ship need not carry frozen
genetic samples along on its voyage.
Of course, these are very tiny and fast approaches,
and cheap too.
As we’ll see as we explore generation ships,
these are huge vessels, whereas a data ship
or seed ship is much smaller.
Indeed, a data ship potentially might be as
small as a model ship someone would keep on
their shelf or mantle.
Data can be stored very densely, even when
you are including many redundant copies to
deal with data decay or damage, and again,
a tight beam aimed to arrive from home about
when the ship would be in place can get rid
of any non-essential data that isn’t needed
for the trip or initial setup.
Either version might begin not by terraforming
a planet but by building a giant receiver
dish and data storage banks instead.
Indeed, the data ship may be more akin to
a Von Neumann probe, only instead of building
a copy of itself, it builds the needed infrastructure
and then builds the colony.
It’s tempting to think the ship’s planetary
probes can go faster because they’re smaller,
but that’s flawed reasoning.
The energy required to achieve a certain speed
scales linearly to mass, so a bigger ship
with a proportionally bigger engine and fuel
tank can get going just as fast.
The real reason your probes can travel ahead
faster is because they don’t have to slow
down, arrive safely, or return to you.
While your colony ships need to use fuel to
slow down as they near their destination system,
probes can use all their fuel accelerating,
do their job of gathering data to send back,
and shoot through into space.
Though they might save a little for a course
correction to check out alternate targets
further ahead your ship could likewise detour
to, waste not, want not.
They take way less total mass to build and
fuel of course, allowing you to build hundreds
for every star in the galaxy out of a single
modest asteroid, but they rely on a level
of smart automation to manufacture that makes
this redundant too.
A gigaton space ark might weigh as much as
a trillion tiny data ships, but the Asteroid
Belt, our topic for last week, masses about
3 billion Gigatons, enough for 3 billion such
ships, and our smallest planet, Mercury, has
enough for 300 billion ships, enough for every
star system in our galaxy.
So mass is irrelevant in this context, and
if you’ve got tiny ships that can colonize
whole solar systems, then you can just as
easily have them rip apart a few large asteroids
or moons in our solar system to make a ton
of giant ships instead.
You also have no need to send a ship to each
star, as the first wave can arrive at the
nearest few hundred systems and build more
of any type, such as data or seed ship, it
just builds copies of itself to go to other
systems further out before getting to work
on terraforming a planet.
Generation ships can do this too, but it’s
assumed to be a lot slower as they presumably
need centuries if not millennia of settling
their first system before they’d have the
time or desire to send out the next wave.
Fundamentally Generation Ships are self-replicating
machines, just as humans are, its just that
neither requires tons of technology we don’t
have yet, even on the drawing board.
This is where our last ship type, the Gardener
Ship, comes in.
In many ways it is just a normal Generation
Ship incorporating some of the other concepts.
We discussed this in the Life in a Space Colony
series, but it's basically on a long voyage
with everyone awake, and with the ability
to manufacture goods en route, rather than
bringing everything from home.
Suddenly your generation ship is not a one-time
use vessel.
There’s no reason that they can’t be breeding
up their numbers during the voyage, indeed
we assumed life-extension technology was available
to it and so they’ve got a rising population
if they have any kids at all, unlike a generation
ship which can simply limit breeding to replacement
levels.
They arrive at a system, leave some of their
people there while helping the colony get
started, and fly off with a full fuel tank
and raw materials sourced from that star system.
During the voyage they can turn those raw
materials into colonial equipment and the
crew can breed new colonists.
Since the ship needs to be able to repair
every component of the vessel, they can, much
like the self-replicators of the data and
seed ship versions, actually even spawn new
ships or sub-divide their ship into two ships
every so often, which will head off to separate
destinations.
With this, you can build rather huge generation
ships because you only need a few hundred
to be built back here in the Solar System
to get the whole galaxy settled quite quickly.
They won’t get it done quite as quick as
a self-replicating probe will, but they won’t
be much slower either.
They move at the same speed and mostly just
stop for longer, but on century long journeys
between each stop, little difference is made
by them stopping for a few years compared
to the probe stopping for a few hours, or
that the probe can probably decelerate and
accelerate quicker.
So those are the main alternatives to the
classic generation ship.
However a lot depends on what we mean by classic
generation ship.
The original versions tended to assume you
needed millennia just to get to the nearest
solar system.
We already have designs for ships using current
tech we can build right now, albeit for costs
that would bankrupt nations, that could get
to our nearest neighbors in centuries or even
decades.
We’ll talk about those designs more next
time, but they change the dynamics a lot.
How fast a ship can go, how long you can keep
people and equipment alive and functioning,
and how quickly you can build en route or
at your destination all heavily influence
how you colonize.
For instance, with several of these designs
there’s no need or point to Earth sending
more than a small handful of ships out, whereas
with classic generation ships you want to
send them as far as you can because your own
colonies will be a long time growing before
they send their own.
And you can always get a ship from Earth to
a destination faster by sending it directly,
rather than by having it zigzag a bit and
stopping to do stuff, refueling or replicating,
and speeding back up again.
We also have other advantages that let us
make colony ships smaller, and thus let you
build more of them.
For instance the big concern originally was
that such a ship needed to be big enough to
support a genetically diverse ecosystem that
wouldn’t bottleneck either.
For its human crew we tended to assume a need
for thousands of colonists to avoid that.
However, in the first place, we could bring
along huge quantities of frozen fertilized
embryos for implantation, we already have
that technology.
In the second place, we will most likely have
the tech to fix genetic issues that crop up
from breeding too closely long before we get
our first space ark built.
This doesn’t mean you don’t need or want
a large ship with a large ecology on it, and
we’ll discuss the challenges and solutions
of that more in the third episode in this
series, Exporting Earth.
Keep in mind, though, that even if you’re
bringing only two of every kind, elephants
take up a lot of room.
The picture we begin to see emerge though
is that a realistic generation ship is going
to include facets of each of those other variations.
It is going to carry large freezer banks,
even if you can’t revive frozen people.
It is going to have self-replicating technology
on it, even if it’s in the more conventional
sense of just having enough factory and industry
to make any given object from raw materials
obtained on arrival.
It is likely to employ a vanguard, even if
that’s just fast flyby probes to take readings
of the system before you arrive or scout ahead
to help the ship avoid dangerous interstellar
space junk.
It is likely to have huge databanks containing
all our art and science and history, and for
that matter, digital copies of DNA so they
can fall back on those if frozen supplies
are damaged or can’t store long enough.
It isn’t likely to make building a big receiver
dish its first project on arrival, but only
because it will likely already have one so
it can be receiving data from home the whole
time.
News, technological breakthroughs, new TV
and books, and likely intermittent repeats
of all essential knowledge in case something
vital is lost.
Another thing we’ll explore more in the
fourth episode is that your colony effort
is not just limited to the folks on the ship
even after it launches, someone has to keep
sending them new info from back home for instance.
That episode, the Million Year Ark, will focus
more on long terms changes of mission and
culture on ships, where we’ll try to tackle
the challenge of keeping a generation ship
intact and on-mission for a million years.
Back home though, you’ve got the same problems.
You want to make sure your ship isn’t reliant
on information from home but you want to have
that option, so it makes sense to invest some
of your colony-ship building funds into creating
a trust or foundation that will keep rounding
up data and sending it to you.
That's not an easy thing, considering how
few organizations survive for centuries and
far fewer of those stay on their original
mission.
Just as an example, a trust set up in the
1500s to ensure funding for colonizing the
Americas would probably have had a department
dedicated to the shipment home of plundered
goods and slaves, and the exporting of missionaries
and possibly soldiers to encourage those missionaries
get listened to.
I think we can assume, if they had existed
then, sometime in the last century or two
there’d have been some major overhauls to
that foundation.
You want that support from home, and you want
to pack all the gear you need, not raw materials,
but fundamentally you need such a ship to
be as self-contained as possible, able to
survive without info from home and build what
it needs for the journey.
Moreover, you need to make sure it can recycle
everything very efficiently and doesn’t
leak.
This is a problem, because everything does
leak.
You take hydrogen for instance, the preferred
propellant for ships and fuel too if you’ve
got fusion.
Its fine for getting up to speed but hydrogen
is so tiny it tends to escape through materials,
much as a chicken wire mesh can keep in a
chicken but not an ant.
Think of your party balloons and how they
lose their buoyancy over just a few hours.
This is a bit of problem if all your supplies
of fuel to slow down evaporate out of the
ship before you arrive.
And we’ve got the same issue with things
like air and water reserves.
Bigger, thicker ships and new and better materials
can help with these problems, as can innovations
in improved recycling efficiency, but are
unlikely to eliminate them entirely.
One of the solutions for this, without giving
too many spoilers for our book of the month,
Rendezvous with Rama, is to essentially use
a sleeper ship on a bit of a grand scale.
You send out a giant ship that can support
a whole ecology, but keep it all frozen or
in hibernation.
The book may be 45 years old at this point,
but still discusses a lot of the issues with
Generation Ships and space colonization in
general, and like most of Clarke’s work,
it’s very hard science fiction.
Since it is on the older side and we will
be focusing in this series on methods suggested
with newer technology, you can read that to
get a fair idea of a lot of the problems envisioned
for generation ships that we’ll be addressing
in the rest of this series.
As books go, it’s a classic, and it features
one of the classic tropes of science fiction.
A giant object is spotted entering the system,
identified as not being natural, and the brave
explorers set off to explore it and unlock
its mysteries.
Clarke writes them well, as the expedition
members act like skilled adults not blundering
around stupidly making crazy decisions.
That object, Rama, is a giant cylinder 20
kilometers wide and 54 long, a good deal bigger
than the behemoth O’Neill Cylinders we discussed
recently, and far larger than the ships usually
envisioned for space travel, and is spotted
entering the solar system at over 100,000
kilometers per hour, which while fast is still
only 1% of 1% of light speed, meaning that
a journey to even the nearest star would take
it many tens of thousands of years.
While we will contemplate journeys of that
duration and even longer in this series, we
will be trying to show how you can do them
far faster with more advanced technology.
Clarke shows us how it might be done with
the technology they had back when he wrote
it, or at least technology comfortably on
the horizon.
It’s a great book and considered one of
the best by one of sci-fi’s legendary authors,
and you can get a free copy today of Rendezvous
with Rama, just use my link in this episode’s
description, Audible.com/Isaac or text Isaac
to 500-500 to get a free book and 30 day free
trial, and that book is yours to keep, whether
you stay on with Audible or not.
Also, for a limited time, Amazon Prime members
can get the first three months of Audible
for the price of one, and you can enjoy all
your fun outdoor summer activities while listening
to your favorite books.
All right, as mentioned our next episode in
the series will focus more on the mechanics
of such ships and factors like flight time
and propulsion, fleets of colony ships versus
lone ships, and more, in Exodus Fleet.
But before then, we will look at how a galaxy
settled by humanity might look after a while,
when we join up again with John Michael Godier
next week for a two-part episode exploring
what a colonized galaxy will look like.
For alerts when those episodes come out, make
sure to subscribe to the channel, and if you
enjoyed this episode, hit the like button
and share it with others.
And if you’d like to share your ideas on
this concept with others who share your interests,
you can join in the discussion over at our
Facebook and Reddit Groups, or our Discord
Server, Science and Futurism with Isaac Arthur.
Until next time, this is Isaac Arthur, saying
thanks for watching and have a great week!
