Nietzsche said "if you stare into the abyss,
the abyss stares back at you."
With metamaterials, how it stares back at
you depends on how you designed your abyss.
Today we will be looking at metamaterials,
a somewhat ambiguous concept oftentimes defined
as any material engineered to have properties
not found in nature.
If you stop and think about that definition,
though, it basically covers any material that
humans have made in their journey from the
Bronze age and up as most metals are rarely
found in their pure form in nature and alloys
like bronze even less so.
We might stretch the point for some alloys
or materials like glass which do occur in
nature but which we’ve learned to make with
different properties.
Purified metals, alloys, semiconductors, ceramics,
plastics and almost everything we use besides
wood and stone tend to be materials we manufacture
from the ground up these days.
For our purposes today, this definition is
simply too broad.
The main characteristic of most things called
a metamaterial is its ability to manipulate
waves of light and sound as well as electromagnetic
properties on the macroscale, so let's use
this to narrow our definition.
Now there are many theoretical applications
of advanced materials that we can and will
get into in future episodes on strange materials.
These include Computronium, a theorized type
of computing material; Neutronium, a hyperdense
stabilized form of the pure neutron material
in neutron stars, strange matter and anything
made out of quarks besides the up and down
quark, and materials like smart matter or
utility fog, that can take on programmed shapes.
However, in this episode we will focus primarily
on the electromagnetic and acoustic metamaterials,
as this is the most understood aspect and
is already beginning to have an impact on
the world around us.
Some theoretical applications have wonderful
and absolutely crazy potential uses, but even
without them, the electromagnetic and acoustic
metamaterial applications are poised to drastically
alter our future in ways that few can truly
envision.
I don’t want to delve into the physics too
much but this typically revolves around properties
of materials called permeability and permittivity.
These properties also affect the index of
refraction of a material; essentially how
the material reacts to magnetic fields, electric
ones, and light.
Most materials have positive values for permeabilitypermittivity
and permittivitypermeability, but some materials
have either a negative permeabilitypermittivity
or a negative permittivitypermeability.
No naturally-occurring materials have both
a negative permeabilitypermittivity and a
negative permittivitypermeability.
The metamaterials we are talking about today,
though, need both of these to be negative,
and we’ll get to how to achieve that shortly.
Now, for ease of visualization, I’m going
to be referring to light here, but it applies
equally to visible light, infrared light,
microwaves and longer radio waves too.
To explain a negative refractive index, let
us think of a vertical mirror that we bounce
a beam of light off of from a high angle,
so our light comes in from the top left at
an angle that hits the mirror and gets reflected
away at an opposite angle towards the bottom
left.
Now, if we replace the mirror with a metamaterial,
but instead of vertical, it is horizontal,
we get much the same effect.
The magic, though, is that we don’t need
a bulky mirror to reflect the light off of,
but instead we have a material that can handle
simultaneous beams hitting and refracting
the light away as if we had millions of vertical
mirrors in a series, ones that do not get
in each other’s way too.
Metamaterials that have a negative index of
refraction are known as NIMs, negative index
materials, and they have that weird perpendicular
mirroring effect that we do not see in normal
materials like water, where that index of
refraction is what causes sticks stuck into
water to appear to bend at the surface of
the water with the air above, but not enough
to appear to be a mirror because normal materials
can only bend light inwards a little bit.
So how do we make a metamaterial?
The principle is that we construct geometric
patterns out of at least one material with
negative permeability and at least one other
material with negative permittivity.
Typically, these are arranged in repeating
patterns called ‘cells’ and an individual
cell is smaller on a side than the wavelength
of light it is affecting.
On the macro scale, the combination of the
material with negative permeability and another
material with negative permittivity is a material
with a negative refractive index.
Let us use your LED computer monitor screen
to illustrate this.
Your monitor is not a metamaterial, but this
will still help explain how metamaterials
work.
The LED screen is composed of a large number
of pixels.
Each pixel is actually a collection of red,
green, and blue LED elements.
By turning on and off the red, green, and
blue elements, much like turning on and off
individual bulbs of a small collection of
colored light bulbs in a cluster, a pixel
is created that can generate almost any hue
and brightness.
Zoom out and you see this video you are watching
now.
You are not aware of what the individual pixel
hues and brightnesses are and you are definitely
not aware of what the individual LED elements
are doing in the pixels.
All you are interested in is that you can
see the magical moving pictures that were
fantasized about only a few generations ago
and that would have been treated as something
approaching magic by your forebears.
Your more recent forebears would have understood
about colored lights and light switches, but
they would not have any idea about how to
miniaturize these to the level required or
be able to do it fast enough to create the
impression of a moving picture.
It is the same with metamaterials, the individual
elements do not behave differently from normal
materials we know about, but taken as a whole
with the other individual elements, the metamaterials
act very differently from what conventional
materials do.
In a metamaterial, its individual elements
should be constructed into geometric shapes,
again called cells, which are smaller than
the wavelength of light, EM radiation, or
sound that the material is designed to manipulate.
This meant, up until recently, that metamaterials
were designed to affect the radio spectrum
and sound waves and not visual light because
it was much easier to create elements that
would work with the larger wavelengths of
radio or sound.
Microwaves have the shortest wavelength of
radio, around a millimeter or larger, which
is more than 7,000 times bigger than even
the longest near infrared wavelength of 1,400
nanometers.
Creating geometric patterns that have a size
smaller than the 390 to 700 nanometers of
visible light or even the 750 nanometers to
1,400 nanometers of the near infrared spectrum
is a real challenge.
The difficulty at these wavelengths of light
is that atoms are only 0.1 to 0.3 nanometers
across, so building elements becomes tricky
because there are quite a limited number of
atoms that will fit into those elements.
As an example, while we think of human biological
cells as quite tiny, they typically are many
thousands of nanometers across, or even bigger,
and thus you can see them with a microscope
and visible light wavelengths.
A cell in a metamaterial needs to be smaller
than light, mere hundreds of nanometers.
Now as you know, we’ve been getting good
at making things smaller in recent decades
and transistors in modern processors are about
14 nanometers across, which is 50 times smaller
than the longest wavelength of light we can
see, deep red bordering on infrared, and about
30 times smaller than the smallest we can
see, the blues and violets on the edge of
the ultraviolet spectrum.
So we are down in that range now, the trouble
is that we have very little material to work
with before we hit the wavelength size of
the light we want to manipulate and we’re
not making something homogenous and identical.
That’s not to say that metamaterials in
the visible and infrared spectra are impossible,
it’s just that they are significantly more
difficult to create.
We have some examples of these and they are
usually very fine layers of two very different
materials where the layer combinations are
much thinner than the wavelength of optical
light.
So let us talk first about the radio-based
metamaterials and how to make them, because
they are the ones we understand best and the
ones that came first.
As I said earlier, most natural materials
have both positive permeability and positive
permittivity.
There are exceptions, though.
Ferrites have positive permittivity but negative
permeability.
On the other hand, plasmas have a negative
permittivity and positive permeability.
Metals have what is known as a plasma frequency,
below the optical range of frequencies.
At high frequencies, metals act like a plasma.
Normally metals are a good conductor, but
above the plasma frequency, they become poor
conductors and currents cannot be excited
properly.
This causes the wave to pass through the metal
as if it was in a lossy vacuum instead of
a solid substance.
If we make very small metal rods, we can get
them to act like a plasma and get that negative
permittivity for a designed wavelength range.
If we make small ferrite rings, we can get
that negative permeability for a designed
wavelength range.
These materials on their own do not give us
any useful negative refraction, though.
The magic happens if we combine the rods and
rings and you now have a metamaterial element.
Multiply that out and you have a metamaterial
with negative permeability and negative permittivity
and a negative refractive index.
Individually, the rods and rings will not
create that magical negative refraction, but
in combination, they do.
We’ve now got our first metamaterial, but
what can we do with it?
Say you want to focus a beam of radio waves
onto a receiver, if you use a slab of a conventional
material as a focusing lens, it would disperse
the radio waves even more.
The opposite happens with a layer of our metamaterial
and the best thing is that the material can
be made flat and it will still concentrate
the waves on the receiver, which is great
for electronics.
We have achieved the holy grail of creating
a perfect lens, one that focuses the radiation
but does not require any variation in thickness
of lens to do so.
The more we can miniaturize this setup, the
smaller the wavelength we can use this material
for as a lens.
We can also do other interesting things.
Let us say we only want a very particular
wavelength of radio waves to go into our receiver,
for our example say we want the Wifi 2.4 GHz
frequency, or 12.5 centimeter wavelength.
We can tune the metamaterial elements so that
the metamaterial only acts as a perfect lens
for the Wifi frequency range we want.
Everything else will be scattered or reflected
as would be the case with a normal material.
Our signal to noise ratio suddenly gets much
better and we get a more efficient and higher
quality of Wifi signal.
We can introduce another effect, which is
called the reverse doppler effect where we
can actually compensate for any doppler effect
by changing the geometry of the elements.
You will know about the doppler effect if
you have ever listened to the sound of a horn
or siren on a vehicle travelling past you.
As it approaches you, the pitch rises, something
we call blue shifting, and as it travels away
from you, the pitch gets lower, something
called redshifting.
You’ll also know this from astronomy as
stars blue shift when approaching us and redshift
while traveling away, which every star outside
our galaxy and its closest neighbors is doing
as the Universe expands.
In spacecraft, which move quite fast, this
is a problem as signals that are transmitted
get blue or red shifted, depending on whether
the receiver and transmitter are approaching
one another or getting further away.
Compensating for this has been a major headache
for NASA over the years, requiring expensive
equipment to compensate for this phenomenon.
We nearly got no data out of the Huygens spacecraft
that entered the atmosphere of Saturn’s
moon, Titan, because of a doppler issue with
it and its mothership, Cassini.
This issue delayed the deployment of the Huygens
probe from Cassini for years.
In the future, though, simply tuning our metamaterial
means that we can reverse any doppler effect
and cause the receiver to pick up the exact
frequency that it was designed to work best
at.
This is also great for spacecraft themselves
as this makes the radios more reliable, lighter
and more energy efficient.
Another great effect of the metamaterial is
that it can take radio waves transmitted from
a variety of angles and perfectly refract
them onto the receiver; no more fiddling to
get the best angle for receiving a signal.
That’s a good place to introduce a more
real-world example.
Given the tendency to look at metamaterials
for their military potential and my own background
in the military, we’ll use a martial scenario
for that example.
We have two soldiers, Romulus and Remus.
Romulus is using conventional tech on the
battlefield, whereas Remus is using metamaterial-based
tech.
So how will they fare?
Romulus sets up his camo gear and applies
face paint to break up his appearance so he
is not quite so obvious to the enemy.
Unfortunately for Romulus, there is nothing
that will really hide his infrared signature
and he is far from being actually invisible.
Covering up his gear with camo and the application
of his face paint also takes precious time.
His unit is moving into the battlefield.
The unit cannot easily tell where other units
might be located or even where each of the
members of the unit are located.
The reality is that friendly fire sometimes
takes down friendly units, particularly when
they can’t see each other.
After a hard day trudging through the battlefield,
Romulus’ unit gets a break and they rest
up.
The electronic equipment he carries has to
be powered by heavy batteries due to the amount
of power that they drain.
Romulus sets up some solar panels to partially
recharge the equipment and sets up a satellite
uplink to get further orders.
It takes a while for Romulus to set up the
uplink as it has to be pointed in the right
direction of the sky to get a signal through
to the satellite and it is a hit and miss
affair.
After a while, he manages to contact his superiors
and get further orders.
The communications gear he has is encrypted
to ensure that the enemy cannot listen in,
but increasingly transmissions have been detected
and decoded by the enemy.
To compensate, the gear has become power hungry
and slow because of the added encryption burden,
meaning that he worries that the batteries
might not hold out or that the gear will take
too long to send and receive messages to be
useful.
Even though the solar panels have been operating
the whole time that he had his gear set up,
they have barely improved the charge in the
batteries and he is worried that he might
not have enough charge left in the batteries
to complete the mission.
They receive orders to scout out a nearby
enemy encampment and send back images.
They sneak closer and hope that they are not
spotted.
He carefully uses his camera to capture images
of the camp and zooms into areas of the camp
that might be of interest.
The zoom capability is limited for the type
of camera lens he has as the more resolution
he wants, the more bulky and heavy the lenses
have to be.
They do this at night as they do not want
to be seen by enemy lookouts and snipers.
This compounds the problem because the night-vision
capability of the lenses and the camera is
limited.
He needs to get dangerously close to the encampment
to get useful images as a result.
Romulus’ day ends badly when his squad is
spotted and they have to make a hasty retreat
under enemy fire.
It takes several hours before he can set up
an uplink to his superiors and provide them
with the footage they required.
Now as everyone knows, Murphy’s Law, that
anything that can go wrong will go wrong will
go wrong, is the first rule of warfare, and
that’s doubly true of both electronic equipment
and the battlefield.
True to form, the batteries give out before
the images are uploaded and he has to try
to explain to them instead, by radio, what
his squad saw, and hope it is in enough detail
for his superiors to make use of it.
Remus, on the other hand, has quite a good
day.
He has a metamaterial infrared camo suit that
directs his heat in a desired direction away
from him so when someone looks at him using
an infrared night scope, they do not see heat
coming from him.
He also has the latest in chameleon suits,
which bend light around him, making him invisible
in the visible spectrum during the day too.
Unlike in the movies, these metamaterials
are robust and take hardly any power.
The metamaterial radio transceivers he has
allow pinpointing of his unit on the battlefield
by friendlies.
He always knows where everyone is at all times
and there is no real possibility of friendly
fire.
It was a long trek that day, but the equipment
he has is relatively light thanks to the metamaterials
they use.
They also use less power due to their increased
efficiency than the equipment Romulus carried
so the batteries he carries are a lot smaller.
He is also able to quickly and fully recharge
his equipment using metamaterial solar panels
that are much lighter and more efficient than
the ones that Romulus was carrying.
The metamaterial transceivers mean that it
takes no time to set up a connection and get
a signal through to a satellite and his superiors
have been monitoring his progress directly
all along.
The ultra-small and efficient metamaterial
optoelectronic processors mean that very little
power is needed to encrypt and decrypt communications
and it happens in real-time too.
It’s very easy to forget that one of the
biggest bottlenecks on computation is how
much energy is needed to flip each bit and
the heat built up doing that.
Remus is even less-exposed in this regard,
as normal electronic equipment tends to stick
out even more than people on thermal-zone
infrared detectors.
They receive the same orders as Romulus to
scout out a nearby enemy encampment and send
back images.
He uses his metamaterial camera to capture
images of the camp and zoom into areas of
the camp that might be of interest.
The zoom capability is excellent being a perfect
lens and he is able to get the necessary images
from well away from the camp, both in the
visible spectrum and in the infrared.
He is far less exposed to detection by being
more distant and can more easily safely retreat
if detected.
He also wants to get heat signatures from
the equipment in the camp so waits until dark
to get infrared images too.
The night vision enabled enemy lookouts and
snipers cannot see him through his chameleon
and infrared camouflage suit.
The images taken are beamed to his superiors
in real time and they ask him to zoom in on
various locations of the camp that they are
interested in.
Remus’ day ends well as his squad is effectively
invisible to the enemy and they make a clean
getaway.
Unlike Romulus, who retreated under fire and
in doing so let the enemy know they’d been
scouted, and react to change their deployment.
Remus’s day was nothing like Romulus’
day and that comes down simply to the metamaterial
revolution that Remus is part of.
Now, don’t get the impression this represents
perfect stealth by the way, there are quite
a few ways to detect Remus but he’s much
better hidden than Romulus was and like all
stealth, it’s really about lowering the
odds of detection against standard search
efforts.
So we see a major use of it, one that gets
talked about a lot in science news, for chameleon
effects, camouflage, and partial invisibility.
Needless to say every military is very interested
in those applications.
We can also use that for shielding as well,
as such materials let us bend away light,
electric or magnetic fields from objects we
need to protect from them or the noise they
create.
We also saw its value in receivers that don’t
have to move to track a satellite for instance.
At the smaller scale this also allows better
transmission of wireless devices, further
improved by the ability to make a perfect
lens for a specific frequency or wavelength.
They also potentially offer faster data processing.
So we get far better phones and far better
cameras on those phones as well.
Your typical smartphone already has a camera
vastly smaller and higher resolution than
anything from a few decades back, and this
only increases that more.
Not only can they make better lenses to see
things with, but they might be able to do
things current lenses can’t do at all.
We talk about wanting very high-speed broadband
internet everywhere, and through metamaterials
we can not only do that far easier but also
make the amount of power and the size of the
receiver much smaller.
And where fiber optics replace copper wires,
metamaterials can replace them as well.
As I mentioned, we can potentially make solar
power far more efficient and less bulky this
way too, one half of our portability issue
with devices is recharging them, the second
half being storing that power, which we’ll
look at in more detail next week in Portable
Power.
However I mentioned that while their cloak
of invisibility aspect is probably their best
known application, it can be foiled; one obvious
example of that is by sound, and a cloak of
invisibility isn’t going to hide you from
bats with echolocation or help you in a fight
with Daredevil.
Your covert scouting party can stay pretty
silent but could still be detected by sound,
tremors created by footsteps, or just doing
what bats do and what whales and dolphins
do underwater and blasting an area with sound
and listening to echoes.
I also mentioned earlier that metamaterials
included acoustic varieties, not just electromagnetic
ones, and the principle is fairly similar,
and in fact a bit easier as sound wavelengths
our ears can hear range from a couple centimeters
for the highest frequencies to about 20 meters
for the lowest, as opposed to nanometers for
visible light.
Needless to say being able to hide sound is
handy, not just for covert scouting parties
or sonar protection for submarines.
Tanks make far more noise than cars, and cars
make so much noise we have to erect sound
walls along highways in urban areas.
It also offers better quality speakers and
microphones, potentially far thinner sound
insulation, and so on.
So it’s also a type of metamaterial and
one with a lot of valuable applications.
Further, since sound and thermal transfer
are heavily related in terms of conduction,
it could offer some impressive applications
for heating and cooling too.
Let us also not forget that you can move stuff
with sound too, and very directed sound lenses
might have some applications for real life
equivalents of tractor beams or shields, though
obviously not for in space since they’d
need air or some other medium to function.
This is just a short list of potential applications
suggested for metamaterials and we expect
far more to be thought up as we further develop
them.
It’s almost impossible to overstate their
potential impact on civilization or foresee
all the possible applications, any more than
the first folks who experimented with semiconductors
could, or even those who turned them into
transistors.
They are potentially a huge part of our future
and one you can expect to see affect every
aspect of our homes and lives, and probably
sooner than later, this is tech for the next
generation, not far future blue sky technology.
And again one of those is for very light encryption
of portable devices which is going to be an
increasingly big deal as we head into the
future.
In fact encryption and privacy is going to
be one of the major topics we cover this spring
and summer as we revisit Post-Scarcity Civilizations
and see some of the very real challenges facing
civilizations that on first glance look like
they want for nothing.
Like today’s episode and next week’s,
that topic, Life in a Post-Scarcity Civilization,
came out on the top of our most recent episode
topic poll on Patreon but I can’t see doing
it in just one episode, just discussing something
like privacy concerns in a high-tech civilization
can easily use an entire episode to itself.
Good timing for that particular topic too
since we are welcoming on board a new channel
sponsor, NordVPN, and you can learn more about
them at NordVPN.com/Isaac.
I don’t have to tell you that privacy is
big concern on the internet especially in
this era of wireless devices where you are
often connected to a public network you have
no control over, and a VPN, a Virtual Private
Network, encrypts and reroutes all your data
so that even a public network becomes a secure
private one.
And it’s not about shadowy folks hacking
your banking or email in an era when it seems
like everyone from Facebook to Microsoft to
Google to your own ISP is essentially spying
on you and often reselling the data they collect.
I’ve been using a VPN when online for some
time, one downside of having a big presence
online here on Youtube and social media is
folks try to hack me a lot.
There are Youtube Channels that have been
flat out stolen before and we all know at
least one Facebook friend who suddenly started
posting strangely then posted later they’d
been hacked.
For me a VPN is a simple necessity, but having
a virtual private network really eases your
mind if you do much online commerce, and especially
over wireless interfaces.
That added layer of military-grade security
and privacy to your personal online footprint
is very comforting, and as we become increasingly
digital and wireless it is going to be more
of necessity, but NordVPN offers a very low-price,
fast, and reliable VPN service that is also
intuitively simple to use, something a lot
of other VPNs I’ve encountered are not.
It has a lot of handy features but to me the
best one is that it’s so easy and seamless
you don’t even notice it’s there.
If you want to learn more about those other
features though, visit NordVPN.com/Isaac and
get 77% off a 3 year plan today.
As mentioned next week we will be looking
at Portable Power, and discuss not just modern
approaches to move energy around for mobile
applications, but more advanced possible approaches
like storing energy as antimatter or light.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, this is Isaac Arthur, saying
thanks for watching
and we’ll see you next week!
