One day we may retire our rockets 
and instead reach the heavens  
by ascending towers so tall they dwarf 
mountains, and rise above the sky itself. 
The tallest structure in the world, at 
over half a mile or 828 meters tall,  
is the Burj Khalifa in Dubai. It’s 
not very far from the Land of Shinar,  
the region of ancient Mesopotamia where 
it is said the Tower of Babel was built,  
seeking to stretch to the heavens themselves.
That story is typically associated with pride  
and hubris and that’s often been true of many 
projects for constructing the tallest buildings or  
largest palaces or temples. Even in modern times 
these gems have often been financially absurd,  
and indeed the reason the Burj Khalifa 
is the tallest building isn’t because we  
can’t build taller, it’s because there’s 
no compelling reason to build so high. 
It is easy to forget that even the biggest 
and grandest of cities like New York or Tokyo  
only have a few hundred skyscrapers, while 
each place boasts over a million buildings,  
and often even those values come only from using 
the most generous lowest mark for skyscraper,  
which is unofficially viewed as being 
at least somewhere between 100 to  
150 meters tall or 40-50 stories or more.
The reasons to build that high is partially  
for maximizing super-valuable real estate in 
packed downtown regions where your cost per  
acre might run a few millions dollars, compared 
to a few thousand in my own neck of the woods,  
and that alters the equation for usage, where 
the cost of an individual floor or level is  
actually less than the land its sitting on, 
unlike virtually everywhere else. They are one  
reason to build tall, and even then, less for 
economy than for premium space and prestige,  
to have an office or apartment that grandly 
looks out upon the vast city and coast below. 
Rents for these higher floors are higher, which 
is the only option that makes it profitable for  
building so tall even in our densest cities. 
After all, with the US average of around 1000  
square feet or 100 square meters of house 
per person, the entire world population  
could be housed in a square 40 miles or 
60 kilometers a side, if you had the 160  
stories of the Burj Khalifa. That’s not even 
a percent of a percent of Earth’s land area. 
So, you really need a lot of people to build that 
high out of actual economic necessity for living  
space. We have discussed structures like that 
where your building isn’t just apartments and  
offices, but parks, factories, and farms. Immense 
mega-buildings called arcologies. But even these  
are rarely contemplated as being kilometers tall. 
You just start getting heat issues with individual  
floors at that point. We can already build that 
tall if we want, it’s quite an engineering hassle,  
all the more so if you haven’t got effectively 
infinite budgets, but the science there is fine. 
Alright, we can build pretty tall. 
But can we build all the way to space? 
A Space elevator is a structure most folks are 
familiar with these days and ironically it is a  
revision of the basic concept. Most buildings rely 
on compressive strength to hold their weight up,  
how much you can pile on something before 
crushing it. Tensile strength is its twin,  
how much weight some rope might hang before 
it snapped under the weight. Around 30 years  
ago we discovered ultra-strong tensile 
materials, various carbon allotropes like  
carbon nanotubes and graphene. So we envision 
hanging a vast tether down from geosynchronous  
orbit to run an elevator car up from below.
But before that, we contemplated a different  
option, just building a tower so 
tall you could launch from it,  
and we’ll be reexamining that option today.
Now a space elevator actually goes beyond  
geosynchronous height, 22,000 miles or 36,000 
kilometers, but the principle is that at that  
height, the speed an object orbits at 
is the same as the planet’s spin rate. 
The further you get from Earth, the slower you 
need to move to remain in orbit, while the larger  
the circle you actually need to orbit around to 
complete one orbit, so the longer your orbital  
period. It’s around 8 kilometers or 5 miles a 
second just above Earth’s atmosphere, and gets  
you around Earth every 90 minutes or so, but at 
22,000 miles, you only need to orbit about 2 miles  
or 3 kilometers per second, and that orbital 
path is a lot wider than Earth, so it takes a  
whole day to cover it, and the Earth is spinning 
at the same rate below you, hence geosynchronous,  
or geostationary when right over the equator.
Tower or Tether, there’s still a decent amount  
of gravity there, so you should be falling 
downward, but the building itself is moving at  
orbital velocity sideways as the planet spins, so 
on that floor, if you jumped out, you’d just hang  
in space, and indeed you’d have no net gravity on 
that floor. One above it, and you would be swung  
to the ceiling -- albeit under microgravity. 
One below, a very tiny amount of gravity would  
pull you down, and you could apply a little 
thrust, even a sneeze, to enter a stable orbit. 
Again, tower or tether, this makes a great launch 
mechanism since you can use the heights above this  
to slingshot off into space, as above this height 
everything is swinging around the planet faster  
than orbital speed. And even just part way up 
the tower, you can jump out and spread some wings  
and basically land anywhere on the planet.
Now, building a tower 22,000 miles high is  
ambitious, but even one just 100 miles up gives us 
some options, especially if we do multiple towers.  
At that height you’re above the vast majority 
of the atmosphere, so you could build a runway  
that didn’t have to mess with air drag and also 
circumvented the rocket equation. You would need  
no propellant since the runway is below you to 
push of of, and propel you down it. This makes  
space launch very cheap, albeit still more 
expensive than the full blown geosynchronous  
tower taller than the planet is wide.
This is awesome as an airport and spaceport then,  
the more so since it avoids loud rockets 
that make leaving directly from a city bad. 
So, we’ve an obvious motivation to build that 
high, it makes for ultra-cheap travel around  
earth and to space, and down from space too. 
There are materials and methods that can allow  
us to seriously contemplate building such high 
buildings too, channel regulars would know of  
active support for instance, but for the moment 
let’s ignore the materials and ask about what the  
rest of that tower does. For those wanting more 
details, like how active support works and how  
you can build things like this off the equator, 
without them tipping over, see our Upward Bound  
Series episodes, particularly Lofstrom Loop, or 
our original Space Tower video focusing on Space  
Fountain Launch Mechanisms, and Orbital Rings.
Now, you might build a tower that juts out wider  
at certain key altitudes, and was otherwise 
super-skinny, but let’s contemplate one for  
the moment that was not pencil thin. 
Although a tower even just 100 miles  
tall that was as wide as the widest skyscraper 
around would still make a pencil look thick. 
At that thing’s peak you would be able to see over 
700 miles in each direction, and have something  
like 50,000 stories in it. At maybe 4000 square 
meters or 40,000 square feet per floor, a 200 by  
200 foot square, in which you might easily have 
40 modest apartments on each of 50,000 floors,  
2 million dwellings probably housing around 5 
million people. This raises the Elevator Conundrum  
tall buildings have, see our arcology episode 
for details, but we’ll skip that for today. 
We tend to assume these things would be wider 
since they are so tall but there’s no special  
necessity for that, beyond it being easier 
to taper as you rise. Since the value is in  
the height, there’s no reason to build wider 
when you can go taller, or not to just build  
another one nearby or elsewhere once you’re 
at the minimum useful or economic width.  
We can seriously contemplate some structure 
40,000 miles tall and 10 miles wide,  
with 20 million floors, each of 100 square 
miles, which is itself a space 10 times larger  
than all of Earth, land and sea, and home to 
56 Trillion people. There are hypothetical  
technological pathways that might even see 
something like that be viable and practical. 
But the difficulties are more than 
one might first think. For one thing,  
buildings like this are better thought of like 
some sprawling river civilization or one built  
up along a highway. All long and stretched out 
with problems running material from one side to  
another, the vertical equivalent being that 
elevator conundrum I mentioned a moment ago. 
As an example, in that first more modest scenario 
we mentioned of a 100 mile tall tower, imagine a  
single, wide road with apartment buildings on it, 
a few stories high, that was 100 miles long, and  
every person or parcel entered on just one side. 
That’s 5 Million people on one long road or river.  
This is potentially viable, especially if it’s 
a decently wide road and we can get away with  
having crosswalks over and under it, but some 
very extreme measures have to be taken to ensure  
you don’t get log jammed, and it really helps if 
most of the traffic is only moving a little bit  
locally, not all the way to the end on most trips.
This Elevator Conundrum, which again we’ve  
discussed more in our Arcology videos, is major 
limit on building tall, as it's hard to add extra  
access high up the air, the way you might bisect a 
river civilization with some perpendicular roads.  
We usually get around the problem mostly by trying 
to minimize how far traffic and cargo have to go,  
so you don’t need to ship in all 
the food because it’s mostly grown  
a few levels up or down from your apartment.
On space towers, your neighborhoods are by height,  
not area, and your zip code presumably is 
altitude related, Mile 12,345 or so on. 
This is one of the ways we get around heat 
radiation on an urbanized planet too, you do big  
towers into space and pump heat up them from below 
into great big radiating fins. A given space tower  
might have thousands of tiny branches going off 
it covering its vicinity in big leaf-like affairs  
that pumped heat out to radiate into space and 
possibly also absorbed sunlight for extra power.  
These might be scaled up to be individual leaves 
many feet wide or even football field wide,  
and they might not always be thin and 
flat, you might have protrusions that were  
someone’s apartment or spacedock or village.
Once you’re above the atmosphere, a lot of  
engineering headaches go away… albeit a lot of new 
ones pop up too. As an example, while you’re still  
in the atmosphere, every window above a kilometer 
or two high needs to be robust, airtight, and have  
blast shutters and airlock designs in mind. This 
need not necessarily be a big thick steel curtain  
that slam shuts where the window is, it might be 
the door into a given room was built to airlock  
standards and the walls similarly, so that only 
that room is vented into space from a puncture.  
A lighter and easier option than a blast shutter 
would be a strong thin net that could catch most  
items while the pressure dropped, and then a 
robot drone in the wall could pop out with the  
equivalent of a sturdy garbage bag and oxygen mask 
to cocoon someone while rescue forces spun up. 
Or maybe even some robots and sensors at external 
positions had that same setup but were complete  
with a parachute, so if you or your dog went 
flying out the window or off the balcony,  
it can intercept you and attach the necessary 
safety gear. I would not be surprised if this was  
technology we saw in the next generation or two, 
for handling jumpers of tall buildings or bridges,  
or for rapid building evacuation for 
infernos. Possibly in tandem with  
drones bringing in heat-shielding garments or 
latching onto people’s face to provide oxygen. 
As an amusing sidenote, given how dubiously 
biologically plausible the alien xenomorphs from  
the Aliens Franchise are, I wonder if a team of 
scientists first encountering a facehugger would  
initially conclude it was an alien biomechanical 
automated breathing mask for emergencies that  
grabbed the first humanoid target in the event 
of an atmospheric pressure or composition change. 
The ways you handle damage, be they accidents, 
or intentional acts of war or terrorism,  
controls how plausible structures like this 
are able to be built, and it attracts a lot  
of wild and inaccurate speculation. For a space 
elevator for instance, if you sever that cable,  
the part above the cut is going to snap up like 
a rubber band and begin drifting into space,  
not fall down wrecking all in its 
path as it wraps around the planet.  
Even the part below the cut which 
falls is not some kind of doomsday  
scenario. It’s going to flop down at more 
normal air speeds, not orbital speeds. 
A cable designed for a transport car maybe 
a foot thick is definitely damaging any  
buildings or trees it flops onto and leaving a 
small crater like a shallow roadside ditch in  
its wake. Thinner ones might do some roof 
damage, and for thicker ones you have the  
option of including separation charges along the 
tether and parachutes. After all, the same hyper  
strong tensile material that makes for a good 
tether makes for an awesome ultra-light parachute. 
For an actual tower built on compressive strength, 
it should be able to crumble straight down,  
and that would be locally devastating. 
In practice, it helps to build sturdy  
and to use both compressive and tensile 
strength if you’re building ultra-tall.  
Safety is harder here than some thin tether, as 
our 200x200 foot wide, 100 mile tall tower with  
a cubic volume of 21 billion cubic feet might 
easily mass a hundred million tons. It would  
not be falling at the speed an asteroid does, as 
it probably has a fairly low terminal velocity  
for individual fragments, somewhere in the 50-100 
meters per second range, so the net impact might  
be on an order of hundreds of trillions of joules.
That’s nothing to sneeze at but it converts to  
around tens of kilotons TNT equivalent, 
the smaller end of atomic bombs.  
So it’s definitely in the ‘evacuate the city 
around it, many folks will die, property damage  
is huge’ category of catastrophe but not in the 
‘civilization will come to an end’ sort of way. 
Bigger towers are going to be way worse, of 
course, but you’re essentially dropping a  
mountain on a planet at that point, and it is 
going to be like an asteroid impact. There are  
things you can do to prevent and mitigate that, 
though. We also need to keep in mind that nukes  
aren’t magic handwaves that ignore materials, 
and if you have ultra-strong building materials,  
they might be able to handle being hit by jets or 
spacecraft or even a modest nuke without being any  
more damaged than a skyscraper that a car or truck 
plowed into, or a single engine private plane. 
Though how a nuke might function inside 
such a building if detonated might get  
rather counterintuitive, depending on 
how it was built to handle pressure and  
atmosphere loss. Radiation inside such a 
tower would also be quite hard to remove. 
Going up higher than the atmosphere, 
into the actual void of space,  
we also have to throw radiation into the 
mix, as you have only your glass window – or  
whatever material – protecting you from lethal 
Ultraviolet and cosmic rays, and at higher levels,  
even the Van Allen Radiation Belt.
A material needs to be especially  
robust to survive that sort of environment, 
constantly peppered with space debris and  
micrometeors while space dust and radiation 
just erode everything. It makes windows at  
those altitudes seem more likely to be steel 
shuttered options that rise only when in use. 
Of course, we can’t remove the option that 
the towers might be self-healing or growing  
either. We obviously aren’t building these 
things unless we get some better technology,  
for a tower like this, either ultra-strong 
materials or energy abundance or warm temperature  
superconductors or vastly superior automation for 
construction. Active support provides potentially  
infinite compressive strength, but only as 
long as the power is on, which runs up quite  
the power bill unless you’ve got cheap energy 
or great superconductors and magnetic shielding.  
Any of those technologies opens the door, some 
better than others though, and it would be best  
to have all of the above. Fortunately I’m 
of the opinion we will by century’s end. 
Let’s consider three specific cases to 
close our discussion out. Our first will  
be a Space Tower on Titan, the largest 
Moon of Saturn. The second one being the  
100 mile tall tower we discussed earlier, 
which we’ll call the Houston Tower. The  
other will be our true geosynchronous space 
tower case, which we’ll call the Sundial. 
Titan Tower represents an interesting case 
as Titan has no real living area down on  
the surface. It is 16% the surface area of Earth 
but it’s not a great place to live, essentially  
tundra but with ice that you wouldn’t want to melt 
and drink. You can do domes, so long as you make  
sure they’re well insulated to avoid freezing 
you or melting the ground under you or causing  
a spark near an oxygen leak to set off a fire, 
since Titan has seas of hydrocarbons. The domes  
also need to be built sturdy against the slightly 
higher surface pressure – Titan has a far thicker  
atmosphere than Earth but far lower gravity, so 
air pressure is about 60% higher than on Earth,  
comparable to what a diver would experience just 
20 feet under the sea here on Earth. Leaks to the  
dome would be fairly low-threat, as most of the 
air coming in is nitrogen with a bit of methane. 
Titan’s atmosphere is thicker than Earth’s and 
high in nitrogen, something the industries of the  
inner system need to fuel their habitat expansion 
in the Asteroid Belt and the Mega-Domes of Mars.  
So Titan Tower looks a bit like a tree, 
thicker on the bottom with big roots and  
with several skinnier branches curving off over 
the atmosphere. It is built to suck minerals, sea,  
and air in at the lower levels and process them on 
the way up into immense metal nitrogen tanks which  
are accelerated by magnets on the voyage up and 
then shot out one of those branches at high speed.  
Those branches are themselves spacedocks for more 
conventional spacecraft, but the pods come out  
as though shot by a cannon, and far faster.
The pods contain a beacon, some sensors and  
transmitter & receivers, and a tiny computer 
can carefully ignite a bit of the hydrocarbons  
also contained in the pod for some guidance and 
course correction and power. Otherwise, those  
tanks are giant pods of liquid nitrogen heading 
to Mars or a space habitat needing more air. 
Titan tower is fairly empty, having only a small 
portion of its space given over to habitation,  
but is still home to over a million people 
working in the various support roles for the  
tower’s operations and general improvements to 
Titan, like ocean floating dome habitats. This  
being the late 23rd century, they obviously 
use robots for nearly everything work-wise,  
and Titan Tower ships out over a 100 
million tons of nitrogen everyday. 
Unlike Venus, which also has a thick atmosphere, 
Titan isn’t a good spot to be trying for large  
towers with buoyant sections that can just 
float. There will be places out in the galaxy  
where this might be true. Super Earths or 
Hycean Planets might be an option. However,  
the low gravity on Titan largely eliminates 
the need, though you might use a buoyant  
section to float on oceans, placing the 
tower on a wide raft rather than ground. 
Houston Tower, an example of a large tower, 
100 miles high and 200 by 200 feet square,  
is part of a sequence of towers running across the 
southwestern US, and its penultimate stop. Each  
tower has a runway built from it to its neighbor, 
a couple hundred miles away. A very great deal of  
the interior space are vacuum train paths allowing 
material to ship up and down faster and easier  
than through air itself, and more people pass 
through the Tower every day than live in it,  
roughly 10 million people, and a megaton of 
cargo take Houston Tower up to its runways,  
many smaller, which are essentially long cannons 
for electromagnetically slinging gee-resistant  
cargos into space, and just as many folks take 
the trains hanging under the runway as the ships  
launching above, as it makes for fast access 
to earlier destinations along the runway and  
a higher final speed for any ship running the 
whole length. Some trains on it are basically  
open pads on which many personal spacecraft 
can be carried on each car and released at  
full speed at the end, flying into orbit, 
with the empty train retrieved afterward. 
Houston Tower’s Eastern Twin, the last on 
the line, floats in the Gulf of Mexico on  
an enormous raft city several miles wide that 
includes many homes and lawns and ship docks. 
Both towers and their siblings have many 
observational balconies, some requiring airlocks  
and pressurized suits to go out to, from which 
tourists will jump with the intent of parachuting,  
hang-gliding, or diving down. Each tower 
cost over a trillion dollars to build,  
though in the year 2323, that represents only 
a couple hours’ worth of national production.  
We’ll talk more about life in the year 2323 
AD two weeks from now, in our 400th episode. 
The Sundial and its cousins, built in the 23rd 
millenia, represented far larger investment,  
only possible on a planet that’s the 
crown jewel of humanity’s sprawling  
mega-civilization of quintillions.
The Sundial is fully 10 kilometers wide  
at its base and tapers as it rises but never 
narrows to less than a kilometer in radius,  
widening again as you approach geostationary, 
where thousands of ships that would dwarf a modern  
oil tanker dock at during any given moment. 
It has 4 million levels, at an average of 10  
square kilometers a level, and at its highest 
are many long tethers hanging out and up behind  
it that ships can run out on for even higher 
launch speeds. Entire O’Neill Cylinders cluster  
around its higher levels, tethered together to 
share and cancel the minor perturbation tugs  
from not being exactly at Geostationary orbit.
The Sundial gets its name from the immense shadow  
it casts that moves over the day, and it is so 
wide that at many places, it eclipses the sun for  
several minutes every day. Each of its 4 million 
levels is essentially a city in and of itself,  
though, in practice it has overlapping levels and 
other places where the roof of a level might be  
a hundred meters high, not 3 or 4. The Sundial 
is so immense, it can be seen anywhere in the  
hemisphere on a clear day, appearing to be a 
thin, barely visible wire, rising into the sky. 
7 Mile City, population 100 million, is a region 
incorporating fully 30 entire floors and large  
chunks of several adjoining ones above and 
below, and 1500 square kilometers of city area,  
including vast skydocks where airships and other 
low velocity airborne vehicles and yachts often  
dock and are manufactured. Large buoyant 
structures ripple out from these levels,  
enormous but dwarfed by the Leviathan that is 
the Sundial, population 8 billion, not including  
tourists and travelers. Most of its space is given 
over to hollow vacuum transport tubes, followed  
by large hydroponic facilities, water and air 
recyclers, and only roughly 1% to actual living  
quarters. A billion travelers pass through it from 
Earth to Space or vice versa every single day. 
The Sundial is the most popular destination for  
wealthy interstellar travelers hoping to 
walk on the surface of Humanity’s cradle  
world. 100 billion visas are applied 
for through the tower every year.  
In its 200 years of construction and 20 centuries 
of operation, the Sundial has survived multiple  
attacks and rammings from spaceships, and 
dozens of internal conflicts between sections,  
three of which involved the employment 
of nuclear devices inside the megatower.  
While originally being a relatively homogenous 
culture when first being built, over the  
centuries and conflicts it has diverged into many 
different peoples with many different languages.
Could we go beyond even this? Make things bigger?
Yes, in theory you could build even taller,  
indeed you could make many such towers like 
the spokes of a wheel and with a vast orbital  
ring between them that could meet with an even 
taller tower out from the Moon, which always  
shows the same face to Earth, and directly 
connect the two. That would work particularly  
well on Pluto and its Moon, as we discussed 
in Colonizing Pluto, where we contemplated an  
actual rigid tower connecting the surface of 
both places that we dubbed the Acheron River. 
Nothing stops you from doing that at the 
interplanetary scale, and such a tower might  
begin having rotating ring segments as it rises 
to add spin gravity to replace or combine with the  
lowering surface gravity as you gain altitude. 
Indeed you might do vast hollow vacuum launch  
tubes down the center and use a thin, pressurized 
ring around for people to live on, and these could  
potentially end up as tubes something like a 
Topopolis Mass Driver, entire astronomical units  
long, designed for launching ships. Or a tower 
lightdays tall, running between the millions  
of world shell levels of a Birch Planet, where 
time would run slower at the bottom, and the top  
would open up only to the eternal darkness 
of the galaxy you disassembled to build the  
billion-billion worlds of that titanic megaplanet.
It's hard to say when and if such supertall  
structures would ever be practical, even the more 
modest ones, or if superior options might prevent  
them being built even if we could, but when 
it comes to envisioning them for the future,  
there’s no real maximum height placed on Space 
Towers by physics, and they can rise into the  
clouds and beyond. As we like to say on the show, 
dream big, because the sky is not the limit.
As I said a moment ago, one of 
the show’s mottos is to dream big,  
because the sky is not the limit, and yet it 
can be hard sometimes trying to figure out where  
to get started on turning a dream into reality.
For a lot of people, summer is a time of change,  
or a great time to begin a new 
project and learn some new skills,  
and if you’re looking for a great community to 
develop new skills, I’d recommend Skillshare.  
Whether you’re looking to relax and work 
on your garden, do some sightseeing and  
snap some breathtaking photos, or sit down 
to write that novel you’ve been working on,  
Skillshare has the courses to help you on 
your learning journey. And you can try them  
all out for 1 month for free by joining up with 
Skillshare, giving you access to top notch content  
like Lincoln Michel’s course on Science Fiction 
& Fantasy, Creating Unique and Powerful Worlds,  
that can help you take some of the concepts we’ve 
discussed on this show or you’ve brainstormed up  
and turn them into compelling worldbuilding for 
a realistic and entrancing tale set in a distant  
future or a fantastic and strange new world.
Take control of your future and make it a reality,  
and let Skillshare help you, try them out 
today by using the link in this episode’s  
description. The first 1,000 people to use the 
link will get a 1 month free trial of Skillshare.
So we wrapped up this year’s International Space 
Development Conference in Texas and I hope you  
had a chance to attend, but if not, there’s 
many other online and in-persons events from  
the National Space Society, and the National 
Space Society of Australia is hosting the  
New Horizons Summit Friday, June 9th, in Sydney 
Australia, with a theme this year of creating a  
thriving cis-lunar ecosystem of companies. I’ll 
link the details in the episode description. 
Well we reached up into the heavens in today’s 
episode, and we’ll continue that a bit more  
metaphorically this weekend, as we look at 
higher dimensional aliens and 4D realities,  
then next week we’ll discuss the 
possibility of using science and  
technology to create artificial afterlives.
And two weeks from now we will have our 400th  
regular episode of SFIA, as we contemplate 
what life might be like in the year 2323 AD,  
then we’ll wrap up June with our Monthly 
Livestream Q&A on Sunday, June 25th,  
and then on Thursday, June 29th, we’ll ask what 
Earth might be like if humanity disappeared. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
