This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula,
when you sign up for CuriosityStream using
the link in the description.
We often talk about building large rotating
space stations
for people to live on in the future,
but just how big can we go?
So today we’ll be looking at some truly
enormous space habitats that we might construct
in the distant future but maybe not too distant.
Our big four structures to look at are the
Bishop Ring, Mckendree Cylinder, the Topopolis,
and the Banks Orbital.
These occupy the size range in-between the
O’Neill Cylinder we’ve discussed so often
before, a structure big enough to house around
a million folks with lots of elbow room, and
the Niven Ringworld, which has about a million
times the living space Earth does, and you
can see both of those episodes for details
on them.
Last week we looked at Graphene, the superstrong
material whose discovery along with Carbon
Nanotubes opened the door for seriously considering
building such behemoth structures using known
science.
You can check that episode too for details,
but the key thing about graphene is that it’s
hundreds of times stronger than steel, and
thus can be used to make much larger radius
habitats when used in conjunction with other
materials.
Like ceramics, graphene is strong and hard
but also very brittle so you’d probably
always be using it as part of a mesh or composite
of structural support rather than alone.
Building a rotating habitat with Earth gravity
requires essentially the same strength as
a suspension bridge on earth with the same
length as the habitat’s circumference so
when you want ones that are many kilometers
wide, you need a very strong material.
This is important for rotating habitats because
the wider the rotating habitat is the higher
tangential speed its outer surface is going
to have while spinning, exerting stronger
ripping force and requiring a stronger material,
though in terms of angular velocity, how often
they spin completely around, that actually
slows down.
A lot of our designs rely on either high material
strength or simply making the habitat much
longer than its radius, which the Topopolis
is the extreme example of, and essentially
today we’re going to be looking at all the
cheats we can use to make a very large space
habitat with a continuous living surface,
or one that effectively is.
Let’s not skip the basics, though.
We need to use spin-gravity because we can’t
artificially generate normal gravity under
known science.
Spin gravity however acts close enough to
regular gravity and even more so for very
large habitats.
Small rotating habitats, what we’d normally
call the habitat drum on a smallish spaceship
or space station, have an issue with their
rate of rotation potentially causing nausea,
and from the apparent gravity being much higher
on your feet than your head, since it’s
proportional to radius.
If I make a habitation drum that’s just
3 meters or about 10 feet in radius, then
it’s going to need to rotate 17 times a
minute to achieve 1-gee – regular Earth
gravity – at its bottom inner edge, the
floor.
Outside it’s spinning around at 5.4 meters
per second or 12 miles per hour and anything
out there would be flung away at that speed
if it wasn’t fastened down.
That’s what your floor is trying to do,
fly off at that speed, and it needs to be
strong enough not to rip apart though at that
speed pretty much any material could handle
it, even stuff like paper.
However, it also needs to be able to handle
the weight sitting on it, a person and some
furniture or equipment in this case, and very
thick layers of water or dirt when we’re
talking about actual habitats trying to replicate
a planetary surface and ecosystem.
To add to that, in such a small drum rotating
so fast, about every three seconds, it is
going to be rather nauseating.
Plus the gravity is linear to the radius of
the drum, so while at your feet, on the floor
of the drum, it might be regular 1-gee Earth
gravity, a meter up this 3-meter drum it's
down by a third, and most folks, depending
on their height, would be experiencing about
half normal gravity at head height.
There is no gravity at the center of the drum,
what we call the axis.
This effect is true of all rotating habitats
but the bigger you go, the slower they rotate,
and the smaller that difference in gravity
based on altitude is going to be.
Since a few meters is the scale we operate
at personally, as do most larger organisms,
you won’t really notice such effects on
a habitat that is 223 meters or 733 feet in
radius, though some taller trees would.
That drum radius is for a habitat with Earth-gravity
that spins twice per minute, our best guess
for the slowest you need to spin to cause
no problems for humans.
Animals won’t be disoriented by spinning
a couple times per minute anymore than you
are by walking around a room and turning 360
degrees while you do that.
It is possible some other organisms might
turn out to be much touchier but we won’t
know till we start building rotating habitats,
everything on Earth is used to spinning once
per day after all.
Key notion there is that the bigger you make
them, in terms of radius, the more Earth-like
it is, and this also matters for things like
the weather since your atmosphere is very
high even compared to tall trees and as we
noted a moment ago even if your drum radius
is hundreds of meters those trees would see
a lower gravity at their top than their bottom,
which would actually be their roots.
The bigger the drum the less this effect,
though it wouldn’t necessarily be a bad
effect, less gravity near the top, more ability
to grow higher and have wide canopies, and
we discussed that more in the episode Environment
of Space Habitats.
So, we want them bigger, but we also want
them bigger because it means more internal
surface area that’s all connected.
Double a drum’s radius and you double its
inside surface area.
Now you can achieve the same effect by doubling
its length, which adds no more rotational
stress to the drum, or by just building two
of the things, and that’s another key point.
We will never build the biggest drum we possibly
could, except maybe as an experiment or attempt
to get into the Guinness Book of World Records,
or Galactic Records perhaps, because while
more land and more radius is always nice,
the added costs and risks make that a dubious
venture.
Those risks can be non-obvious too, as for
instance we can make a better and more self-contained
ecosystem when we go bigger but also have
a harder time controlling virus outbreaks
and invasive species than we would if we had
a hundred habitats that have the same total
volume but were separated.
They’d probably be cheaper to build too,
all hundred of them, rather than one big one
of the same area.
Usually when we’re giving the figures for
maximum size on things like an O’Neill Cylinder
– which assumes steel as the structure – we’re
already building in some padding rather than
going to theoretical maximums for that material,
the larger O’Neill Cylinder design for instance
still incorporates a 50% safety factor.
We calculate that maximum radius by dividing
the hoop strength by the desired gravity and
the density of the interior, so if you double
your hoop strength you can double your radius,
if you half your gravity you can double your
radius, and if you half the amount of mass
you’re using for your dirt, sea, and atmosphere,
you can also double your radius, which is
why filling your hills and mountains with
ultra-light aerogel and just a thin dirt or
rock crust over it is so often discussed as
an option for landscaping rotating habitats.
You don’t need graphene or some other super
material to go larger, Titanium lets you go
larger, as do materials like Kevlar.
Graphene lets you go larger yet, and we usually
put the maximum plausible size on these as
roughly 1000 kilometers in radius, with half
that being more the expected max size, and
we give the major forms of these, a ring and
a cylinder, the names of Bishop Ring and McKendree
Cylinder for Forrest Bishop and Thomas McKendree,
who first thought them up and ran the numbers
on them back in the 1990s after we discovered
carbon nanotubes, which are essentially cylinders
of graphene.
I usually refer to anything smaller than a
continent as an O’Neill Cylinder, regardless
of materials and specific geometry, and McKendree
as anything up in these big zones.
How big is a continent anyway?
Well Australia, our smallest continent – though
that’s admittedly a rather arbitrary definition
since Greenland might be argued to be one
as might subcontinents like India or Arabia
- Australia has a land area of 7.7 million
square kilometers or 3 million square miles.
We’ll treat that as our minimum especially
as you would usually want some water in these
things, though not necessarily anything like
our 3:1 sea to land ratio as on Earth.
You do want a lot of water if you want natural
evaporation and rainfall levels but this need
not be large seas in favor of small lakes,
nor do they need to be deep, and for that
matter you can always cheat and dump energy
into that water to evaporate it faster.
Nonetheless, how big is such a cylinder?
Well it depends on how long it is, but if
we kept to the classic Islands Three O’Neill
cylinder design – two counter-rotating cylinders
each 4 kilometers in radius and 32 kilometers
long, spinning completely every 2 minutes,
we’d have a basic design we could scale
up.
Incidentally the 1975 Summer Study found the
optimal cylinder was 10 times longer than
the radius, the Island Three is 8:1, but there
is no maximal length so long as you account
for torsional harmonics with active stabilization.
For one of those, that internal surface area
is Pi times twice the radius times the length,
or about 804 square kilometers, and since
we need almost 10,000 times that, which we
could get by making it have a hundred times
the radius and length, 400 kilometers in radius,
3200 kilometers long.
You could flat out double both those numbers
if you wanted 4 times the area to permit that
3:1 sea to land ratio of Earth while keeping
an Australia’s worth of land.
So, this Australia Habitat with lots of seas
is going to be a cylinder with a radius a
bit less than 800 kilometers and length a
bit less than 6400 kilometers.
If you’re curious we usually put the titanium
O’Neill Cylinder at 14 kilometers Radius,
8.7 miles, which is 3.5 times larger than
the Island Three cylinder and scaled up length
would be about 10,000 square kilometers.
That’s a very big island, on par with Cyprus,
Puerto Rico, or Hawaii’s biggest island,
but hardly a continent.
We have other materials with better tensile
strength without getting into carbon allotropes
like graphene, but to get these to continent
size we have essentially three options, lengthening,
connecting, and layering.
There is no maximum length limit on a habitat
besides their tendency to wobble without a
counter-rotating habitat or some other active
stabilization.
So a long Titanium drum 14 kilometers in radius,
or 88 kilometers in circumference, would require
a length of 88,000 kilometers or 54,000 miles,
or quadruple that if you wanted that 3:1 sea
to land ratio.
Now that is bigger than our planet’s circumference,
around double it, or eight times if we’re
including those seas.
However if we opted to put a great big ring
around the whole Earth up above geosynchronous
altitudes, that would more than do the trick
even if you were limited to using steel or
wanted all that water.
You wouldn’t put it closer because even
up at geosynchronous gravity is still about
2% of Earth-surface normal so one side of
your ring will be experiencing slightly heavier
weight.
That actually might be handy as a way of creating
tides, though even the titanium version spins
around once every 4 minutes so if you were
sitting on a scale and normally weighed 100
kilograms, you’d see your weight move from
98 to 102 and back every 4 minutes and feel
a slight drift as you spun toward Earth, probably
enough to make taller trees sway a bit, and
this would be decreased by going further out
from Earth or increased if you tried to do
it closer.
This is not technically a topopolis, which
is a vastly bigger structure, as we have previously
dubbed these Circle Habitats to avoid confusion
with Ringworlds, Donut Worlds, Hoop Worlds,
and so on.
Though as this version described, one encircling
a planet far below, as it has a fairly unique
setup with that wobbling gravity, we’ll
dub it a Planet-Circling Habitat.
Not to be confused with Orbital Rings, which
can also be used to build continent sized
habitats, or much bigger, and which as we’ll
see in a bit can also be used to circumvent
the material strength issue on rotating habitats.
Now the Topopolis is an idea we get form Larry
Niven, same as the Niven Ringworld and same
as that structure, it encircles an entire
star, only in the Topopolis’s case it can
either loop around once or loop around many
times, and it need not complete itself by
having its two ends touch to form a loop,
nor need it be around a star so a miniature
version around a planet or even in the void
of deep space wrapped around nothing, just
big hoop, or like some big ball of yarn, are
all still Topopolises.
To avoid confusion we’ll call that last
a Ball Topopolis, and a single-circle one
around a star, or nothing, a Circle-Topopolis.
Apologies incidentally, I often get stuck
coining the names for concepts and structures
on this show and really am not very good at
it.
There are not too many examples of these in
fiction, and indeed the only popular fiction
example I know of beyond Niven’s quick description
of the basic concept is in Dennis E. Taylor’s
upcoming novel “Heaven’s River”, the
fourth installment in his Bobiverse series.
Dennis is a friend of mine, and I consulted
on that book and contemplating the more interesting
notions involved in the structure, internal
environment, and the societies that would
emerge on it was a ton of fun as you might
imagine.
Topolises are interesting because we usually
envision them as essentially a river-world,
where the habitat and society is a lot like
those we saw on long rivers like the Nile.
You wouldn’t have to set this up as a single
long river many tens of thousands – or billions
– of kilometers long, and might have two
or four rivers in any given section running
the water back in a loop – again these don’t
have to connect at their ends – but you
essentially have a very long skinny environment
so coastal layouts make sense.
From a practical standpoint you’d probably
interrupt the landscape with airlocks or membranes
for safety reasons though these might appear
as a circular mountain range where water got
permitted through with a door ready to snap
shut, or just pumped through underground in
conduits.
I’m very fond of these because in the first
place humans tend to like coasts and river
banks anyway and because the idea of some
ridiculously long river you could sail down,
passing through endless small nations bordering
each other, has big appeal.
Now if we were treating this as an O’Neill
Cylinder radius, then you’d be looking at
small city states or possibly some longer
ones akin to Old Egypt, 25 kilometers wide
and however long, or 88 wide if it were titanium
not steel.
However there’s nothing stopping you from
doing those at graphene widths in which case
your long river would be cutting through segments
the size of modern large countries, not counties
or towns.
For skinny cylinders, these are either going
to be long ropes or sausage link affairs.
Now the Ball of Yarn Topopolis can confuse
folks because they’re wondering how it spins,
and the key thing about these super-skinny
habitats is that just like a rope, any material
has a certain length at which it becomes flexible
and can spin around its axis too without any
problems.
The other key thing about most rotating habitats
is that they are going to be embedded into
a superstructure that either doesn’t rotate
or rotates very slowly the other way as a
counterforce.
For long skinny ones I call this non-rotating
bit a sheath, same as the sheath on a wire,
where in this case that wire spins inside
it and there’s a small vacuum space between
the two either supporting the internal drum
on ball bearings or some magnetic field so
it doesn’t touch at all.
If you’re doing that non-rotating superstructure
sheath then yes you can wind it up as a very
tight ball just like yarn and stick all sorts
of vacuum trains, akin to the Hyperloop, between
those strands for easy travel.
Though even going the long way down a single
stretched out strand isn’t as time consuming
as you’d think, as you can get those vacuum
trains moving very fast and energy-cheap,
potentially even at decent fractions of light
speed for the really long ones – which makes
an awesome way of launching space ships - though
from a practical standpoint something carrying
nuclear bomb levels of energy running around
your hull probably isn’t wise, as a derailment
might blow a hole in your structure.
That’s the other reason we like superstructures
around our rotating habitats, it lets you
have lots of big dumb mass for absorbing damage.
Ultimately the key cool thing about Topopolises,
Circle Habitats, and so on is that they require
no fancy new materials science, you just go
longer once you get as wide as your materials,
economics, and safety standards permit.
Now as I said, when trying to make continent
sized habitats you can make them longer but
you can also connect them – of which the
counter-rotating pair and sausage links styles
are the simplest approaches – or you can
layer them, and that’s where the McKendree
Cylinder comes into play.
While mostly known as just a giant O’Neill
Cylinder that has an internal surface area
on par with a continent, what’s special
about these is that they aren’t usually
contemplated as a single cylinder but rather
a series of nested cylinders, and you’ll
sometimes hear me call this a Matrioshka McKendree
as a result.
Hypothetically you can do this on any cylinder
habitats but unless you are very wide you
can’t really have many cylinders with significant
gravity on each layer or spin them at different
rates, you get all sorts of problems spinning
a giant cylinder inside the lower layer’s
atmosphere at a different speed than that
lower layer, and if you don’t you’ll have
lower gravity.
But if you have a 10 kilometer difference
between layers on an object whose superstructure
is 1000 kilometers in radius you can get away
with keeping each next layer at a slightly
different spin rate with the same gravity,
or the same spin rate but only a 1% drop in
gravity to each new layer up toward the central
axis.
This means you can pack a lot more land into
the same volume, though as a caveat I should
note that you mostly aren’t short on building
space in the endless void of space anyway,
through compaction and higher population density
have advantages.
They also have the disadvantage of making
heat dissipation slower, which is problematic
if you are lighting each layer of a habitat
drum as you’ll need external radiators to
purge your heat.
Also if those layers aren’t far enough apart,
the layers moving at different speeds will
cause a lot of air-friction which will also
generate heat.
So size really helps here if you want to do
layers.
If you go big enough though, you are no longer
dealing with a pressurized can.
In any rotating habitat your air is going
to be thicker near the floor than the axis
but only when you start getting kilometers
wide will this be more than trivial.
However on the really big ones they actually
have the diameter to create a genuine atmosphere
that thins to nothing as you go up just like
on a planet, and we call these open air-habitats
and this is what is of interest to us with
the Bishop Ring.
The ultimate ring habitat, Larry Niven’s
Ringworld, simply relied on gravity, or spin-gravity,
to hold the air down no different then on
a planet, but still required monstrously tall
rim walls to hold the air from spilling over
the side.
The Bishop Ring is far smaller, but still
big enough that it can have a natural atmosphere
rather than one that’s essentially air held
in by a container, so while it still needs
very high rim walls too, you can actually
fly into the center axis rather than needing
to dock to the side and then take an elevator
down from that central axis spaceport.
However, atmospheres go up a long way even
if they thin down so you would leak some air
but depending on how high you went up, not
very much.
By the time you’ve gotten 30 kilometers
or 20 miles up, your air density has dropped
to about 1% of surface air density, and if
you go twice as high it drops to about 1%
of that, in what is called the MesoSphere,
or MesoRing or MesoCylinder I suppose.
You could go higher yet with your rim wall
especially as it could be a thin transparent
membrane as it hardly is a big deal if it
gets punctured, and you might stretch such
a thing all the way to the axis as it wouldn’t
interfere with seeing the stars.
And given that such a structure is still rotating
rather fast, twice an hour depending on how
far you can push that graphene tensile strength,
you might not care to see the stars moving
that quickly… or it might be considered
a plus since the night sky whirling around
every half hour rather than every day is hardly
nauseating like it would be on a smaller station.
Of course the Banks Orbital, the Bishop Ring’s
big brother, rotates exactly once a day, we’ll
get to that in a moment though.
So why leave it open at all?
As opposed to putting a transparent thin layer
of rim wall all the way up, as a full endcap
rather than rim wall.
Well, one nice thing about a thousand-kilometer
radius structure is that the outside is spinning
at over 3 kilometers per second, Mach 9 in
terms of aircraft speeds, and that’s a very
nice speed to launch at, just let go of the
structure – though if it has a superstructure
this doesn’t work but the bishop Ring doesn’t
have to have one.
However you can’t use that to land as easily
and if it’s open down the axis you can come
in at an angle and aerobrake, indeed if you
do it right you could be spiraling around
its upper atmosphere to lose all your speed
and either pop up to some port at the central
axis or just fly down to the ground, even
if you were at high interplanetary velocities
when you arrived.
This isn’t really necessary as we have lots
of other options but it’s a neat feature
and might be one people liked having incorporated
into their habitat.
It also makes it much easier to incorporate
a nice mirror array to bounce light in and
properly simulate a normal 24-hour day.
Longer versions of a Bishop Ring, entering
McKendree Cylinder length or longer, might
have such a sun-mirror or fusion powered fake
sun move throughout the sky on an axial track
too, to give you a decent equivalent of a
sunrise and sunset, as the light would be
moving at an angle through a lot of air to
give you that red coloring of the sky, though
you could also lower the power or fold up
your mirror or selectively generate or reflect
your preferred wavelengths of light too.
So we’ve looked at lengthening these habitats
to make them bigger, and layering them too,
and we considered linking them and discussed
some ways to do more than sausage links in
our episode Life on Board an O’Neill Cylinder,
where we contemplated making conglomerations
of the cylinders to make a 2D Net or even
a 3D setup like a Platonic solid or a Buckyball,
which would be appropriate given that carbon
allotropes like the Buckyball might be what
allow cheap and giant construction of such
behemoths.
Those can be a bit of pain to try to connect
land between, though a bit less of one for
seas and only a minor hassle for air, as it
would be very easy to connect a whole bunch
of rotating cylinders with a low or no gravity
pressurized sphere they all linked into, but
it is doable for all if you really want to.
You could also make a chain link string of
Bishop Rings who shared a bit of atmosphere
but that doesn’t work as well as when we
contemplated doing it with genuine Hoopworlds.
But you can also contemplate going even bigger
yet.
It’s dubious if we’d ever be able to make
a full-sized Bishop Ring or McKendree Cylinder
out of Graphene, we might be limited to something
that was much wider than an O’Neill Cylinder
but not quite that big, but that’s only
relying on material strength.
I doubt we could ever make a material strong
enough to create a Banks Orbital, but we’ll
discuss a trick under known science for doing
it in a moment.
First, what is a Banks Orbital?
Well, it’s an idea from the late great author
Iain M. Banks he presented to us in the first
novel of his Culture series, Consider Phlebas.
Essentially a giant ring habitat whose radius
was just right to produce earth-gravity on
its surface while spinning only once a day,
so that you could let it float like a planet
around a Sun, only it’s the far interior
side that’s getting the sunlight.
It still needs rim walls to keep the air in
but given that it has a radius of 1.84 million
kilometers, or 1.15 million miles, even a
rim wall a thousand miles high that leaks
less air than Earth itself does would be trivial
in comparison.
This is your ultimate in Earth-replication,
as you can even cock it at a bit of an angle
and orbit it as an ellipse to simulate regular
seasons, though these will not vary by latitude,
unless you put some extra effort into the
layout because you really want polar and equatorial
conditions.
Incidentally that radius is for replicating
Earth’s gravity and day length specifically,
and there is a single unique radius for any
given planet’s day length and gravity.
That ring is rotating at 134 kilometers per
second, which is about a dozen times Earth’s
escape velocity and a very nice interplanetary
cruising speed for ships launching from it.
This incidentally is why you still need those
rim walls even on truly massive objects like
this with a net mass that’s of a planetary
scale, because those air particles would be
leaving very fast compared to the objects
far smaller really gravity felt by nearby
objects and particles.
Now at that radius, 1.84 million kilometers,
a circumference of 11.6 million kilometers,
you get an Earth’s worth of surface area
for every 44 kilometers of axial length, and
for it to be continent class using our Australia
definition from earlier, it would literally
only need to be a kilometer wide and still
be about as much sea to land as Earth is.
Since your rimwalls probably ought to be a
lot taller than this, you obviously go bigger,
but again every 44 kilometers of length is
another Earth.
Now we usually envision these as rather thin
rings since we want them not to block out
the sunlight or have a massive reflection
from the other side that made it very bright
even at night time, rather than as a cylinder,
so you are probably keeping these somewhere
around 10,000 kilometers in axial length which
would be around 200 Earth’s worth of land
area.
Since the whole point of this object is to
use an external sun as a natural day, converting
it into a cylinder habitat or even a topopolis
of that radius wouldn’t make sense unless
your unobtainium building material just coincidentally
allowed that as it’s maximum habitat radius.
Now how do you build this thing, without magically
strong materials?
Well, here is where active support comes into
play, as you essentially are going to build
a much bigger, thicker, heavier, and slower
ring on the outside of it that the habitation
ring will nest inside as a superstructure.
We detailed the specifics more in the Ringworld
episode, but in short form you would hold
the faster moving inner-ring together by having
it push off the more massive outer ring, which
is probably a huge sectioned tank full of
hydrogen or helium as its cheap and abundant
and not of value in artificial habitat construction
except as raw mass or for fueling a fusion
economy.
This technique works good in tandem with strong
tensile materials too so might be seen on
rings and habitats far smaller than Banks
Orbitals.
The stronger your materials the better, but
you can just keep adding mass to things.
As to the pushing methods, you could either
use magnetic or even maybe concentrated light
to keep the inner ring bunched together, instead
of ripping apart, without needing to physically
connect the two structures which is important
since as mentioned its spinning at 134 kilometers
per second, and probably a bit more relatively
speaking since the outer ring is likely to
be spinning the opposite direction much slower
but with much more mass to counter its angular
momentum, rather than being stationary.
This is a lot more mass intensive than a normal
rotating habitat, whose whole value is that
they give you way more land per unit of mass
than a planet does, usually by about a million
fold, but it’s still going to be much less
than a classic shellworld with natural gravity
would use per unit of surface.
Since that outer ring is effectively non-rotating
and very massive, you actually would get a
gas accumulation around it from gravity - which
might make for a rather pretty halo look,
and given that one of the other nickname’s
for Banks Orbitals is “God’s Bracelet”,
would make it sparkle and glitter rather appropriately.
Such a structure could comfortable house a
trillion people at a lower density than modern
Earth, and those other continent class habitats
could house hundreds of millions or billions
all on their own, without even needing to
turn to hydroponics or supplemental space
farms or making the whole thing agriculture
land.
These are truly large habitats you build large
nations or even many nations upon.
It’s not likely to ever be the most economical
approach to building space habitats, truth
be told none of the continent-class one’s
like the McKendree or Bishop or smaller Topopolises
probably ever will be, but they are doable
under known science and so we probably will
see them in the future.
And of course, economics are very dependent
on the technology you’ve got, so folks might
decide they like these a lot more than the
smaller ones even if they are a bit of pain
to build and maintain in comparison.
As we say on this show, go big or go home,
or when it comes to continent-class habitats,
go big and go home.
We were talking today about developing in
space on a truly grand scale, but before we
can even begin to contemplate that we need
to be able to protect ourselves from threats
in space, and from space, like asteroids and
space debris, and we’ll be exploring that
in our new episode “Asteroid Defense”,
which is out now on Nebula.
Nebula, our new subscription streaming service,
was made as a way for education-focused independent
creators to try out new content that might
not work too well on Youtube, where algorithms
might not be too kind to some topics or demonetize
certain ones entirely, or just doesn’t fit
our usual content.
And if you’d like to get free access to
it, it does come as a free bonus with a subscription
to Curiositystream, which also has thousands
of amazing documentaries you can watch, on
top of the Nebula-exclusive content from myself,
like our Nebula-Exclusive series, Coexistence
with Aliens, and many other excellent works
by creators like CGP Grey, Minute Physics,
and Wendover.
A year of Curiosity Stream is just $14.99,
and it gets you access to thousands of documentaries,
as well as complimentary access to Nebula
for as long as you're a subscriber, and use
the link in this episode’s description,
curiositystream.com/isaacarthur.
All those huge megastructures we’re looking
to build one day are going to require vast
amounts of resources, and in two weeks we’ll
be looking at where we might get them all,
as we explore whether or not we should dismantle
our own solar system to build them.
But before that, we’ll be taking a look
at what life might be like if you were a Brian
in a Jar, and if maybe you already are one.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes,
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website,
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode
description below,
along with all of our various social media
forums where you can get updates and chat
with others about the concepts in the episodes
and many other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
