This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
Imagine living on a world where you could
see all the starry majesty of space, but it
was denied to you by firestorms in the sky
in a constant rain of meteors.
Now imagine that world was Earth.
So today we are going to be looking at Kessler
Syndrome, a cascade effect in orbit of a planet
that clutters it up with dangerous hypersonic
debris, and discussing how that can happen,
what you can do about it, and the impact it
would have on a world – in many cases this
impact will be fairly literal too.
A little while back, one of our regular editors
on the show, Jerry Guern, suggested to me
we might do an episode looking at how Kessler
Syndrome might happen naturally in orbit of
a planet, and if that might make civilizations
native to such worlds unable to ever pursue
space colonization.
I instantly leapt on the idea, and put it
on the schedule, but it reminded me that I’ve
been meaning for some time to do a Fermi Paradox
episode on various scenarios that might keep
a technological species planetbound, like
higher gravity or thicker skies or several
other options, and so we will be doing a companion
video to this one focusing on those other
options for this weekend’s scifi Sunday
episode.
As always, make sure to hit the subscribe,
like, and notification buttons for alerts
when that and other episodes come out.
Today though, while we will discuss that Fermi
Paradox case of Kessler syndrome, natural
or artificial, I think we should start by
discussing what the heck Kessler Syndrome
is, because it sounds more like a disease
than a space phenomenon.
In truth it has some similarity to a disease
too.
Kessler Syndrome, also known as the Kessler
Effect, collision cascade, or ablation cascade,
was proposed in 1978 by Astrophysicist Donald
Kessler as a concern about space pollution.
As more and more satellites went up, and rockets
went up, more clutter accumulated.
Now space is huge but virtually every object
we put up is in Low Earth Orbit, the region
above the atmosphere to about 2000 kilometers
or 1200 miles up.
It’s also the place where objects orbit
Earth every couple hours or less and are ripping
around at about 8 kilometers or 5 miles per
second.
It is a huge volume even when contemplating
millions of objects, a volume bigger than
all of Earth’s surface and mantle, but the
objects in it move fast and they stay there
for years.
Remember that the atmosphere doesn’t just
end abruptly at some certain altitude, it
just gets exponentially thinner and thinner
as you go upward and outward, and the defining
attribute of Low Earth Orbit is that it’s
as close to Earth as you can get to have little
enough air drag that it's possible to keep
something at orbital speeds for many orbits
without constantly burning fuel.
Now it’s astronomically improbable that
two of our satellites should ever run into
each while up in orbit even given that one
a meter wide is plowing through a volume of
nearly a million cubic meters a day, because
there’s something like a billion-trillion
cubic meters of low orbit space and two such
objects encountering each other at the same
time in that volume is about that probable
for any given moment.
Indeed, even when we’ve got a million such
satellites up these odds don’t change much,
satellites might occasionally collide but
the odds of it happening to even one of those
million during their typical operational life
would be rather slim.
Of course that can be a touch misleading,
because there is a lot of junk up there and
a lot of satellites on similar paths, and
we estimate we lose about one satellite a
year to debris collisions, and once two of
them collided.
That’s usually assumed to have been accidental
but it's worth noting that it’s pretty easy
to make them intentionally collide.
Artificially and intentionally generated Kessler
Syndrome is a real concern as a potential
threat.
However, space is full of plenty of natural
objects in orbital space too, ranging in size
from grains of dust to dinosaur obliterating
asteroids.
Earth gets hit by about 5000 tons or 10 millions
pounds of the stuff every year, with more
that wings through orbital space and either
doesn’t hit Earth itself or orbits around
many times before hitting.
Let’s say one thumb-sized rock hits a satellite
or space station or similar.
What happens?
Well let’s say it massed about 10 or 12
grams and slammed in at roughly orbital speed,
for a single megajoule of kinetic energy exchanged.
That’s hundreds of times more energy than
your typical bullet has and indeed is roughly
the energy of a stick of dynamite or hand
grenade.
But on impact it will behave a lot like a
bullet.
With such intense impact energy, it could
easily disintegrate, but even if it mostly
holds together, it will blast fragments of
itself and the satellite outward, quite violently,
in many directions.
If we were down in the air, the air would
slow these fragments and gravity would pull
them to the ground after a short blast radius.
In low orbit though, while many of those pieces
would end up on trajectories taking them down
into the atmosphere or out of Earth orbit
entirely, thousands of objects carrying bullet-level
energies might hit something on the way out.
But a lot of those fragments will end up in
new, semi-stable orbits around Earth, where
they can crash into something else, something
also moving at orbital speed but on a different
path, resulting in collisions at even higher
relative speed.
And even if a satellite and a debris chunk
are on very different orbits, any two orbits
at the same altitude intersect in two places.
Each subsequent collision has a good chance
of shredding or ablating more material off
the next object, causing a cascading effect
of more and more collisions.
This is the syndrome or disease aspect, because
in and of itself a single satellite getting
mauled and turned into debris isn’t too
bad, but it’s actually contagious.
The more objects you have up there, the more
likely you are to get collisions and debris,
the more likely such a cascade is to start,
and the more intense such a cascade can get.
With so much empty space up there, the odds
of a collision might be pretty low on any
particular day, but these bits will be flying
along for years if not decades, awaiting their
opportunity.
In fact, while you might be tempted to visualize
Kessler Syndrome as a sky cluttered with debris
and ships passing through being destroyed
immediately, it would be more accurate to
picture the orbit still looking mostly empty,
but with objects in it having a very short
halflife, an average period in which they
have a 50% chance of being destroyed.
In a relatively mild but still disastrous
version of the scenario, new satellites might
be just fine for a month or two on average
before something hits them.
That’s not exactly a dense debris field,
but it certainly keeps you from having a functioning
satellite network.
In more intense cases though, such as the
obliteration of a developed orbital infrastructure
massing in the many trillions of tons, those
half lives of new satellites might measure
minutes.
I will say I’m not a big fan of the term
itself, Kessler Syndrome, I favor Kessler
Effect or an Orbital Collision Cascade, but
the term seems fairly locked in these days,
probably because the other two just don’t
sound very dramatic.
Now once such a cascade begins it would not
stop until everything that can get shredded
up there gets shredded.
Armoring your ships and satellites will just
provide more material to turn into shrapnel,
unless you armor them very, very heavily,
and correctly, which is doable but then every
launch becomes enormously expensive.
And it makes low cost launch options like
Orbital Rings, Space Elevators, and Space
Towers much harder to maintain safely without
being destroyed by debris.
See our Upward Bound series for more discussion
of those launch methods and the costs of launching
bigger or armored vessels.
It needs to be understood that by and large
this is not an instant effect, though it could
happen very fast if someone blew up something
big like an O’Neill Cylinder, which is also
rotating fairly rapidly to spread its debris
on many more trajectories.
Normally though, we would imagine a protracted
period of dangerous debris building up till
it went critical, it’s not a single instant
explosion rippling out to trash everything
in seconds.
The slow buildup does give you some time to
react and intervene, too, and there are numerous
but expensive ways to clear the debris, even
once the cascade begins.
But you definitely want to prevent such a
cascade from starting and to have the means
to stop it ready before it begins.
If it happened to us right now, with us barely
having a toe in the proverbial water, the
results would be bad.
Communications would be severely curtailed.
GPS satellites would fail, and military operations
would be hampered.
Our ability to detect ICBM launches or major
fleet movements and similar would breakdown,
meaning nuclear first strike options would
become more viable as a winning strategy,
and the problem with winning first strike
strategies is sometimes it provokes folks
to use them for fear that the other side might
do so first.
By and large it’s a first strike victory
option, not mutually assured destruction,
that tends to result in tense and arguably
irrational decision making, not something
you want involved with the ownership of weapons
of mass destruction.
Unfortunately Kessler Syndrome, unless the
debris field becomes very, very dense - which
it might be shortly after a cascade - would
have minimal impact on the reliability of
the ICBMs, as they are not even making a single
complete orbit, and as I mentioned earlier
we are generally contemplating scenarios where
satellites will have halflives of dozens if
not thousands of orbits.
On the other hand, ICBM reliability might
be very handy since nukes in high altitudes
is one way to clear Kessler Syndrome debris,
although we have to assume that it will be
a geopolitically tense time in a Kessler scenario,
and launching ICBMs even with good intentions
might lead to some violent misunderstandings,
all the easier when communications are severely
hampered by a ruined satellite grid and global
panic.
Moreover we are sufficiently reliant on satellites
economically that satellites being out of
play for decades is almost bound to cause
an economic crash, which is definitely not
a great place to be when folks are worried
about their neighbors and contemplating war.
So again, the cascade is best prevented, and
barring that, all efforts to be bent to quickly
clear the cascade during buildup or after
as quick as you can.
It would be a good idea for nations to have
their clearance procedures fairly transparent
and available in advance to minimize spooking
each other too, given the nature of such clearance
procedures, which is basically guns, bombs,
and drones.
These are likely to make your neighbors worried
if they don’t know what they’re doing.
It should also be understood that if you miss
your window for preventing or stopping the
cascade, this effect can last quite a long
time but it’s not eternal.
An object randomly moving on a trajectory
after a collision in Low Earth Orbit has a
pretty narrow window of trajectories that
won’t put it into Earth or it’s atmosphere,
either of which would see it gone very quickly.
A fair number of those trajectories would
be at escape velocity too, so that it disappeared
for good, though that’s much more likely
to occur for Kessler Syndrome up in the higher
orbits.
For the chunks that do end up still in orbit,
there is still some very thin atmosphere there,
slowing everything down ever so slightly,
making every orbit slowly decay.
The Earth is also not a perfect and homogeneous
sphere and the Moon does not stay in the same
place relative to Earth, so there is no such
thing as a stable low orbit.
And any time the orbit of a chunk gets perturbed
in a way that takes it down lower, for even
part of its orbit, it will get slowed down
even more on every orbit.
In fact, strategies to clear space debris
do exactly this, just nudge it into an orbit
that dips down into a slightly thicker atmosphere,
and let Earth’s greatest natural defense
shield do the rest, burning up the debris.
And at the same time the atmosphere is slowly
decaying those orbits, all those small collisions
will tend to average out the debris’ speed
and direction until it forms an accretion
disk and starts clumping back together, either
into proto-moons or just chunks that de-orbit
together, though only for very large amounts
of matter, such as in our case of an advanced
civilizations with trillions of tons of orbital
infrastructure getting wrecked.
So if we’re considering Kessler Syndrome
as a Fermi Paradox solution, a reason a developed
civilization might fail to colonize space,
we need to remember that the Kessler Syndrome
they caused themselves probably would not
last long.
Most of the debris from any early space faring
civilizations is going to be in low orbit,
exactly where clouds of debris will have the
shortest durations.
For low orbit, think a timeline of a century
for it to be pretty clear though it’s going
to be an exponential decay, with the supermajority
of initial debris gone in mere months.
Now we should differentiate between a few
thousand tons of satellites and ships, like
we have nowadays, and the millions or even
trillions of tons of space stations, habitats,
and orbital infrastructure that a more advanced
civilization or our futures selves might have
in place.
We also want to keep in mind that little pebbles
of debris striking off an armored hull of
a big space habitat has a very different effect
than of hitting billions of square meters
of thin but wide solar panels or mirrors or
shades in orbit of a world.
In a period of active spaceflight, you can
potentially have tons of gas, dust, and small
vaporized grains of debris acting as a wind,
causing erosion or drag on objects in orbital
space.
Up in medium or high orbit, and certainly
above geostationary orbit, debris can persist
much longer, almost indefinitely in terms
of civilization timelines for distances significantly
farther from Earth than its own radius, though
the perturbing effect of the Earth Moon system
is probably going to be too strong for any
natural debris cloud to persist for geological
timelines.
The relative absence of any space debris of
a natural variety hanging around Earth speaks
volume as to how quickly it tends to disappear.
But the situation could be different on other
planets.
You could think of Saturn’s rings as an
extreme case of naturally occurring high-orbit
Kessler Syndrome, but you should keep in mind
that Saturn’s rings are out where its atmosphere
isn’t a factor.
Saturn also has moons with cryo-volcanos that
replenish the rings, and “shepherd” moons
that keep the material of the rings from escaping
Saturn’s orbit but also help keep it from
coalescing into more moons.
For many years, we believed Saturn’s rings
were inherently unstable, 100 million years
old at most, formed by collision with a comet.
But based on data from Cassini, NASA now believes
they might be billions of years old, possibly
around since the formation of the Solar System.
So even though we’ve been at this orbital
mechanics thing for decades and doing it with
evermore powerful computers and detailed models,
the universe can still surprise us with what
structures can turn out to be stable.
Now if there are any alien creatures living
on Saturn, the difficulties of space exploration
is probably the least of their problems.
But let’s consider the case of a civilization
developing on a natural Kessler planet that
happens to be more hospitable to life than
Saturn.
Worlds have debris clouds, both from sweeping
junk up from space and from the occasional
ultra-hard collision.
Indeed we believe our entire Moon formed from
one such collision and the huge cloud around
proto-Earth it left, and we imagine the majority
of that cloud either fell back down to Earth
or wandered off elsewhere in the solar system.
Smaller collisions of the dinosaur killer
size or less are going to send debris up into
space.
For that matter, while a volcano, even the
super powerful kind, cannot throw debris into
orbit here on Earth, worlds of lesser gravity
might be able to get that.
A tectonically active low-gravity world might
have a constant debris cloud replenished by
its own volcanoes.
Nonetheless the main way a planet would tend
to get a big debris cloud would be the capture
of a new small moon that was inside the Roche
Limit of that planet.
The Roche Limit is the distance an object
held together by its own gravity can be from
a bigger object, like Earth, and not be pulled
apart by that object’s bigger gravity.
Bbasically where that other object exerts
more force upward on that smaller body’s
surface than its own gravity pulls the ground
back down, causing the dirt to rain upward.
For context here, an object a thousand kilometers
across, like Ceres, which is either a dwarf
planet or the largest asteroid, has a surface
gravity of just 3% what Earth’s is.
If it were orbiting a thousand kilometers
above Earth, with its furthest side 2000 kilometers
up, then that low side would experience 75%
of Earth normal gravity on its surface, pulling
down to Earth, while it was pulling back with
only 3%.
Which would be fine except it’s far side,
2000 kilometers up the gravity of Earth is
down to under 60%, and while there Earth and
Ceres are pulling material in the same direction,
it still means there is a huge difference
in the force on the surface of that dwarf
planet turned Moon, in excess of the pull
of that planet, and the lower surface is going
to start coming off.
Eventually the object gets ripped apart.
Though think of this as a slow erosion not
an explosion.
Now the Roche Limit for any given planet and
smaller object is actually based on the mass
of that object – bigger massed objects can
be closer before shredding – and the material
of that object, as a big pile of gravel falls
apart easier than a metallic asteroid or an
artificial satellite or any other object held
together by forces besides just gravity.
Nonetheless for objects significantly less
massive than Earth, many orders of magnitude
less, that Roche Limit is 18 to 28,000 kilometers
in altitude above Earth, or 12 to 20,000 miles,
depending on how rigid that object is or how
fluid.
That places it above Medium Orbit in High
Orbit or even a little above geostationary.
Beneath that limit, it will fall apart, spreading
debris, and again that’s where all our own
stuff is, so they will get hit by that debris.
In addition to that, when we talk about modern
era Kessler syndrome we are talking about
collision cascades occurring while the entire
orbital infrastructure and junkyard combined
masses less than a megaton, while a kilometer
wide rock ball would mass thousands of megatons,
and the one that allegedly killed the dinos
is estimated at 7 million megatons, and both
are rather small to be contemplating a Roche
Limit breakup.
So any object disintegrating from gravitational
tidal forces near a planet is dumping millions
or billions of times more debris as it goes
and as an example, a small moon like Phobos
around Mars, which isn’t that far over the
Roche Limit for Mars, if it got hit by a decent
sized asteroid, might get whacked down toward
the Roche limit even as millions of tons of
debris sprayed loose and begin orbiting with
it to cause constant collision cascades, which
might further drop that Moon, eroding it over
a protracted time while causing a near constant
replenishing of debris around that planet,
each bit of which increases the odds any near-miss
asteroid passing by that planet will get whacked
and set off another collision cascade.
Earth’s single enormous moon tends to prevent
us having other smaller and closer moons,
and its perturbation makes orbital debris
shorter lived before burning up in our atmosphere.
Many think our big Moon is a major factor
in why Earth has life, what we call a Great
Filter of the Fermi Paradox.
However that is speculative and Earth without
our Moon is big enough it might have several
smaller and closer moons, much like the gas
giant planets have, and they have all got
rings of debris and Moons which may have undergone
Roche Limit shredding before, or even currently.
Many solar systems might have far more asteroids
or temporary heavy amounts of them.
Any collision in a solar system between larger
bodies will generate them, as would any supernovae
inside a reasonable distance, and while such
swarms of deadly hypersonic bullets and bigger
asteroids is not very friendly to life, like
the Dinosaurs, there is likely to be a number
of middle grounds or scenarios where a planet
might have rich debris rings or clouds for
tens of thousands of years or longer while
still enjoying a livable surface.
Incidentally you can actually get Kessler
Syndrome at the Solar Scale, and it’s a
real concern for K2 civilizations, Dyson Swarm
builders, not just those around one planet,
especially for a fully built habitat swarm
which might have hundreds of Earth’s worth
of material in the form of rotating habitats,
and in thin solar collectors and heat radiators.
Amusingly solar systems where such cascades
were common would also be great candidates
for Panspermia or a natural solar ecology
like we hypothesized in our Space Whales and
Void Ecology Episodes.
Anyway, could such a civilization actually
get into space, one that came from a Kessler
Planet?
The simple answer is yes but with more effort.
It is also possible they might look up, see
that, run the numbers when they are still
barely inventing rockets, and decide it was
a doomed effort.
On the other hand a civilization with such
rings would be enjoying constant meteor showers.
Which probably means getting magnetized lodestone
and other heavenly bounties showered down
on them while they are at it.
This might make them really into sky watching
– which depending on the debris cloud might
make seeing stars harder too, at least near
the equator where we would tend to expect
debris to be densest.
They might long to go to the stars or have
an Icarus or Tower of Babel-like fear of doing
so, I could see it going either way.
A lot depends on how dense and stable the
debris was.
As an example, a megaton of debris of randomly
scattered rock decaying over a thousand years
isn’t going to pose too big a worry or offer
much of a light show, as it would parallel
what Earth already gets from the solar system
in a year.
I could also imagine a culture seeing it,
seeing that each year the debris decreased,
and viewing it as some divine barrier lessening
over time and a challenge to those willing
to risk it soonest to get out and claim the
grand prize of the galaxy.
Or alternatively, as an imposed barrier to
prevent them going out to the stars before
they were ready, as a variation of the Star
Trek Prime Directive.
On the other hand the shattered remains of
a 10 trillion ton space rock like Phobos,
struck by a smaller asteroid ten thousand
years before and whose initial carnage nearly
obliterated the civilization there at the
time, might see civilization slowly rebuilt
under 10 thousand years of fiery meteoric
rain of a billion tons of space junk dropping
a year in size between gravel and houses.
Constant strikes from above might tilt to
fearing to travel to space too, but if you
got up there you’d be inside a constant
cloud of debris that would be rough to work
around.
So they might be forever planet bound, especially
if civilizations with weapons of mass destruction
tend to have short half-lives when occupying
a single planet, as many think would be likely.
Still, that would be a beautiful place to
live, albeit in a deadly sort of way that
probably would have meteors up there with
weather and fire deaths in terms of frequency.
This ties back into the notion that Kessler
Syndrome might just be something that’s
constantly ongoing, like the way storms are
and other weather constantly impact sailing
ships or farming or almost everything honestly.
A civilization might clear major cascades
but also might tolerate a constant haze of
junk and dust and gas as the background orbital
smog and litter that comes with space travel.
They might expect everyone to either armor
their ships or facilities enough to handle
that background orbital smog or build those
facilities elsewhere.
And there is plenty of ‘elsewhere’ to
put things.
After all, an orbital mirror or power collector
doesn’t need to be within a few thousand
kilometers of Earth, it could be way up beyond
geostationary or honestly even out past the
Moon.
Earth’s Hill Sphere, the volume it gravitationally
dominates and in which orbit of Earth is possible,
is 1.5 million kilometers, just under a million
miles, four times the distance the Moon is
and 64 times the volume of CisLunar Space.
It is also roughly 40 times the distance geostationary
is from Earth, and 64,000 times that volume,
and low, medium, and high orbit are all inside
that geostationary and geosynchronous radius.
Low orbit is hundreds of times less wide than
Earth’s Hill Sphere and a billion times
smaller in volume.
So there’s a lot more space to leave a big
power satellite array beaming energy down
to Earth.
So too, the orbital velocity of the Moon around
Earth is around a kilometer a second, everywhere
out past the Moon is even lower, so you are
down to collision speeds happening at bullet
speed or less out there.
Not that such speeds are trivial, emptying
a machinegun on the side of space station
is not likely to be healthy for it, but there’s
a big difference between the energies in a
bullet, or the energies in rocks or debris
sprayed by a hurricane or tornado, and one’s
moving at hypersonic velocities.
Kinetic energy and collision damage go with
the square of relative velocity, ten times
the speed, 100 times the damage.
And you need not go that far either, out past
the Moon, as even up at geostationary you
are already looking at a thousand times more
volume for things to be spread out and those
carrying a tenth the kinetic energy.
Now clearance of debris is possible.
In a quick and dirty way, if it happened tomorrow,
we could prepare everyone for an EMP attack
then intentionally set off a lot of nukes
in low orbit.
That would help a lot, and nukes are a way
to blow a temporary launch window through
too, for a very thick haze.
However the better way is probably a mix of
absorptive armor for minimizing cascades and
Laser Brooms for sweeping up the debris.
We are very fond these days of ablative armor,
armor that blows off chunks of itself as part
of its damage mitigation method, such as some
tanks now use, but that’s opposite of what
we want to minimize debris.
Such armor also helps your ships survive in
a cloud of debris if there’s a lot of it
around in survivable bits.
A lot of heavily used orbital space might
eventually take on a sand-blasting quality,
where there’s just a lot of finer grain
stuff too small to be individually tracked
or cleared.
This still permits orbital infrastructure
but would require more mass and armoring on
all ships and facilities and also represent
an additional wear and tear on them, as they
are essentially all sitting in a constant
hypersonic sandstorm.
Once the debris is there though, what you
need to sweep it away is either explosions
or what we call the Laser Broom.
This is a fairly simple concept as it relies
on hitting objects with a laser beam to superheat
its surface enough to give off some gas, shoving
it away like a little brief rocket plume.
You can do this from many angles but for conceptual
purposes, assume it was done from above, hit
the debris so each emitted a quick squirt
of gas upward, and was shoved a bit downward,
putting them on a decay orbit into Earth’s
atmosphere.
This incidentally is a lot of how clearance
with a nuclear bomb works too, the radiation
blast ablates some material off and gives
the object a shove downward, or onto a more
eccentric and shorter lived trajectory.
You can vaporize stuff in its entirety but
that takes more energy and requires deploying
a laser able to blow objects apart, rather
than simply burn a quick microns-thick layer
off the surface.
Which sounds good, but ‘objects’ can include
ships and facilities, not just debris, and
those lasers don’t care what they aim at
presumably, thus are subject to hijacking.
So lower-powered and more numerous and also
automated lasers is a good approach, as in
space hitting an object with a laser is child’s
play, so you have a big radar grid and lots
of small lasers automatically targeting small
objects much smaller than a person and not
next to anything large, or that doesn’t
have a friend-foe transmitter.
There are a ton of reasons you want a big
radar grid and laser system around a planet
that we have discussed on other occasions,
and it would be relatively cheap to deploy,
especially if you’re using such components
for those other reasons and just let them
be retasked as needed to handle debris incidents
major and minor, routine and urgent.
I should note that any civilization with a
developed orbital infrastructure is likely
to have those constant bright objects and
fiery tails in the sky too, and so we might
see a lot of use of non-visible lasers – infrared
or UV – and collection drones trying to
snag debris rather than roast it.
That will depend a lot on the economics involved,
and whether the public enjoys lots of small
and harmless meteor showers or not.
So Kessler Syndrome is definitely a threat
to our future in space, and one we and any
other civilization should take seriously,
natural or the product of our own voyaging
out, but it is a manageable one, and possibly
a fairly majestic problem to see managed.
We’ll be discussing some of those harder
to manage obstacles to reaching space in this
weekend’s episode.
So we have a couple announcements along with
our upcoming schedule, but first, we spent
a lot of time talking about orbital mechanics
today and those can be confusing to folks
but do become a lot clearer with some practice
and examples, and there’s some really good
explanations and interactive quizzes in Brilliant’s
Course on Gravitational Physics.
Their hands-on, visual approach to learning
is the most effective way for you to learn,
and their ever-growing catalog of courses
in math, science, and computer science gives
you many topics to pick from.
Another thing we were talking about was how
clearing space debris in the future might
require automated lasers to make split-second
decisions to fire and while these days the
idea of quick computer decisions is very familiar,
we are often less familiar with how those
computers make such decisions.
For instance, did you know most of these decisions
can be broken down into very simple processes?
Brilliant's Computer Science Fundamentals
course explains this kind of procedure with
easy-to-understand visuals like this decision
tree, letting you learn in bite-sized pieces
and tackle big topics one simple explanation
at a time.
To get started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or click on the link in the description, and
the first 200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
We have a couple quick announcements before
our schedule, and we’ll start by wishing
a quick happy 91st Birthday to physicist and
inventor James West, who among 250 other patents
can claim credit for the technology that runs
90% of all modern microphones, particularly
small ones.
As someone who spends a lot of time recording
and on the phone, I’m rather grateful for
those audio improvements he and others have
made.
When you have a speech impediment, anything
that makes you easier to understand by phone
or recording is very appreciated.
Second, speaking of audio, I mentioned that
ringed planets like Saturn could be thought
of as extreme cases of natural Kessler Syndrome.
And while rings of ice and rock would be a
real problem if you lived on a planet’s
surface and wanted to leave, they would be
great if you happened to be a squid-like creature
that lived in the vacuum in those rings.
If you’re curious what life in the rings
of a gas giant might be like, I highly recommend
a short audio-story called Momentum, written
by my friend and long-time SFIA editor Jerry
Guern, who cowrote this episode and several
others.
You can listen to Momentum and lots of other
very unique sci-fi and fantasy from Jerry
that I’ve thoroughly enjoyed, over on his
channel “Jerry’s Stories”, and I’ll
include a card for that and put it in the
episode description.
Jerry was also the one who suggested today’s
episode though I decided to split it into
two to contemplates its effect on the Fermi
Paradox, and add in some of the other spacefaring
hurdles, like not having fossil fuels or other
scenarios, natural or artificial, which might
imprison a civilization on their homeworld,
and that will be our topic for this weekend’s
Scifi Sunday episode.
One other case folks often mention for that
are worlds where the gravity is too high to
let them send rockets into space, Super Earths,
and so next week that we will examine those
and how life might evolve on them and how
we might colonize them.
Then we’ll finish out February with a look
at building Water Worlds and Marine Space
Habitats, and our next Livestream Q&A on Sunday,
February 27th.
Then we’ll jump into March with a look at
Nuclear Transmutation and Alchemy.
Now if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe
to the Channel and hit the notifications bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below.
You can also join in the conversation on any
of our social media forums, find our audio-only
versions of the show, or donate to support
future episodes, and all those options and
more are listed in the links in the episode
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
