Whether it’s wealth or influence or electricity,
all the power in the world is worthless if
you can’t access it where you need to.
So today’s topic is portable power and energy,
and we’re going to cover everything from
the classic modern batteries up to peculiar
stuff on the hazy edge of theory, like ultra-small
black holes, antimatter, and bottled light.
We’re not really that interested in batteries
for today’s discussion though, nor are they
our first portable energy source. In the past
we’ve used flywheels or big containers of
water, like tidal mills, to store energy but
neither is very portable. Nor is firewood,
one of our first ways of storing energy outside
what we’d use in our bodies, though it’s
actually more energy-dense than even the best
modern batteries.
Of course we’ve been storing food for longer,
and doing so predates humanity as a lot of
critters squirrelled food away. But we’ve
been storing energy as triacylglycerols[a][b]
in fat cells and as glycogen in liver and
muscle cells and even proteins since long
before life crawled out of the ocean.
Batteries are technically devices for converting
chemical energy into electrical energy, which
is also reversible if the battery is rechargeable.
Capacitors, on the other hand, store electrical
energy directly as charge. There weren’t
any batteries when Benjamin Franklin started
looking at electricity, which he called liquid
fire at the time, but those earliest devices,
Leyden Jars, a basic form of capacitor, reminded
him of a group of cannons, called a battery.
I spent many years working in artillery and
a friend once asked me if we called the guns
and our company-sized unit a battery, and
the wads of gunpowder we’d load into them
a charge, as some reference to electric batteries
and it’s actually the reverse. Battery and
electric charge both derive from cannons and
Franklin also coined conductor and positive
and negative electric charge too, though those
make more sense, even if some argue that positive
and negative should be reversed.
For today’s discussion, we’ll borrow the
way Benjamin Franklin looked at a battery,
basically anything you deliberately store
energy in for future withdrawal, to save time,
and because fundamentally we don’t actually
care what type of energy is being stored or
how, we just want to be able to store our
energy for easy withdrawal and little loss
during storage or difficulty moving it around
and using it..
But storing energy, storing food, storing
money or information or anything else always
has the same basic problems. It’s valuable
and you want to put it somewhere safe where
it is convenient to access or move around.
But storage always has a cost.
A battery is a lot like a grain silo, our
first real dedicated energy storage structure
except for maybe a woodshed. You need to take
a lot of time and energy to build one, and
to maintain it, and you need to guard that
silo from rodents and weather and thieves,
and even while the grain is safely stored
it’s decaying, losing its food energy. Batteries
are the same way only far worse. Energy units
can get confusing, amp-hours aren’t exactly
energy but basically that’s the term for
it for batteries.
It’s a little cumbersome like saying kilowatt-hours
instead of 3.6 megajoules but it’s the standard,
same as food still tends to be given in calories
instead of kilojoules and lots of fuels are
given in BTUs or essentially miles or kilometer
per gallon or liter but fundamentally it’s
still energy and all those terms can obfuscate
how they all compare. Your typical 1.5 volt
AA Alkaline battery is 2.4 amp-hours and weighs
about 15-20 grams, meaning it is storing,
when brand new, about 13,000 joules or a bit
under a thousand joules per gram, and costs
about a buck. A buck will also usually buy
you about 10 kilowatt-hours of electricity,
equal to 2800 AA batteries or about 40 kilograms
of them.
Of course, your wall socket isn’t portable
and even a cord for nearby use is often quite
a hassle. Considering those batteries are
a few thousand times more expensive per unit
of energy, not that much of a hassle. Thus
bigger energy using devices either come with
a plug or a small engine. Weight-wise, 40
kilograms worth of AA batteries contain less
energy than a single kilogram of gasoline,
about a third of a gallon. Wood, fat, and
carbohydrates, our more classic energy storage
systems, all fall short of gasoline in energy
density but not by that much, and store far
more than an electric battery.
Actually, about the only thing they match
in energy density is the even older mechanical
flywheel, that you spin up and tap for rotational
energy, of which the bicycle wheel and car
wheels are among the last common modern examples.
Those also leak energy to air drag and friction
even faster than the worst batteries and are
anything but portable. They are large and
bulky and actually very hard to walk around
corners with due to conservation of angular
momentum.
We see more of a push to improve batteries
nowadays mostly because we’ve already so
improved small electronic devices to need
less power that they can actually run on the
fumes of the typical battery. But if you loaded
a pair of AA’s into a microwave they’d
power it about long enough to heat a glass
of water.
A modern smartphone battery has about the
same amount of juice in it when fully charged,
even laptops aren’t much more. These devices
use little power so they can run off batteries.
Our batteries have gotten better, especially
rechargeable ones, but ultimately it’s the
improved power efficiency that’s allowed
us to have more and more devices that don’t
have to be plugged in constantly to operate.
Like I said earlier though, this is not an
episode on batteries, it’s about having
power where you need it, and we don’t care
if that’s by a battery, a solar panel, a
fuel tank and generator, or miles of power
lines and local extension cords. I want to
talk about a few of those methods before we
launch into the high-tech options because
they tie into the real fundamental issue,
which is getting your energy where you need
it, when you need it, for the least hassle
and loss.
As mentioned for energy storage we’ve got
problems. You have to build and maintain that
storage device, you’ve got losses filling
it up, you’ve got losses while it stores
it, and you have them when you make a withdrawal.
To make it portable you also have to drag
it around and batteries are very heavy, generally
having only a small percentage of the energy
an equal weight of the typical chemical fuel
will have. Size matters too, not just weight,
by making things cumbersome.
For these non-battery approaches we’ve got
problems too. With power cords you have the
obvious problem, you need a cord and I don’t
need to elaborate on the hassles involved
there as we know them all too well. They also
require a big generator somewhere making the
energy and countless kilometers of power lines
that require space, right of way, heavy initial
investment, continuing maintenance, and also
bleed off precious energy due to the wires
not being superconductors.
I want to spend a little time explaining why
the losses in power storage and delivery are
an important consideration. For an electrical
cable, loss is proportional to the amount
of current passing through a given length
of conductor, and this was a major headache
for the likes of Thomas Edison around the
1900s. The thicker the cable, the more efficiently
it carries a given amount of current. Edison
found that to get power at 110 volts DC to
nearby homes and businesses required very
thick, heavy and expensive power cables and,
even so, the losses to get power from a power
station just a couple of miles away to a house
were staggering.
Another famous man discovered something that
revolutionized the way that we transport power.
His stroke of genius was to use alternating
current, or AC power, as opposed to direct
current, or DC power, that Edison used. I
am, of course, talking about Nikola Tesla
here. What makes AC so brilliant is that you
can easily transform it.
Now, electrical power is the wattage that
the electricity can deliver and it is volts
times amps, for single phase systems anyway.
If we put that power through a transformer,
we can play with the ratios of the volts and
the amps. So, if we increase the voltage to
thousands or even hundreds of thousands of
volts, we can decrease the current proportionally.
This means we don’t need to have thick cables
to carry the power on. This is the reason
that typical energy grid power lines run at
anything from a couple of hundred thousand
volts to some that run close to a million
volts. It means we can get power hundreds
or even thousands of kilometers without huge
losses and using relatively small cables.
However, large voltages have their problems
too as the electricity can jump between conductors
and if you get zapped by a high voltage, one
carrying even a moderately small current,
it will electrocute you. We are trading off
one type of problem for another.
Ideally you want wires with little to no resistance
but even if you could use superconductors,
those need coolant that has to be made and
replaced and the amount of current that can
be carried by a given conductor size is also
limited as the conductor loses its superconductivity
if too much current flows through it. Should
we ever get a warm temperature superconductor,
the coolant problem goes away, but the other
problems remain.
That is an example of how one tech can cause
damage to the development of others though,
and we see that a lot with energy. Some new
improvement to some type of energy technology
makes it better and the other worse, relatively
speaking, so R&D drops off to those areas
and slows improvement. We actually had solar
power long before cars were common and most
houses had electricity, but research in improving
that died off, and indeed probably would have
stayed dead if we hadn’t invented semiconductors
and improved them for their value in computing.
We’ve been using wood and other biofuels
a long time too, and had wood powered vehicles,
but seen very little improvement in those
because gas and diesel were better. Ditto,
even solar and wind have probably hampered
improvements in safer & cheaper atomic energy
because they tend to be viewed as more ecologically
attractive alternative energy sources, which
is very debatable. Economics and perception
matter a lot in this field though.
So batteries and land line power we know well
enough. How about a local generator? Of course
we do that too. Lots of yard tools have their
own gasoline engines, but these need to be
fairly large, require additional maintenance,
have reliability issues, acquiring and storing
fuel, and also tend to be loud. We can’t
really do wind power for smaller objects either,
as while it’s great for windmills, it -, like
the flywheel - is quite cumbersome and large,
and not something you can easily make smaller.
If the wind dies off, or if your windmill
is in a blocked or sheltered location, you
get no power; meaning you need a battery or
flywheel in it or would need to blow on it.
Solar isn’t terribly energy dense either,
200 watts is a very good output rate for a
square meter of solar panel under full sun,
but you won’t usually get that and obviously
not inside a building or at night. Even if
you did though, it couldn’t power a car.
A horsepower, our unit of power for cars,
is 746 watts, and you’d barely get just
one if you coated the whole surface of a car
in solar panels. It generally take tens of
thousands of watts just to maintain cruising
speed of an automobile on a highway. Still,
solar is a very attractive option, in conjunction
with batteries, for powering smaller devices.
Atomic power sources are also pretty tempting.
Now, you can’t stuff a thorium reactor into
a car, but you can use Radioisotope Thermoelectric
Generators, RTGs, as a power source. Such
things are phenomenally energy dense, on an
order of a million times that of any chemical
fuel and a billion times better than most
batteries, though it drops off quite a lot
as you add in shielding from radiation, and
factor in the incredibly low efficiency of
thermocouples, which have never broken 10%
and generally do about half that. But these
are incredibly durable objects lacking moving
parts, that just put out a constant supply
of power and metamaterials hold promise to
improve the efficiency of the thermocouples
in the foreseeable future.
Most RTGs are pretty heavy affairs, able to
turn out hundreds of watts for decades off
only a few kilograms of fuel, and a good deal
more of shielding. But we actually have something
called a betavoltaic battery that can be quite
small. The name comes from them running on
beta radiation, which is electrons or positrons,
and beta radiation can be stopped by virtually
anything, including a thin piece of tin foil
or your own top layer of dead skin.
So you can take a quick beta-decay isotope
like Strontium-90, half-life of 29 years,
and have a power source that creates a steady
supply of energy for decades. Indeed we used
these in older pacemakers and use tritium
based ones in a lot of tiny low-power, long
term devices. Two key caveats there though,
first, the power supply is not actually constant,
it slowly decreases over time and at the half-life
of the isotope will be down to half-wattage
so a 20 watt Strontium-90 betavoltaic battery
would be down to 10 watts in 29 years and
5 watts in 58 years. Second, it is a steady
power supply. You can’t stop it, it just
keeps going and going and going at that wattage.
Meaning unless your device needs a constant
power supply of X amount, all the rest of
that energy is being wasted, and if you need
more than X power sometime, you will need
a battery attached too.
A new type of betavoltaic device that shows
a lot of promise is the diamond battery. This
device takes advantage of Carbon-14, a radioisotope
made in our own atmosphere by cosmic rays,
or in graphite in fission reactors, and of
course diamonds are made of carbon. The outer,
non-radioactive Carbon-12 slows the electrons
being emitted by the inner, mildly radioactive
Carbon-14. This is a very low power device,
just 3 watts, and isn’t the most energy
dense, but it does allow for a more than 6000
year lifetime before reaching half power,
making it attractive for space missions and
other remote or difficult to reach applications.
These kinds of isotopes are expensive too.
That’s the real limit on RTGs, not them
being dangerous. An atomic power plant uses
a reaction that causes fission, RTG’s and
the like rely on natural decay. Needless to
say, things with half-lives of less than many
millions of years are not found much in nature
because they don’t live long after the event
that made them, which for many was some giant
supernova billions of years ago.
And tritium, the most popular to use, costs
about 30 thousand dollars per gram, hundreds
of times more than gold or platinum, though
it produces about a watt of power and has
a half-life of 12 years. Still insane though
that sounds, you could power quite a few devices
off that much juice, especially with an attached
battery to handle peak use, and its cost comes
from production, you need a fission reactor
to make it, so there are scenarios where that
could become much more plentiful in the future.
Ignoring that cost, you could easily have
a 10-watt tritium ‘battery’ that with
shielding and thermocouple loss included weighed
no more than a typical smartphone battery
and lasted decades, or you could have, say,
3 or 4 smaller ones where you just staggered
the usage and pulled one for replacement every
5 or 6 years with no radiation concerns.
Another option is to not use radioactive decay
as your power source, but to use micro fission
reactors. The smallest thermal nuclear reactor
ever designed is only 4.6 kg, including all
shielding. Less than half a kg of Americium-232,
the most easily fissioned fissile fuel known
that can sustain a chain reaction, it is dissolved
in nitric acid, then this is mixed with water,
and placed in a sphere 9.6 cm across that
serves as a neutron reflector and radiation
shield. While this is only produces a few
hundred watts, the fission reaction can be
throttled to meet energy demands, and it is
able to be refueled or replaced.
This is the smallest you can go for a reasonably
traditional reactor, but there are experiments
being conducted into other quirks of neutronics
that may make it possible to go even smaller.
Two related concepts have been bounced around
for a number of years, ultra-cold neutrons
and tetraneutrons. Briefly, ultracold neutrons
move very slowly and are thus more likely
to be captured and cause a fission event,
and tetraneutrons are bundle of neutrons that
are also more likely to be captured and cause
fission. If we can advance this technology
we may be able to produce smaller, safer reactors
that can actually be throttled quickly to
allow you to produce power only in the amount
you want when you want it.
We also have energy beaming and wireless energy,
and like the others these are not new concepts
but are seeing more interest these days. Energy
beaming is more of a space-based application,
where instead of a wire, you beam light or
microwaves to something like a spaceship or
satellite. We’ve discussed that here on
SFIA a lot so we’ll skip it today. It’s
not very ideal for terrestrial applications.
Wireless power, though, is seeing more use,
due in part to the quantum uncertainty of
power plugs and USB ports, which are always
backwards from whichever direction of the
plug you are attempting to insert, particularly
if said connector is in an awkward place to
reach or see. Wireless power has its pros
and cons too. Range is quite an issue, which
is why most devices using it now require them
to be practically physically touching to work,
meaning it’s basically just an easy plug.
But those are improving, and I wouldn’t
be surprised if that became common enough
in homes in a decade or two that ‘wireless’
started meaning power supply for devices rather
than an internet connection.
This is a good place to jump in to higher-tech
stuff. Even if we had a teleporter, like we
discussed two weeks back, we can’t just
freely refuel things or move power, at least
not under the methods that look like they
might be allowed under known physics. But
that is also one potential option, as is quantum
energy teleportation. I generally tend to
expect these to be impossible, or at least
impractical, but we can’t rule it out yet.
Like energy beaming though, it potentially
lets you move energy over huge distances and
not have to carry it with you like fuel. And
considering the big issue with such things
is scaling it up past the atomic scale, micro-sizing
it for portable electronics is presumably
not the issue, rather the reverse, getting
it even that big.
We were also talking about atomic batteries
as a great option, and they absolutely are
if you can find a way to produce those low-half-life
beta-decaying isotopes cheaper, and that derives
from them being atomic rather than chemical,
millions of times more energy dense. . Another
way to harvest energy from decay would be
to develop gammavoltaic systems. These are
basically a lot like solar panels, but working
in a MUCH higher frequency than visible light.
Because of the way traditional Photovoltaics
works, the wavelength of the light and the
size of the components actually converting
the light into electricity are linked, so
traditional silicon wouldn’t cut it, even
if the radiation wouldn’t overwhelm the
thing first. The two most promising options
here are perovskites, which are already being
used in the newest generation of solar panels,
and biogammavoltaics, which are really interesting.
Biogammavoltaics come from certain radiotrophic,
or radiation eating, fungi that have been
studied fairly extensively in Russia. One
of the most promising is a fungus that lives
in the same room as the Elephant’s Foot,
or the melted down corium from the Chernobyl
meltdown. These fungi contain a LOT of melanin,
with basically just enough room to squeeze
in the rest of the things that they need to
live, and this melanin converts the gamma
radiation into biochemical energy. Since most
radioisotopes also produce gamma radiation,
being able to use this to harvest power would
truly be a game changer, not just for RTGs,
but for antimatter devices as well.
Antimatter lets us get even denser than atomic
energy. Under Einstein’s famous E=mc²,
a single gram of matter contains about 100
trillion joules of energy, as we mentioned
earlier you only get maybe a thousand joules
out of an equal mass of batteries and at most
a hundred times more than that out of a gram
of chemical fuel, so raw matter to energy
conversion batteries are around a billion
times more energy dense than chemical fuels
and a hundred billion times as dense as modern
batteries.
Now that would be the penultimate energy supply,
just short of being able to yank power out
of nothing. And we have two approaches that
let us more or less do this. The first is
antimatter, which is technically twice as
good since it will render itself and an equal
amount of regular matter into energy. It’s
more properly thought of as a battery too
because there’s no real source of naturally
occurring antimatter in any significant quantity,
you have to make it. And right now not only
can we not store it, but we need to spend
millions of times more energy to make a bit
of anti-matter than it would release. Like
being able to cheaply mass produce radioisotopes,
if we could ever mass-produce antimatter and
safely store it, it would be an amazing power
storage medium. Not only is it even more energy
dense than fissionable materials and radioisotopes
- indeed it even outstrips fusion - but you
can throttle your power output. An RTG produces
a set power supply, constantly, whether you
need it or not and you can’t squeeze any
extra out.
Antimatter is more like a fuel, you only burn
it when you want to at the rate you want to.
Since it has otherwise identical properties
to normal matter, long term storage without
decay isn’t really an issue, though considering
touching any matter makes it explode, even
short term storage is an issue. But a big
ball of antihydrogen or anti-iron left to
itself isn’t decaying and can just sit there
indefinitely awaiting use without loss to
time and decay.
You can also potentially use antimatter to
catalyze fusion. We generally think of a fusion
power source needing to be very large. But
you might be able to make a very small one
that ran on a little antimatter and much more
common and mundane fusion fuel instead. Which
is nice unless you have very cheap antimatter
production, more so since the assumption is
the process will always require at least as
much energy be put in as you get out, whereas
you might get a net positive output using
it to catalyze fusion.
Our other approach for raw matter to energy
conversion is black holes. Now needless to
say these are not normally portable, but as
we discussed way, way back in micro-blackholes,
you can potentially make very tiny ones by
jamming a lot of energy into one place at
once, usually by targeting a tiny spot with
a huge array of lasers, energy has gravity
too, not just mass, and lasers are the only
type of non-mass energy we usually can get
anywhere that dense. This is called a kugelblitz
black hole, and according to current theory
they decay and release energy via Hawking
Radiation at a speed roughly inverse to the
cube of their mass. Making one ten times lighter
means it lives only tenth-cubed or one thousandth
the time. It will also produce ten-squared
or one hundred times the power. We’ve talked
about moving starships with ones weighing
hundreds of thousands of tons, or fueling
whole civilizations with far more massive
but lower-powered versions that will keep
going for eons.
However you could potentially make very tiny
but ridiculously high powered ones too. Ones
that shine nearly as bright as a star for
just a few seconds. This, needless to say,
is pretty darn useless for most applications,
as would be some billion ton black hole producing
only a few thousand watts even if it did so
steadily for a trillion years.
But the solution comes with the problem. We
regard these as batteries because it’s virtually
impossible to feed new matter into such a
black hole, so they run out. This sounds counterintuitive,
since normally feeding a black hole is very
easy, eating stuff is what they are best known
for. But these tiny black holes are even tinier
than an atomic nucleus and so it’s hard
to get fuel into them while they are gushing
out so much energy, it will push away the
stuff you are trying to get in.
It’s kind of like trying to jam a beach
ball into a hole in the wall the size of a
dime while someone is spraying a pressure
washer through the other side. So if you can
feed one, you have a power generator rather
than a battery; but trying to do so is nigh
impossible. They also - like our RTGs - produce
a set amount of power constantly, not on demand.
Though unlike them, that power rises as the
black hole shrinks, instead of diminishing
as the radioisotopes decay.
Now last week we were talking about metamaterials
and possible perfect mirrors and better lenses,
so let’s imagine for the moment we had a
truly perfect mirror around such a super-tiny
black hole. Everything keeps reflecting around
and going back in eventually. Now you have
an ideal battery, and you can use even a very
low-mass black hole for this, and just let
some energy leak out in the amount you need.
This is much easier said than done. For one
thing, the energy released this way is going
to be mostly gamma radiation; which we not
only don’t have any perfect mirrors for,
but honestly any mirrors at all. But it may
be possible. Still fairly dangerous though
since the lighter ones are so short-lived
that if it started leaking, it would basically
explode.
So feedable blackholes, or mirror contained
ones, at the larger scale are possibly on
the table but one light enough to carry around
in your pocket probably are not.
That said, if you’ve got perfect mirrors
you maybe don’t need a black hole for power
storage. Instead of making a kugelblitz black
hole by shooting tons of lasers at one atom-sized
spot, you shoot them all into a box with perfect
mirror sides and close it up. All that light
bounces around until you release it. This
is definitely physically possible, even now,
it’s just miniaturizing it that’s hard
because light moves very fast and mirrors
aren’t perfect, though we’ve made some
that are perfect for a single wavelength.
Every bounce on an imperfect mirror loses
some energy, so if you had a mirror box billions
of kilometers long you aren’t getting many
bounces and loss.
Micro-sizing that to a useful size means your
mirrors need to be perfect. at least for that
wavelength of stored light. The energy density
is the same as matter, stick a hundred trillion
joules of photons in a box and it will weigh
one gram more. This basically ties with anti-matter
as your penultimate battery, and depending
on how mirror technology goes, might be the
most plausible approach. Indeed it might not
be all that far off either, again we’ve
made perfect mirrors for individual wavelengths.
Can we do even better? Well nothing beats
entirely free energy produced wherever you
want it in the amount you want it, and while
we have no theory for that, vacuum energy
potentially offers something pretty close.
There’s an awful lot of energy sitting around
in the seeming emptiness of the true void,
and being able to tap that or dark energy
or even reaching into other universes to snatch
some are things we can’t rule out for the
future, but sadly we also can’t discuss
them much as we don’t have anything approaching
a solid understanding of any of those yet.
This is something that Iain Banks described
in his Culture novels with his Gridfire weapon,
and this weapon truly dwarfs any other type
of weapon that we could possibly obtain in
this universe.
That would however, be the ultimate game changer,
vast amounts of energy available to you wherever
you go when you want it that you didn’t
even have to lug around, the ultimate in portable
power.
All right, we’ll wrap up there for the day.
One quick announcement before we get into
the upcoming episodes, folks have been asking
me to make some channel merchandise for a
long while now and we’ve finally gotten
around to starting that up. The big request
was for T-shirts and coffee mugs and I was
delaying a bit in large part because I wanted
to make sure it wasn’t junk that would melt
in folks’ dishwashers, once we found a good
company, Signil, we were ready to proceed.
We’ll add to the available options as time
and interest permit, but those are now available
at Signil.com and will be linked below in
the video description.
Next week we will be looking at how humans
and life in general need to adapt to live
in the empty expanse of space, and probably
not surprisingly our SFIA Book of the Month
is Leviathan Wakes, the first book of The
Expanse series, whose TV adaptation has its
third season premiering next week too. The
week after that we will go the opposite direction,
and talk about making habitats in space tailored
to humans, with a detailed look at the O’Neill
Cylinder, the largest rotating habitat you
can make from materials we can currently cheaply
mass produce, and probably the first megastructure
you would build in space.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others, or donate
to support future episodes at our website,
IsaacArthur.net, or Patreon, or of course
you can buy some channel merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and have a great week!
