This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
As we move into the future and expand off
planet we tend to design our megastructures
and habitats to our own bipedal, land-based
desires.
But what about our oceanic friends, like super-smart
dolphins, or if we find marine life in the
ocean moons of Jupiter?
Or if we decide to re-engineer ourselves into
mermen and mermaids?
So one of our most talked about topics on
this channel is the general concept that humanity
is likely to build giant space habitats as
opposed to simply terraforming and colonizing
other planets, and today we’ll be discussing
that notion in the context of building oceanic
and aquatic habitats in space.
We will also introduce some new megastructures,
like a Hydroshell, which allows truly huge
aquatic environments; dwarfing planets but
avoiding crushing water pressures.
We will be looking at this in terms of a few
options for gravity - micro-gravity, gravity
simulated by rotation, natural gravity, and
artificial gravity.
We will be looking at scales from small habitats
up to planet sized ones and even ones dwarfing
planets in scope.
We will also be looking at purposes, whether
it's a civilization that’s aquatic in nature
or it’s more of a preserve, such as if we
built large marine habitats as nature preserves
rather than for us to live in.
Or for highly intelligent uplifted dolphins
or whales to live in.
We will also play with some interesting features
you might have in these, like vertical reefs
or submarine islands inside and under the
water.
Now to begin our discussion there’s two
critical concepts we need to understand.
First, that water under gravity will grow
in pressure as you go down, each layer above
pressing down on you more, and second, that
gravity can be mimicked by rotation and centrifugal
force, and water will still grow in pressure
under that pseudo-gravity.
This is going to cause us some problems that,
as we will see today, make it tempting to
either minimize gravity if you can or opt
for small rotating habitats, or rather, skinny
ones.
Spin-gravity habitats, the most popular example
of which is the O’Neill Cylinder, rely on
the core assumption of Einstein’s General
Relativity, which is that gravity and acceleration
are essentially interchangeable, under the
Equivalence Principle.
What this means is that objects which are
spinning around in a circle, while maintaining
the same speed, are constantly undergoing
a change in actual velocity - the direction
changes - and this is acceleration and this
makes that spinning, accelerating object effectively
under gravity.
A man in zero gravity, but being spun on a
rope like a sling, whirling around in a circle,
is going to feel as though they are under
gravity pulling them outward away from the
center of that spin.
This is centrifugal force and is what makes
water and clothes press to the side of a washing
machine in the spin cycle, or makes you tilt
when your car goes around a corner or bend.
Now centrifugal force is often called a fictional
force or pseudo force and that makes folks
think it doesn’t exist.
Amusingly modern physics often regards gravity
itself as a fictional or pseudo force as well,
but critically, it just refers to how the
source of the force is your acceleration,
rather than the gravitational pull of mass
or electric charge or such.
Without dipping into frames of reference,
inertial and non-inertial, the key notion
is that if you are inside a big spinning cylinder,
drum, donut, or so on, you will feel pressed
down to the surface the same as you would
on Earth.
Folks sometimes misunderstand this and think
if they jumped up, they would float, but quite
to the contrary you’d fall right back down
again.
Folks ask if this can work as real gravity,
and the answer is yes, just ask the clothes
in your washing machine, or the astronauts
in the space station.
They are still entirely inside Earth's gravitational
field, it’s a bit weaker that high up, a
few percent, but that’s barely noticeable.
They float around because the station is whirling
around Earth and the centrifugal force is
negating Earth’s gravity on them.
This is one way of understanding how orbits
work and why speeds needed to orbit decrease
the further away you go, as gravity drops
and as acceleration needed to turn at such
a radius increases.
For a lot of channel regulars that was old-hat,
but I felt it needed repeating since we haven’t
covered it in a while and not everyone on
this show is a long time listener.
Also, we need to understand that whirling
an object around to create this pseudo-gravity
puts it under tension.
Whirling a stone around on a rope makes that
rope taut and if you spin it fast enough,
or use too big a rock, the tension will rise
too high and it will break that rope.
How strong a material is in this way is called
its tensile strength.
Normal gravity can break stuff too, under
sheer weight of stuff piled on it, compressing
it, and this is called compressive strength.
Materials have tensile strengths and compressive
strengths and the two have little relation,
a given material can be very strong in one
of those strengths but weak in the other.
How fast you spin a cylinder, combined with
its radius or diameter, will control how strong
gravity is at the surface - it is linear too,
so halfway between the center and edge it’s
half-strength, and zero at the center.
This tension on the material the cylinder
is made out of is essentially identical to
what a suspension bridge here on Earth experiences
and a bridge a kilometer long would need the
same strength as a cylinder habitat a kilometer
in circumference or 0.16 kilometers in radius,
or 520 feet in radius.
Steel can handle such a length or circumference
or radius but it’s quite a burden on it,
and only made worse by adding materials, such
as lots of cars and trucks driving on that
bridge or all the concrete or asphalt making
the road on it.
Same for cylinder habits, all that dirt and
water inside them add up.
And a few meters of dirt is pretty heavy,
several tons per square meter, so we tend
to think that any hills inside of such habitats
would be hollow, filled with tough but ultralight
fillers like aerogel that could be covered
with a thin layer of dirt, or by putting dimples
and rises in the hull itself.
This mostly works because land based life
is really pretty two-dimensional, we have
plenty of hills and valleys but it's the surface
we live on and a house at the top of a hill
and one down in a valley still have a basement
and second floor just a few meters above or
below that surface.
Marine life is a bit trickier, our oceans
here on Earth average about 3000 meters in
depth and each meter of depth represents another
ton per square meter of stress.
So whereas a thin coat of dirt a few meters
or ten feet deep might put ten tons of pressure
per square meter down on your drum hull, a
few kilometers of water would put down 3000
tons per square meter.
That means your hull needs to be 300 times
stronger to handle such depths of water inside.
Now there’s a couple caveats here, and the
first is that, as I mentioned, gravity experienced
inside a rotating habitat is linear to how
far from the center you are, so the upper
layers of water in such a habitat push down
less because gravity is weaker up there, though
only if that habitat’s radius is fairly
similar to the water depth.
If the habitat is a thousand kilometers in
radius, then even if your ocean is ten kilometers
deep, the top is only experiencing 1% less
gravity than the bottom, and it's fairly trivial,
much as the change in gravity on Earth from
altitude or depth is when we’re only talking
about mountain peaks or ocean trenches.
But what it means is that a cylinder full
of water a kilometer in radius is only getting
about half the stress on the bottom as that
depth implies from the weaker gravity, 500
tons per square meter rather than 1000.
Also it means that you have a 2 kilometer
wide stretch of ocean there, since it’s
water all the way through and its diameter
is 2 kilometers.
Though you might want a layer of air in there.
And we probably want to ask why we need that
much depth.
There are creatures living in the deepest
parts of our oceans, fully 11 kilometers deep
in the Mariana Trench, and we may want to
simulate that environment, or even higher
pressure ones.
However, the overwhelming majority of ocean
life lives in the Epipelagic Zone, the thin
skin 200 meters deep where sunlight can still
meaningfully penetrate water and fuel photosynthesis.
On our planet, that Epipelagic Zone also fuels
what life is below it, as things either swim
up there for food, hunt things swimming down
from there for food, or wait for dead matter
and detritus to come falling down, what we
call Marine Snow.
Now there are geothermal vents and such fueling
some life too, indeed the principle current
theory on the origin of life puts those vents
as the best candidates for life to have emerged
at and been sustained by until photosynthesis
evolved a billion years later.
We can replicate such thermal vents on a space
habitat of course, and one of the cool things
about artificial worlds is all the flexibility
you get, they are the difference between living
in a natural cave and a well-built mansion.
If you want a habitat dense in life but only
running on geothermal vents, you can do that,
and create worlds worth of ecosystems for
all those life forms confined to those tiny
undersea oases of heat and life.
That might be some interesting engineering
too.
You might have a nuclear reactor's secondary
cooling circuit venting directly into the
hab.
The water coming from vents needs to be highly
mineralized, so you'd either need a tank of
dissolved minerals to inject into the stream
of hot water, or solid mineral blocks that
are dissolved by the hot water.
Either way, your engineering would need to
avoid minerals precipitating onto critical
components like turbines or nozzles.
Key thing about megastructures, they do need
maintenance.
You might instead opt for something like a
passive decay radioisotope supply or even
the natural fission reactors that sometimes
formed in Earth’s deep past around uranium
rich pockets.
With artificial habitats we so often focus
on using the Sun, or mimicking it, that is
easy to forget we have some other options
for life.
Nonetheless, virtually all the life in our
seas lives in that sunlit Epipelagic region
or close to it so we could build a skinny
habitat just a hundred meters in radius, reflect
and pump sunlight into it, and actually get
some fairly interesting currents and motion
going from all that spin and varying gravity
by depth.
The smaller a habitat is and the faster it
rotates the more pronounced the effects of
gravity varying by height and also the coriolis
force, which is another fictitious or inertial
force like centrifugal force, related to spin,
and one strong enough that it’s a big player
in our weather in spite of Earth being wide
and slow spinning.
We’ll be talking about suspending islands
or reefs in bigger water habitats later today
and these weird currents are one option for
doing that, as rocks should fall down but
much as gliders can remain hanging in the
air by using rising currents of moving air,
you could get some metastable pockets of ocean
on your habitat where coral reefs glide or
hover on currents of moving water.
You also have the ability to hang your islands
by a tether from the center, which is exactly
as sturdy as the hull is since it uses the
same principle of tensile strength, much as
islands and continents use compressive strength
here on Earth.
The cool difference is that tensile strength
is generally flexible, so a big rock floating
in the middle of a marine hab held by a tether
to the center, could also move around and
twist like a pendulum.
So imagine a big three-dimensional ocean with
submarine islands moving around, under water,
on their own orbits and paths, circularly,
elliptical, and potentially all sorts of zig
zags especially since one cool thing about
a tether is that you can winch it up or down
too.
And run power down it, for engines or turbines
or air compressors, or lighting.
Part of the reason our oceans are so dead
on a volume by volume basis with land is that
in spite of being huge in resources and sunlight,
those two are not in the same place much.
With the exception of a narrow band along
the coast, most of the nutrients in the ocean
sit on the sea floor in darkness, whereas
most of the sunlit part of the ocean is starved
for nutrients.
An engineered ocean habitat is capable of
using water currents and lighting to bring
nutrients and light wherever they are desired,
extending epipelagic zones indefinitely.
We often discuss doing this for Earth’s
oceans or subsurface oceans like we expect
to find on icy moons like Europa or Callisto
and I call them vertical reefs as one would
expect these chains of light to result in
fairly parallel roles to what normal reefs
do, creating dense local pockets or ribbons
of ecology and biomass.
Indeed we tend to assume lighting on rotating
habitats will be artificially generated to
begin with for many hab designs, generated
by electricity or moved in by mirrors or fiber
optic cables, and I’d say this would be
a common approach except for one big factor
- hull stress.
We don’t really want to involve deeper layers
of the sea except where it’s either needed
for the ecosystem to function, or because
that is the ecosystem we are making because
it's supposed to be simulating the Mariana
Trench not Caribbean archipelagos.
If we want to make strictly epipelagic lit
regions, only more of it, we opt to make our
habitat longer, not wider or deeper.
Once you get to that peak radius and depth
for your sea based on your needs and material
constraints, you don’t build any wider,
you just build longer.
Your cylinder becomes more of a skinny pencil
or needle shape, or even a very long sausage-like
linked arrangement of many chained together.
Or a rope like mega-long hab, what we call
a topopolis, which might be millions or even
billions of kilometers long but only a few
kilometers wide.
Such long habs or sausage link affairs are
good ways to place similar but distinct ecosystems
nearby in a way that allows only the amount
of interchange that you want between them,
as a means of controlling invasive species
or encouraging migration.
So what if we want really deep oceans but
don’t have the materials for it?
Nothing strong enough or cheap enough?
One thing to remember is that a lot of the
ocean’s dependence on gravity is just to
keep things moving from above to below, and
we are quite capable of pumping nutrients
and air bubbles around inside a microgravity
environment too.
But as I mentioned, we think a lot of icy
moons might have subsurface oceans and they
are considered strong candidates for extraterrestrial
life, albeit probably low in biomass and biodiversity
from the lack of sunlight.
We tend to assume the lower gravity is not
an issue there, where it's often weaker than
our own moon, and there are good odds Earth
based Marine life would require little adaptation
to lower gravity, say a tenth of Earth normal.
And that right there lets you seriously increase
your depth of sea and radius of habitat because
it's still enough for there to be a real and
meaningful concept of up and down but each
layer of water presses down less.
This potentially allows much deeper layers
of ecology in your habitat as pressure will
shift more slowly with height.
It is too soon to tell if low gravity is viable
for terrestrial marine life, zero gravity
seems to have been rough on the fish we tested
thus far, and even if low-gravity is, it might
be viable but require lots of adaptation,
natural or genetically engineered, which somewhat
defeats the point of building a nature preserve.
We will have to see on those and it might
turn out we need full gravity, in which case
we might need to be considering using rare
oceanic planets of the right gravity as those
preserves or very long thin water habitats.
One other option though might be a shell world.
Now normally we contemplate this as a hollow
metal shell with dirt and water on top of
it, with either a black hole or compressed
hydrogen and helium inside serving as an abundant
and cheap source of natural gravity.
However, a hollow sphere itself generates
gravity with the normal properties by and
large.
The difference is that all your gravity is
generated by that shell and its higher layers
exert no gravity on its lower layers, so that
counterintuitively the gravity decreases as
you go down the layers.
It still pulls inward though, it’s not reversed
gravity.
This has some interesting options for habitats
because a sturdy hollow metal shell with some
rock over it, nothing under it, and many kilometers
of water above, might make for a huge and
viable ecosystem dwarfing anything Earth could
have.
In our discussion of Super Earths last week
I mentioned that since Earth is 5.5 times
denser than water, a planet with the same
surface gravity as Earth but composed entirely
of water would be 5.5 times wider than Earth,
with over 30 times the surface area and obviously
much deeper seas.
But if those seas weren’t very deep at all,
and just ended with a rocky shore and hull
ten kilometers below, things shift quite a
lot.
Incidentally if this shell world and how it
is not collapsing downward is a new concept
to you, see our Mega Earths episode for a
discussion of the mechanics and technologies
required, otherwise just assume its a magically
strong material for now.
Water is ridiculously common in this universe,
albeit mostly as ice, and coming up with entire
planetary masses of it is much easier than
coming up with rock or steel or even air.
A spherical shell 10 kilometers thick of Earth’s
Mass in water and some rock and hull would
have a volume of 6 trillion cubic kilometers,
and a surface area of 600 billion square kilometers,
about 1200 times that of Earth’s surface,
and a radius of 220,000 kilometers, 34 times
that of Earth, and over half the distance
out to the Moon, closer to the size of a star
than a planet.
However, because it only has Earth’s Mass,
the surface gravity would be 34-squared or
1200 times weaker, amusingly meaning the pressure
even ten kilometers deep would still be less
than one atmosphere - earth normal pressure
- before even accounting for the drop in gravity
as you went down, which for these shells much
thinner in thickness than in radius would
be linear to how deep you were.
Now critically, if you double this structure’s
radius but keep that same thickness of sea,
10 kilometers, that surface gravity will stay
the same because you quadruple the surface
area and thus quadruple the mass, resulting
in same strength of gravity no matter how
big you go, and you can push this up to Birch
Planet Scales, galaxy-mass artificial planets,
again see the Mega Earth’s episode.
However, if we increase the thickness a bit,
say to 1200 kilometers deep, then we’ve
got 120 times the mass or density on these
objects, for a surface gravity a tenth of
what Earth has.
Meaning pressure is only rising at a tenth
the rate and will actually rise slower as
you get deeper and those higher levels of
water cease contributing to the gravity pulling
down.
Any spherical shell of mass generates no gravity
inside it, be it one step inside or at its
center.
So way down at the bottom, 1200 kilometers
deep, over a hundred times the depth of the
Mariana Trench, our pressure is only a twentieth
of what we would expect, albeit five times
higher than at the bottom of that trench.
One where the water was only 120 kilometers
deep, giving only 1% of Earth normal gravity
at the top, would be one where you could swim
around with normal Scuba gear all the way
to the bottom.
This also means biological life can run that
whole range, especially with supplemental
lighting such as vertical reefs, and with
heaters and pumps and mixers down on that
shell, you could simulate thermal vents too
and massively more densely.
So you could get some huge depths of ocean
habitable to life and densely so.
Oxygen is incredibly common and hydrogen vastly
more common than that, but even without putting
effort into cramming them together, we get
estimates as high as a dozen times Earth’s
mass in water in our Oort Cloud alone, which
for this 120 kilometer deep shell example
would result in a shell as big as our first
thin version, 1200 times Earth Surface area,
all of it composed of a massive sea of low
pressure.
I’m going to define worlds or megastructures
of this type as a Hydroshellworld or just
hydroshell, ones where the water pressure
doesn’t rise beyond anything we’d find
on Earth, indeed may stay well short of it,
but which is huge compared to Earth, and we’ll
just prefix kilo, mega, giga etc onto hydroshell
for its total mass relative to Earth.
This is, to the best of my knowledge, a totally
new type of Megastructure that came to my
mind while writing this script with the power
flickering here at home from 40 mile an hour
winds and plenty of rain, so I doubt I’ve
done more than scratch the surface of what
these surface shells of sea might offer for
combinations and I’d encourage our many
math and worldbuilding savvy folks to play
with the options on the idea and let me know
what you come up with for options and limits.
The same for our topopolis seaworlds.
One that comes to mind is, neutrally buoyant
submarine habitats with air-filled domes that
are pressurized to right around the one atmosphere
mark, since the dome would have no real stress
on either side of it then, making air bubble
submarine island habs a real and decently
safe option.
And you could play with partial pressure and
air mix to let your islands be at various
depths.
These could get big too, continent sized,
complete with kilometers of vertical change
in terms of mountains and valleys on them.
They could also be very three-dimensional
rather than just that classic image of a thin
island with a big dome over it.
You probably do lots of bubble domes instead
of one big one, and you probably have a lot
of gas packed into your rock layer, like aerogel,
below the ground to help with buoyancy, but
this offers some huge options for habitable
land on such worlds, which again can be hundreds
or even millions of times Earth’s surface
area.
Any rock in your hab that is exposed to the
water would become coral reefs, which would
be just delightful!
Of course you have the option to genetically
engineer gills into folks for your mermen
and mermaids, but I suspect a nice safe dome
operating well under known cracking pressure
would be preferable for most potential colonists.
This would work on subsurface oceans of icy
moons too as they have low gravity and a similar
slow rising pressure scale.
We also have the option of an oceanic hoop
world though we’ll save discussion of that
for another time if we ever remake our old
hoopworlds episode.
Needless to say, if you can create gravity
artificially like we see so often in science
fiction, or have anti-gravity, you have some
additional options for big water worlds.
Now it also might turn out that gravity isn’t
needed for marine life (or you might choose
to genetically engineer all your marine life
to no longer need gravity), which sure makes
building such habs easier, though so long
as little gravity is needed it shouldn’t
pose too rough an engineering hurdle, as we’ve
seen.
And if we are actively pumping air bubbles
and nutrients around our habitat anyway, then
we need not rely on gravity alone for that
sort of effect.
The problem is at a certain point you do get
gravity if the habitat is big enough but we
are talking hundreds of kilometers wide before
it even got to 1% of Earth gravity, so you
can make some very big marine habitats in
microgravity, but as they get bigger they
get more gravity.
One option though would be something that
is mostly water in the large moon range of
mass and which had an artificial sun at its
center.
Such a water globe might have an atmosphere
outside, or a layer of ice as its skin, or
a metal hull, depending on size and engineering
concerns and preferences.
This central sun need not be sun-hot, it could
simply be light generated by LED, but it is
worth noting that at a certain sweet spot
of temperature and gravity, water falling
down on a white hot pseudo-sun is going to
evaporate faster than it can fall and shove
water back up too.
This should seem to create some sort of brilliantly
bright bubbling eternal storm at the center,
which would be quite a cool effect I think.
However I could definitely see a lot of those
sorts of artificial stars, scaled down to
something more like a big power plant, floating
around these sorts of world seas.
You might intentionally power them up too
strong for anything to live right next to
them, producing that bright and hot boiling
effect, just to ensure they didn’t get covered
in lifeforms and algae blocking their light.
You might extend long metal or ceramic tentacles
or spurs off them for life to grab hold of
or let them migrate untouchable with things
needing to swim along.
Boiling and seething and bubbling around your
world sea, these sea suns might just have
bubbles of ecology roaming around with them
if you left them to wander.
Now as we discussed last time in Super-Earths,
between those and subsurface oceans of various
icy moons and planets, we are not expecting
to have any sort of shortage of natural oceans
to use or terraform, and they should generally
be easier to terraform than planet surfaces
and atmospheres by and large.
Additionally I’d expect most of humanity
will want to build its habitats with lots
of land and shallower seas and lakes, lots
of beaches and reefs and sea bottoms you could
SCUBA Dive down to, though this assume we
have started building lots of megastructures
before engaging in a lot of genetic tinkering
and other transhuman paths, and that’s a
very debatable thing.
So when it comes to megastructure habitat
preferences we will leave it at assuming tastes
will vary.
However, the purpose of megastructure habitats
is to let you build far more worlds with far
more living area than natural planets would
ever supply, tailored to your wants and desires,
so it lets you get away with using only a
tiny fraction of your worlds for those which
wouldn’t be human paradise habitats and
still have billions of times Earth’s living
area devoted to weird worlds and habitats
and nature preserves and more.
Untold trillions of ocean habitats, big and
small, Earth-like and unearthly, normal and
alien.
And as we saw today, we have no shortage of
options for building space habitats with deep
blue seas.
So today’s episode was all about water and
it has some pretty interesting facets we had
to gloss over a bit, for instance those entirely
water-based worlds we mentioned this week
and last week obviously can’t form naturally
but they can’t be made above a certain mass
without their material undergoing a phase
shift into exotic ices of various types and
densities, so that if they were deep enough
they’d have layers and cores of those exotice
ice types, throwing off our calculations a
bit, and indeed that’s one of the advantages
to the various megastructure marine habitats
we discussed today like the Hydroshell or
simply skinny rotating habitats.
Of course there’s even more strange effects
on systems from adding things like salt to
water, a critical factor in our own oceans
and with some very surprising effects.
There’s an excellent interactive examining
how salinity effects water temperature and
behavior in Brilliant’s Scientific Thinking
Course that helps demonstrate this and it
is just one of the course’s many interactive
exercises that let you experience the principles
of science firsthand.
Brilliant is an online interactive STEM-learning
platform that helps you gain a deeper understanding
of concepts in math, science, and computer
science by taking you through the subjects
piece by piece in visually stimulating, hands-on
ways.
Brilliant is also constantly expanding their
catalogue of courses, so whether you’re
a beginner, an expert, or anywhere in between,
there’s an interactive lesson to help you
improve and learn.
And this hands-on, interactive approach to
learning is the hands-down best way to learn.
To get started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or click on the link in the description, and
the first 200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
So that will wrap us up for today but don’t
forget to join us this Sunday, February 27th,
at 4 pm Eastern Time, for our Monthly Livestream
Q&A, where we take questions from the livestream
chat and answer them live.
Speaking of live, I haven’t actually done
a live and an in-person talk since Covid-19
hit us, and that’s finally thawing out so
I’ve the first of a few spring ones coming
up in early March, when I’ll be giving closing
remarks for the conference on the Future of
Space Cooperation between the US and Japan
on March 7th and 8th hosted by the Rand Corporation.
And there’s going to be some great speakers
there, starting with David Kipping from Cool
Worlds and Pete Worden, the Director of the
Breakthrough Starshot Initiative.
I’ll attach a link for the event and registration
to see it in-person or online in the episode
description.
Before that we have our first episode for
march, and we’ll be looking at how civilizations
might mass manufacture many of the heavier
elements their engineers might need for building
megastructures in our episode Nuclear Transmutation.
Of course such megastructures often assume
lifespans similar to the planet’s they emulate,
so on March 10th we will take a look at how
you could build a machine designed to last
a million years.
Then we’ll have our March Scifi Sunday episode
to look at the concept of Synthetic Life.
And we’ll keep to the scifi theme as we
return to our Alien Civilizations series to
contemplate the concept of clandestine extraterrestrial
operations and Covert Aliens.
Now if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe
to the Channel and hit the notifications bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below.
You can also join in the conversation on any
of our social media forums, find our audio-only
versions of the show, or donate to support
future episodes, and all those options and
more are listed in the links in the episode
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
