In science fiction we often see immense starships
attacking planets, crushing or besieging them,
but in our own future we may deploy powerful
orbital fortresses to defend our world.
Way back in the late 90s when I was just starting
college one of my favorite sci-fi TV shows,
Babylon 5, was wrapping up its fourth season
with the end of a story arc about a human
civil war that had an attack on Earth.
CGI was just starting to let us have grand
space battles between large fleets instead
of a handful of physical spaceship models,
and so Babylon 5 and Deep Space Nine and some
others were featuring episodes with dozens
or even hundreds of ships flying around.
In this climactic episode the good guys manage
to trick the defending fleet out of position
and temporarily out of play and jump to Earth
directly to begin the assault.
Classically in sci-fi one or two ships are
evenly matched against a planet or even have
the upper hand, but in the episode we suddenly
see a whole bunch of big orbital stations
flick on, rotate into play, and begin firing
high energy beams and volleys of missiles
and just start beating the heck out of the
fleet.
It’s a great episode to end the penultimate
season of one of science fiction's best TV
franchises, but it got me rethinking a lot
of classic space opera ideas about how space
combat would work and challenge the tendency
to think of planets as rare jewels in space
that were terribly vulnerable to attack.
That indeed, a massive fleet rolling up to
a planet was likely to be involved in a one-sided
fight, just not going the way we expected.
And a lot of that would come down to Orbital
Defense Platforms and Space Fortresses and
that’s our topic for today.
What they are, what their strengths and weaknesses
are, what combat with them would be like,
what life on them would be like, and when
we might start seeing them.
And if that sounds like fun, make sure to
hit the like button and subscribe to the channel
for future episodes.
I think the first key point to discuss is
the mobility issue.
Planets are hard to miss and hard to move,
unpredictably anyway, they generally move
tens of thousands of miles per hour but in
very well-known courses and the sorts of energies
needed to move them are immense and not likely
to be something you could deploy quickly to
move the planet out of line with a death ray
or missile attack.
Spaceships on the other hand are very mobile,
but the problem is, under known-physics they
need to use insane amounts of fuel and energy
to move and every bit of mass they devote
to more armor and weapons slows them down
or requires more engine.
A Defense Platform orbiting a planet can avoid
this as it doesn’t need to move and can
put huge amounts of armor on and weapons on.
Racks of expendable missiles that can be fired
rapidly help to cover some of the weakness
it would have from not being very maneuverable.
It can fire them all off and be destroyed,
so you just calculate its median lifespan
in a full-scale conflict and make sure its
weapons are built to fully discharge in that
time.
It’s not likely an incoming fleet could
jam your communication with groundside control,
so they could remote control it from bunkers
down on the planet and you could have a backup
automated firing system able to kick in if
its comms were damaged or jammed.
Or it could unspool a really long thin antenna
cable right down into the atmosphere to restore
comms.
Big missiles boat in space, but it raises
the issue of beam weapons and slower munitions,
guided or unguided.
And as we’ll see, the mechanics on that
have some flaws that tend to get overlooked
in casual geeky chat on space combat, so let’s
begin there.
A key aspect to space is that it is huge,
just mind-blowing in scale, and even the tiny
little dot of space that is our orbital volume
around Earth is immense.
That difference in scale from orbital to interplanetary
to interstellar is going to be very important
but begin by recognizing that spaceships just
don’t park near each other and fire weapons
from a few miles aways like old school ships
of the line.
A low orbital engagement is better compared
to a pair of seagoing vessels attacking each
other while one is in the Atlantic and the
other in the Pacific.
The engagement ranges only grow from there,
and for a context, two big battleships throwing
down in Cis-Lunar Space might see one by the
Moon and another over at our L5 Lagrange Point
and the scale there might be to imagine two
plastic ship models like they used to use
in sci-fi pre-CGI and a distance between them
of a couple hundred miles, rather than the
couple hundred thousand they really are.
At this range, a beam of light, or any other
electromagnetic radiation, or gravity, or
any relativistic particles, is taking just
over a second to reach its target, but we
have to double that because there’s no guidance
on a beam once its fired and you only know
that target ship’s location as what it was
when light bounces off it and traveled to
you, also taking a bit over a second.
Even with highly automated tracking, targeting,
and firing systems, that means your shot had
about 3 seconds of enemy motion to deal with.
Needless to say, any missile or solid slug
has more flight time but those might have
guidance packages.
If a ship is just moving along, it’s easy
to predict where it will be in 3 seconds,
assuming you knew its velocity anyway which
is very likely at this range.
They can’t see you aiming at them and move
either, the light from your ship travels at
the same speed as your weapon.
You cannot dodge a laser beam.
However, you can randomly jitter around when
you expect combat to be at hand.
If I can make my ship accelerate sideways
at 3g for 3 seconds, and pick a random direction
for that to occur in, then anyone targeting
me now has an uncertainty of my position of
132 meters, and assuming that’s decently
larger than my ship, which we’ll assume
is a convenient saucer shape 13 meters in
radius, they now have 1% chance of any beam
they fire into that uncertainty window actually
hitting me.
This tells us the de facto ranges of combat,
as it's determined by how big your ship is,
or at least how big it’s exposed cross-section
is, which is probably narrow with long spaceships
likely being the norm.
Having defense stations or your own fleets
able to attack from the side and its bigger
cross-section is also likely to be a thing
and a reason for having your defense installations
spread out.
Based on how fast you can randomly jitter
that spaceship and how big it is, that’s
your odds of getting hit, especially if your
enemy has a decent guess at your acceleration
profile.
Great big spaceships with great big plates
of armor probably want to stand off at great
big distances.
Tinier ships want to get in closer, though
not too close.
They want to be where the odds of being hit
are lower than their odds of hitting you.
Now the discussion comes down to two important
questions: how long you have fuel for randomly
jittering around and how long you’re in
an engagement window.
It is entirely possible you might assault
a planet with ground forces, we discussed
that in our episodes Planetary Invasions and
more recently in Drop Ships some months back,
but otherwise there’s no reason to slow
down.
And more to the point, not every element of
your fleet needs to slow down.
Your vanguard might not bother decelerating
on approach and plow by the planet, and if
they’re moving at 1% of light speed that
window of engagement is very short.
They’ll get to within the moon’s distance
of Earth and crash by and back out to that
distance on the other side in roughly two
minutes.
They didn’t slow down so they have a lot
of fuel to use for jinking around, and any
guided munitions you have suffer a difficult
intercept trajectory with those fast and brief
targets.
I should note though that their speed is not
without issues, because at that speed any
object is hitting with huge force, including
the space junk probably lying around any settled
planet, even assuming they don’t have automated
mines that simply fragment into debris for
such ships to hit.
Which they do, because it’s the best defense
against anyone ramming their planet with a
spaceship or relativistic kill missile, intentionally
or by accident, during open war or an act
of terror or sabotage.
One detection sets off any of the fragmenting
cluster mines in the trajectory of the incoming
object and wrecks its whole day.
Buzzing by the enemy planet at high speed
is a real option for first assault but so
is getting swatted like a fly or shotgunned
by strategic debris deployment.
And non-strategic debris too, as a space battle
is going to start leaving wads of high-speed
shrapnel all over the place.
The other end of that is fuel consumption,
those ships slowing down to engage are using
fuel to do that now have less to jink around
with.
On the other hand, those orbital defense platforms
presumably don’t have that much – which
is probably not true, they’re in an easy
position to have a fuel stash and get refueled
after or even during combat operations.
Refueling can take place by matter or energy
beam too and that planet below has a lot of
both to lend its sentinels.
However, here’s the big misconception about
fuel use here.
You don’t need to burn any to jink around
quite a lot.
Let us imagine a pair of space fighters running
parallel, an ace and his wingman.
The two can burn fuel to jink around but they
do not actually need to because they could
have a thin tether between them and a winch,
and swing around using that and reeling themselves
in and out.
Those tethers might be good for entire miles
of separation even with conventional materials,
let alone those contemplated by options like
space elevators and skyhooks.
And you might have several backups and redundant
ones able to clamp onto willing partners.
Allowing replacement if one ultra-skinny wire
gets broken.
You can get a lot more elaborate with that
setup, especially with multiple ships in a
whole squadron, even having an automated system
orchestrate slinging the ships around with
detachable and re-atachable cables.
The key point is they can be doing random
high-g maneuvers constantly as they enter
combat and without much fuel being used.
The thing is, so can those big orbital behemoths.
Indeed many probably already would have tether
systems in place like skyhooks for easy refueling
and resupply, or for electrodynamic tethering
to regenerate their orbital momentum.
We could imagine a large network of defense
platforms all interconnected with cables – which
would make signal jamming harder, potentially
even with hard lines down to the planets below
– they might be up in space but not actually
orbiting, we’ll get back to that later.
A big fortress might also just extrude outward
into segments like a bunch of spiders sharing
a web.
And you might also be having expandable fortresses
like that to shield a planet from direct attack
with a physical shield, since science doesn’t
seem to leave us many options for the classic
cool sci-fi forcefield, though there are some,
see our episode on force fields for further
discussion.
On the matter of dodging, by fuel or by physical
rearrangement of a connected system, it’s
important to understand that time is your
ally for getting missed.
If a rival planet in your solar system 10
light minutes away has a powerful laser array
in orbit, then you make sure everything you
have in space that’s worth targeting is
making a minor correction about that often.
Applying 1% of a gee of acceleration for 10
seconds every ten minutes would be unnoticeable
to those on board and would move you a meter
per second in some direction and have you
over a kilometer away ten minutes later.
Thinking of large constructs, motions of this
variety can also be achieved by having 6 telescoping
protrusions that would extend and retract
in each of the directions up, down, left,
right, forward, and back.
Even just having very long gun barrels you
could extend out would do some of this positional
changing, and every time one of them moves,
the main body of the station does too.
Even civilian space habitats, most of which
would have plenty of ancillary space stations
attached anyway, their docks and space farms
and power collectors and so on, probably would
do these minor tweaks of positions constantly
just as a matter of basic security.
We’re seeing that there’s no major advantage
to being one big block like a star trek borg
cube, though we also want to keep in mind
that lasers and unguided beams aren’t the
only weapons in the arsenal.
They’re just very fast and thus accurate
in space.
The flip side is that any missile, torpedo,
or guided slug you fire at someone won’t
need a very advanced tracking system to get
them.
It’s mostly about ensuring the weapons don’t
get blown up by beams before hitting.
But armor matters too and bigger is better
in that regard since an identical but larger
object ten times wider can keep a thousand
times the guns and ammo on board, but needs
only 100 times more armor to have it at the
same thickness, so can afford thicker armor,
this is the cube-square law.
It’s the compensation bigger ships and stations
have for being less maneuverable, they can
afford thicker armor and more point defense
weapons.
And if those point defense systems are lasers
or near-lightspeed beams, they should be able
to always detect and hit any sub-light guided
munition.
This doesn’t make those munitions useless
though.
One option is deploying them before they strike,
such as a directed blast from a shaped charge.
Or a project Excalibur style bomb pumped laser,
which would now be more accurate since the
beam could be aimed and discharged closer
to the enemy.
They can also employ the technique of having
a volley of missiles all connected with tethers
and using those to jink around while flying
in.
They don’t have to actually hit, they could
all be nukes, bomb-pumped lasers, or fragmenting
devices that detonate once they reach range
and before the laser point defense becomes
a sure thing.
Same for solid slugs, which might come out
of a barrel as on munition but might spread
out for the flight and then pick individual
targets or even retract back down to hit one
spot very hard or in a rapid sequence.
Those munitions might also simply be very
heavily armored.
Point defense will always have an advantage
hitting things when closer with beams but
at the same time there are likely to be real
mechanical limitations on how fast a weapon
can get on target and aim.
Thus, you probably have an engagement window
with any given defensive weapon system and
odds are the smaller ones will be able to
track and fire faster.
They also might be too weak to penetrate armor
on a bigger munition or boarding shuttle.
Whichever the case, we see that the future
is likely to see a wide panoply of both spaceships
and weapon types and sizes, and that the same
is likely to be true of orbital defense systems.
In the early days in particular, such a platform
only needs to be designed to take out unguided
junk in space or dangerous asteroids.
A given damaged ship or satellite leaking
fuel or air might randomly twitch a lot while
this is going on but at a distance of just
a few thousand kilometers and probably only
briefly.
Remember light, or a laser beam, moves a few
hundred thousand kilometers a second, and
even some robot drone isn’t altering its
trajectory much in a millisecond.
You armor these early platforms because if
a Kessler Syndrome Event occurs, they’ll
start taking damage and they are the maintenance
mitigation and debris clearance tools you
have to work with in space.
Of course you could have weapons down on Earth
too and this is another reason why non-beam
weapons are important.
An attack on Earth isn’t going to use beams
unless someone around a distant star is fielding
a Nicoll-Dyson Beam or Quasar Cannon with
the intent of eradicating the actual planet.
There’s defense for that we’ll get to
in a moment but lasers and ion beams don’t
do well against atmospheres so you would probably
be using solid slugs to bombard the planet
below, guided or unguided.
Which means your orbital platform needs to
be able to engage those and ablate them enough
to wreck their guidance packages or send them
on a tumble through the atmosphere that’s
likely to detonate them or make them fall
off target.
So you need to take those platforms out before
invading.
Point defense isn’t limited to laser beams
or flak cannons either, it can involve extending
huge thin inflatable or extendable shields
which now have to be torn through before further
attacking the station.
We might put ten meters of armor on a station
but also have it able to shoot out compacted
shells full of what’s basically a solar
sail that detonates a few hundred kilometers
away from it into a big thin shield only a
ten thousandth of a meter thick.
I should also note that in addition to these
purpose-built defense platforms, orbital space
around any planet may already include tons
of solar shades, mirrors, and power collectors
that can be rapidly released for defense and
that as orbital space fills up with junk it
makes every weapon less effective, which in
turn benefits the defender.
Not that they’re likely to be happy watching
trillions of dollars of orbital infrastructure
get torn to pieces, it's just a nice consolation
prize.
The defender gains more time for coordination
or reinforcements to arrive, they are protected
down on the planet by their atmosphere, and
those platforms likely have much thicker armor
than any invading ships do.
Every fragment becomes more dangerous at higher
speed so it presses the engagement slower
and closer to the planet.
And you don’t want to be close to an orbital
defense platform.
Amusingly this justifies boarding actions
to try to take that platform, at least the
bigger ones, since it's entirely likely they
are over-armored giants, possibly converted
asteroids, and probably do not have tons of
personnel or huge contingent of marines or
automated killamajigs on board.
There’s always tricky calculus, for both
sides, on if they want to just blow something
up or try to take it or take it back.
In sci-fi there’s some self-destruct device,
and that’s doable, but more likely you’d
have all the hardware and systems encrypted
so your enemy can’t turn the platform against
you – unless they had spies on board or
many days to work at it – and you are not
likely to embed a nuclear device in your station
where it is sitting for many years over your
planet waiting for some terrorist to get their
hands on your self-destruct codes.
Admittedly your station might have thousands
of nuclear missiles on board, just not rigged
to casually and intentionally kill all of
you if someone knew the right code, or your
commander went insane.
You also want a decent amount of personnel
on board any station that’s too big for
your planet, or planetary guns, to rapidly
take apart themselves if someone gets their
hands on engine control and tries shoving
it down on your planet, the tactic known as
a colony drop.
And of course part of a defense platform's
job is going to need to be having the means
and capability to take out a piece of orbital
infrastructure or habitation that someone
is trying to weaponize that way.
To really think about how you build these
defense platforms, you have to contemplate
the intended means of attack, and how your
platform can help with that.
Fleets are a classic option but we spent plenty
of time on those already.
What about a long range attack with something
other than a directed asteroid?
Let’s say Mars fired on us with a RKM, or
relativistic kill missile.
This is a guided slug moving at some high
fraction of light speed, possibly even at
ultra-relativistic speeds.
They can be deployed from neighboring planets,
or a neighboring stellar system, or even halfway
across the galaxy.
They are fairly stealthy but hardly invisible
and it is likely you would instantly detect
that launch from a neighboring planet, except
it’s probably reaching you shortly after
you see that launch, as it is moving at a
high fraction of light speed.
You will likely start pinging it the moment
you have a hint of its existence and it can
start doing random jinking before that or
once you do that, but you either need to blast
it with something moving at a similar speed
or faster, like a laser, or you need to have
something small it runs into, since anything
it hits is going to crash into it with the
power of nuclear ordnance.
Your eleven-ton slug moving at 87% of light
speed is carrying 10^21 joules of energy in
it, the equivalent of a quarter of a million
megaton nukes and more than both sides had
at the height of the Cold War.
That’s not a world-ending event, the asteroid
that we think wiped out the dinosaurs was
at least a few thousand times more potent
than that, but it’s a terrifying weapon
and is likely to be part of a salvo.
RKM launchers, especially at interstellar
range, can fire a chain of RKMs off, each
following one just a bit faster, so that they
all arrive at the destination at the same
time to clog your defense systems.
But even if that eleven-ton missile of doom
is built out of something sturdy, like being
one big slab of steel or uranium, which wouldn’t
be much bigger than you or I at that point,
it still can’t survive running into even
something the size of a piece of gravel or
a quarter.
That quarter, at 5.67 grams of mass, would
hit that RKM moving at 87% of light speed
with 122 kilotons of explosive power, several
times more than atomic bombs deployed at the
end of World War 2.
Indeed even a dime would have more energy
on impact than both of those bombs combined
had.
No more RKM and honestly that would be overkill.
RKMs are insanely lethal but their very nature
makes them dangerously vulnerable.
They can jink around too but will be visible
doing it and you use a lot less energy scattering
a bunch of dimes through the space a volley
is approaching than the enemy uses sending
up that RKM.
Their speed makes it hard for them to detect
and dodge or vaporize things themselves, and
they’re not going to have lots of room for
detectors and point defense systems, but they
may have some package for that.
RKM size is likely to be some optimal exchange
of the smallest object you can fit sufficient
guidance and detection gear on to avoid easy
destruction.
So that taking them out is not super-easy.
In practice you might start by firing off
a projectile like the one we mentioned earlier,
that detonates in an area and fills it with
a thin-spread foil shield, or tiny little
pellets.
Along with some sensor drones to help track
and guide, and those pellets might have tiny
little boosters to let them be tossed more
accurately in the way of the RKM.
Indeed your pellets might all have tethers
connecting them so they stay in a given volume,
rather than continuing to spread out.
You might fire a grid or net of tethers with
lots of tiny weights at the junction.
Or thin film a micron thick with tiny beads
spaced out at the typically RKM Cross-sectional
width.
Even a microgram of matter, a billionth of
a kilogram, is carrying as much explosive
power as an entire crate of hand grenades.
That is not going to vaporize an eleven-ton
slab of metal but it is going to leave it
damaged and flying blind and easy to meat
for layer 2 of defenses.
There might be tons of these giant ultra-thin
screens hanging between it and the primary
minefield full of more of these boxed up and
waiting to blow out or unfold and simpler
automated cannons that form the first wall
of defense.
These can be fired directly toward the munition
or from the side to intercept it as it tries
to plow into another facility or the planet.
And each wave of attack builds up more free
defenses, though of course is also hampering
your defensive efforts a bit and your civilian
operations a lot more.
This general approach also works against beam
weapons but mostly by rapidly building up
a cloud to diffuse the energy.
You may leave thin-film shields on direct
paths between you and enemy star systems with
the intent of them giving you that brief instant
of warning and defense so you could pop off
defense clouds.
As to the defense platform itself, what the
types are, I think we would be envisioning
something like a local hub that had a lot
of ancillary facilities attached to it.
Probably physically too.
You may have tethers and wires out to each
tiny sensor and weapons pods even tens of
miles away, just to avoid attempts at jamming
or hacking.
Or waiting to spool out and magnetically grapple
to the pod, so as to avoid being a navigation
hazard during normal operations.
Or those smaller pods might spend most of
their time withdrawn entirely, inside the
larger defense platform, with just a few deployed
out for standard emergency management of local
collision debris.
Now a defense platform might not be a big
space station.
It might be a re-tooled asteroid as that’s
cheaper and you could be permitting mining
operations on it.
A floating mountain in space is not an easy
nut to crack and if you imagine trying to
blow up or assault a mountain fortress here
on Earth, by which I mean an actual mountain,
not some castle sitting on it, it’s just
as bad except you’re not sneaking up on
it etiher.
Another option is a non-orbiting space tower.
This may require active support and you probably
are already using them for civilian purposes,
but it’s just a very tall tower rising up
into space and then probably spreading out
wide.
I could imagine thousands of these things
having actual physical metal shields they
could expand to form a shield wall around
a planet, possibly several layers of them
extending from the lower levels of the tower
and rotating to prevent puncture through multiple
layers at any single spot.
That’s a massive piece of infrastructure
but honestly not as crazy as it sounds like
and you could have huge amounts of power running
from groundside nuclear fission or fusion
reactors to power those things.
See our Space Towers episode for more on their
function and civilian uses, but some thousand
kilometer tall, ten kilometer wide tower rising
like a spike off a planet might be a gun all
on its own for flinging relativistic flak
at incoming enemy fleets and missile volleys.
There’s really no limit on how big you might
build your planetary defenses and if we imagined
just 1% of your budget was for your military
and just 1% of that budget was for building
and maintaining orbital defense platforms,
then the same sort of Ecumenopolis planet-wide
city K1 civilizations we contemplate on future
planets might have tens of millions of military
personnel stationed across tens of thousands
of miles-wide orbital behemoths looming in
orbit and throughout cislunar space.
Which might look pretty ominous to those below
too.
Each one carrying crust-buster nukes and huge
arrays of energy weapons, mass drivers, and
rail guns, each with tons of deployable weapons
pods and forward defense pods able to suddenly
unfold as minefields and obstructions.
Tag team that with lots of mundane civilian
habitats with some weapons of their own, normal
or quickly upgraded, your actual planetary
defense fleet and any ships able to arrive
as reinforcements, and you’ve got one tough
nut to crack, even before we start un-limbering
skyscraper-sized guns down on the planetary
surface for surface-to-orbit anti-ship fire.
All in all, when it comes to space warfare,
an orbital defense platform is probably not
a bad place to be, at least compared to whoever
has decided to attack your planet.
As to if there’s anyone on the platform,
that’s hard to say.
I think your smaller pods are automated and
bigger ones might have a crew of anywhere
from a lone person up to an entire military
division of ten or twenty thousand on board.
It’s very likely this is where your traffic
control for space is taking place at, so they
might be the equivalent of a military town
with some escape pods for jamming the civilians
into before battle begins to drop to the planet
below.
Same line of reasoning, in tense times you
might pull the families off and jam pack a
few more brigades of marines and several wings
of fighter craft into one.
They might be an isolated microgravity outpost
a few introverts staffed on a one year rotation,
spending their off time online since the planet
is right next door, or they might be some
mined out asteroid you crammed an entire rotating
habitat into with towns, malls, schools, and
all the normal trappings of civilization.
In all likelihood it depends on the planet,
it’s population, and the era we’re in.
You might be in orbit of Earth when its the
capital of some multiplanetary empire of quadrillions
and where the home defense navy alone number
tens of thousands of capital ships with billions
of sailors and soldiers on board that fleet
and those platforms, or it might be the lonely
multi-purpose station hanging over some dwarf
planet, that guards the space elevator descending
from it and tracks and repairs the handful
of satellites orbiting the iceball.
Without an atmosphere the main defenses are
scattered around down on the planet and hidden
under hundreds of meters of ice, where the
defense turrets just melt their way up when
the time comes to open fire.
While those around a gas giant might be one
part air-craft and hide in the atmosphere,
and others might orbit in the upper layers
of a red giant star and use it for cover,
gliding up to attack.
The options are virtually limitless but the
one sure thing is that these defense platforms
or towers will likely exist and sooner than
later.
They’ll begin simple around Earth and mostly
intended for handling asteroids, traffic control,
space debris clearance, and rogue satellites
or spaceships - or possibly for anti-ICBM
purposes, but as time goes on they’ll only
grow in number and size, and it’s quite
likely that some of the first space habitats
will be defense platforms too, possibly before
even the end of this century, especially small
scale ones.
They’ll be the final line of defense before
an invader attacks Earth itself, but as we
saw today, they will be no small wall to overcome,
and the bastions on which many an invader
might crash their forces and break their teeth
in vain.
So last month we released our big 3-hour long
Fermi Paradox Compendium and in it I raised
a few new solutions that we had never discussed
before including one I thought up earlier
this year after a question on our livestream,
the Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis, and since
it was a compendium I had to keep the conversation
short, but I felt it deserved more discussion
so this month’s Nebula Exclusive is going
to deep dive this idea that civilizations
might end up melting down into a lot of individuals
or small groups fleeing for deep space and
stopping to grab or steal resources along
the way.
That’s out now on Nebula, where you can
not only see every regular episode of SFIA
a few days early and ad free, but all our
other bonus content, including extended editions
of many episodes, and more Nebula Exclusives
like, Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark
Stars at the Beginning of Time, Life As An
Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon,
Space Freighters, Retrocausality, Orch Or
& Free Will, Conformal Cyclic Cosmology, Colonizing
Binary Stars, and more.
Using my link and discount, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
and use my code, isaacarthur, Nebula is available
for just over $2.50 a month, but this holiday
season we are once again offering Lifetime
Memberships to Nebula for $300, part of which
goes directly to our show, and part to help
raise capital for a number of creator-owned
projects we’re greenlighting for 2024.
Instead of a monthly subscription, lifetime
memberships are a one time payment where you
can get access to everything that’s on Nebula
now and in the future, including our quickly
growing catalog of exclusive movies, plays,
shows, documentaries and more.
And right now for the holidays you can even
gift a lifetime membership of Nebula’s life-changing
and stimulating content.
Monthly, annual or lifetime, whichever you
choose, you not only get access to all of
the great stuff Nebula offers, you’ll also
be directly supporting this show.
Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, and with
all the exclusive bonus content like Hermi
Shoplifter Hypothesis, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
For anyone who is curious I ended up making
a number of bonus episodes recently for both
youtube and Nebula like today’s episode,
our December Nebula Exclusive Hermit Shoplifter
Hypothesis, and later this Month, “Will
we colonize space?”, along with last weekend's
“Space Hygiene” episode, and I basically
flipped a coin for which would go into which
spots.
Some will be rolling out in January and February
too, and mostly a result of me having a bit
of a creative bumper crop and some free time.
Hence our fairly packed schedule for the month,
call it a holiday gift, as I don’t expect
to keep up this tempo of production.
We'll continue that holiday tempo with a discussion
of how to select spaceship crews this Thursday,
before returning to our Alien Civilization
series for Scifi Sunday on December 10th,
with a look at Nihilistic Aliens.
Two weeks from now we’ll talk about ways
to warp and manipulate reality, on December
14th.
In three weeks we’ll look at discussing
Silicon based lifeforms on the 21st, and then
our bonus episode on if we will colonize space.
After that we will finish the month and year
with clearing space debris on the 28th and
our final Livestream Q&A on Sunday, December
31st.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
