There are many ways to measure how advanced a 
civilization is, by its feats of architecture  
or art or philosophy or wisdom. “How big and 
numerous their guns are?” probably is not the  
best measure of things, but they might make a very 
convincing case to those who feel otherwise.
 
So, welcome back to another Scifi Sunday here 
on SFIA, where we explore the Science behind  
Science Fiction and ask how realistic it is 
and what real science paths might allow a given  
scifi technology or something parallel.
Today we’ll be examining super weapons,  
from those just a bit stronger than we have 
now to those which might ruin worlds or even  
wreck whole Universes, tearing at the fabric 
of spacetime itself. We’ll explore the weapons  
of the far future and those which might be 
used to attack your enemies in the past. And  
if that sounds like a fun topic, make sure 
to hit those like and subscribe buttons.
 
Now, a problem we often have in science fiction is 
that a lot of the time, the weapons on display are  
actually a good deal weaker and less effective 
than modern ones. Frequently you’ll see a show  
where they’ve got advanced lasers and phasers that 
are all high-tech but weaker and less accurate  
than modern sidearms. There’s also nothing 
in between laser pistol and ‘blow up planet’,  
not much in terms of tanks and artillery and 
even assault rifles and shoulder-mounted rocket  
launcher equivalents are pretty rare. In fairness 
to TV shows, with classic scifi TV shows, you’re  
often working with limited budgets and trying to 
mimic the cowboy shoot-ups from Westerns, but with  
Lasers. If that’s got existing audience appeal, 
it saves you money, and lots of actors, directors,  
and production crews would be experienced with 
making and filming that sort of scene already.
 
So that’s our acknowledgment that there are some 
real limitations on showing mid-range gear, but it  
nonetheless results in the bad guys way too often 
having their massive and overwhelming military  
demonstrated by “We have a doomsday device”. 
On the other hand, that gives us a massive  
arsenal of doomsday devices to discuss today.
As we did devote an entire episode to Death  
Rays already, we can skip around that specific 
class of weapon, and let’s instead consider just  
bombs bigger than nukes for the moment. Though 
we should note that a super weapon need not be  
a singleton, like a big bomb or gun, but it 
could be something like a self-replicating  
swarm of death bots, which we’ll discuss later 
today, or just something very clever like a  
virus that makes everybody who catches it less 
aggressive, or the computer kind that deletes  
the secret bank accounts of everybody in power, 
or dumps their dirty laundry on public display. 
 
Now, in the classic film Dr. Strangelove, we 
find out the Soviets have a doomsday super-bomb  
designed to go off automatically if they’re 
attacked but they didn’t tell the other side,  
and the eponymous character chides the 
Soviet Ambassador, “The whole point of  
the Doomsday Machine is lost, if you keep it a 
secret! Why didn’t you tell the world, eh?” 
 
So, there’s always that question of why you 
would build a megaweapon and whether or not  
a total lunatic is going to need other people 
helping on that project, any one of which could  
opt to be both greedy and self-protective 
by just leaving a vital component out.  
You’ve no real reason to keep such a thing 
secret and since it’s often hard to do so anyway,  
you can use weapons tests to demonstrate 
that you have got the megaweapon in  
question and that it does actually work. 
Why you want it definitely plays a role in  
which options you pursue, because a deterrence 
weapon needs to be safe to build and maintain  
and not accidentally set off, which means 
its needs failsafes and guardians, and those  
guardians now get to vote in whether it gets used 
and can potentially use it to threaten you too,  
if it comes time to be asking about pay raises 
and promotions, or changes in supreme leadership.
 
Big bombs aren’t cheap to build and maintain 
but the real reason we never saw supernukes was  
because the hard part about building a bigger bomb 
is actually building a rocket able to deliver it,  
as otherwise you’re detonating it in your 
own territory. The biggest nuke ever set off,  
the Tzar Bomba, was less than 50 megatons and 
honestly served little point. Often in history  
we find the world record for something big 
belongs less to a champion than a glorious  
example of why people can do bigger but choose 
not to. Any major power is capable of building  
a bomb that is as big or even bigger again. 
Without testing it is hard to know if a new  
and bigger design will even work. Afterall, 
untested prototypes have a fairly bad track  
record for success even when the design team has 
vast expertise and resources. But there’s nothing  
obviously tricky about boosting nuke size up more 
and indeed bigger is generally more efficient  
when it comes to nukes or even reactors. 
But you hit a point of diminishing returns,  
as with big bombs being used on Earth, the loose 
rule is that if you double the yield you only  
increase radius of the explosion by about a third. 
Or More energy goes into making the mushroom cloud  
hotter, brighter, and taller; which looks awesome 
but is basically just further vaporizing what’s  
already vaporized. And if that’s not on a rocket, 
it’s your homeland that’s getting more vaporized.  
It’s why an asteroid impact or volcano can 
have way more released energy than our entire  
cold war nuclear stockpile and be thought of as 
fairly destructive but not be truly apocalyptic.  
Consider, a one megaton bomb might kill almost 
everyone in a 2 mile or 3 kilometer radius,  
with few survivors and many dead out to about 
double that radius. But it would take about 8  
megatons to double that radius, 4 miles or 6 
kilometers, whereas an ICBM carrying several  
smaller warheads could deploy that as a cluster 
munition and get more damage done. Scifi is full  
of various bigger bombs than A-Bombs and H-Bombs, 
often something like the D-Bomb or Omega Bomb,  
and honestly it’s not bad to have a 
bigger bomb, all things being equal,  
but several smaller ones with a combined equal 
or even lesser yield is generally more valuable.
 
It’s hard to estimate how much it would 
take to serve as a true doomsday weapon,  
as the asteroid impact we think killed-off 
the dinosaurs was thought to be around 100  
million megatons, or 2 million Tsar Bomba 
equivalents. Humanity would survive that,  
though most people might not, and civilization 
might fall apart for several generations, which  
is nothing in the grand scheme of time or even 
humanity. But how much would kill us all off? And  
what would it take to just blow the planet up?
I think to start our conversation of super weapons  
off, we would have to list modern Weapons of 
Mass Destruction as essentially category 1,  
and something able to wreck the whole observable 
Universe as Category 10, though keeping in mind  
that we can envision Multiverse-level weapons 
or destruction so 10 is arbitrary, not maximum.
 
I will semi-arbitrarily put anything that can 
wipe all life off the surface of a planet as  
Category 3 and actually obliterate a planet, death 
star-style, as Category 4. Though exterminating  
an entire solar system, in a classic space opera 
case of multiple inhabited planets and potentially  
hundreds of facilities on moons, asteroids, 
and other space habitats, would be easier than  
obliterating an entire planet, as we will discuss 
in a second, an actual inhabited and developed  
star system really can survive a massive beating.
The amount of energy needed to vaporize a planet  
the size and composition of your typical 
Earth-Mass planet is going to be on an order  
of 10^32 Joules, but unless you’re at war 
with the lava people living in the core,  
this is stupidly high overkill. Even 
just peeling the crust off the planet,  
which should take about 1% as much energy, should 
do the job, indeed we think a big rock hitting  
Earth in the deep past did exactly that and got 
us our Moon. Though a single impact on one side  
of a planet might distribute energy to blow some 
mantle off there and leave crust elsewhere, I’d  
still have problems imagining anything surviving 
that. Though folks with spaceships on the other  
side of the planet might have some time to flee, 
depending on how fast the shockwaves traveled.
 
Ultimately if you really want someone dead, 
just remember the first rule of warfare:  
there is no such thing as overkill. It works 
well and so does using multiple techniques.  
You blow everything up, gas the place, then send 
in the murderbots. Then you pave the smoldering  
embers over and build a giant monument to how 
vengeful you are toward your enemies so that  
nobody else decides to poke their head up and 
take their chances at getting on your bad side.
 
So, something like 10^30 Joules of energy, 
a million, trillion-trillion joules,  
should do the job for any Earth-like planet. If 
you had to buy that energy in real modern dollars,  
at something like a dollar for every 100 
million joules, that’s going to cost you  
10 Trillion-trillion dollars, or more than the 
entire current global economy if it kept producing  
at current rates for the rest of Earth’s lifetime 
till the sun roasted us. The assumption is that  
you have some cheaper or singular nuke-like power 
source with super weapons, but never forget that  
energy is originally and literally defined as the 
measurement of how much work you can get done. 
 
So, if you feel like you could get a lot better 
results in terms of net destruction by keeping  
modern humanity producing and working 
on a problem for a few billion years,  
then blowing all that energy on peeling the crust 
off a world isn’t an effective use of juice. We  
see something like this with the allied Cardassian 
and Romulan Assault in Star Trek Deep Space 9 on  
what they thought was the enemy’s homeworld, and 
they talk of how many hours they’ll need to take  
off the crust and mantle. This doesn’t seem 
the cleverest use of weapons, but then again  
it turned out to be a decoy planet and a trap.
A Megaton of nuke is cheaper as a power source  
but again, those cold war arsenals of hundreds, 
if not thousands of megatons of nukes would have  
barely scratched this planet’s surface, just 
the life on it, and yet we’re still talking  
generations worth of effort building those 
bombs and trillions of cost in the building and  
maintaining. Yes, vastly superior power production 
or automation might make such an object cheaper,  
but remember that this will also apply to whoever 
is building the defenses for the place you want to  
attack. You need more like 100 trillion megatons 
of nukes to peel a crust off a planet like Earth,  
and a hundred times that to vaporize one, 
though this varies a lot from world to world. 
 
In terms of antimatter, it would take roughly a 
trillion tons of antimatter to vaporize Earth,  
and several billion to remove the surface layer, 
but that feels a lot more plausible – assuming  
you have the ability to produce and store 
antimatter cheaply. Still a lot though,  
just to rip the crust off a world means having 
nearly a ton of antimatter per person living  
on it, and while we could have a real paradigm 
shift in costs and availability of antimatter,  
that would feel like killing someone by 
burying them under gold and diamonds. 
 
This can tempt folks toward using asteroids as 
a seemingly cheaper source of kinetic energy,  
and indeed it would be, especially if you have the 
space and math skills to find a big asteroid with  
very little delta-v needed to change its course 
to an impact trajectory, but you can still assume  
that at best you’re saving a couple orders of 
magnitude on energy cost – which is nothing to  
be sneezed at of course – but it’s still a vast 
energy need and there’s nothing subtle about this  
massive use of energy. They’re gonna know you 
just shoved a giant asteroid off course and the  
effort will be way more visible while ongoing 
than that asteroid by itself is. You might not  
care if they know as they may be powerless 
to stop it and the dread of inevitable death  
raining down upon them in a couple years might 
merely be sweet sauce for your vengeful meal.
 
The alternative though, when dealing with a 
spacefaring culture, is to do a “Colony Drop”  
instead, which is where you substitute 
dragging an asteroid onto a long trip  
to an enemy world and instead grab any of their 
larger space orbitals, like an O’Neill Cylinder,  
and de-orbit it onto the world below. An O’Neill 
Cylinder would generally mass several gigatons  
and would come crashing downs with more than 
its TNT equivalent, as TNT only has about 4  
gigajoules of explosive energy per ton, while 
a ton of matter falling from Earth’s orbit at  
about 8 kilometers per second will have 
more like 32, which is 8 times as much. 
 
So, essentially you can convert something 
falling from orbit as being several times  
its actual mass in explosives, and in this case, 
an O’Neill Cylinder would impact on some spot  
below with a thousand times the energy of the Tsar 
Bomba. Given that a civilization might have many  
thousands of stations that size and larger in 
orbit – and far more smaller ones – an attacker  
might be able to set off a major Kessler 
Syndrome event wrecking those orbitals and  
dropping large chunks of them all over the world 
below, dwarfing classic nuclear Armageddon. 
 
We see this in David Weber’s military 
scifi series Honor Harrington, where a  
big chunk of a three hundred thousand ton orbital 
shipyard crashes onto a city, killing millions.  
At a smaller scale, we see this done with 
satellites, where in the Modern Fantasy series  
the Dresden files they drop a decommissioned 
satellite on an enemy villain's hometown, blowing  
him and his goons up… plus civilians I assume.
Before we leave the topic of more conventional  
weapons, it should be noted that a superweapon 
might save on power input required by taking  
advantage of existing sources. For instance, we 
explain the Butterfly Effect by noting that the  
beating of a butterfly’s wings in China might 
affect the course of an Atlantic Hurricane down  
the road, and while an extreme case, a very good 
knowledge of weather-modeling might let you use  
very minimal and hard-to-detect efforts 
to steer a future storm as it develops,  
to ransack an enemy’s capital. On a grander scale 
you could set off a storm on the Sun’s surface to  
blow an immense coronal mass ejection out at the 
right time and place to hit the target planet. 
 
It’s a reminder that subtle and clever 
use of force can be better than raw might,  
though we must also remember that in any situation 
where your enemy has rough parity of abilities,  
they probably can monitor weather patterns and 
sun storms fairly well, and also notice any heavy  
effort to alter them. If you can be more subtle 
than your enemy, you might be able to outfox them,  
though trickery has a way of weaving webs 
so tangled that you snare yourself in them.
 
In the end, a lot can be said for heavy and 
direct use of force, that’s the first rule  
of warfare after all, if Brute Force Isn’t 
Working, You’re Just Not Using Enough Of It”
 
Still, we have another option that incorporates 
both brute force and a modicum of stealth,  
subtlety, and cleverness. Relativistic Kill 
Missiles are the ultimate in raw kinetic  
brute force, large missiles with simple guidance 
packages launched from afar that need no explosive  
warhead, not even a nuke or antimatter, because 
their raw kinetic energy already exceeds what a  
bomb – fission, fusion, or antimatter – would 
hold. Though you may pack it with antimatter  
to give it extra maneuverability, it 
is a great and simple rocket fuel,  
and it does add a little extra punch.
Indeed, antimatter is the only known rocket  
fuel besides kugelblitz black holes that can 
actually accelerate a RKM. Typically we assume  
that it will be pushed up to speed by a powerful 
laser, which can push on the RKM for many days,  
transfer all the beam’s energy over that time 
into kinetic energy which the RKM now has and  
which it can deliver in total in a mere instant by 
ramming into something at near-lightspeed. Indeed,  
this is a better approach than just using a big 
star-powered laser for interstellar attacks, or  
a Nicoll-Dyson Beam or Stellaser, as you can skip 
all the issue of focusing on a target light years  
away and having to keep a beam on target for days, 
in favor of putting that into individual RKMS.
 
Or multiple, which is where the RKM really 
excels. It can break itself up into several  
smaller projectiles right before impact 
to spread itself around, but you can also  
arrange for volleys of RKMs. For instance, if 
I really want to hammer Earth, I want my RKMs  
to arrive over at least a 12 hour period so it 
rotates around to the undamaged side. But I can  
arrange my RKMs to arrive together or strung out. 
Consider, I can push one up to 97% of light speed,  
the next to 98%, the next to 99%, or so on, so 
that I’m using my pushing laser, matter beam, or  
electromagnetic catapult over many weeks or even 
years to sling projectiles that will all arrive  
simultaneously or at a spacing of my choice, 
and deliver all that energy in an instant.
 
And while they coast through space, 
having been accelerated lightyears away,  
they aren’t actually invisible but they are 
very tiny compared to an asteroid. They’re  
now moving so fast that a radar that might pick 
them up a light-hour away might give you less  
than a minute between when you get the return 
signal alerting you of the threat and when the  
impact occurs. And trying to pick up some skinny 
black metal mega-bullet maybe a few meters across  
and several long, moving at 99% of light speed 
through the vacuum of space is no easy trick.
 
One other advantage is you can abort an attack, 
detonating them or moving them off course,  
as you could have a forward observer or even 
a small command ship trailing shortly behind  
who could give an abort code. You can’t do that 
with a laser. Once it is fired the light will  
arrive and as fast as any warning signal you might 
send, so RKMs allow some options for later mercy,  
as well as coercion. Surrender or 
die, the missiles arrive tomorrow.
 
Incidentally, for folks wondering about the 
effectiveness of this super weapon against a  
non-planet target like a Dyson Swarm, yes it 
is diminished but at the same time the RKMs  
can break apart sooner and spread out more 
like a shotgun blast to the entire system,  
potentially distributed over a year or 
more, like some brutal relativistic kill  
cloud. That sort of thing is going to cause a 
navigational hazard like a cone spreading out  
from that system for a broad swath through 
the galaxy, so like a lot of superweapons,  
you need to contemplate unintended 
collateral damage that might also  
bring thus far unaligned empires into the fight 
against you… or scare the cowards into line. 
 
Needless to say this can be scaled up to wreck 
whole galaxies, and since the main shot will be  
moving far faster than the escape velocity of that 
galaxy, it will pass through into the wider void,  
leaving the place colonizable afterward. I will 
call this a Category 7 Superweapon at this stage,  
again fairly arbitrarily, but will say that 
8 is a Galactic Group killer, 9 is a Galactic  
Supercluster killer, and 10 is able to take out 
a Hubble volume or the Observable Universe.
 
Jumping a bit ahead, but a Category 6 Superweapon 
might be artificially setting off a supernova to  
take out several neighboring systems. There are 
any number of scifi settings that have used this  
trick, the two best-known being Star Trek, 
where the plotline of the film Generations  
features artificially blowing-up stars, and Star 
Wars, with a number of supernova-based weapons  
in the Legends setting, from Sith superpowers, 
to the small spacecraft, the Sun Crusher. When  
it comes to superweapons, few fictional 
settings have as many as Star Wars does,  
from Death Stars to Thought Bombs to Sith Lords 
who can cause Coronal Mass Ejections to take out  
enemy spaceships pursuing them. We see that trick 
used by Worf in Star Trek the Next Generation too,  
during the Klingon Civil War, and also against 
the Borg later in the series. As is often the  
case with this sort of weapon of opportunity, much 
like dropping a boulder on someone in an ambush,  
a lot depends on getting the person there. More 
so with supernovae, as, while they are very fast  
explosions, they are the final moment on a 
process of fusion taking millions of years.
 
Methods for setting one off have been proposed. 
You could launch two large iron slugs, at least  
large asteroid mass, from different directions, 
timed to intersect at that star’s core. Hot  
as stars are, they actually take quite a while 
to melt large objects, and planets might orbit  
inside red giants for very long times before 
being burned up. So the slugs would intersect  
in the center giving a large initiating blast 
while poisoning the fusion reaction with iron  
and initiating the blast. This trick is used in 
the Bobiverse book series by Dennis E. Taylor,  
and should work on lower mass stars.
This is easier in some ways with white dwarfs,  
which can go supernova when sufficient new 
matter is added, though of course, adding 1%  
to some near-supernova white dwarf’s mass still 
means hundreds of Earth’s worth of new matter,  
not exactly easy to move. We might also really 
scale this effect up by reigniting Active Galactic  
Nuclei or dumping whole stars into a galaxy’s 
central black hole, potentially releasing  
galaxy-sterilizing levels of radiation in a big 
blast; rolling out at light speed from the core.  
Larry Niven’s known space series features 
that event, and the well-known Ringworld  
megastructure comes from that setting, and was 
built as something like a Galactic Noah’s Ark.  
Smaller Scale events using various regular 
or medium sized black holec of several solar  
masses to several thousand, pumped with several 
solar masses of rapidly in-falling new matter,  
could be used to create Hypernova able to 
wreck large pockets of interstellar space  
in a sphere around the target or as polar jets, 
striking out as long cones but even further.
 
This is where we can start talking about 
edge-of-science options, as you might be  
able to dump matter into a star by a wormhole, or 
on the flip side, you dump one mouth of a wormhole  
in orbit of a star or even in one, and use the 
other mouth as a portable flamethrower to torch  
planets or propel ships as its rocket thrust, such 
as moving and maneuvering the weapon’s platform  
itself. This is a superweapon used to take out a 
meeting of a powerful galaxy-spanning faction in  
the novel House of Suns by Alastair Reynolds, 
which also shows us supernova defense methods,  
like ringing a star in a cluster of tilted 
and perfectly reflective thin ringworlds.  
We could also dump a neutron star into a gas 
giant, after all, a wormhole mouth only needs  
to be a handful of kilometers wide to suck in 
a neutron star, as opposed to many thousands  
or million for white dwarfs or normal stars. 
As we saw in our episode Weaponizing Black Holes,  
shooting a black hole into something isn’t the 
superweapon scifi often shows us, a micro black  
hole mostly wouldn’t do anything to a star for 
instance, but a neutron star certainly would,  
if we could dump either through a wormhole. 
Or any other version of teleportation,  
and a superweapon might be a fairly mundane 
transporter like we see in Star Trek, just  
one able to beam nuclear bombs from your magazines 
into an enemy ship or bunker, the Asgard use this  
trick against the Wraith in Stargate Atlantis. 
And anything that just ignores armor or shields  
is arguably a superweapon even if the payload 
is very mundane, after all, a simple stone  
arrowhead teleported into your supreme leader’s 
head works wonders for changing his mind.  
So too, Brainwashing machines represent a type 
of superweapon, as do any other contagious or  
self-replicating devices, one could even argue 
bits of propaganda or philosophy are superweapons.  
Though, a giant weaponized pulsar, blowing jets 
of plasma or gamma rays out for lightyears seems  
a better example, and any neutron star could be 
turned back into a pulsar and probably aimed.  
You can do parallel tricks with black 
holes and white dwarfs too, and we already  
discussed various star-weaponizing options.
Getting back to our neutron star example,  
that’s also not really how wormholes under 
classic Einstein-Rosen Bridge version works,  
they are expected to collapse if you put a 
lot of matter through one, which a neutron  
star would certainly qualify as, but we’ll assume 
the more classic scifi wormhole portal opening.  
Sticking a neutron star in the middle of a gas 
giant should cause a detonation, not a refurbished  
star, as we see in the Kevin J. Anderson’s Saga 
of Seven Suns, which, while a little loose with  
its science, but does have a nice mix of space 
opera classic and big-scale superweapons.
 
One of those is automated murderous robots that 
can be mass-manufactured, and when they can also  
replicate themselves or make factories to do 
so, we call this a Berserker. Lots of machines,  
automated spacecraft of varying intelligence, 
out to kill stuff. A variant of what we call  
a Hegemonizing Swarm, borrowing the term 
from Iain M. Banks and his Culture series,  
another scifi gem that doesn’t hesitate to 
show us massive scales and stellar engineering.  
Banks never really details the specifics here 
but the implication is somewhere between the  
Borg from Star Trek and a Paperclip Maximizer or 
Optimizer, something that pretty much goes through  
space turning every free bit of matter into more 
of itself or its desired end state, like turning  
everything into paperclips. Or taking every 
rock apart into its constituent elements to make  
everything into huge collections of sorted metal 
ingots awaiting usage. You could do that to stars  
too, not just planets. Or directly, something 
more useful, like war machines or space habitats.
 
One can make the argument that any interstellar 
species moving out from its homeworld is basically  
acting as a Hegemonizing Swarm, just with various 
tightness to its curve of standardization and  
accepted outliers, or mutant peoples and cultures. 
Of course, one can also argue the ultimate  
superweapon is intelligence itself, and that 
while converting an entire star into a massive  
war engine able to rain RKMs and mega-laser 
across the galaxy, converting a star into  
a single massive computer mind, what we call a 
Matrioshka Brain, is actually way more dangerous.
 
We don’t know what the hard limits on physics 
are, but odds are good that such a mind would  
quickly find them, and that might give it access 
to not only some reality-bending weapons, but the  
brains to utilize them to terrifying effect. Those 
might include surprising options like being able  
to play with fundamental physical forces, locally 
altering them to be stronger or weaker, or even  
turning them off. Even a fairly small increase in 
the Gravitational Constant of the Universe would  
cause stars to implode very quickly or cause gas 
giants like Jupiter to become second suns, which  
would be both a magnificent tool for building 
great wonders or a weapon for wrecking them. 
 
A sudden decrease in gravitational strength could 
circumvent the energy requirements for vaporizing  
planets too, causing existing ones with molten 
cores to fall apart, or causing stars to explode  
under their own immense heat, no longer restrained 
by gravity. Indeed we might imagine a ‘bomb’  
that caused a target star to supernova by higher 
gravity and used the energy from that to power a  
galaxy-wide drop or increase in the gravitational 
constant, taking a whole galaxy apart. Or the  
equivalent of a bomb-pumped laser, which 
normally is when we set off a nuke and use it  
to power a fast laser blast inside a cavity in the 
microseconds before it vaporizes it. In this case  
being aimed at a distant target star or galaxy.
We could do similar with alterations to other  
forces and fields, such as shutting 
down electromagnetism and the forces  
that bind neighboring atoms to hold together as 
molecules, like the Molecular Disruptor Device,  
or MD, or Little Doctor, from Orson 
Scott Card’s novel Ender’s Game,  
which uses that effect to further power itself, 
making it weak against small objects but can  
chain react if ships in a fleet get too close, 
and can blow up entire planets just as easily.
 
Shutting off the Nuclear Forces, like the 
gluons which hold atomic nuclei together,  
could be even more devastating, and the ability 
to play with that might not just allow one to  
mass produce antimatter or even convert matter 
directly into energy or other types of matter,  
but could risk, for lack of a better word, 
a puncture in the False Vacuum of Reality.
 
It is the current view of physics, or most 
physicists anyway, that normal space, even when  
empty of matter and radiation, still bubbles and 
seethes with various waves and particles popping  
in and out of existence constantly. These last for 
only the tiniest increments of time – literally,  
they can be viewed as almost an accounting error 
of the universe – but the basic effect of so many  
of them doing it constantly adds just a tiny – or 
maybe not so tiny – constant energy to an area,  
making it not a true vacuum, or false vacuum. 
The ability to manipulate that and derive power  
from it is the basic concept of Vacuum Energy 
or Zero-Point energy, and we’ve discussed that  
more elsewhere, but it would make for 
a potent power source and weapon too.
 
And If you could shut that off or suppress 
it, you would then have a true vacuum,  
and potentially an expanding collapse of the false 
vacuum. We think that would essentially delete the  
Universe there in an expanding sphere, but one 
thankfully that would move at the Speed of Light,  
so while the perpetrator’s civilization is toast, 
neighboring galaxies have millions of years,  
and most of the Universe would be outside of 
its spread, much as light emitted from any place  
nowadays will not reach any of the places where 
Hubble Expansion has already reached light speed  
or greater, the Cosmological Event Horizon. 
Something like that could also have the opposite  
effect, instead setting off a new Big Bang in an 
area, blowing its way into the Universe at light  
speed and wrecking everything in its wake with a 
mix of superfast matter and crunched up spacetime.  
The ability to warp spacetime is also very potent, 
as a star suddenly taking up half the volume it  
used to is going to blow itself to bits, and the 
effect on planets or people would be fatal too.  
Ripping spacetime up or increasing the rate 
of Dark Energy, possibly setting off a Big  
Rip Scenario locally or universe-wide, would 
definitely all qualify as super weapons. So  
would the ability to create Closed-Timelike 
Curves, which are a restrained and less  
paradox-prone version of time travel, where 
you can – conceptually – build a machine that  
lets you reset back to when you turned it 
on the first time, there are a lot of ways  
to use that to your advantage, not least of 
which is infinite save-states, so to speak.
 
Of course, if time travel is on the table, 
it might mean the ability to go arbitrarily  
far back in time, and we looked at the possible 
consequences and results of that in our episode  
Time Wars and more in its recent sequel 
Multiverse Warfare and Quantum Mania.  
But just the ability to send one single atom back 
in time, or crush one Planck Volume of space,  
can potentially delete entire civilizations, or 
entire superclusters if you managed to hit early  
enough, back during or before the Inflationary 
Epoch moments after the Big Bang. Great power  
source too, if you can do the portal trick we 
discussed with wormholes earlier, only to an early  
and energy-dense era of the Universe rather than 
opening a portal into a star. That primal energy  
back when the Universe was denser than an atomic 
nuclei can definitely feed some serious engines,  
for pushing ships, powering empires, or blowing 
them to smithereens, and of course unless that  
is coming from a younger alternate universe, not 
your own, that empire blown to smithereens might  
be yours, or all of them in your universe, 
while you drain the past dry of energy and  
utterly wreck your timeline from moment zero.
One could imagine that as a pretty good way to  
start a war between Universes though, tapping them 
for power and tearing up their timelines, or the  
same for Multiverse Branes in String Theory. We 
see something like that in Isaac Asimov’s epic  
novel The Gods Themselves, and when it comes to 
superweapons of this sort of scale, that might be  
a very appropriate name for both the wielder 
and target of such immense superweapons.
 
So it’s Scifi Sunday here on SFIA, on 
youtube and most of our other platforms,  
but on Nebula we just had our episode, Life on 
Giant Moons come out, early like all our episodes  
on Nebula. Which you can join if you don’t want to 
wait till Thursday. But we also often have bonus  
content there, from extended editions to entire 
to exclusive short or even full length episodes,  
and we just had one come out a couple days ago, 
Colonizing Binary Stars. So if you want to catch  
exclusive content like that, along with seeing 
all our episodes a few days early and ad free,  
including no sponsors reads, you can 
click the link in the episode description,  
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
That lets you see all those exclusives like  
Colonizing Binary Stars, or full length episodes 
like Planets vs Megastructures or our entire  
Coexistence with Alien series. And again it’s all 
early and uninterrupted by ads, so you can enjoy  
the episodes as intended. Nebula is a streaming 
service started by creators for creators and their  
audiences, and has grown to be the largest 
creator owned streaming service. No Youtube  
algorithms penalizing content or dumping badly 
matched commercials on you, and using my link and  
discount it’s available now for just over $2.50 a 
month, less than the price of the drink or snack  
you might have been enjoying during the episode, 
and it goes to supporting new content from myself  
and other creators, like our new feature, 
Nebula Classes, so its 2 for the price of 1.
 
When you sign up at my link, 
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use my code,  
isaacarthur, you not only get access to all of 
the great stuff Nebula offers plus now Classes,  
you’ll also be directly supporting this 
show. Again, to see SFIA early, ad free,  
and with all the exclusive content, 
go https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
 
So that will wrap us up for today but we’ll be 
back in a few days with our look at Life on Giant  
Moons, ones nearly as big as Earth itself or even 
larger, and how life might arise on such worlds  
and how we might colonize them. And a week from 
now we’ll be having our monthly livestream Q&A,  
Sunday, April 23rd at 4pm Eastern time. Then we’ll 
be returning to Earth and the near future to talk  
about Smart Cities and the future of automation 
in urban environments and how that will change  
them. Then we’ll jump into May with a return 
to the Fermi Paradox, to discuss Dysonian SETI,  
and how we might find Kardashev 2 civilizations.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can  
also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting our website, 
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s  
episodes early and ad free on our streaming 
service, Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
