In a grim and dark future among the vast ocean
of our galaxy there may be worlds where humanity
treats its members as little more than cogs
in a machine or ants in a hive, but what would
such worlds truly be like?
So, welcome to another Scifi Sunday here on
SFIA, where we look at concepts popular in
science fiction and ask how realistic they
are or how they might operate if they come
to fruition, and today we’ll be looking
at the concept of hive cities and hive worlds,
the grim and dark urban settings of so many
scifi stories.
They are bleak places where you always wonder
how anyone survives and where all the food
comes from, which we’ll be spending a fair
amount of time discussing today; as getting
food and energy in, along with waste and heat
out, are the big bottlenecks of these depressing
places where the only laughter is cruel or
dark humor, and we’ll have a fair amount
of that in today’s episode too.
But as many the administrator of a hive city
can tell you, Dark humor is like food… not
everyone gets it.
There are many settings that talk about enormous
mega-cities, and indeed we even did an episode
on Mega-Cities some years back, but not very
many books or shows really go into detail,
especially on the truly enormous cities.
To really look at the idea in detail, ever
since we started seeing the big migration
to cities and emergence of skyscrapers, folks
have tried to imagine super-cities, and often
in a grim and dark light.
Indeed, the movie usually considered the first
big budget scifi film is named Metropolis,
and explores a dystopian view of life in those
cities, with people treated like robots and
indeed an android being built, one of the
first scenes in scifi.
We also see that in Caves of Steel, Isaac
Asimov’s first robot novel, which is set
in a hive city of future New York.
His imperial capital in the Foundation series,
Trantor, and its twin in Star Wars, Coruscant,
both explore planet-wide cities, what we also
call an Ecumenopolis.
But a hive city or hive world is not simply
a big city, the implication is layer after
layer of bleak enormity.
A dark place, physically and emotionally,
sprawling in barely structured chaos.
Amusingly, a lot of the best film examples,
like Metropolis or Blade Runner – my own
favorite film – are set in the future past,
as Metropolis takes place in 2026 and Blade
Runner in 2019, and Soylent Green in 2022.
The artistic inspiration for them and the
cyberpunk genre they helped inspire is heavily
drawn on the hardboiled detective and film
noir genres, which are almost inevitably set
in bleak crowded cities where life is cheap,
and we see parallels in stories like Robocop
or Judge Dredd.
Far future Dying Earth genre settings often
have it too, and Gene Wolfe explores it in
the enormous city of Nessus in his Book of
the New Sun series.
But probably nobody goes into such detail
as the Warhammer 40,000 setting, where we
have a crumbling galactic empire of millions
of worlds, many thousands of which are Hive
Worlds or have one or more giant Hive Cities,
or Forge Worlds, essentially huge factory
planets, and often on these the air is so
toxic that to step outside would kill you.
Albeit living inside merely kills you a bit
slower.
In these places, you are lucky if your role
in life is merely to be a tiny minor cog in
the machine, as the alternatives are to be
discarded and become a decaying part of a
now broken machine, or to be trying to scrape
out a life living on the detritus and garbage
fallen down from higher levels.
I thought today we would explore the realism
of such worlds, though, since it is so linked
with more dystopian scifi and fantasy we will
not hold their feet too much to the fire.
It is also my favorite genre and we’ll be
discussing a lot of my favorite bits of fiction,
so I want to emphasize that their realism
or lack thereof is not really pertinent to
whether or not they are good stories.
I’m not sure a Hive World can ever really
be divorced from the notion of the decaying
giant, even if it is a bit antithetical to
the general premise of the channel that the
future is a pretty awesome place to live,
but we’ll discuss some of the flaws in the
thinking that makes them awful places.
At the same time, as we noted in both our
Mega-cities episode and our discussions of
space habitats in Dyson Spheres, the sheer
enormity of such places would – by default
– mean we always had vast amounts of derelict
spaces.
Even a very competent and well-resourced leadership
is going to need time to handle changes.
If we assume only 1% of various spaces are
in overhaul or derelict at any given time
– which would indicate an exceptional city
or regional manager – then when we’re
talking billions or trillions of people, that
means millions or billions living in those
derelict spaces.
Tiny margins aren’t so tiny when the whole
is so immense.
A street gang in modern terms and size might
scale up on a Hive World to represent a million-person
strong army, even if their crime rates were
lower than ours.
In a grim context, and to set the tone for
today’s discussion, your typical human corpse
contains enough calories to feed a person
for two months.
This obviously makes cannibal civilizations
living on entirely Soylent Green rather implausible,
but it does mean it’s a non-trivial dietary
supplement and means that if people typically
lived 70 years, or 840 months, that a city
of a billion people could support 2.4 million
dedicated cannibals.
And far more on a diversified diet.
Not that we would expect people to typically
live 70 years in such places or for everybody
to get eaten, or for cannibals to only eat
people, not other food like grain or rats.
Indeed a hive world without giant mutant rats
is no hive world at all, and with all the
other wasted food going into the garbage,
you could have entire hunter-gatherer civilizations
living in some enormous landfill, gathering
garbage like they were nuts and berries, foraging
for mushrooms, fighting giants rats and cyber-seagulls
for the detritus, and occasionally making
a meal of them or the other way around.
And the sad thing is that this doesn’t actually
require that the rest of the civilization
be all that dystopian, this sort of rogue
civilization could exist even inside a larger
post-scarcity one.
Indeed, it might not even require that civilization
have a great scarcity of compassion.
But let’s talk scale here first, and not
just in terms of physical size and people,
but also of time.
A city is a huge thing which sprawls and shifts
with time, and for those of us in the US,
where those cities are often only a few lifetimes
old, it is easy to forget that when it comes
to great cities, whether they were built on
the coast or a fertile river bank or a rocky
and defensible hill, what that city is mostly
built on as time goes by, is itself.
We often see a pyramid theme in hive cities
but it might be more appropriate to view it
as a mountain, a heap tossed upon itself,
as layer after layer gets built and those
before them get torn up, compressed, lost,
and rediscovered.
This is not necessarily vertical either, in
Gene Wolfe’s Nessus, the city is essentially
slowly flowing down the river as the world
cools off and it migrates away from its nominal
old downtown region, a spaceport full of wrecked
old spaceships that everyone unknowingly uses
as buildings.
Wolfe does a magnificent job in that series
of quietly showing rather than telling the
readers that many of the mountains were long
ago carved into statues, that a cliff face
is now some statue’s actual face, and that
the term for ‘miner’ now essentially means
grave robber, as everything is just built
over top itself or something else from millions
of years of humanity living there and slowly
ebbing as the sun dies.
So, the critical piece to remember about something
like a Hive World or City is that it probably
wasn’t built according to any grand plan
or in any given era, and that it’s gone
through countless episodes of renewal, restoration,
and collapse.
These need not have been individually epic,
because the scale involved is.
So the city need not have been nuked till
it glowed and got rebuilt, but maybe once
every few hundred years some terrorist group
does manage to set a nuke off somewhere in
the city, or unleash some chemical accident
that renders a chunk of it uninhabitable for
a time.
Or a train carrying dangerous chemicals derailed
or a reactor melted down and rendered part
of the city unsafe or undesirable for decades.
Even if someone wants to do a big renewal
project, it takes decades to get the place
picked and planned and then even longer to
buy or acquire all the parcels of land, horizontal
and maybe vertical, that you need.
You may even want the area to decay further
to make that cheaper or easier to invoke eminent
domain on.
Funding might dry up part way through, requiring
revisions, and all the while the area is basically
a decaying garbage heap being used by the
lost, the desperate, criminals, and desperate
lost criminals.
If such a project takes decades, even if big
renewal projects like that were only needed
every few centuries, you would still have
a respectable fraction of your hive as a constant
dumpster-fire even if everywhere else was
pretty awesome and pleasant.
And indeed, you might have sections that were
on fire for years at a time, or others where
an entire forest or jungle had sprouted up
inside the structures.
We also have one other critical piece to contemplate
in regards to realism, and that’s heat and
energy.
As we so often see with the megastructures
we discuss on the show, it's not just where
you get your energy from but how you get rid
of it once it inevitably turns into heat.
And the same applies to food production.
Every piece of food people eat takes energy
to make or import, every appliance they use
does too, and it all ends up as waste heat.
Hive Worlds don’t grow food under an open
sky.
They might do it by domed-in super greenhouses,
vertical farming, or vast underground artificially
lit growth chambers.
They might use soil or hydroponics, they might
skip plants and meat in favor of big tanks
of algae and yeast and artificial flavoring.
They might import the food from off-world.
All of this produces waste heat, as does every
factory, TV, or other process you run.
And you’ll cook to death if you make heat
faster than you can pump it into space.
Food is what keeps people alive though, so
let’s talk about each of these production
options really quick and get some estimates.
We will use Earth as our baseline, though
a Hive World might be a bigger or smaller
planet or moon or asteroid or even some giant
construct built around a stellar remnant.
Classic Farming is basically limited by access
to liquid water and favorable climate, and
our current technology would probably let
us pump out about 10-20 times the food we
do now if we were focusing on high-calorie
crops and didn’t mind basically plowing
everything over.
Feeding 20 people per acre or 50 per hectare
is plausible enough and there are ocean farming
techniques that might pull off similar performance.
This number is a little dubious since I’m
just multiplying total planetary acreage by
current max production, but as we’ll see
in a moment it’s also not likely to be done
in favor of doming-over.
We’ll just assume huge power plants or beaming
stations are letting you mass produce virtually
endless supplies of nitrogen fertilizer and
process the other macro and micro nutrients
out of earth, air, or water too.
This could get you close to a trillion people
being supported, and ignoring what an ongoing
ecological and logistical nightmare this would
create, it would probably be stable.
This isn’t a hive world though, because
a trillion people could fit in a single state
or smaller county at the sorts of population
densities we see in dystopian mega-city settings
or even large modern downtown regions.
Stage two on something like this is to dome
everything over in bits and pieces, it lets
you control the temperature and humidity and
save on water pumping, and keep out pestilence,
diseases, air and water contaminants.
You would easily more than double food production
in such a setup and this can be done on basically
any planet.
Our population growth rates aren’t terribly
high right now and might peak out, otherwise
I would say to expect this style of agriculture
to become dominant in our lifetimes.
It's hard to get exact and meaningful values
in a case where everything has been turned
into a greenhouse since we don’t really
have a lot of practice maximizing those for
calorie production, but at a minimum we might
expect to be able to sustain 100 people per
acre, or 250 per hectare of land converted,
and big floating greenhouses, or those in
tundras, further warmed by piping waste heat
up from cities, basically makes the whole
surface of a planet farmable.
That makes populations north of 10 trillion,
all fed from that planet, viable, and still
leaves most of the land free of cities if
you’re going for even fairly modest skyscrapers
as the typical home and workplace of humans.
This is also assuming no major improvements
in how plants are getting light – sunlight
on leaves isn’t super-efficient and generally
results in less than 1% of the sunlight energy
being converted into usable food calories,
reflective foils on the soil and genetically
engineered plants that could use other wavelengths
of light – like green – for photosynthesis,
might boost those numbers up a lot.
In the context of an Agri-World, like the
20 planets dedicated to nothing but farming
and sending food to the world-city of Trantor
in Asimov’s foundation, this is probably
what those would look like.
A world dedicated to farming, able to support
trillions though, not dozens of worlds dedicated
to supporting one world of, in Trantor’s
case, a mere 40 billion people.
Indeed, a world supported by dozens of dedicated
agri-worlds might be able to support a hundred
trillion or more people, and some galactic
empire of millions of worlds could easily
dedicate many hundreds of them supporting
an ultra-urbanized capital planet of a quadrillion
or more people.
So, amusingly the grandmaster of science fiction’s
portrayal of a planet city is less realistic
in scale than Warhammer 40,000, a setting
known for its indifference to scientific realism,
which casually contemplates hive worlds of
trillions and gives an estimate of Earth at
over a quadrillion.
After all, if we compare a single rural county
of the US, which has about 3000 counties,
to an empire of a few million worlds, a single
county would be the equivalent of a thousand
planets, and there wouldn’t be anything
unreal about an agricultural county sending
virtually all its product to a nearby hungry
metropolis.
For fans of that setting who post into forums
like reddit’s r/40klore, of which I’m
a regular lurker, the next time someone is
arguing the realism of Terra or other Hive
Worlds, this does not, incidentally, imply
that there’s any realism to interstellar
shipping of food stocks between planets.
Planets have deep gravity wells, and clawing
your way out of one with a typical spaceship
involves more heat and power than running
some grow lights in a hydroponic chamber would.
So this should only occur if you have both
some cheap space launch option like space
elevators or anti-gravity, and ultra-easy
and fast interstellar space travel, like world-to-world
wormhole gates as we see in the Stargate Franchise,
which is also handy for heat management.
Otherwise, it makes way more sense to build
endless cheap space farms using all that abundant
sunlight, in the same solar system and general
orbital region, and shipping the food in.
Indeed, it generally is better to even run
your power production off-world, and pipe
it down superconductors or as microwave beams,
as most of the energy coming out of a power
plant is heat, not electricity.
In terms of shipping, figure on needing to
bring in somewhere around a pound a day or
couple hundred kilograms of food per person
per year, or 200 gigatons per trillion people,
which is both huge and tiny, a lot of those
mile long ships scifi is so fond of could
handle that entire shipment for a trillion
people all on its own just by coming and going
once or twice a day, fully loaded.
One can imagine needing millions of people
and lifting machines to unload that ship too.
It’s a bit debatable if this is going to
save you heat or energy vs. growing it on
the planet in big hydroponic farms as air-breaking
a bunch of matter on a high-gravity planet
like Earth tends to involve converting all
its kinetic energy into heat – which is
tens of megajoules per kilogram, and actually
greater than what an equal weight of chemical
fuel would release when burned.
The tyrannical rule of the rocket equation
fleeces you coming and going, so to speak.
It’s also all the reason you need to keep
things pretty scarce in a fictional story,
food is minimalist and barebones because it
makes the setting grimmer, but in-setting
the rationale is that a planet will seek to
maximize the population it supports and that
will involve stripping all the luxury out
of your basic foodstuffs so that you can feed
more people.
Alternatively, bringing the stuff up and down
space elevators or orbital rings by tethers
let’s you reclaim a lot of that as electricity
and you might be able to profitably grow your
food in vast arrays of orbital farms and tether
it in, possibly by actual physical elevator
cars into deep orbits rather than spaceships.
This is probably best done with the idea of
a potential siege in mind, with stockpiles
of food down on the planet and lots of food
production there too.
Those space farms and space power collectors
are not exactly fortified positions, and while
a fleet trying to chew through those and a
bunch of mixed in space fortresses is going
to get beat up badly before they besiege your
world, those facilities are going to end up
getting mulched.
While deep and artificially lit hydroponic
ones can be bunkered whole kilometers under
the ground if needed, where even thermonuclear
devices would have problems reaching them.
What this generally means is that you do want
to grow your food on-planet if possible, or
have that option, and that might be vertically
farming in skyscrapers but just as plausible
would be underground caverns, especially if
defense concerns were an issue.
It is possible you would have huge storage
vaults that could be emptied in times of problems
and turned into growth chambers as they emptied,
especially as climate-controlled artificially-lit
systems like that have very fast turnaround
time on growing food compared to the normal
annual growth cycle.
Also, it is advantageous to grow short storage
duration foods on the planet and have a general
tendency towards shipping the more durable
kinds, though such plants, like lettuce for
instance, aren’t offering much in terms
of calories.
They can also help recycle your air and water
and keep it clean, and if your environment
is that artificial, you do need to handle
all the otherwise natural cycles, like turning
oxygen into carbon dioxide and back again.
In terms of food density, it would be very
plausible to keep an entire year’s worth
of food, even in fully processed and packaged
form, in less than 1 cubic meter per person.
Strictly speaking, there are 7700 calories
in a kilogram of fat, and 100 kilograms would
be all the calories a human needed for a whole
year, and at a density of 900 kilograms per
cubic meter, that would be a maximum condensed
supply of food for 9 people per cubic meter.
Assume the answer for the storehouses is somewhere
between those two values of 1-9 people per
cubic meter, but it means a kilometer-wide
cubic cavern in a hollow mountain can contain
all the food a billion people need for 1-9
years, and as you cycle that out you could
convert it to hydroponics.
Or if they were stasis vaults or freezers,
places to stick your surplus population till
the crisis is over.
Civilizations with fairly dark and utilitarian
attitudes toward its citizens, or ones that
are simply desperate, might keep immense cryo-vaults
packed to the brim with soldiers, who they
thaw out when needed – riots or sieges – and
stuff non-wartime citizens in till its time
to rotate them.
And you might need a trillion police officers
on a hive world of a quadrillion people.
I could imagine families getting broken up
over decades of rotation, only getting to
see each other for a few scattered days in
their dingy cramped quarters while the kids
get stuck in stasis and mommy and daddy rotate
because one is a soldier and the other has
a job deemed non-critical during a siege,
while some centuries long conflict rages around
that solar system of this hive world, its
dozen twins, and ten million asteroid colonies
and space habitats.
Each an armored fortress that would make the
difficulty and scale of the invasion of Normandy
in World War 2 look tiny.
It’s probably worth noting that even the
ultra-cramped dingy quarters we usually see
for the common man in such settings is a lot
more spacey than a cubic meter, so it shouldn’t
be hard to find space to store supplies, be
it food, or ammo, or your precious few luxuries.
If we’re picturing such a world simplistically
as an Earth-sized building, 2000 stories tall
or deep, then that’s a trillion square kilometers,
or a quintillion square meters, of floor area.
Critically, on planets like this, while heat
is your bottleneck you have effectively infinite
storage space, if you’ve got the materials
strong enough and durable enough, or robots
good enough, that you can keep and maintain
vast unlit caverns or complexes to be used
when you need to.
And while you do have to worry about overheating
the place if you suddenly switch on billions
of megawatts of lighting for food growth,
you do have a lot of thermal mass you can
be flushing heat to on that planet temporarily
for during a crisis.
In fact, you could even bank cooling the same
way you bank food, soldiers, and other supplies
for a crisis.
Food stores would be best kept at cryogenic
temperatures, but you could also fill huge
caverns with enormous vacuum insulated storage
tanks filled with liquid nitrogen.
In the raw numbers sense, we don’t know
that they might not have food creation paths
that did better than 1% energy conversion
of light to food, and you can by playing with
the artificial sunlight wavelength or frequency
to optimize photosynthesis.
Maybe they have vast algae vats covering thousands
of square miles on dozens of levels, all growing
food and recycling waste into more food.
Indeed, they might just flat out manufacture
those macronutrients without involving plants
or be a fairly cybernetic culture.
If that 1% value held though, then a human
consumes about 3 billion joules a year of
food or 300 gigajoules of energy to produce
that at 1% efficiency.
If you prefer that in wattage, it's around
10,000 watts.
Earth gets and emits about 2x10^17 watts of
sunlight and infrared waste heat, which is
20 trillion times that, and I’ve often used
that as a justification for Ecumenopolises
having a population of 10-20 trillion tops,
but again there are ways to lower that wattage
per person, and options to radiate more heat,
and in the short term, Earth has a huge heat
capacity if you’re really dug in and able
to pipe heat around the crust and mantle,
not just your oceans or icecaps, though water
has an a amazingly high heat capacity and
you could keep your oceans in huge chilled
cisterns or as ice blocks in vacuum-walled
chambers just to dump heat into it as you
needed during troubled times.
You might easily get 500 megajoules dumped
into a ton – or cubic meter – of chilled
ice, and a given planet might easily have
2 quadrillion cubic meters of water in its
oceans, and more in its mantle, but that would
be 10^23 joules of extra temporary heat capacity,
many months’ worth of heat production in
its own right for the hydroponics to support
a trillion people, and a nice supplement to
your planet’s existing stores of food and
waste heat radiation.
Seas of liquid fat, or icebergs of it, might
actually make more sense for calorie storage
and heat sinks, and that’s disturbing enough
that it would fit a hive world setting.
The frozen fat vaults of mighty Terra, able
to feed trillions during a siege.
I’m placing so much emphasis on how you
can handle a planetary siege because your
real limit -especially in a dystopian civilization
– on how big such a Hive World could be
is how big it could be and survive a couple
years of being cut off from supply.
The game changes immensely if you have special
tricks for getting rid of heat, like a wormhole
pipeline to various ice giant planets, whose
high ammonia content actually makes good radiator
fluid, and fertilizer.
Giant Towers radiating heat into space also
works well, serving as pipelines for transport,
power and heat.
You might be able to dump heat into black
holes too, we don’t really understand their
thermodynamics very well, and amusingly the
idea of thousands of artificial micro-black
holes inside your planet is a saner, safer,
and more scientifically plausible pathway
than a lot of the ones discussed in fiction
for these giant planet cities.
The takeaway though is that if you’ve got
ultra-strong materials and the sort of augmented
and automated workforce we would tend to expect
in even just a few more decades here on Earth,
let alone millennia into the future, then
you are very likely to go up and down in your
construction, and over the centuries a lot
of that will still be standing, and if not
abandoned, then set aside as useful storage
space that nobody really wants to live in.
If your structural members can last a thousand
years without corroding, then anything you
built out of it is still there in a thousand
years, and the reality is that for many metals,
when they’re big and thick, they can really
just sit there, doing their job for entire
eons, they just get a layer of corrosion on
the outside that eventually acts like a protective
layer, especially if that layer doesn’t
easily chip or fall off.
Even more stable would be ceramic structural
members.
In context, even if we assumed a quadrillion
people on a planet, that 2000 stories example
– which is not that tall – is a thousand
square meters of floor area per person.
In some dystopian garbage heap where your
typical person lives in a cubby hole a few
meters across and works in a cubicle that’s
smaller, you still have 99% of your space
left over for everything else, be it storage
or roads and corridors or factories.
And again 2000 stories, maybe 6 kilometers,
is not that tall in hive city context, you
could build towers right into space and all
the way down to the mantle.
You could also be building this as an enormous
shell layer around a gas giant, something
like Saturn is perfect for that, and you could
dump a lot of heat into that fluid-like planet
below.
Likewise, we can imagine using bigger planets,
but we can also imagine a hive city on a big
and otherwise empty planet, and that changes
your packing options.
So you can make a sane case for a hive city
having many billions or even trillions in
it, and a hive world as high as a quadrillion
or even more, especially with certain technologies.
Indeed, once we toss traditional planets out
the window, we have giant shellworld options
that can rival dyson swarms themselves in
terms of living area, or in the case of the
Birch Planet, exceed it so much that a civilization
of quadrillions would qualify as some trivial
rounding error.
On a planet of a quadrillion, just to add
to the grim dark, using our earlier figure,
you could have 2.4 trillion mutant cannibals
warring over cemetery stasis vaults, who empty
out the older corpses from distant centuries
with the silent unofficial approval of the
overlords to clear room for more folks or
new uses.
Untold empires dwarfing our greatest modern
nations could fight over the scraps left in
the garbage heap and recycling layers.
Keeping to modern scales, it’s a place that
has more heart surgeons than Earth currently
has people… not including the gifted amateurs
from among the mutant cannibal tribes.
They would have somewhere around a billion
active serial killers too, and that’s going
off modern numbers, not the presumably elevated
ones we’d have in these sort of dystopian
settings.
In that city I mentioned earlier, Nessus,
we have a scene in the first book where the
equivalent of the local police precinct captain
is telling our protagonist some of the city’s
stats on murders and suicides, and fans of
the series back estimate from that to calculate
a population of many tens of millions if not
hundreds of millions, and the numbers given
are just so overwhelming before you realize
that they’re actually small compared to
our current modern immensity, in a civilization
of 8 billion.
The same number as the total population of
all the dystopian megacities of Earth in Asimov’s
Caves of Steel.
So any hive city ought to match those planetary
statistics, and a full hive world might bring
them up a thousand to a million fold.
It's a place where the main university for
teaching new dentists has a big auditorium
that graduates a new dentist every single
second, day and night, every day, no interruption,
for the last ten thousand years.
There are dozens, if not hundreds of places
doing that for teachers, or police, or military
officers.
They could hold a continual parade a hundred
soldiers abreast marching down a huge road,
all day every day, just of new soldiers graduating
boot camp and walking up the ramp to troop
transports headed off to assault or defend
distant planets.
We also shouldn't assume the surface of such
a world is a flat metal sheet of uniform altitude.
Rather, it would be akin to a patchwork quilt
of a billion different mega-projects, some
rising just a few hundred stories above ground
and covered in heat-radiating panels.
Other places we would see artificial mountains,
not a lone skinny tower, but thousands of
them together, each a thin spire against the
immense mountain of the hive, but each are
home to ten million people, all to maximize
heat radiation and a view of the outside scenery.
Some of these towers might rise even into
low orbit, to be intersected by multiple orbital
rings providing docking and ultra-fast travel
to and from orbit as well as around the planet,
with millions of trains running along them,
up where the barely existent atmosphere provides
no air drag.
Hives don’t have to be dirty and depressing
places, that’s just the scifi setting needing
it for the plot, and we’ve discussed that
more in our episodes on Ecumenopolises, Arcologies,
and Matrioshka Shell Worlds.
They do generally need to be dark though,
as light that it hasn’t reflected is absorbed
as heat.
So you can have entire immense farms, gardens,
parks, and nature preserves in such worlds.
Indeed you might have entire continents worth
of each tucked down around various levels,
but unless you’re favoring shade gardens
or mushroom forests, that lighting is coming
out of your effective maximum population and
other heat-producing activities.
Such places are likely to be better known
for their dimly-lit caverns full of tree-sized
mushrooms, stalactites, and dimly-glowing
crystal clusters, than for their vast redwood
forests.
You could have truly massive ecologies on
such a world too, even if it was only running
on a small percentage of the energy lost to
waste and garbage.
There’s also the virtual realm, as such
a planet might hold the computational capacity
to simulate whole galaxies worth of planets
and more surreal virtual realms, and humans
with implants and augmented reality might
almost slide casually between this prime reality
and the various virtual domains they also
dwell in.
Though this style of hive world, all virtual,
might prefer some very spread out artificial
space station for maximum heat radiation and
revolves around your best computronium and
heat dissipation, rather than food production
and heat radiation.
Indeed, in extreme cases, a planet might contain
many trillions of people living matrix-style
in pods, or even simply as brains in jars,
or as uploaded minds.
They may have virtual afterlives in those
simulated worlds and you might have entire
layers of a planet given-over to storing the
dead of prior millennia, well-preserved, or
possibly in stasis or frozen for eventual
revival.
Entire layers might be sealed off over time
and left cold and dark, and locked up as tombs,
as their residents decide to sleep forward
to distant futures, and new layers are simply
built on top of them, much to their surprise
when and if they wake up.
Your hive is a tomb world, and the levels
in many regions are like geological strata,
because space is not at a premium when heat
and energy are.
All that changes if you have Clarketech heat-management
options, then you can have enormous forests
rolling for untold miles.
A million layers of diamond and hyper-steel
all beneath fake skies, with vast flowing
rivers on the landscape, moving heat to pipes
that run it through wormholes to cold places
in deep space to move the heat and generate
even more power.
Those places might be actual suburbs and farms
connected to that main planet perpetually.
Some worlds would also be mostly immune to
that problem, as a hive city might be an asteroid
a dozen kilometers across that’s been mostly
hollowed-out to add living space and provide
construction material for higher layers, which
again, are probably many jutting protrusions
of towers rather than simply spherical shells;
a smooth surface doesn’t radiate heat as
well as a crinkled or jutting one.
Several thousand cubic kilometers should be
able to house billions of folks all on its
own, and heat radiation is less severe for
smaller objects which have fewer layers per
unit of radiating surface area.
Indeed, you might opt for a series of caverns
deep inside a rocky ice ball far from your
sun, which would actually fit the hive concept
better.
You have some fortified starport as your anthill
entrance or entrances but the true city is
far below and most of your upper layers are
essentially big radiator tubes acting almost
like rebar in concrete, kilometers of sturdy
shielding, heat-management, and lower priority
storage, all snaking around in tight corridors
to be a nightmare for any invasion force.
These might be your mines too, as in all but
the largest asteroids you can burrow down
and build from the center out almost as easily
as from the top downward.
If it’s classic scifi, we just have artificial
gravity, but under current known science,
everything is provided by rotating, which
means long, skinny cylinders in your tunnels,
probably sheathed in a non-rotating outer
layers.
As you dig ever more tunnels out, with many
even running parallel or adjoining, you take
the excess spill from those spots and dump
it on the surface, slowly expanding your radiating
surface area to allow more heat dissipation.
Who knows how many hundreds of centuries it
would take for even a colony of millions to
mine out and use up even a relatively small
rocky or icy body a dozen kilometers in radius?
And we might imagine parallel versions in
floating rigid blimp tunnels and hives woven
into the upper atmosphere of gas giants or
Venus-like worlds, those are good for refining
and mining those colossal atmospheres for
resources.
If building your hive into a place like Pluto,
named for the God of the Underworld, or into
Venus, which might as well be a suburb of
Hell, or the eternal mega-storms of a gas
giant, doesn’t count as a bleak and depressing
place to build your mega-city, I don’t know
what is, but with the right Clarketech you
could build these things into dead stars or
black holes too, or even inside wormhole-like
gate spaces, like the Webway city of Commorragh.
As always, I don’t see any need for these
places to be bleak and depressing, except
for the sake of darker fiction, but the sheer
scale of them guarantees tiny fractions that
are decrepit or gang-ridden, and those areas
would be plentiful simply because a city ten
thousand times the size of our largest modern
one can have ganger clans bigger, better,
and more organized than many a modern country’s
military, while still being a tiny rogue fragment
of the greater whole.
As always, I would argue that whether or not
our future is in such cities, or more utopian
ones, is much more a reflection of the character
of a civilization than its actual technology
and resources, though it’s nice to have
all of the above, especially if you’re aiming
to build cities so grand that they sprawl
over continents and reach into the heavens
themselves.
So this episode comes out mid-May and for
a lot of our viewers that means you made it
through another set of final exams, and for
some folks, it was their last one.
If you just graduated, congratulations and
good luck with your next step, whatever form
that takes.
It took a lot of hard work and determination
to devote yourself to something for multiple
years and stick at it.
Sometimes people realize part way through
that their chosen major isn’t what they
want to do after all, or wasn’t what they
expected, and change it.
The same applies to careers.
Most people spend about 80,000 hours of their
life in their job, 40 hours a week, 50 weeks
a year, for 40 years, and would prefer that
they enjoyed their work and that their work
helped the world.
80,000 hours is a lot of time, and a massive
resource to accomplish things with, so it’s
a good idea to do some research on what career
to pick.
And that’s where our friends at 80,000 Hours
come in, they’re a non-profit that spent
a decade alongside academics at Oxford University
researching which careers have the most impact,
and all the research is on their website,
for free.
80,000 Hours wants to help you find a fulfilling
career that does good, too, and so their website
is full of free tools to help you find the
right path for you, and lots of decision-making
tools, such as their 8-week career planning
course.
There’s a podcast with entertaining insights
and interviews discussing the world’s pressing
problems and what you can do about them, and
a job’s board with tons of opportunities
from entry level to advanced.
I found over a hundred opportunities just
focused on AI safety & policy, and all over
the map both literally and in required experience.
80,000 hours gives you the resources and leads
to help find the career you love and that
makes the world a better place.
And again, 80,000 hours is free, completely,
if you looking for a career that works on
one of the world’s most pressing problems,
sign up now at 80000hours.org/isaacarthur
Incidentally if you want to hear more about
Hive Cities specifically from the Warhammer
40,000 setting there’s a great deep dive
on the topic by Leutin, which I’ll link,
and a lot of those concepts would translate
over outside that specific setting too.
That setting isn’t hyper-realistic overall
but does give the topic a lot more thought
than any other fiction or nonfiction setting
I’m aware of, and it is a huge topic.
Which is why today’s episode is a companion
piece to this upcoming Thursday’s episode
on Hungry Aliens but even after writing both
I still felt we had left out a big element
of the logistics that didn’t really fit
in either episode so I recently wrote a short
bonus episode, Space Freighters, that will
be out on Nebula later this week, and I suspect
we will be discussing that matter more down
the road too.
We have a lot of other episodes to get to
before that though, I think the schedule of
scripts is loaded all the way up till September
at this point, which is why I felt a shorter
overview now was better than waiting.
Speaking of those episodes, we have a livestream
coming up a week from now, Sunday May 21st,
then two weekends from now I’ll be down
at the International Space Development Conference
in Frisco, Texas, helping cohost that, and
before that we have our look at warping reality,
on May 25th, where we’ll examine a lot of
ways various higher technologies might alter
space, time, physical constants, and more.
Then it’s into June to look at Colonizing
the Kuiper Belt, followed by a look at how
we can build enormously tall and strong structures,
like Hive Citadels, in Space Towers.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
