This episode is brought to you by Brilliant
Possibly one of the best known solutions for
why we don’t see or hear from Aliens is
that they can contact us, but feel morally
obliged not to, and that perhaps in the future
we’ll feel the same.
Star Trek is perhaps the most culturally influential
of all the science fiction franchises, and
one of its best known features is the Prime
Directive of the Federation Starfleet, also
known as General Order 1, or the non-interference
directive.
It’s been stated in various forms over the
years, but the general idea is that they are
not supposed to interfere in other civilizations,
and for those who lack the ability to engage
in interstellar travel, not to be detected
by them.
The priority of this is considered so high
that Starfleet personnel are expected not
to violate the prime directive even to save
their own lives or their ship or shipmates.
That often seems rather extreme but as we’ll
see today, if a civilization did want to follow
a directive like this, they essentially would
have to be that extreme about it, and maybe
even go further to make it work.
We have looked at this notion before, perhaps
in most detail in our episodes Smug Aliens
and Zoo Hypothesis, but I wanted to revisit
it to ask if our normal assumption about Non-Exclusivity
actually holds or not.
For those of you new to the Fermi Paradox,
it’s the apparent contradiction in how empty
the Universe appears to be of ancient and
advanced civilizations taken against the sheer
age and size of the Universe.
Non-Exclusivity is one of our recurring terms
for asking if everybody would do the same
thing.
It asks if for two given traits, if one of
them would only occur where the other did,
like a knowledge of geometry being exclusive
to those who knew basic arithmetic.
As an example, it’s easy enough to posit
a species that sticks at home and keeps to
itself, and the galaxy may be full of thousands
of such civilizations which did just that.
And yet, if civilizations can travel the stars
and can exist without imploding for millennia,
it would seem improbable that not even one
of those decided to go out and colonize the
stars.
Since anyone who did so, and kept growing
their numbers and colonizing, could easily
colonize every solar system in their own galaxy
in under a million years even without faster
than light travel, and thus outnumber all
the folks who stayed at home, it wouldn’t
really matter if 999 out of 1000 civilizations
stayed homebound, just that 1 did not.
Exclusivity itself refers to cases where we
can expect a given trait to almost always
be entwined with another.
An example of that would be that any interstellar
civilization should also understand rocket
science, and that civilizations which are
interstellar are exclusively those who also
understand rocket science.
We can think of some hypothetical scenarios
for a civilization not knowing rocket science
but still have interstellar travel, but we’d
imagine those to be fairly rare examples.
Similarly, we tend to expect interstellar
civilizations to be exclusive to those with
the trait of being curious, since developing
technology would seem unlikely if you weren’t.
Again, we can imagine cases where that might
not apply, like a species that stole their
technology from someone else or used to be
curious but removed that trait in some fashion,
but it ought to be a rarity.
When dealing with many other things though,
it’s harder to argue exclusivity.
It is fairly common to suggest one economic
system or another is the only rational one
a civilization would follow and must converge
to in order to succeed in space.
And it is entirely possible some forms of
government or economics are better at space
development, but the simple fact that the
space race was between a capitalist and communist
nation and that both had major successes would
seem to imply that regardless if one economic
system was better than another, you can get
out to space with either and presumably with
others too.[a] Thus we can’t say interstellar
civilization is exclusive to capitalism or
communism or socialism or any of their variants
or alternatives.
The same reasoning would seem to apply to
various governmental systems, be it democracy
or monarchy, dictatorship or republic, and
so on.
We generally assume this is also true for
ethics and morality too.
There may be a lot of ethical concepts that
are near universal among civilizations, such
as a respect for life or at least life of
their own species, but that’s a lot harder
to claim exclusivity on.
Now there is a general notion that if there
is such a thing as objective right and wrong
or best ethical practices, that civilizations
would tend to converge on those moral systems
over time, and we’ll return to that notion
in a bit.
However, in absence of that, any civilization
that wants to practice something like the
Prime Directive is confronted with a bit of
a problem.
As an example, Star Trek introduces us to
many other civilizations beyond humanity and
the other members of the Federation.
The Klingons, Romulans, and Borg being maybe
the best known, and none of those three seem
like they would care about non-interference
in other civilizations, quite to the contrary,
interfering in other civilizations would seem
a major policy of theirs.
The Klingons want to fight and conquer everybody,
the Romulans want to run the show, and the
Borg want to assimilate everyone.
None of this implies leaving peaceful or primitive
societies alone.
Indeed, a bit of a plothole in Star Trek is
the question of how the Federation ever manages
to find anyone those three haven’t already
gotten to first, since they’ve all had interstellar
travel a lot longer than the Federation has
been around.
And that is the other big issue with the general
notion of non-interference.
If you are doing it from apathy it's fine,
you do not care if someone else interferes,
conquers, assimilates, or eradicates other
civilizations.
However if it’s a moral stance, then you’ll
hear folks suggesting you should either get
there first, if interference is unavoidable,
to do it in the least damaging way, and others
suggesting you should stop those aggressor
civilizations from interfering.
Whether that’s diplomatic efforts to discourage
them or setting up a blockade around the planet
to prevent interference or simply attacking
the other empire, if you want to stop them
from interfering you have to take some sort
of action.
And that includes your own civilization since
if you’ve got a range of viewpoints on the
issue, you will have members of your own civilization
opting to ignore the rule and interfere.
The Prime directive is Starfleet’s General
Order 1, but there are folks in the Federation
who own starships.
We don’t know how that non-interference
is enforced in the Federation, if it is at
all, but it wouldn’t seem likely that Starfleet
hides the existence and location of planets
they discover or leaves minefields and defense
platforms around them.
Of course in Roddenberry’s vision of a Star
Trek future it’s implied humanity has outgrown
its bad behavior except for the occasional
and rare bad eggs, so maybe virtually no one
is inclined to break rules and starships aren’t
so easily obtained that any lone bad egg can
do it on their own.
We might dismiss this as a plothole in a fictional
universe, but it could actually play out that
way in real life.
Civilizations might get very good at handling
their bad eggs and minimizing the spoilage
in the first place, and we’ll return to
that notion shortly.
For a prime directive solution of the Fermi
Paradox to be true, it pretty much requires
a situation like that, where all civilizations
not only converge to a morality of non-interference
and are good at instilling their morality
to their entire civilization.
Or alternatively that one civilization or
faction in control of a civilization is just
very, very dedicated to enforcing that policy.
As an example, it doesn’t matter if most
civilizations in the Universe get contacted
while their still bound to their homeworld,
just that we were not, and if in our galaxy
someone got on the scene early and achieved
dominance, but firmly believed in letting
planets with native life be left alone, well
they might be in a very good position to enforce
that.
We don’t know that our solar system might
not be protected from outside interference,
it is entirely possible our whole Oort Cloud
is one big swarm of mines and anti-ship batteries
and signal scramblers designed to make sure
we are left alone by lone individuals or minor
factions that would break the rule and that
some ancient civilization’s unstoppable
armada sits around waiting for any other civilization
to pounce on any other civilization that dares
break the rule.
We often assume neither option – a universal
belief in non-interference or a powerful civilization
enforcing non-interference in our region of
space - makes a realistic solution for the
Fermi Paradox.
However for today we’re going to assume
they do and ask how that might have happened
and what it would take to make it work.
Let’s begin with the case of an inevitable
Universal belief in non-interference, which
as we’ll see represents a very narrow window
of possible moralities.
Now this does not mean civilizations have
to begin with this viewpoint, were that so
we could easily disprove it just by our own
attitudes now and in the past, which decidedly
do not favor non-interference.
It is pretty critical to this concept too
that there actually be a provable and demonstrably
true concept of right and wrong that’s as
ironclad and specific as Scientific Laws like
conservation of momentum and energy or thermodynamics
and entropy.
Now that’s not a very hard idea to wrap
our head around since most of us believe that
already.
Oh to be sure we often take the intellectual
stance that morality is relative or acknowledge
that our own personal morality is probably
not complete or correct, but the word or thought
“That was wrong” applied to someone else’s
views or actions is an anathema to the notion
that morality is relative.
You can not look at someone who has committed
a heinous murder and say “That was morally
wrong” or “That was evil”, believe that,
and believe that morality is entirely subjective.
Personally I take the stance that morality
isn’t relative, we just haven’t figured
out that ironclad and specifically clear version
of morality that would let us say X was right
in the same way we could say “That airplane
has this amount of kinetic energy” or “That
building has a height of this many meters”.
And that’s a fairly common view.
We obviously can’t prove that to be the
case, at least at this time, but choosing
to assume it is the case, and fumbling our
way toward a clearer and truer view of a fundamental
ethical system is pretty much the only alternative
to adopting nihilism and its rather hard to
imagine a civilization operating under a core
belief in nihilism.
Indeed that’s a common Fermi Paradox Solution
all on its own, that civilizations realize
there is no purpose to life, that there is
no genuine right and wrong, and essentially
collapse as a result, and we explored that
more in our episode “Gods & Monsters: Space
as Lovecraft Envisioned it”.
Needless to say from the title, that is not
a Fermi Paradox Solution that qualifies as
cheerful or optimistic.
So it is possible that there is a true ethical
system achievable by every civilization through
logical deduction that will match everyone
else’s, or do so on the topic of non-interference
anyway, or at least that only civilizations
that believe that – rightly or wrongly – actually
survive and grow and can have debates about
non-interference.
As to the ethics of non-interference, they
are decent enough, leave other folks be, to
grow up on their own and live their own lives.
It is not really something most of us disagree
with, especially compared to ramming your
own culture and beliefs down their throats.
However, this raises another problem, which
is essentially the missionary or teacher dilemma
of the prime directive.
If you believe – rightly or wrongly – that
there is a fundamental ethical truth and you
know it, that doesn’t match up too well
to the notion of letting other civilizations,
be they primitive or neighboring interstellar
empires, live by their own version of the
truth that does not match your own.
Now your morality might dictate that they
are indeed wrong but to interfere would be
wrong too, and you can only control your own
actions so you choose not to do wrong, but
it still has a problem with it.
You’ll be instructing a class on these ethics
to future space explorers and one of the students
will ask why it is wrong to help them find
the right and proper truth.
You might respond by saying they have to reach
it on their own because it would be wrong
for you to interfere in their development,
and that student might respond, “But Teacher,
isn’t that what you’re doing with us right
now?”
You would be on fairly thin ice to try to
argue that it's okay because they are part
of your species – particularly as in the
case of something like the Federation, composed
of many alien races, that is unlikely to be
true.
Kids have to get their morality from somewhere,
presumably their parents, but you are probably
not their parent and arguing you’ve effectively
adopted them in teaching them – true though
that is – is just going to get you the rebuttal
of one of those students saying “Can’t
we then say we’ve adopted these primitive
worlds.”
There would seem to be some truth to the notion
that a culture needs to reach a destination
organically to really appreciate it, not have
it force-fed to them, but we don’t expect
people to derive all ethics on their own from
square one without outside assistance.
We do encourage them to think on it but we
give them at least a basic moral code to operate
in while they’re doing that and also encourage
them not to reinvent the wheel.
Great minds have contemplated these ideas
in the past and wrote those contemplations
down, we tell folks to go read them, read
the rebuttals and counterarguments to those,
not just navel-gaze till they derive the truth.
Now a very advanced civilization with life
extension and mind augmentation might decide
that self-deriving that fundamental truth
was important, they might even go so far as
to dump their children into virtual worlds
till they self-derive these things.
That one does work for a Prime Directive Universe
but only with a caveat, that those civilizations
experiencing non-interference from outside
civilizations do so because they did get interfered
with just one time.
When they first found that world with sentient
life they dropped a trillion little self-replicating
drones down on them and infected their brains
and transferred them all into an identical
virtual world since that allowed every member
of that civilization thereafter to have a
chance to keep repeating life until they figured
out that core morality on their own and were
graduated back up to reality.
This is a much safer approach to non-interference
too, as you can keep a civilization bottled
up digitally secure inside your own empire
on some harddrive and also keep every individual
member of it safe too, without countless generations
having to die to learn those lessons.
A common objection to the prime directive,
and one we explored more in Smug Aliens, is
that taken to an extreme is not very ethical
either.
If I see a 100 kilometer wide asteroid headed
toward a primitive world and opt not to interfere,
right or wrong, the one guaranteed thing is
those folks won’t be doing any more cultural
advancement after that asteroid hits.
Star Trek takes this view sometimes too, depending
on the era and writer they sometimes say even
doing that is wrong, but in the Original Series
episode “For the World is Hollow and I Have
Touched the Sky", in dealing with a generation
ship built inside an asteroid, whose inhabitants,
the Yonada, have forgotten they are on such
a generation ship and which is headed on a
crash course for a Federation world, Daran
Five, Spock says:
“Captain, informing these people they're
on a ship may be in violation of the Prime
Directive of Starfleet Command.
Kirk replies, “No.
The people of Yonada may be changed by the
knowledge, but it's better than exterminating
them.”
Spock says, “Logical, Captain.”
And Kirk says, “And the three billion on
Daran Five.”
“Also logical, Captain.”
says Spock.
There’s also a very good treatment of this
in Star Trek: The Next Generation episode
“Pen Pals”, where the crew are debating
about interference, and what the exceptions
are.
If an asteroid is okay, or a geological calamity,
what about a plague or epidemic?
What about a war, or if some oppressive government
is enslaving millions.
It’s probably the best discussion of the
philosophy of the prime directive that ever
happens in the shows, where usually the answer
is hand-waved as morally clear and distinct,
and a rare gem out of Season Two of TNG which
wasn’t the best of the franchise.
One of the bits I liked about it the most
is that while they did all settle on a plan,
it wasn’t without heated disagreement or
a bunch of strawman arguments, they got themselves
into a moral quandary, invited disagreement,
didn’t all agree even if they followed orders
to execute the plan, and didn’t try to tell
the audience what the right thing clearly
was.
So it’s a problem with the prime directive,
interpreted in its strictest form of zero
interference, period, you will have people
defying it.
If you’re a moral person with access to
a vaccine that will save millions, even the
threat of death won’t stop you from trying
to give folks that vaccine, and “I died
to save a million people” is a great epitaph
to have carved on your tombstone.
So again, you need to have that ironclad code
of morality that can flat out calculate the
morally right thing, which I’d tend to assume
follows a path of minimal interference instead
of zero interference.
Assuming it even does say minimal interference,
the code might say “New civilization, send
in the diplomats, doctors, and teachers”.
This is why a universal non-interference policy
has to rely on the idea of a provable right
and wrong, and one that can actually be fed
in specific complex scenarios to give you
a sure answer for a specific course of action,
or at least a very clear statistical analysis
with probabilities.
Without that provable ethical code you need
an enforcement wing, you probably need one
anyway but it will have to be way more robust,
more ruthless, and is much more vulnerable
to time.
If you’re doing minimal interference then
you can have the occasional crazy citizen
who doesn’t respect your code try to get
in, and either stop them or pull them out
before they’ve done too much damage.
If you have to deal with organized groups
with alternative moralities or the shifting
policies you would expect over many thousands
of years if your civilization wasn’t operating
on some clearly-defined and provable ethical
system, then you will have the other issue
of the Prime Directive, not if it is right
to do but if there is any point in trying
to.
We can visit some world that resembles early
human civilization, stone age or similar,
and choose not to interfere in it.
We might even classify its existence.
But they have thousands of years ahead of
them and trying to keep the place secret and
keep folks from landing there is going to
require a quarantine, one ongoing for thousands
of years and sturdy enough to prevent any
interference over such a time.
That takes us into our second case, not that
there is a universal code of ethics everyone
eventually finds but that there is some faction
out there in the galaxy, or at least our region
of it, who believes we should be left alone
and has the commitment to do that for millennia
and the influence or firepower to back that
up.
Now the commitment angle is maybe not so bad,
because the future is not the present.
We couldn’t maintain a quarantine for centuries
because we have to worry about budgets and
ever-shifting viewpoints on the matter.
Some ancient civilization whose average member
lifespan was millions of years probably does
not view this stuff the same way.
One shouldn’t assume that massively extended
lifespans results in cultural or philosophical
stagnation but it probably does slow down
and dampen shifts in those.
But you have to think about the actual members
of such a civilization.
We can picture them as numbering in the trillions
or far more, each one so wise and educated
that they make us all look like drooling babbling
morons.
They are wise, but maybe more importantly,
they are Terrifying.
One of them just one of them, would contain
all the knowledge and technology and ability
to stroll onto our planet and enlighten it,
or conquer it, or convert it, or eradicate
it and we couldn’t stop them.
They probably would be able to talk us into
helping them do any of the above, but they
wouldn’t need to.
They could bend over, pickup a handful of
dirt, infect it with nanotechnology, and fling
it to the sky to achieve whatever end they
had in mind.
That is the sort of power you would expect
to be the norm for any citizen of an advanced
civilization.
They are, every single one of them, ancient,
they are superhuman, they could crush you
like a bug, and they probably outnumber you
by as many orders of magnitude as those bugs
outnumber us.
That is not someone you want to screw with,
so if you get out on the galactic scene and
meet them and they tell you, “Stay away
from primitive worlds” or “Do not interfere
with other civilizations” you are going
to know that there was no ‘or’ there,
because they think of your civilization right
now as not much less primitive than when you
were playing with sharp flint stones.
And you are going to know that they can absolutely
enforce that, because your own existence is
proof they have been doing so successfully
for at least as long as you have been around.
They might not be a single species either,
assuming such a term actually means anything
to some civilization that mastered genetics,
cybernetics, and artificial intelligence long
before you mastered fire.
You know they can monitor you, you probably
won’t try to lie to them because you guess
they can read your mind for all practical
purposes.
You’re probably talking to something that
could look at an entire stadium full of people
for a quick moment, announce how many people
were there, recognize every face a century
later, and tell you what each person’s heart
rate was, skin temperature, and maybe even
have MRI’d them all.
You are not terrified of what their civilization
might do to you if you disposed of their representative,
you are terrified of what that lone representative
could do to you if you even thought of trying
to.
All things considered, including that other
civilizations should keep advancing even if
they are stuck under that civilization’s
thumb, I can’t see a non-interference policy
being enforced eternally, but we should not
assume it is from a lack of capability to
either do so or maintain the will to do so.
As Fermi Paradox solutions go, this version
of a Prime directive is easy enough to see
occurring.
Someone gets a headstart on everyone else,
and they can pretty much do as they please,
whether it is to colonize everything themselves
or wipe everyone else out.
Since we exist it stands to reason nobody
preceded us with that intent, either because
they had a different motivation or because
we are the folks with that headstart, as we
considered in the Fermi Paradox episode “Firstborn”.
If there was someone with such a headstart
who happened to believe that others should
be allowed to develop with minimal interference,
then they have the capacity to enforce that.
However it can’t be zero interference since
they have to make that dictate clear to everyone
else and, again, to enforce that.
Either it is a minimalist attitude or has
a threshhold level, no interference until
a civilization hits some milestone, the ability
to make warp drives being the one in Star
Trek.
Though it would still seem like their preferred
pathway would not be to surround worlds with
armadas, even ones run by faithful artificial
intelligence that would not deviate from the
goal even if they commanded it to, but rather
some alternative for removal or quarantine
like dumping primitive civilizations into
virtual worlds or outright pocket universes
if their technology permitted that.
Of course, any one of those three could be
true for us right now and we wouldn’t be
able to tell if they didn’t want us to.
Consider again those likely abilities they
have, and why I describe them as terrifying,
if they decide to keep you quarantined and
ignorant of the rest of the Universe, or the
real or main Universe, they aren’t likely
to have made any mistakes we could see or
exploit.
But I also mentioned the scenario that we
might be the first, and that one day we might
have to decide if we want such a policy without
the advantage of anyone older to advise us
on it or order us to do it.
And that seems a good place to wrap up for
today, by asking if it is likely we would
ever have such policies?
Are we going to develop some unarguable system
of ethics, and what would that imply for us?
Would we be willing to quarantine worlds for
millennia?
Would we order our ships to attack anyone
who tried to run the blockade or be willing
to program an AI to guard that system from
everyone, maybe even to refuse orders from
us countermanding it.
If after such a protected civilization got
advanced, would we be willing to give them
some chunk of the galaxy to call their own
or tell them they could only have it if they
agreed to our policies?
What would we do to them if they refused us?
Or to one of our own colonies who broke from
the policy?
Many would say no rule is any stronger than
the ability and will to enforce it, after
all, so with all that in mind, as we sit at
the dawn of the Space Age, is it possible
we only got here because someone out there
is already enforcing a prime directive of
non-interference, and if not, if we are the
first, should we adopt such a policy as we
head out to the stars?
We were talking about the notion of all civilizations
converging on some unified theory of ethics
today through contemplation and logic, and
how that’s often a common theme in science
fiction, but another common occurrence in
a lot of early science fiction is how often
they mangle the notion of logic.
A better understanding of logic, especially
formal logic, is one of those skills I wish
we taught more and is a wonderful tool to
have in your mental toolbox and skillset.
If you’re interested in improving your skill
with logic, there’s some great courses and
quizzes on the topic over at Brilliant.
Brilliant is an online learning site with
an enormous collection of topics on math,
science, and computer science where you can
improve your skills with interactive content
and have fun while you’re at it.
They make a great addition to educational
videos like these, as they let you get hands-on
learning and practice with the concepts to
help you truly master them, and learn more
about how our world and our Universe work.
From courses and quizzes to a community forum
to get help, to daily challenges and an offline
app that let you sharpen your analytical abilities
anywhere you are and have a few minutes to
spend, Brilliant let’s you learn math, science,
and computer science and have fun while you’re
doing it.
If you want to learn more, and help support
our show, you can try Brilliant out, for free,
by going brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
We mentioned asteroids wiping civilizations
out today, but they also offer potential resources
and homes for an expanding humanity and a
gateway to space settlement.
And we’ll examine that this Thursday as
we consider the role of Asteroid Mining & Orbital
Settlements in our future, as we continue
our Becoming an Interplanetary Species series,
and the week after that we’ll be looking
at space development from the more human side
of things as we contemplate Life as a Space
Colonist.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
[a]Well, the capitalists are still IN the
space race, whereas...
