This episode is sponsored by Audible.
Many an alien conspiracy theory seems  
to fall apart from asking why a high tech 
civilization bent on secrecy would seem  
to get spotted so often, but what if they get 
seen so often on purpose to make us think they  
don’t exist because they couldn’t be that 
clumsy? Maybe it’s all part of the plan. 
Something we often contemplate on this channel, 
and particularly in the alien civilizations  
series, is that a lot of alien behavior 
suggested by science fiction or indicated  
by alien sightings should be viewed from the 
standpoint of motive, means, and opportunity,  
and we should ask if there’s some easier way to 
get to the apparent objective. This tends to be  
the case in a lot of science fiction portrayals of 
aliens, not to mention alien conspiracy theories,  
as well conspiracy theories in general. Often the 
thread knitting all the various facts, assertions,  
and conclusions together is so convoluted it 
better resembles a tangled heap of yarn than  
some logical flow chart. It often feels like the 
result of either lazy writing or crazy rambling. 
Of course the key thing about conspiracies 
is that they do occasionally happen and a  
lot of the real world examples are absolutely 
crazy tangled messes that seem like something  
from a soap opera or comic book. Reality is often 
stranger than fiction, and with that in mind,  
I thought today we would try to work from the 
assumption that various alien theories were true  
and see what that might mean. We did something 
similar back in our Secret Aliens episode a few  
years ago but there, we were focused on the 
idea that the aliens in question were acting  
rationally and trying to figure out what might 
motivate them to take the reported actions.  
Here, we’re not assuming they’re 
crazy but we will instead act from  
the perspective they’re of a covert 
and clandestine mindset and tradition. 
That’s a thing to keep in mind: institutional 
mindset. We never want to speak in gross  
generalizations but if you present a problem to 
two different people, the head of an intelligence  
agency and the commander of an armored division, 
the former is likely to suggest a subtle and  
covert approach to the problem, while the latter 
is likely to favor going straight up the middle.  
It’s the tools they’ve got to work with, tanks are 
great ways to smash in the front door and patience  
is no virtue in operating them. But it’s also who 
they attract, the mindsets predisposed to going  
into particular organizations, the institutional 
culture that tilts you to trusting that approach,  
and the genuine reality that those 
are the tools and skills you’ve got. 
Give a tank commander a sniper and he’s 
likely to employ him covertly and as a sniper,  
since he’s presumably not an idiot, but he is 
likely to have at least tried to fit that tool  
into his normal operations first, maybe as a 
scout. Same, some sneaky spymaster might look  
at a tank and crew and be trying to think how 
to sneak it in somewhere, Trojan Horse style,  
or use them as fake defectors with valuable 
resources who can now infiltrate the enemy  
to provide good intel and also have a good way 
of exfiltrating themselves if things turn sour. 
Not to belabor the point, but if you’re dealing 
with an alien race that’s predisposed to be sneaky  
or conspiratorial, it is likely to choose those 
pathways even when they’re not optimal. If you  
are some alien descended from a critter that 
hid from predators by chameleon techniques,  
it's not shocking that your go-to technique for 
managing problems is going to tilt to hiding. 
Now I picked that armored division commander 
example because I used to be in an armored  
division and it’s no coincidence my motto tends to 
be “If Brute force isn’t working, you’re not using  
enough of it”, I tend to be fond of simple, 
direct paths to goals fueled by sheer might,  
right, and willpower. I know how to be sneaky but 
it’s not my preference and I suspect I rationalize  
the open and direct, as better on occasions when 
it isn’t. I certainly know folks who seem to do  
the reverse, and over-complicate in my view, 
and we probably all share a certain bias or  
blindness to the best path as a result. Which view 
is better doesn’t matter, that’s often going to be  
subjective anyway, what we care about is the fact 
that such biases can exist and be ingrained into a  
person or culture or presumably a whole species.
As a result we need to assume that what we think  
is the best path to pursue isn’t necessarily the 
best in their eyes, and it might not be either;  
either because we’re wrong or because they are 
so institutionally predisposed to that path  
that they’re experts at it and rather amateur 
at others. To me it seems absurd to involve ten  
different people or groups in some elaborate 
backstab, infiltration, or assassination  
which will be useless or even negative if it’s 
ever revealed and exposed, because I don’t find  
volunteer participants in that process terribly 
trustworthy to keep their mouths shut and not sell  
the operation out or brag to a friend or write it 
in their journal or deathbed confession. However,  
we don’t know that an alien would have that degree 
of concern about their agents keeping quiet and  
moreover we don’t know that they would think they 
would. It doesn’t matter if your operation leaks  
like a sieve if you are convinced it wouldn’t when 
you start it. My opinions aside, as reasonable  
as I think they are, lots of people seem to 
think such conspiracies will work just fine.  
They might be right, but even if they’re wrong, 
if they think they’re right they’ll do it anyway. 
Now an alien might not need to worry 
about the consequences of us finding out,  
but that raises the question of why they 
are making an effort to act quietly now.  
We don’t know what the galactic stage looks like, 
my best guess is it consists of us and a lot of  
worlds covered in algae and simple microbes, not 
tons of alien civilizations, but it could be a  
setup with complex communities with galactic 
courts. Species X might have to worry about  
censure or fine for getting caught interfering 
in our civilization, especially in a case like  
tampering with their culture or stealing their 
treasures. Or it might be Agency Y of Species  
X that has to worry about them yanking funding 
or providing congressional oversight if they get  
caught engaging in monkey business, which many an 
intelligence agency or black bag group has found  
happening to them when they got caught doing 
stuff the public thought was beyond the pale. 
When it comes to conspiracies, I always start by 
asking, what would flat out kill the conspiracy,  
because I tend to assume they would be smart 
enough to ask that themselves and not do the  
plan if they didn’t get a good answer, today’s 
topic is assuming that might not be true.  
But as an example, I’ve heard folks say they 
think the cure for cancer is already known  
but Big Pharma won’t let it out, and I 
usually ask if they bothered to check  
if any of the current or past members of their 
board of directors either suffered from cancer,  
or lost a close family member to it. Now I 
know the answer is no, they haven’t checked,  
but if they look a bit abashed at the oversight, 
it tells me they recognize that these folks  
are humans too, whereas otherwise it's just 
a shadow conspiracy of stereotype characters,  
which helps me figure out how I need to discuss 
that with them. It’s like with the Moon Hoax,  
to most believers, it's a lie based 
on a small group of shadowy folks,  
to me, it’s an unbelievably large conspiracy 
involving many of my actual mentors who worked  
on the project, and would have to have known.
Regardless, we can hypothesize a group of  
folks – or an alien civilization – that 
really are that cold, willing to hide a  
cure for cancer for profit. That they would turn 
a blind-eye to not only their fellow citizens,  
but their own families, and possibly even die 
for the cause, which is hardly a worthy cause to  
inspire sacrifice: Giant personal profits or for 
your company. Of course an alien might not feel  
the same, like the Ferengi from Star Trek, and 
the cancer example is obviously fairly extreme.  
Alien is alien, their motives might 
be weird for personal sacrifice  
by our standards. Now they might think it is 
ethical in conjunction with something else too. 
It could be that the cure for cancer is the 
automatic path for extreme life extension  
and they think that would result in an inevitable 
overpopulation and brutal Malthusian Catastrophe.  
In which case, yes it is very plausible you could 
run a conspiracy of folks who believed it was a  
hard but necessary choice which changes a lot 
of the dynamics on things like self-sacrifice. 
However, if we’re assuming the usual evil 
old dudes, smoking cigars and sipping wine  
made from the tears of orphans, then they know 
if they ever get found out, they are screwed.  
They might literally be ripped to shreds by a 
mob and their families too, or forced into exile,  
and all it will take is one credible 
accusation made with evidence.  
Evidence anyone of them on that board, or a senior 
minion, or one of the scientists who worked on it,  
can offer to folks. Someone is going to pose 
this to them, “Hey we found a cure for cancer,  
this will make us outrageously rich and folks 
will build monuments to our names as benefactors,  
or we could keep this secret, make money 
another way, and hope none of our competitors  
come up with it, or none of the scientists 
rats us out, or our staff, or each other.” 
And they are going to look around at their shady 
peers, their employees with their purchased  
loyalty, and ask how many milliseconds it's going 
to take for one of them to rat them all out,  
and if they can do it first. And if by some chance 
none do, how they could possibly convince their  
competitors not to develop that cure or rat them 
out too, since eliminating them as a competitor  
would surely be desirable, and they have a motive 
to assist investigations of that competitor  
and encourage accusations against them. After 
reviewing all of that, they will presumably opt  
to take the fortune and fame of curing cancer 
because the alternative is not good for them. 
Except that analogy does require that they look 
around at their peers and worry how they are  
atypical. If your whole species is of 
that attitude, there’s no fear of people  
screaming for your head. And that cancer 
case matters a lot when discussing aliens  
because a big question that is going to 
come up if you’re talking to aliens in,  
say, the 22nd century after they have come out 
of the shadows is, “Hey, while you guys were  
here meeting us and laying the groundwork for our 
future relations, why didn’t you sneak in a cure  
for cancer? I mean the 20th and 21st century were 
times of unparalleled technological development,  
even a fairly complex cure being 
discovered on seeming inspiration  
would probably not have been that suspicious.”
But a lot of covert messages to researchers via  
email of some of the building blocks to that cure 
snuck in over a few years would probably never  
have raised an eyebrow. Same for nuclear fusion or 
really cheap solar panels or batteries. For that  
matter, they wouldn’t even have to guide us toward 
the correct answer. Merely discouraging us from  
pursuing dead ends would greatly accelerate the 
discovery of these world-changing technologies. 
And that’s going to be a bit awkward because a lot 
of death and misery goes away with any of those.  
And they can’t point to the Malthusian Catastrophe 
option, that they would hurt us by helping us,  
because they presumably already solved that 
themselves. Admittedly it might be by eating  
their excess children, in which case they wouldn’t 
assume that was some solution we would be open to  
adopting. This also all assumes a desire for some 
sort of future peaceful relations, but again,  
if not, then why be covert? Habit? They’ve got 
the weapons to obliterate us, want to see us dead,  
don’t care who finds out, but still launched a 
complex conspiracy to have us kill ourselves? 
Of course they might want us gone quietly and 
not on their official scorecard. Imagine there  
was a galactic treaty that said worlds where 
multicellular life exist are quarantined,  
with access restricted to careful science and 
nothing else. Worlds that evolve intelligent  
life are entitled to ask for and receive a 
sphere of territory around them with a radius  
of 50 light years, just a few billionths of the 
galaxy, but still around a thousand star systems.  
But let’s say your ultra hive has plans for 
that territory - plans which you could legally  
implement if only those pesky humans were to kill 
themselves off. Or maybe be killed off by one of  
your neighbors, who might look bad for doing it.
Now introducing technology to humanity might be  
a good way to achieve that, techs humans don’t 
really have a great grasp on but think they do,  
and thus blow themselves up. Risky process 
though, since we only suspect such scenarios  
from the countless claims of sightings, 
and we talk about those on broadcasts  
other aliens probably have gotten or will. 
Amusingly that might mean broadcasting conspiracy  
theories on TV and radio out into the galaxy 
might serve as some sort of galactic insurance. 
Now they might not care if everyone knows they did 
it, so long as they’ve got official cover, like  
some mob boss who is happy if everyone knows he 
had someone whacked, so long as nobody can prove  
it in court. Indeed it might be that most of the 
folks in the galaxy hate this old rule, feel like  
it lets territory waste away for millions of years 
unused in case some monkey or slug ever figures  
out rocketry, but have to honor the letter of the 
law, so cheerfully turn a blind-eye when they can. 
Still, that would seem unlikely. From a pragmatic 
scenario though, it won’t be possible to avoid  
suspicion in any situation in which you are a 
benefactor and there is some cause to think the  
target species was not naturally killed. A great 
big asteroid like a dino-killer carefully pushed  
their way, is plausible, but there’s good 
odds that wouldn’t wipe out our civilization  
beyond repair and the bigger the asteroid, 
the better the odds it would kill us all,  
but the worse the odds it would occur naturally. 
It would get pretty suspicious if one of those  
asteroids, the kinds that are maybe once in a 
hundred million years, hit a technologically  
developing planet. It is possible, but not super 
plausible and is likely to cause investigation. 
Same for some disease, one that wipes 
out everyone just isn’t very plausible.  
And if they get a sample of that virus and it's 
obviously engineered, not a fluke mutation,  
that’s going to raise suspicions, as would our 
scientists screaming about how unnatural it was  
on TV broadcasts. The more natural the look, the 
less suspicion, but the harder it is to make it  
fully lethal and keep it plausible. And the 
last thing you would want in a case like that  
was a belief among the victims that you did it 
and survivors who can press the case legally,  
diplomatically, or militarily down the road. 
Plausible deniability helps too, in the sense  
that a country can point at its own spooks and say 
“Hey, we never gave them permission to do this”  
and this won’t sway a lot of folks but it will 
often sway other leaders because they know how  
often underlings do decide to exercise initiative 
when you really wish they hadn’t, and in ways you  
really wish they hadn’t. As Henry the Second might 
have found out when he said about Thomas Beckett,  
“Will no one Rid me of this Turbulent Priest?”
They might be willing to fall on their swords,  
and they genuinely might have done it without even 
trying to get a wink and nod from you in advance.  
And even if that brings down the leadership, 
the accused civilization itself is unlikely to  
be decimated by that. Though judgement of an alien 
court might be something like actual decimation,  
this killing of a tenth of 
a population in punishment.  
Some other civilizations might expect literal 
blood and pounds of flesh from the actual citizens  
of a civilization for whatever their leaders 
or their leader’s minions did, with or without  
their consent. We really don’t know how alien 
minds will view such matters, “You let them be  
in charge, you’re just as guilty” might be their 
attitude toward elected rulers or even despots. 
Which all comes to the notion that while I still 
think covert-ops, on this planet, by aliens,  
is not what we’re seeing, it isn’t hard to imagine 
them doing some. That is easy enough, if you want  
some anthropology done, you might send in covert 
agents to do that. If you want to steer them away  
from some really bad technological path or toward 
a good one, clandestine ops isn’t a bad approach.  
If you see a blockbuster film under development 
that has evil aliens that closely resemble you,  
by coincidence or by the possible covert ops 
of your unfriendly neighbors, then you could  
pop in and soften the image or switch it.
The key thing there is, if you’re caught,  
you can make a pretty good case about 
why a big escalation isn’t called for.  
“We wanted to get to know you for both our best 
interests, but quietly” is a decent argument to  
offer, so is “we didn’t want you to blow up your 
planet” or “we didn’t think it fair you hate us  
because of a movie, we just happen to physically 
resemble the xenomorphs from aliens franchise  
but we’re actually lithovores, we eat rocks not 
lifeforms, let alone people. We didn’t want you  
to run for the hills when you saw us.” And there 
might be real consequences of that, hard feelings  
and accusations of a lack of respect and so on, 
but it wouldn’t seem likely to result in some  
thousand-year genocidal war or such. And since you 
have collected that detailed anthropological data,  
you are better able to predict what sort of 
things they would find atypically offensive. 
As an example, a hive species probably doesn’t 
care much about you abducting some of its workers  
for even lethal probing, especially a full-on 
hive mind which would view abductions like we  
might view a skin scraping for analysis. This is 
specifically a notion played with in the classic  
Ender’s Game novel series, where a hive mind 
encounters humans and rather casually kills them,  
not because they don’t respect intelligent 
life, but because they didn’t think they were  
killing the actual intelligence, anymore 
than drawing a blood sample kills ours.  
Interesting point there too, because a lot of us 
would view that as a major violation while others  
might be surprised it was considered so, and 
similar notions apply to many areas of privacy or  
harm, with aliens likely to have very different 
views of what should be considered private. 
This of course is a very good reason why 
you should be getting detailed observations  
as unobtrusively as you can, implying a 
covert op, but at the same time, that might  
be implying eliminating witnesses. Leave no eyes 
to see, ears to hear, or mouths to tell tales. 
Of course that would tend to imply they suck 
at their job since we seem to have thousands  
of sightings and first-hand eyewitness accounts 
of them doing things. Now that could all be some  
false flag operation, set up a whole lot of 
implausible sightings to cover-over your real  
activities. As an example, if my goal was to 
sneak some agents into the corporate boards  
of some companies in order to facilitate 
corporate takeovers in a century or two,  
then a whole bunch of fake sightings of folks 
who don’t even look like us sets up a pretty  
big cloud of doubt for later. Then maybe a few 
more sightings of aliens who did look like us  
but were obviously doing benevolently-tilted 
anthropology, makes for a very good cover.  
A couple centuries down the road, they quietly own 
some controlling shares in some big companies and  
lobbying firms, part open, part concealed.
They have used their knowledge of how space  
colonization would occur and could be 
done better, to really push that effort  
in a profitable direction and one that 
makes them seem like very generous  
and knowledgeable business partners. They’ve been 
the consultants who got fabulously wealthy giving  
people good advice that worked and they can just 
outright admit it, complete with documentation,  
that they did have folks here observing and 
learning about us, that they handily used  
our growing awareness of space and many 
false sightings to cover those missions,  
and even if a few of the corporate infiltrations 
get revealed they can shrug and say they were  
being thorough and investigating and also checking 
for a way to sneak a few critical technologies to  
us, or prevent a couple greedy corporate 
boards from taking us down ruinous paths.  
Same for governments.
The best cover is a believable one,  
and it helps if it’s a true one, and if some past 
incident comes-to-light several centuries down the  
road, you can get away with saying a few folks 
exceeded their mandate and you covered it over  
to avoid an interstellar incident or that’s 
not what your records say, no one is alive  
from back then anyway, and you’re not claiming 
to be angels but you resent the implication. 
Though that’s another point against it. It’s 
usually assumed secrets eventually get out,  
but a century or two later, the perpetrators and 
victims are dead and the records of specifics are  
pretty vague and debatable, so best let 
sleeping dogs lie. That’s a lot trickier  
in a civilization where everyone might be 
quasi-immortal cyborgs with perfect recall.  
That’s also a difficult environment 
to pull off clandestine operations.  
It’s a bit of a cynical thought but I tend to 
think one of the big reasons you see stronger  
and more successful pushes for transparency in 
government is that it really is a lot harder to  
hide skullduggery and the forecasts make that 
even less favorable a decade down the road. 
On the other hand, the ease of recording and the 
vast data engines, able to look for tiny clues  
in vast data sets, probably can be used to help 
hide clues too, and bury them under huge amounts  
of data like people’s facebook posts. See our 
episode, Criminal AI, for more discussion of that.  
So too, the speed of light introduces time scales 
and limitations that might make clandestine  
actions easier to hide or getaway with. Consider, 
someone’s fleet is going to need centuries to get  
to your territory to get some revenge and that's 
a long time to let cooler heads prevail and make  
excuses or remuneration for past incidents. So 
too, the distances involved for communication mean  
everybody has teams out in the field with lots 
of room for decision making and judgment calls,  
and presumably sometimes those are bad ones.
If you catch some black bag operation going  
on in one of your colonies that took you fifty 
years to find out about, another fifty to demand  
a detailed investigation of, fifty more to 
report back that investigation's findings,  
and then two more centuries for your 
ambassador to get the documentation  
and go over to see their leader and complain, 
then its been 350 years since it got caught,  
and at least another 150 since they presumably 
ordered it. That’s half a millennia, literally  
how long ago Henry VIII was king in England, and 
it might be akin then to Spain delivering a note  
to the current monarch of England complaining 
about catching a smear operation directed against  
Queen Catherine, or even to the president or 
prime minister of one the British colonies like  
the US or Canada or Australia. Even if they are 
really long-lived, it seems unlikely the ruling  
persons would be the same and the culture and 
internal political and legal landscape would  
be close enough that your Ambassador could 
deliver that complaint without their leader  
giving you a raised eyebrow and a shrug.
Of course, the same reasoning applies to  
dispatching agents on secret missions. We 
can contemplate FTL travel or communication,  
in which case then, we might expect a lot of back 
and forth of agents and missions, but without that  
there’s just too much lag time. Why steal military 
secrets of new technology that will take centuries  
for it to reach you, when you can wait for the 
patent to expire in a couple decades and get it  
all for free and with the bugs worked out. And 
it might take you a millenia to get a fleet out  
there to demand compensation or retribution 
for the theft and injury done during it.  
Your own fleet is still going to get it before 
theirs would ever arrive carrying it. Even if  
they were doing upgrades en route, there’s a 
pretty big burden on trying to renovate a fleet  
at relativistic speeds while moving toward 
some system that has wads of raw materials  
and industry. Your 20-year tech advantage 
probably won’t make up for them outnumbering  
your fleet a million to one when you arrive.
So it is not that stealing military secrets  
wouldn’t be desirable, I’m just dubious as to 
why you would risk sending in agents to uncover  
something when you could instead invest 
in discovering it yourself in less time.  
Generally speaking, once a technology is known 
to exist, it gets a lot easier for others to  
figure out how it works, and if it is not known 
to exist, you presumably don’t know to steal it.  
Authorizing fishing expeditions to infiltrate 
another world just to see if they’ve got something  
cool and secret doesn’t seem like a great plan 
given that if it is useful, you are likely to see  
overt use of it eventually and probably before 
your own team arrives to look for it. Truth be  
told, I would bet most peacetime intelligence 
gathering would be done, as often it is now,  
right out of the embassy and probably by hiring 
natives to do most of it. Loyalty for loyalty’s  
sake, to a rival government power, is not likely 
to be inspired by a concern of betraying them to  
some distant alien menace a millenia away with 
a friendly ambassador who has a big checkbook. 
Of course, there’s no embassy on Earth… 
except there might be. One common feature  
of a lot of alien conspiracy theories is 
our government is in cahoots with them,  
one specifically or all of them, and if that 
was the case we might assume the aliens have  
some agreed on deal with them and might be running 
a side hustle the governments didn’t know about.  
They obviously wouldn’t need to abduct humans with 
flying saucers when those governments could easily  
provide test subjects, for instance, especially 
if they are saying it's to help with a plague or  
cancer or such. The thing is, the best sorts of 
plans of this kind are the ones where it doesn’t  
matter if they get found out down the road.
As an example, if the goal is to get enough  
genetic and logistical data to release a doomsday 
super-plague that looks like it was engineered  
by some terrestrial group, terrorists or what 
have you, then it really wouldn’t matter once  
it was released if they suspected you, because 
accusations will be flying around left and right  
at everyone while humanity was dying off and you 
would presumably have centuries to cover over  
your tracks and just shrug and say “Hey, We were 
there working with their government and constantly  
warning them about the dangers civilizations faced 
with advanced technology, one of those dangers  
became real and of course the high-tech foreigners 
they secretly worked with got blamed by many.” 
On the other hand, a lot of the suggested 
conspiracies don’t have that option.  
Half-human-half-alien hybrids is a popular one in 
science fiction as a way to take over the Earth,  
but first, it’s pretty overt once it starts 
occurring. We’re gonna notice all the freaks and  
we check people’s DNA all the time now. Second, 
its assuming the aliens are both really fixated  
on their DNA, or their alien DNA equivalent, 
being what gets spread around the galaxy  
but also aren’t real purists about it, since it's 
akin to us colonizing a world full squid-people  
by making half-human half-squid freaks. If 
you're genetic purists, I’m guessing any  
alien DNA is too much, and if you’re not, 
then you probably spread your civilization  
more in an ideological sense, in which case 
you’re converting people to your way of life  
and consider that sufficient and honestly, 
folks don’t usually keep that secret. 
They might, I suppose, if you’re a missionary, 
you don’t have to announce that to everyone,  
and I could certainly see it if you were busy 
trying to get folks to bow down in praise  
of Cthulhu or Nyarlathotep. Those very-alien 
aliens are also a good reminder that a lot of  
human behavior and morality is biology based, we 
don’t eat our babies or feces, plenty of animals  
native to Earth do one or both, and life not even 
from Earth might be pretty casual about either. 
One thing we can’t ignore though, is that if 
a species or alien empire has reason to have  
interactions with their neighbors, then that 
does include reason to have covert ones too.  
For all that I have difficulty imagining they 
would try for long term covert interactions only,  
as our current situation on Earth would imply; 
if sightings are accurate, it doesn’t change  
that if they have open relations, they 
would want to have some covert ones too. 
Are there aliens covertly here on Earth 
now? Possibly, but I don’t think so.  
I’d not be surprised if they began quietly, but 
after some basic intel gathering, and probably  
mostly by robot drones that looked like native 
animals or oak trees or pollen grains, I think  
they’d begin open relations. Of course, that 
doesn’t mean they would end the covert ones and  
when you think about it, it wouldn’t really seem 
smart to close down and yank all your operations.  
So one thing seems sure, whether or not there 
are aliens here secretly now, if they ever  
appeared here openly, odds are, it wouldn’t 
be long before they were here covertly too.
Needless to say there are an awful lot of 
scifi novels and films on alien invasions  
but a bit less on long term covert operations 
though it was a more common theme in a lot of  
classic science fiction, especially ancient 
aliens descending on us to slowly tweak our  
genes or sneak in guardians or influencers. We see 
that in a lot of comic book heroes as a reason for  
their power or what their job was, like the 
Eternals or Inhumans or a bunch of others.  
Probably the most influential work on it though 
is E.E. Doc Smith’s legendary Lensmen series,  
which features an ancient and fairly benevolent 
alien race that’s been tinkering with humanity to  
produce mighty heroes who can eventually take over 
the job of guarding the galaxy for them. Lensmen  
was the runner-up to Isaac Asimov’s Foundation 
for best science fictions series of all time  
back when it won that title in 1966 and if you’ve 
never read it before but are a big fan of scifi  
you’ll be surprised how many familiar ideas there 
are in Doc Smith’s novels that he popularized.  
For instance, he’s the first to write about a 
multi-species cooperative government, something  
we’re doing an episode on next month, and is 
usually considered the father of Space Opera. 
So he’s long overdue to win our Audible 
Audiobook of the Month, six years after we  
first awarded it to Isaac Asimov, and if you’re 
looking for some binge-worthy classic scifi,  
Audible’s got the whole series, starting with 
Triplanetary, which chronicles a battle for Earth,  
and the Galaxy, between two ancient alien 
races fighting from Ancient Atlantis to  
a distant future. Audible also has all of 
E.E. Doc Smith’s other novels along with a  
fantastic catalog from classic science fiction 
to newest best sellers and Audible Originals. 
Now Audible is the place to go for 
audiobooks but it has a lot more to offer,  
including many excellent podcasts, such 
as Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur.  
That’s right, our show is available on Audible 
now and that includes the Narration-Only version  
for folks who prefer to skip on the music 
we blend into the episodes, which seems  
popular for folks who like to drift off to sleep 
listening to me, though the Audible Plus Catalog  
also has sleep & meditation tracks available, 
as well as guided fitness programs for helping  
keep those new year’s resolutions, and Audible 
Original’s like Impact Winter, from the folks who  
brought you Pacific Rim and the Walking Dead.
Audible has got literally centuries worth  
of content for you to pick from to keep you 
entertained while commuting or working out,  
including about 500 hours of this show now, and 
the whole Audible Plus Catalog full of free books  
and other content, comes as a bonus when you 
join Audible, in addition to your usual 1 free  
audiobook each month and big member discounts on 
additional ones, and as always, new members can  
try Audible for free for the first month, just go 
to Audible.com/isaac, or text isaac to 500-500. 
So I mentioned that E.E. Doc Smith’s Lensmen 
series, our Audiobook of the Month, was the first  
big work with a multispecies cooperative empire 
in it, and next month we’ll return again to the  
alien civilization series to examine the notion 
of Multi-Species Empires on Sunday, April 10th. 
We’ve got plenty of shows before then though, 
starting next week where we’ll jump forward  
to the distant future and look at a time when the 
Moon has become an enormous Mega City. Then we’ll  
finish out March with our Livestream Q&A followed 
by a look at Programmable and Smart Matter.  
Then we’ll open up April with a look at the 
concept of Self-Growing Space Habitats and Bases. 
Now if you want alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to the  
Channel and hit the notifications bell, and if you 
enjoyed this episode, please hit the like button,  
share it with others, and leave a comment below. 
You can also join in the conversation on any  
of our social media forums, find our audio-only 
versions of the show, or donate to support future  
episodes, and all those options and more are 
listed in the links in the episode description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
