It seems like just yesterday we were celebrating
hitting 10,000 subscribers, today we’ve
reached 100,000 and there’s plenty of room
to go.
So today is a special episode celebrating
the 100,000th subscriber to the channel and
I have no idea what day this will air, though
it’s Memorial Day as I write this.
It’s customary to make a special 100k episode
on Youtube because it’s a more than symbolic
benchmark.
Typically after you get past 10,000 subscribers
Youtube formally contacts you to offer some
advice and options, you’re on their radar
in a formal sense, but at 100,000 you get
the Silver Creator play button award as a
thanks from them, and I gather they give you
a gift card too.
I’d considered celebrating 100,000 subscribers
with a video discussing the year 100,000 AD,
but the custom is to thank the viewers and
talk a bit about your channel and yourself,
so we’ll save that for another day.
I’m not a big one on biography but I’ll
do a little of that today, and of course while
I do want to thank my viewers, and the patrons
who fund this channel, I also wanted to thank
a few other channels who’ve helped me learn
the ropes and a lot of the artists and musicians
whose work seriously enhances the quality
of these episodes compared to the early days.
Those early days and the channel’s origins
are a bit peculiar.
Mostly because I never meant there to be one.
Some folks who have noticed that I started
labeling videos this year by season and episode
order, 2017 being season 3, making 2015 season
1, might note that the oldest episode is actually
from 2014 and the channel has existed since
2012.
For official purposes I consider that episode
the ‘pilot’ or episode 0, but the handful
of subscribers from the very beginning might
remember I used to have other videos up there.
That’s because I just had a regular old
account I used sometimes to upload home videos
or presentations to for storage.
At one point I wanted to try Powerpoint’s
built in tool for letting you record narrations
and export a slideshow as a video, as an experiment
for some other projects I was doing.
I was a member of scifi worldbuilding group
at the time, an author friend of mine suggested
it to me as a fun place to bounce ideas around.
I have a notorious dislike for scifi’s habit
of always setting everything on planets and
often advocated more space stations and megastructures
as settings, so I decided to do my practice
run on that topic and upload it to youtube
to post it to that group.
I could just link it instead of re-typing
my arguments.
Some months later I did the same thing for
another group I was involved in on the Fermi
Paradox.
Thus was the channel born.
Well not quite, it was some months before
I deleted older home videos and almost a year
before I decided to do regular episodes, and
just over a year ago that I switched over
to the regular weekly schedule.
This though is one of the reasons why the
episodes are visual imagery with me talking
over them.
The second reason being that my favorite online
show, SF Debris hosted by Chuck Sonnenburg,
is him reviewing scifi films and shows with
just clips of the shows he talks over top
of.
I liked this format as I’d found a lot of
the other review shows a bit distracting with
the host showing up on screen and often doing
skits, which wasn’t my cup of tea.
The third reason is that I started rendering
the episodes in 1080p HD, and my webcam is
lower resolution than that, just one I use
for playing Dungeons and Dragons with some
friends in another state.
In fact I developed most of my video production
skills doing fun little videos for that gaming
group.
Reason 4 is that shooting video at decent
quality takes a lot of skill and a lot of
takes, and even just recording the audio for
these can take a couple hours.
If you visit some of sibling channels where
they do a live presenter in front of camera
for 5-20 minutes, take my word for it, there’s
was a lot more setup time and recording time
than 5-20 minutes.
I was little surprised some folks thought
I was a recluse, same as folks often figure
I use a pseudonym for the channel.
Originally there were a bunch of home videos
with me in them and my pictures been in several
episodes starting from the second one.
I’ve even filmed a short channel update
video for the Facebook Group, Science and
Futurism with Isaac Arthur, of me just talking
into the aforementioned webcam.
I don’t use photos of me on the channel
much either, the one most probably know is
a photoshop of the command and control center
I use for episodes set on the spaceship unity,
from the life in a space colony trilogy.
That’s actually quite old, from 2006, but
was the only picture of me in uniform sitting
down that I could find.
It’s from my tent in Tel Afar Iraq, which
was my home and workshop for the first half
of the 14 months I spent in Iraq.
We used to play a fair amount of D&D down
there in our tiny amounts of free time too,
it doesn’t require electricity which is
handy, and I actually still play with one
of my brethren from then, my best friend,
who runs the group in another state I mentioned.
He’s also one of my sounding boards for
the channel, I’ve been bouncing these ideas
off him for well over a decade.
I’ve mentioned it on the channel a time
or too but I served with the US Army from
2003 to 2010.
I’d been intending to go back to college
and finish my doctorate afterwards but I lost
my taste for academia by then.
Actually I lost it maybe a year into grad
school but I figured it might come back after
I went and saw more of the world.
I love my field, and I do enjoy teaching,
but only to crowds who are interested, and
the idea of spending my life on a campus just
lost its appeal.
You have to love what you’re doing or you
generally won’t do it well, and while it’s
a good idea to press on into the storm for
a while to see if things change, if they don’t
its best to make changes.
That was a big change for me because becoming
a scientist had been something I was set on
since I was a little kid.
My parents were both physics majors when they
met and got married, probably not too surprising
since my full name is Isaac Albert Arthur,
though I am also named after Isaac Asimov
and my family always has an Alan or Chester
in the name somewhere, so the ‘Al’ in
Albert did double duty I suppose.
Most of the men in my family have been in
the military too, so that wasn’t surprising
either.
I count both as very positive experiences
overall and had and have many good friends
and mentors from both of those periods of
my life.
Anyway I was raised by mother and my Grandfather,
Alan Arthur, both of whom were geeks, as is
my older sister, so it’s no surprise I had
a big interest in science and science fiction.
I started school young, left it in favor of
homeschooling at 10, skipped a couple grades,
tried high school briefly and dropped out
when I was 12.
And yes I am a genuine high school dropout
complete with GED, I basically stayed home
by myself and read all day till I was 16.
When I did finally get to college I had some
excellent professors, and also found out how
handy study groups were.
Fundamentally all learning is self-taught,
especially when you get past the basics, but
it does help to have mentors and companions
for that journey.
If you’re curious I graduated with a bachelor’s
in Physics from Kent State University in 2001,
when I was 20.
I was top of my class so I got offered a generous
teaching and research stipend to stick around
for grad school which I did for a few years,
studying under Theorist Mike Lee.
I was originally planning to go into Nuclear
and Particle Physics, indeed my college ring,
the only bit of jewelry I ever wear besides
my dogtags, has a big Bohr-style atom on it
with that in mind, as the jeweler didn’t
have a mushroom cloud available.
But I ended up studying Biophysics, with a
focus on Mitochondria and molecular motors.
Probably a mistake as I absolutely hated it,
but the genome project was just wrapping up
then and my advisor and I both thought it
sounded interesting.
Indeed it is, but it wasn’t my sup of tea.
In any event one day I called up a recruiter
and a week later I was a Fort Sill in Oklahoma,
and a few months later I was stationed to
Giessen, Germany, just a little ways north
of Frankfurt.
Giessen is a beautiful town and I highly recommend
it should you be in the area, though Ohio
is and always has been the place I call home
and there’s no place I’d rather be.
After the military I went home to Ohio and
after twiddling my thumbs for a bit I went
into local governance and politics, I do a
lot analysis and advising.
Though my official position is Board Member
on the Board of Elections, by appointment
of the Secretary of State, and I’m in my
second term of office.
I consider it quite an honor too, I received
unanimous bipartisan approval for my reappointment
and am to the best of my knowledge the youngest
to hold the office in the state.
I’m also firmly committed to keeping the
channel apolitical, and I find war stories
to be morbid affairs at best, so I typically
avoid mentioning either on the channel.
I’d probably have bypassed it entirely if
it weren’t Memorial Day, which puts absent
friends to mind.
If that’s your cup of tea, my first sergeant
published his memoirs after he retired last
year, and I show up in there a few times.
It’s fairly graphic and violent as you might
expect from someone who served in ground combat
in every US conflict since Grenada, but it’s
not gratuitous, and there is no person on
this planet I respect more than him, which
says a lot since I’ve had no shortage of
admirable people in my life and many of them
from that unit.
Those were exciting times but I have, thankfully,
led a pretty boring life in recent years.
I also can’t remember ever being happier
in life, and this channel is a big part of
that.
What else is there?
We do talk scifi on the channel a lot and
folks do ask who my favorite writers are or
for reading recommendations, but I once decided
to test Facebook’s reading recommendation
ability by pumping in several hundred novels
I’ve read and rating them 1-5 stars, and
my facebook page is public, so I just send
curious folks there.
It’s not complete and I don’t update it
much, but it lists a ton of them and films
and shows too.
These days I listen to audiobooks more than
read, my favorite narrator is John Lee.
My favorite musician incidentally is Sting,
which I will use to segue back to discussing
the channel.
I use a lot of graphics and music from Public
Domain and Creative Commons sources, NASA
is unsurprisingly one of those but Pixabay
is another, and I did want to thank every
artist who contributes their work there for
others to use, and the same for the Free Music
Archive.
These days I use a lot of graphics and music
contributed to the channel by their artists
and composers, but I wanted to give a shout
out to the folks who donate their work for
general use by all.
It really is amazing getting to work directly
with those artists and musicians these days
though and I hope you will check out their
other work, and for the music get to listen
to them at full volume for a change.
I do always include every song used in an
episode in chronological order in the credits
at the end, something which a lot of folks
miss.
“Who did that song?” is probably the second
most commonly asked question on the channel,
right after “What is that accent?”
And yeah I do tend to find my speech impediment
amusing, if you can’t laugh at yourself
life will get pretty boring pretty quick.
Anyway I get complimented on it more often
than the reverse, I don’t think I ever got
insulted about it till the channel, and this
is the internet after all so a thick skin
is a necessity.
It gets brought up a lot in older videos because
I didn’t want folks distracted wondering
about it while watching the material, these
day I just use the Elmer Fudd Grpahic.
Speaking of Graphics, I wanted to thank Jakub
Grygier who started doing the cover art, the
thumbnails, for the channel about a year ago.
For the longest time it was just him and me
working on the channel, and Luis handling
the website, with occasional help from some
others.
A couple months ago I also put out the call
for volunteers to help with the graphics and
script editing, and we’re always looking
for more volunteers helping on the graphics.
It’s been wonderful having folks helping
out with that, and they do get named in the
credits at the end of episodes.
But all the mods and admins from the facebook
group, the reddit group, or the youtube comments
section do not, all of whom volunteer tons
of time to managing those.
It also doesn’t include all the folks who
have translated the subtitles for this channel
into other languages.
So I wanted to take a moment to thank all
of them too.
I also to want to thank a few of the channels
who have provided me a lot help and advice
this last year.
Joe Scott from Answers with Joe, who got into
the game around the same time I did and who
I did my first collaboration episode with.
Fraser Cain of Universe Today, whose publication
I’ve been reading for a long time and who
is my main source for astronomy updates over
the years along with Paul Gilster of Centuari
Dreams.
And last but hardly least, Cody don Reeder
of Cody’s Lab, who gave me a lot of great
advice on running a channel, which is not
surprising for someone who has over a million
subscribers.
He’s also recommended my channel to his
audience more than once and that’s quite
an honor.
He mentioned at the time someone doing that
for him once and believing in paying it forward,
and I try to espouse the same attitude when
contacted by other channels just getting started.
Though I think if I had to give one single
piece of advice to aspiring creators, it would
be always to respect your audience.
Don’t ever dumb your material down or hype
it up.
No video should be needlessly long, and every
artist has to find their right style, for
some that is short and intense, but don’t
feel constrained to the common wisdom that
you need to go short and simple.
As this channel proves, there is a big niche
for in-depth discussion of concepts.
I know everyone says their audience is the
best, and I suspect most sincerely believe
that too, I know I do and it’s probably
a point against me that I tend to be terribly
smug about my audience.
It ranges from folks with no formal education
to professors, but they, you, all seem to
share that passion for knowledge that makes
discussing these topics so rewarding.
I remember teaching, and have a lot friends
who do it for a living, so I know how draining
it can be trying to stoke the fires of curiosity
in a class, but I won’t deny that it’s
a bit thrilling to go out every Thursday morning
and share these topics with a crowd who already
enjoys it and is also big enough to fill a
stadium.
Pretty intimidating at times too, though I’d
still recommend giving it a try to anyone
with some expertise on a topic who wants to
share that with others.
It’s a fascinating emerging industry, only
time will tell how well it will prosper and
change, but it’s neat to be involved in.
It wouldn’t be possible without places like
Youtube providing a forum and Patreon allowing
a safe and easy way for folks to crowd-source
these things.
I mostly eschew ads on the channel, there
are some features only available to creators
on Youtube who monetize their videos so I
do some and it does bring in some revenue,
but funding for the channel mostly comes through
Patreon and my patrons there.
There are over 400 of them these days, and
many of them value their privacy, so I won’t
display all of them now, but beyond my own
personal gratitude for their generosity I
think they deserve a round of applause for
helping to keep this channel going, and while
I hope some of you will join their number,
I’d also encourage you to donate to other
channels you like and places like the Free
Music Archive and Pixabay and the various
artists, composers, and creators who donate
their time and labors for others to use.
I’m not one for knocking the big networks
and studios, but I think we benefit a lot
from independent small groups and individuals
getting involved in these enterprises and
this simple donation and crowd-sourcing method
that’s been emerging makes that much easier.
It’s really an amazing aspect of the world
we live in today that such resources are available.
Folks occasionally challenge my general optimism
about the future and point to bleaker aspects
of human nature as examples, stuff like that
is just one of many examples I keep in mind
that keeps me upbeat about humanity.
We are race of thinkers and dreamers, hopers
and builders, and I never need to look further
than the comments section on my channel for
a reminder of that.
I think on that note we’ll close out for
today.
It’s been a long march to 100,000 subscribers,
and will be a longer one to a million if we
ever get there, but even if I never get another
subscriber I will count myself lucky for this
experience and am grateful to all of you for
tuning in every week.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
great week!
