Black Holes can swallow anything, 
even light, and small black holes  
made from light itself may offer us abundant 
clean energy and a pathway to the stars. 
Black holes are enormously massive and 
dense objects, birthed in the wake of  
dying stars many times more massive than our 
own, but that may not be the only way to create  
them. One option proposed is to create Kugelblitz 
black holes, and while this originally referred  
to the suggested process for making them, it 
has also come to mean a class of micro-black  
hole smaller than an atomic nucleus that 
could be used for powering spaceships or  
even civilizations. While there are many ways a 
black hole might be used for power generation,  
these very small ones offer the easiest and 
most portable version, Hawking Radiation. 
Today we’ll be looking at the Kugelblitz Black 
hole generation method, some variants on it,  
how that would function, how Hawking 
Radiation works, what the scale of  
power generation and mass and lifetime would 
be for these black holes, and many potential  
applications, advantages, and limitations.
If that sounds like fun, grab a drink and a snack,  
before a black hole snatches it from you, relax, 
and please hit those like and subscribe buttons. 
Now Kugelblitz is the German word for ball 
lightning and it is a pretty good pick for  
the concept. As everyone knows, black holes are 
intensely massive objects and mass generates  
gravity. But in reality mass is just one type 
of energy and other types of energy generate  
gravity. An object that is incredibly hot has 
actually increased its gravitational pull over  
that same object if it were cold, and so 
too, an object spinning very quickly has a  
lot of rotational energy and that adds gravity.
Indeed, most black holes have as much as 20% of  
their energy in rotational format. They are also 
incredibly hot. But even photons generate gravity.  
Photons, the particles of light emitted by stars 
and which cannot escape from a black hole’s event  
horizon, can be added to a black hole and their 
energy would add to its apparent total mass. 
In this same way, if we could manage to get a 
whole bunch of photons in the same time and place,  
at a high enough density, we could have enough 
energy there to generate an event horizon big  
enough to encompass them. And there is 
no known bottom limit for a black hole,  
though we’ll discuss some possible limits later. 
For any given amount of mass or energy there is  
a density it can be that if you crammed it down 
would form a black hole. The radius of black event  
horizon rises linearly with its mass or energy, 
but volume rises with the cube of radius so that  
required density ends up inversely proportional 
to the mass. Something ten times more massive  
only needs to be at one hundredth the density 
to form a black hole, something a million times  
more massive only needs a trillionth of density.
As a result, you can make a black hole just by  
piling a lot of matter together that won’t fuse, 
but we’re still talking masses larger than our sun  
even if we’re piling up iron in one big ball. Even 
the big monster at the core of the galaxy composed  
of several million sun’s worth of matter is still 
denser than steel by a couple orders of magnitude,  
though there are some black holes that are less 
dense than thin air in the Universe at large. 
Trying to make one this way would seem 
a bad approach, especially since we can  
move a naturally occurring black hole, they’re 
actually amazingly efficient spaceship drives,  
though so massive it wouldn’t generally 
be worth moving in favor of moving to. 
So instead we contemplate trying to 
make one much smaller than a star,  
and that’s where we get into problems. Normally 
a supernova occurs in the upper core of a star,  
blowing most of the matter there into space and 
imploding all the inner core, now made of iron,  
into a very tiny ball. So dense that it can’t 
even be iron anymore, or any atom, but instead  
has to be degenerate matter. Indeed it has to be 
a little denser than even a neutron star, which  
is around ten trillion times denser than steel.
Normal matter doesn’t like being shoved together  
that tight, by which I mean fermions, which is 
the class of particles that includes protons,  
neutrons, electrons, and everything made from 
them, and are also named after physicist Enrico  
Fermi, from where we get the term Fermi Paradox. 
Lots of things are fermions and indeed it even  
includes neutrinos and they barely interact with 
anything. Untold number of neutrinos hit Earth  
every instant, in fact about 100 trillion hit 
you every second, and yet only a handful would  
actually interact with any atoms while passing 
through you or this planet. In the super-dense  
hearts of dying stars is one of the few places 
things are dense enough that they tend to get  
absorbed. Which is how we get many heavy elements.
Stick enough neutrinos in one place and you’ve got  
a black hole, same for something else 
weakly interacting like dark matter,  
which may or may not be a fermion itself. 
Neither is very easy to handle though,  
so we imagine a different option, bosons.
Bosons are a different category of particle and  
include photons of light, gluons, higgs bosons, 
and even some particles made of a pair of quarks,  
instead of the three quarks protons and neutrons 
are made from. What’s particularly interesting  
about bosons is that they don’t mind being in 
the same place as each other. You can stack  
them up. Indeed when we talk about wavelength of 
light, you can think of that as the actual size  
of a photon of light, and counterintuitively 
the more energy a photon has the smaller its  
wavelength. So gamma rays are basically on 
the order of atomic nuclei while X-rays are  
more at the atomic and visible light we can see, 
plus its neighbors in Ultraviolet and Infrared,  
as more on the size of molecules and cells.
Alternatively, a microwave photon is on the  
human scale and longer radio frequencies can even 
be as big as a planet, while perversely holding  
virtually no energy, and even a normal gamma 
ray photon might hold a billion-trillion times  
as much energy in something as small as an atomic 
nucleus. Indeed, if we could arbitrarily generate  
a photon of whatever energy we wanted, you could 
have one so short in wavelength and high in energy  
it would meet the qualifications to have an event 
horizon and that is a notion that gets played with  
in some quantum gravity and cosmology discussion.
We talked about that more in our episode Things  
Which Will Never Exist and generating such a 
particle isn’t something we have an apparent  
avenue to, so we’ll leave that there for today. 
But these bosons, whatever their energy and  
wavelength can all be in the same place at 
once, intersect freely and keep on moving. 
Even with bosons there are some issues with 
packing them too tight, which we’ll get to  
in a moment, but if we imagined some perfect 
sphere of a mirror that let light of a certain  
wavelength in, but not back out, just like 
a black hole does, then we could pump that  
thing with energy until its energy density 
tipped over the threshold to be a black hole. 
If we imagined we did that with a sphere half 
a micron across, able to absorb blue light,  
which has a wavelength of about half a micron, 
then all we would need to do is stuff in a lot  
of photons… 15 trillion-trillion-trillion joules 
of energy worth in fact, which is roughly 1200  
years of power production of our entire sun.
That would seem a little hard to pull off but  
something like X-rays, at a thousand times the 
energy and thousandth the wavelength of a blue  
photon, or even more, could cram into a smaller 
spot and need only a thousandth the energy to do  
it. So basically, one year of solar production.
Channel regulars have probably heard me mention  
before that even civilizations that aren’t 
interested in growing their population into  
the quadrillions might still build a Dyson swarm 
for technologies like this and we’ll come back  
to why that might be the case in a bit, but since 
we do not have any 100% perfect one way mirrors,  
the idea is to try to time a lot of laser 
blasts to arrive at the same place and time  
very accurately so that for that briefest 
moment they are a big ball of energy. Hence  
the kugelblitz or ball lightning name.
To give some scale here, since light moves  
300 million meters per second and in our blue 
light case we were contemplating something half  
a millionth of a meter wide, the time a given 
photon would be passing through there is only  
a femtosecond, a millionth of a billionth of 
a second, and the X-ray has to do even better,  
hitting a spot the size of an atom 
that it passes through in a billionth  
of a billionth of a second, or an attosecond.
Needless to say, that’s quite a small window to  
be trying to dump the entire annual output 
of the sun into and you presumably have to  
have mirror arrays able to bounce a beam of light 
around without major dissipation for a full light  
year to get that entire annual solar output in one 
spot at one instant. It’s a lot of energy too, but  
to think of it in terms of mass, that blue-light 
kugelblitz black hole has a mass equivalent to  
a fifth of Ceres, the largest asteroid and one 
so big we debate if it should be called a dwarf  
planet instead. While the mass energy of our X-ray 
example would be on an order of 200 Mount Everests  
crammed into something the size of an atom.
They are also way too big to be of use to us  
for Hawking Radiation as Big Blue isn’t 
even quite generating a single joule of  
energy in a whole year… it might be enough for 
a post-biological and post-stellar civilization  
though, see our episode black hole farming for 
details, though we’ll cover it a bit today too.  
The Atom X black hole could at least run an 
LED light bulb we could see in a dark room. 
Not a lot of power but more importantly, 
it is generating that power consistently  
for 7 billion-billion-billion 
years, and Big Blue even longer. 
Only it isn’t consistent, as it gives off power 
it loses mass and generates more power. Any black  
hole, given a long enough time period, will 
generate useful amounts of energy. Just don’t  
hold your breath, most wouldn’t do so for so long 
a time that they’d view the entire history of our  
Universe from the Big Bang to the last Star as 
less than a blink of an eye in very long life. 
We would love to create smaller black holes, 
but you really can’t do one smaller than you  
can generate a beam for or make a material you 
can reflect, and since materials are made of  
multiple atoms, and gamma rays are smaller than 
atoms, they don’t reflect well. As of the time  
of this writing, the smallest wavelength laser I’m 
aware of is 0.15 nanometers, just a little smaller  
than our X-ray example, with a power output 
of 35 milliwatts and working out to a mass of  
almost exactly 10^17 kilograms or 100 trillion 
megatons. We’ll be using megatons and kilotons  
a lot in our discussion going forward but the key 
thing here is that we can’t really make this and  
use it for useful Hawking radiation, not unless 
we want to wait a billion-billion-billion years. 
However it is a lot bigger than an atomic nucleus 
so we could start feeding it matter and faster  
than it was oozing power out. Mind you, you have 
to add the equivalent of a quarter of a billion  
neutrons or protons to this thing every second to 
add mass faster than its losing but that should be  
possible given that a line of nucleons flying at 
it at near light speed can still be spaced nearly  
a meter apart coming out of their cannon, and you 
could have multiple beams on it and add more and  
speed it up as it grew. Though with the caveat 
that even if you were feeding this at several  
hundred times its minimum feed rate you might need 
longer than the universe has been around to get  
something big enough to feed matter in as fast 
as you could want. But you could also just keep  
whatever beam you used to make it on it until 
it got big enough to force feed normal matter. 
So, I would bump this into the category of 
scientifically solid and engineering feasible,  
and it is why we spend a lot of time talking 
about micro black holes on this channel,  
and indeed did a whole episode on black hole 
technologies last month that wasn’t focused  
on hawking radiation black holes. Because a big 
but tiny black hole the size of an atom can still  
generate power by other methods as can anything 
bigger than that and much easier too. Time will  
tell if we can make and manipulate higher-energy 
beams to make even smaller black holes. 
Now what’s all this black 
hole Hawking Radiation stuff? 
In that aforementioned episode I did cover the 
virtual particle explanation in some detail,  
though we’ll go over it briefly today and we’ll 
also give a non-virtual particle explanation. The  
very confusing thing about Hawking Radiation 
for most folks is that smaller black holes  
give off much higher amounts of radiation.
As mentioned we did the virtual particle  
explanation in last month’s episode on Black Hole 
Technologies and the two paragraph summary of  
that is that the quantum foam everywhere in this 
universe is constantly spawning huge quantities of  
virtual particles in pairs that self-annihilate. 
The rate at which this happens is the same  
everywhere, near a big black hole or a small one 
or inside your finger or thumb. And the energies  
involved are staggering and mind-boggling. 
Sometimes the place they emerge though is  
where an incredible amount of force is at play 
and one that varies heavily in strength even over  
subatomic distance. This can rip those two virtual 
particles apart so they can interact with other  
particles or objects instead of annihilating.
This doesn’t happen simply by being near a big  
force field, Earth has a big gravity field but 
the difference in strength from one kilometer  
to another is pretty minor, let alone from one 
nanometer to another. It’s the sharp change in  
force that matters and so even big black holes 
don’t cause this effect much, only very small  
black holes and the smaller the better. It 
can happen with other forces incidentally,  
such as the subatomic ones acting inside existing 
nuclei, see our antimatter factories episode or  
Vacuum Energy episode for further discussion. 
These virtual particles have a total of zero  
energy in the pair, so one contains negative 
energy and over time, the black hole absorbs  
more of those negative energy particles and 
loses masses, while emitting those positive  
energy photons into the wider Universe.
That’s the virtual particle explanation  
and they are more of a calculation device than 
a real object though the word ‘real’ is pretty  
ambiguous in cosmology and particle physics these 
days. It is not correct and when folks think on it  
they start wondering why the quantum foam, which 
constantly pops out brief-lived pairs of all sorts  
of particles, seems to be producing just photons 
for Hawking Radiation and why negative energy  
photons are the ones falling in. There’s no reason 
that either should be true but Hawking used it as  
his original popular explanation for Hawking 
Radiation, so it gets reused a lot. This irritates  
a lot of physicists, but I happen to agree with 
Hawking that this is a simpler to explain and true  
enough version, which is why I often use it.
But this is a construct for explanation. Much  
as its energy, not just mass, that is warping 
spacetime, it is that actual warped spacetime  
that’s emitting the Hawking Radiation. 
The greater and more severe that warping,  
the more energy can spill out of it. So, in 
reality it is not the event horizon emitting  
the radiation, it’s that whole sharply curved 
area, it just sharpens the closer you get to  
the horizon and beyond there too, but nothing 
is emerging from inside that horizon. As this  
energy emerges from that warped spacetime region 
several times larger than the event horizon,  
the overall warping decreases, resulting in the 
mass or energy of that black hole decreasing. 
If you want another version, then you may think 
of that region very close to a black hole as being  
very hot. Think of how a metal bar heats up as 
you bend it back and forth and imagine that for  
spacetime itself in that spot, it is tortuously 
bent. This is how objects give off thermal light,  
in this case that spacetime itself 
is so bent and hot that it does,  
and again it’s only the region safely out past 
the event horizon that we can see that light from  
and it gets sharper and hotter as we approach.
If none of those worked as a good mental analogy,  
then I’ll simply say that the math demands 
that the region right near a black hole emits  
radiation, and that the sharpness of that curving 
matters way more than the size of the space being  
curved for how much radiation is emitted. So yes, 
a neutron star would also emit Hawking Radiation,  
and so would a white dwarf, or even you or I. 
But given that even a neutron star bends space  
less than a normal black hole and a normal 
stellar mass black hole’s bending near its  
event horizon is still so small it takes a 
trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion  
years to leak most of its radiation out, 
we can discard these all as meaningful  
producers of Hawking Radiation.
It also does mean that we could at  
least consider that since its really the 
warped spacetime producing this effect,  
which we might think of a cracks in spacetime 
letting vacuum energy leak out, that we could  
do this without mass, or even energy, if 
we had someway to sharply bend spacetime  
without either. And the kugelblitz approach is 
about doing it without mass, but with energy,  
and if we wanted to think of this as slicing a 
hole through the universe with a very powerful  
laser into the true vacuum or pushing down on a 
rubber sheet with it so that it slowly relaxes  
back to where it was,gradually emitting the energy 
you bent that sheet with, those analogies seem as  
right as the virtual particle analogy Hawking 
offers. I would be curious which if any you  
found most clear for the concept though, since I 
must explain the idea a lot and without much math.
So how tiny and compressed does spacetime need 
to get to give us useful Hawking radiation? 
Well, that’s obviously a bit subjective, in a cold 
post-stellar universe running on Landauer Limit  
calculation, a whole civilization might thrive 
on a single watt of energy, see our civilizations  
at the End of Time series for further discussion. 
And we might find a one-watt black hole useful for  
something like a navigation beacon or to power a 
low-energy device for 10 trillion-trillion years,  
about a trillion times longer than we expect 
before the stars all stop forming and die off.  
That would mass 18.9 million megatons, and I’d 
put this as the extreme edge of what anyone would  
bother making unless they were planning to live 
off natural black holes when they evaporated,  
and they made a bunch of these to stagger their 
lifetimes as a bridge to that period. This is also  
probably more than enough to run a human level 
emulation of a mind inside a virtual reality,  
offering them a lifetime of at least 10,000 
trillion years, since they could certainly  
trickle feed particles in from a greater stockpile 
to keep it running, as it is nearly atom sized. 
Beneath this, every kugelblitz is subatomic or 
smaller. To go through scales of power briefly,  
by hundreds, a 100 Watt black hole masses 
1.89 million Megatons and runs for 10 billion,  
trillion years, a 10,000 watt or 10 kilowatt black 
hole masses 189,000 megatons, and would live for  
10 billion-billion years, and could easily run a 
fairly lavish household that hole time. A megawatt  
black hole masses 18,900 megatons and could run 
a small community for 10 quadrillion years. A  
100-megawatt black hole would be 1890 megatons 
and could replace most modern power plants for 10  
trillion years, the period of time we think stars 
will exist in this universe, while a 10 Gigawatt  
black hole, at 189 megatons could match the output 
of our biggest hydroelectric power plants and do  
it for 10 billion years, the lifetime of our Sun.
At this range we are getting black holes that  
could run real space habitats, and you may 
have noticed that while the power output has  
been rising by a factor of a hundred each step, 
the mass has been dropping by a factor of ten,  
and the lifetime by a factor of a thousand. 
That’s because at each step you’ve got an  
object a tenth as big generating a hundred times 
the power, and thus burning it out 10 times 100  
or a thousand times faster. At each step our 
mass has dropped by a factor of ten and so  
has the width of that black hole too. Although 
there’s nothing black about these, as even our  
1 watt example would be able to dimly light a 
room – albeit it with soft X-rays not visible  
light – and it only gets worse from there as we 
get into hard x-rays and then gamma rays. We can  
convert those x-rays into visible light, and same 
for gamma, much as we do in nuclear power plants. 
If you’re curious, you could have a black 
hole that emitted a light spectrum similar  
to a normal star, it's just that it would 
be at about the one-microwatt range so not  
very useful for lighting things, as 20 
billion megatons isn’t exactly portable. 
Back to our powers of 10 wattage scale. Our next 
step would be a trillion watts, or a terawatt,  
at 18.9 megatons, and this would comfortable run 
even a full-scale island three O’Neill Cylinder  
complete with auxiliary facilities. And it will do 
it for 10 million years. I think your sweet spot  
for artificial habitats and space stations 
is probably between here and our last step,  
the 10 billion year 10 gigawatt level. Note that 
you can use anything in between or alternatively,  
just find your desired battery life and add 
several of that size instead till you reach  
your power requirement. That’s not optimal 
for a spaceship though and it's our next  
sizes that are in the top and bottom 
mass and power ranges for a spaceship. 
At 1.89 megatons we have a black hole able to 
produce 100 trillion watts of power and do so  
for 10,000 years. This is long enough to cross a 
decent chunk of a galaxy but wouldn’t be enough  
for a trip across the entire galaxy or to a 
neighboring galaxy, where the 10-million-year  
duration terawatt black hole might be needed 
instead. Of course, you could feed a smaller  
one to keep it alive but that is just as precise 
as making one and you’re trying to stuff particles  
of fuel into a black hole just 5 billionths 
of a nanometer wide at this point which is  
simultaneously emitting as much energy as the Sun 
shines down on the whole state of Texas at noon. 
I’m not sure how you could get anything 
in there that was a normal bit of matter,  
and you might be limited to feeding it something 
very non-interacting like dark matter at this  
point. Think of a more normal scale black hole 
as a big pond or lake, it’s very easy to throw  
a stone into one and even if it skips it's going 
to fall in after that. At some point this turns  
into you trying instead to throw a rock into 
a firehose while it’s on, hard but possible,  
maybe you need to fire a bullet from a gun to 
feed instead, and beyond that we get to the  
point where we can’t feed matter into one at all.
You could conceivably pull over at an inhabited  
solar system with a giant power collector 
array that could force feed your black hole  
with an x-ray laser or maybe gamma rays, but 
now it's basically a battery for recharging,  
not a ship drive you could dump 
more matter into from a supply. 
Our 1.89 megaton black hole at 100 terrawatts is 
quite an impressive ship, in that the black hole  
alone masses as much as 20 aircraft carriers, 
and the rest of the ship is presumably in that  
general size range, so this works great 
for space freighters and colony arkships.  
Most often when folks talk about wanting to 
use kugelblitz black holes this way though,  
they are thinking something more in the 0.189 
megaton or 189 kiloton range, which produces 10  
petawatts and that’s enough to comfortably light a 
continent…. Though again it being gamma rays means  
it’s enough to easily sterilize a continent. 
This black hole lasts about ten years and is  
half of a billionth of a nanometer across. And is 
allowing ships the size of a modern oil tanker to  
cross an interstellar void and at a high fraction 
of light speed, to the nearest neighboring star. 
You want, for course, a smaller ship like the 
Millenium Falcon on the order of tens of tons  
or even maybe a kugelblitz black hole running 
your power armor, and an 18.9 kiloton black  
hole produces a billion gigawatts of power for 
half a week, enough to light a handful of Earths,  
while a 1.89 kiloton black hole, at 100 billion 
gigawatts, last just 5 minutes. A 189 ton black  
hole, at 10 trillion gigawatts, would shine 
as brightly as a dimmer red dwarf star but  
only for a third of a second. One as bright as 
our own sun and as massive as a large tractor  
at 18.9 tons would live only 300 microseconds.
As a sidenote, I tend to be dubious if objects  
in this scale or much smaller but more energetic 
can really exist, though I’m no cosmologist. Given  
that the upper end for the theoretical maximum 
of vacuum energy is on an order of about 10  
Joules for one cubic femtometer, then by the 
time we get to our 189-ton black hole, this is  
trying to emit more than a billion-trillion 
joules of energy from a region more than a  
billion-billion times smaller than a femtometer 
or atomic nuclei. That would tend to imply a  
throughput or complete refresh rate of something 
just above a Planck Time, roughly 10^-43 seconds,  
which is what we usually say is the hard 
limit of the minimum time any action can  
occur in. There’s no half a Planck time.
So I think at this point we can say that  
even if you somehow managed to get around all the 
creation and feeding issues, you’ve reached a hard  
limit on how small things are getting here where 
we definitely move into the Clarketech range. No  
man-portable black hole generators unless 
you’ve also got some method of anti-gravity  
or nullifying inertia, which might also allow 
some interesting approaches to energy creation. 
Some make a case there’s also a hard limit at 
about 10^16 kilograms or 10 million megatons,  
which has a power output of 3.56 watts and a 
lifetime of 1.47 billion, trillion years. That’s  
just over the threshold from soft x-rays to hard 
x-rays at 4145 eV or 0.3 nanometers wavelength and  
thus is something we can comfortably work with. 
That value of 10^16 kilograms as a minimum is a  
number I encountered back when folks were trying 
to argue if the Large Hadron Collider was going to  
produce a black holethat would eat Earth, though 
any black hole of that scale or smaller would take  
far longer to naturally eat this planet than it 
would live, the planet or the black hole. When  
you’re trying to swallow an atom with a mouth 
smaller than one, and you need to eat untold  
billions of them a second to even eat a planet 
over a trillion years, you have a constraint  
there that even Pacman couldn’t overcome.
If you can’t feed these things normal matter,  
then they need to be regarded as batteries, 
something civilizations do with a thin-Dyson swarm  
of power collectors around their sun to store 
energy for the ultra-long term. They might be  
the ultimate commodity currency for civilizations 
too, the sorts of things you store in bank vaults  
at the center of artificial planets.
For the purpose of artificial planets,  
when you just want mass, you probably still would 
rather use several smaller ones than one big one,  
which would mean placing them either in a magnetic 
field so they didn’t merge or putting them in  
something like a Klemperer Rosette configuration. 
Even the biggest of these is so tiny, and carries  
so much inertia, that they aren’t going to be 
accidentally knocked of course by accidents,  
so storing them safely is a lot easier 
than antimatter and they have the same  
energy density but can only be released at a 
certain rate. Though if you have truly good  
gamma-reflective mirrors you could, in theory 
anyway, throttle a feedable kugelblitz black hole  
by reflecting some of its energy back into it.
Let’s go over some other interesting sizes and  
applications, and thanks to my friend Bob Fowler 
for the chart he sent me that contained a lot of  
specific interesting black hole values I 
hadn’t thought of. For spherical planets  
generating natural gravity equivalent to Earth’s, 
their land area is proportional to their mass,  
twice the land area of Earth, twice 
the mass, a thousandth the land area,  
a thousandth the mass. And similar, the amount of 
light they need to stay warm and comfortably lit  
scales proportional to land area or mass in this 
case. You need something like one watt of sunlight  
for every 25 million kilograms of planet mass.
For a micro-planet with something like Earth  
gravity and Lighting supplied by that black 
hole, or by light generated from that powerplant,  
your scale is around 10^13 kilograms, a little 
over a trillionth of earth’s mass, or a 3.56  
megawatt black hole, to potentially as high as 
one trillionth of an Earth mass at 10 megawatts,  
it would depend on how efficiently you 
generated power, turned it into light,  
and how close to Earth normal light and gravity 
you wanted. Their lifespan is on an order of a  
quadrillion years, so decently longer than the 
universe will be old when the last stars die. 
This would generate you about a trillionth the 
land area Earth has, or a millionth is radius,  
about 6 meters or 30 feet, just 500 square meters 
or 5500 square feet, or an eighth of an acre,  
in spherical format. This also means the 
gravity in your basement level is a lot higher  
than in your second story. Now you wouldn’t 
build a planet this small, but you might use  
hundreds of black holes in this mass range 
to make a microplanet dozens of times wider,  
or keep piling them in to get even bigger. But 
a pico-Earth mass black hole is probably your  
minimum mass artificial planet building block.
You can also give artificial gravity to large  
flat regions of low gravity bodies, for 
something like a spaceport, by laying a  
bunch of these out in some 2D hexagonal 
arrangement, magnetically held in place,  
and that provides gravity and power and again on a 
timeline of a quadrillion years. Also at the high  
end of what you really want in terms of regular 
power generation for a civilization because once  
you start getting to energy levels stronger 
than sunlight you start getting heat issues. 
So while you might want some smaller and more 
powerful black holes for running something  
specific like a space cannon or spaceship 
launcher, your own civilization on that moon  
or asteroid cannot really benefit from a higher 
energy density than this without melting, same  
reason we wouldn’t expect folks to bother with 
fusion reactors in the inner solar system around  
Mercury or Venus, the local sunlight is already as 
energy dense as what they can use on their ship or  
habitat so any reactor is like running your dryer 
in the summer with the air conditioner on instead  
of a clothesline, sometimes more practical 
but never really ideal under engineering. 
A rotating habitat would seem easier than this 
black hole hexagonal plating, or grav plating, but  
may be higher maintenance and more importantly, 
if your civilization is dumping all your sun’s  
excess energy into kugelblitz black holes to use 
trillion or quadrillions of years down the road,  
you do need to stores those and you might as 
well make use of their gravity in the meantime. 
I don’t know if we’ll ever make 
kugelblitz black holes a reality,  
I’m not sure our science is solid enough on black 
holes and quantum gravity to really speak with  
any certainty on their function or creation, but 
if we can make them, and given how easy doing a  
tinfoil thick power collector Dyson swarm is, 
relatively speaking, I think kugelblitz black  
hole creation is what you would do with all 
of a star’s excess power generation until your  
population and demand there grew to reach that.
In the end, it will all depend on how small  
a black hole you could make and also how 
small a black hole you can feed, because the  
latter is always the control on using them for 
Hawking Radiation Spaceships. As we discussed,  
no matter what, black holes are likely to 
play a huge role in our future civilization,  
but if we can make subatomic kugelblitz black 
holes function, they are likely to become the  
go-to for both energy storage and power creation, 
and possibly the gold standard of the future  
when it comes to interstellar banking.
Time will tell if it is possible or not,  
but the neat thing about even small black holes 
is that they tend to be around for a long while,  
even compared to the stars themselves, and 
so would the civilizations that used them.
While producing this episode I got asked about 
making computers from black holes and we’ll be  
having one of our weekly shorts on the topic in a 
few days, but I’ve mentioned in some of our more  
existential episodes that you can build a computer 
of out all sorts of things, be it black holes or  
ants pushing grains of food around. If you can 
make a switch out of something, you can make a  
computer, and if you’re looking for a fun example 
of that, there’s Upper Story’s award-winning game  
Turing Tumble, that lets you build a computer 
that runs on marbles instead of electricity. 
It is a great game and my kids instantly 
fell in love with it too. Turing Tumble,  
named for the great Alan Turing who helped 
us invent computers, is a fascinating and  
intuitive way to learn and hands-on experiment 
with the fundamentals of computing. It also  
comes with a wonderful graphic novel that 
gives you a story and presents you dozens of  
different challenges and switch diagrams to try, 
before modifying and experimenting on your own. 
Computers don’t have to be a black box with 
mysterious workings inside - unless they are made  
of black holes of course - check out Turing Tumble 
at upperstory.com/turingtumble to see why it won  
Parents Choice Gold Award, Astra Best Toy for 
Kids Award, Toy of the Year Finalist, and the Dice  
Tower Seal of Excellence. Again, you can learn 
more about Turing Tumble and see it in action at  
upperstory.com/turingtumble Use the coupon code 
ISAACARTHUR for 10% off your total purchase. 
So that’s it for today and this weekend we’ll 
close out the month with a look at multi-planetary  
empires, on Sunday, March 31st, to explore what 
nations controlling several worlds might actually  
be like and how they’d function. Then we’ll start 
April off on the 4th with a discussion of space  
based solar power and several other clean energy 
options from space that might be able to help us  
power not only our orbital infrastructure, but 
Earth itself, including options like Earth’s own  
magnetic field. Then on the 7th will return to the 
Fermi Paradox to ask if the reason why we don’t  
see expanding alien civilizations is because they 
eat their own colonies, in the Cronus Scenarios. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you’d like to donate or help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s 
episodes early and ad free on our streaming  
service, Nebula, along with hours of bonus content 
like Crystal Aliens, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
