This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
It’s been half a century since Neil Armstrong’s
one small step, and its time for humanity
to make another giant leap, but where to?
A common debate these days is whether we should
go to Mars now or wait till we have returned
to the Moon and usually with the intent of
having a permanent Moon Base setup.
Today we will be asking which is better or
if maybe a third option is better than either
the Moon or Mars first.
Now I don’t make much of a secret that I
tend to favor a robust lunar setup as a precursor
to going to Mars, or even doing them in tandem,
but we’ll be trying to examine the case
for each today, and in the context of today.
Many of the arguments for one or the other
have been dependent on the situation of public
support and available technology at the time
the case was being made and that is a fluid
setup but sometimes the arguments lag behind.
Existing space infrastructure might matter
a lot in the equation too.
For instance the concept of Asteroid Mining
has surged in popular interest in recent years,
and a Near-Earth asteroid might be converted
into an Aldrin Cycler, a sort of ferry craft
between Earth and Mars.
Or Earth and other planets for that matter.
So we will look at the possibility of Asteroids
first, as an alternative to the Moon or Mars,
and also Venus First and Jupiter First and
some other lesser known scenarios.
But our main focus today will be the Moon
and Mars and without further ado, grab a drink
and snack and let’s jump on in…
So, for most of us who love space travel the
answer to if we should do the Moon or Mars
first is “Yes, please”, we don’t care
which happens first so long as it is both
eventually and every other place too.
The key concepts of going to the Moon before
Mars is essentially the idea that the Moon
is more important as a first step than Mars
or that it makes going to Mars easier.
There are many arguments often made but some
probably are less valid than others and let's
begin with one that has a number of both.
Namely that setting up a base on the Moon
will help us learn better how to do so on
Mars.
On the one hand, yes this is very true, but
we also need to keep in mind that living on
either has very little in common with each
other.
It's a bit akin to saying that learning to
live in the Sahara Desert teaches you about
how to live in Antarctica or at the peak of
Mount Everest or in the Marianas Oceanic Trench
and vice versa.
There are going to be good lessons that adapt
well between each case, but by and large adapting
to these environments is so different that
you can’t assume mastering one makes you
ready for the others.
On the flip side, learning to extract oxygen
from Lunar Regolith to fill structures so
we can breathe on the Moon, and learning to
keep those air tight, is going to translate
decently to Mars.
Same for converting ice to oxygen and water
if it turns out the Moon has accessible amounts
of those.
That’s something we still don’t really
know, whereas Mars certainly has them.
It's also worth keeping in mind that these
two worlds, Mars and the Moon, may be very
different from each other but they are also
different from themselves.
I used various examples from around Earth
to emphasize how different Mars and the Moon
were from each other but the examples illustrate
how different bits of Earth are from other
bits of Earth and we should not assume either
the Moon or Mars are monolithic and homogenous.
Indeed we know they are not, and so even a
base built in one part of the Moon isn’t
a perfect blueprint for a base elsewhere on
the Moon, and the same for Mars.
Such being the case, it really challenges
how useful a Moon Base is for learning the
lessons we need for a Mars base.
It might be more practical to just do prototypes
and demos on Earth, given the difficulty of
building them on the Moon.
If you really needed an airless bit of desert
to practice in we could always put a big dome
over a bit of existing desert and suck the
air out, and probably easier and cheaper than
building a Moon base right now.
So too, I said we could learn to make oxygen
from rock or ice on the Moon and apply that
technology to Mars, but it's even easier to
do that right here on Earth where all our
industry and scientists and engineers already
are.
In terms of valuable lessons learned, we would
pick up a ton from doing a Moon Base, but
we would also learn a ton from doing the Mars
Base that would help on the Moon.
The advantage of doing the Moon first in terms
of those two options might be that the Moon
would be cheaper and easier to try first,
but that’s debatable.
What isn’t debatable is that the Moon is
so close to us that signals take only a few
laggy seconds to go back and forth, versus
several minutes for Mars, and that ships need
a few days to get to the Moon with current
drives, versus months for Mars.
So, if you screw up, someone can be online
helping you in moments, real time, and evacuation
or new supplies might be available in a short
enough time that a person who had to escape
a base in nothing but a spacesuit with an
extra bottle of air and water might still
be alive when help came.
Not so for Mars.
Critical failure there is going to be a lot
harder to avoid and survive.
Nor can we remote control robots from Earth
on Mars like we can on the Moon.
That said, those same signal and travel delays
are still in play on Mars when you head there
whether you have set up shop on the Moon or
not.
We also probably should not be sending missions
to either with people on board until we have
modeled and tested failure options to the
point that one happening would be highly unlikely
and most of the failure scenarios can be tested
just fine on Earth anyway.
It’s more about handling unknown unknowns
and those will exist for Mars whether we have
found some on the Moon first or not.
We also need to be asking ourselves how much
risk we are willing to take.
I am quite sure we could find qualified volunteers
for the trip who would go even if the odds
were rated 50/50, but I would have difficulty
imagining many current major nations or corporations
being willing to launch with odds that bad.
Even 90/10 for Mission 1 is asking for trouble.
It is one thing for everyone to say they accept
risks, it is another after the fact.
Success requires no excuses, failure tolerates
none.
And while there is no substitute for real
experience in dealing with potential problems,
we never aim for trial by error and we can
do a lot of preparation and redundancy, gold-plating
systems to be robust, durable, simple, and
easy to replace or repair.
We probably are not going to lose a Mars Base
because it sprung a critical air leak on some
seal, where had that happened first on a Moon
base we would be fine.
You lose it to stuff nobody saw coming, like
the Mars Base getting eaten by indigenous
giant sandworms, which presumably don’t
dwell on the Moon anyway.
Alternatively a big problem on the Moon that
was not really expected during the Pre-Apollo
build up was the moondust.
The regolith on the moon isn’t weathered,
it is sharp and sticks and clings to everything
and represents a giant maintenance headache.
Martian dust is also problematic but differently
than the Moon and probably less of a headache,
but the same basic concepts are in play.
Neither world has soil, they are not weathered
down and they may be toxic and require major
efforts to render safe and useful as a growth
medium for plants.
Managing them to prevent them damaging equipment
may require different approaches but would
probably have a lot of overlap.
So what emerges is that the argument that
starting on the Moon will help us on Mars
is valid but only so much so.
That still leaves us proximity though.
The Moon can be reached by signal near instantly
and emergency resupply or help or evacuation
should be available in a few days, possibly
less.
However, in reality even the idea that we
could send help to the Moon in mere days is
not necessarily as handy as it sounds like.
For a well resourced and well-trained team,
you can probably make do against emergencies
that aren’t rapid and catastrophic like
the roof blowing off your habitation dome.
There really is not likely to ever be a manned
mission to Mars, and probably not the Moon
either, which does not have some robotic component,
a 3D printer, and either large reserves of
air, water, and fuel, or devices for making
them on site from local materials, what we
call in situ resource utilization.
Let’s paint a picture.
You’re part of a 10-person team including
a lot of STEM experts all rigorously trained
with your equipment and for crisis management.
I drop you somewhere on Mars or the Moon,
doesn’t matter which, with two spacesuits
each, a couple boxes of spacesuit repair gear,
a bunch of solar panels, a device able to
extract oxygen from rock so long as supplied
with electricity, and a device able to recycle
water from sweat or urine or impure ice deposits
so long as supplied with electricity, plus
spares of each of those devices.
And some hand tools, a year's worth of food,
some seeds, and a lot of feedstock for that
3D printer.
Our remaining kit is all the obvious stuff
like lights, batteries, medicine, computers,
and so on.
What realistically is going to go wrong here
that won’t kill people in minutes but would
get them in a week but not a year?
Or where a rescue or resupply on the Moon
would help but if they were on Mars they’d
be out of luck?
Could they run out of food?
Sure but they aren’t keeping all of it in
one place.
Presumably you send them with reserves, say
25% more than expected.
There’s presumably no space bears or space
ants going to go raid your picnic baskets,
so damage would have to be some strange type
of unexpected spoilage or some gross physical
damage to the site that destroyed either a
lot of the camp or by bad luck hit one of
your food stores.
If you had it all in only 3 spots, even a
total loss of one, with a 25% reserve, leaves
you 83% of your food left.
Tight rations but not starvations rations
either.
Of course, maybe a meteor hit and blew up
two of your 3 reserves, now you’re down
to 42% of your food, but odds are good something
that destructive killed a couple people at
least who now don’t need food.
Indeed it probably would have gotten nearly
everyone if it also got the food.
The type of food you’d send for missions
like this is not destroyed by vacuum exposure,
so to lose it all to some destructive event
would tend to imply the camp took a pasting
that destroyed lots of other stuff and killed
lots of people.
Alternatively for something like water reserves
being damaged, on Mars, assuming you have
transport, you can go source more from places
with ice faster than any ship could arrive
from Earth, and if you can recycle your water,
you should be able to make do even if only
a fraction of your reserves were left.
Alternatively maybe a member of your crew
went nuts and started selectively destroying
food, or water or air, but why would they
do that and what really is the defense against
it?
They could overload the reactor, so to speak,
and kill everyone, in which case a resupply
pod or search and rescue team a few days later
isn’t really helping either, everyone’s
already dead.
Such breakdowns shouldn’t be fast though,
and psychologists monitoring base cameras
and crew real time for the Moonbase enjoy
little advantage over those watching 20 minute
old recordings from a Mars Base.
Another thing to keep in mind is that it is
really only in the early days that ‘help’
is coming from Earth.
On the Moon or Mars there is likely to be
a ship or station orbiting it, or another
base, either of which might provide assistance
to others and vice versa.
One more big factor to contemplate about whether
we should put boots on the ground on Mars
or the Moon next, is that wherever that pair
of boots first take a small step for a man
and another giant leap for mankind, there’s
already going to be a robot sitting there.
Not all landing sites are created equal and
you can plan your mission a lot better if
you’re not guessing about the site.
You will have sent rovers to check the spot
out probably before you even started building
the ship the folks who will travel there will
come on.
You will have a very good survey and you will
likely have pre-dropped some supply and gear.
A Moon base might be partially constructed
by robots remotely controlled from home, so
that the crew can rapidly assemble and inhabit
the facility on arrival.
We consider that another big advantage for
the Moon, but it may be overstated.
Consider, scooping dirt and shoving or ramming
it into crude habitat walls, assembling a
solar panel from an existing kit, or having
some water or ice oxygen extractor setup,
mobile or fed by robots bringing raw material
to it, is not exactly some complex chess game
requiring an artificial intelligence of prodigious
capability to perform.
Especially given that these are long term
tasks compared to the singal lag time even
to Mars.You can’t remote control the drone
near-real time but you can send it general
construction updates and plans.
Or maybe you could do it near-real time.
We often suggest that one of the two Martian
Moons, Phobos or Deimos, might be better first
stops, especially if any of their surface
craters contained ice.
Nobody really likes the idea of going all
the way to Mars just to stop a few thousand
kilometers short at one of its tiny little
moons, but setting up a base on one might
be a very good plan.
Possibly done by robots in a precursor mission,
possibly done by whoever is left on board
the main ship as the rest of the crew descends
in shuttles or pods.
One of the more popular notions for a Mars
mission is to send a nuclear reactor there
produce rocket fuel from native ice, which
can be used to fuel your return trip to orbit
and to Earth.
But for all the millions of kilometers between
Earth and Mars, it’s those handful of thousands
nearest that represent most of the risk and
problem, especially that last couple hundred
kilometers of atmosphere.
If either Martian moon contained ice, robot
probes might find it and set up a fuel depot
there.
Of course another popular reason for going
to the Moon first is that we can set up fuel
production there too.
There appears to be ice on the Moon, but you
don’t need ice there or on either Martian
Moon to make fuel.
Aluminum and oxygen make a decent fuel, and
there’s tons of Aluminium on the Moon, and
there’s tons of oxygen any place you’ve
got rock.
Aluminum is abundant on Mars too, so also
presumably its two moons.
If you can make fuel in space, off Earth,
then it makes flying to any other place much
easier because most of the fuel used flying
to Mars is flying out of Earth’s gravity
well to begin with.
So if you set up fuel production on the Moon,
not only does that let you build a more robust
space infrastructure near Earth and the Moon
for sending things to Mars, it lets you send
a lot more cargo there to await a manned mission.
Supplies left in orbit of Mars or dropped
to the surface, either made on the Moon or
in Orbit, or just sent up from Earth but pushed
the rest of the way from low Earth Orbit using
fuel made on the Moon.
That’s probably the most attractive aspect
of the Moon First scenario.
It allows a big buildup of space infrastructure
and industry, which is going to make any Mars
venture vastly easier and done with vastly
more experience of day-to-day off-Earth operations.
The Moon fuels all that with raw materials
and literal fuel.
Maybe the biggest thing Mars is often seen
as having for it is that it's not a resource
extraction site, as we think of the Moon or
asteroids as, it's a potential new planet
we could terraform to be Earth-like and be
home to humanity and our transplanted and
adapted ecosystem.
However, Venus is perhaps the more logical
candidate in this regard, and is closer to
us than Mars in both Size and distance, were
it not so hot.
Fundamentally Venus can be made Earth-like
in ways Mars really cannot, though terraforming
either is way outside the scope of this episode,
which is about first missions and maybe respectably
large bases or outposts.
We explored how to live in floating cities
on Venus in our episode Colonizing Venus and
we explored terraforming both Mars and Venus
in our Springtime on Mars and Winter on Venus
episodes.
Now, we often note that the Moon’s proximity
to us is an advantage but another argument
for Mars is exactly that, the Moon is so close
to Earth that it does not represent a backup
plan.
We often think of colonization of space as
important for getting all of our eggs out
of one basket, and it is hard to imagine how
an event that utterly obliterated civilization
on Earth wouldn’t get our orbital facilities
or Moon bases too.
It’s also unlikely the Moon would ever be
any more decoupled from Earth's politics and
economics than any of its space stations or
continents and islands would be.
So if you want to truly set up a backup civilization
Mars is better as a choice than the Moon and
easier to do than Venus, even if Venus can
be done more properly with more time and effort.
However, this is where the Moons of Jupiter
become even more appealing.
Jupiter is still close enough to the Sun to
make solar power feasible if that’s all
you got, it’s got dozens of Moons, 4 of
which match or exceed our own Moon, and it
has plenty of every element life needs.
Each of those moons is easily traveled to
from each other, and a place like Europa,
Callisto, or Ganymede, might be ideal for
a subsurface colony that was well protected
by distance and physical barriers from any
chaos or havoc closer into the solar system.
So for backups, the Moons of Jupiter seem
better than Mars, especially as they are plural,
and setting up multiple bases on multiple
moons, all able to be independent but also
easily able to trade back and forth, or come
to each other’s ais, does seem a better
backup plan than Mars.
You can terraform them too if you really want,
see our episode Summer on Jupiter for details.
Incidentally for folks who ask, there are
no plans for an “Autumn on Planet X” episode.
I get asked about that a lot and the most
popular suggestion seems to be “Autumn in
the Asteroids”.
As mentioned we’ve no plan for that episode
but asteroids are another alternative first.
The Asteroid Belt has many of the same advantages
that Jupiter’s Moons have, but in this case
we mean the asteroids not in the Belt.
Rather our interest is in the Near Earth Asteroids.
Now, near-Earth can mean physical proximity
but what we generally also mean is delta-v,
or how much fuel it would take to leave Earth
orbit and rendezvous with an asteroid, and
in this regard there are thousands of objects
that are easier to get to than Mars or even
the Moon.
Many of these have no shortage of raw materials
we could use to fill the same supply role
we contemplate for the Moon.
A kilometer-wide near-Earth asteroid maybe
tiny mote of dust compared to the Moon or
Mars but it’s still around a billion tons
of material we could use.
Some of which might be precious metals to
fuel asteroid mining endeavors financially.
There’s no real profit model for Mars that
I know of, just a new place for people, and
even for the Moon the interest is mostly for
raw materials to fuel space exploration or
colonization, your profit model tends to be
scenarios like mining and building orbital
mirrors to be used in power satellite grids
or weather and climate control systems.
Near Earth Asteroids also might be better
stepping stones to Mars than the Moon.
They are just as easily turned into fuel production
spots as the Moon, and use less fuel getting
free of their own gravity well.
What’s more, a smaller one, especially one
being used to make fuel anyway, can be found
that’s on a fairly elliptical orbit not
too far off from what we contemplate for an
Aldrin Cycler.
An Aldrin Cycler, a large spacecraft named
for Moon Man Buzz Aldrin – who refined the
concept of cycler spacecraft – is essentially
a ferry craft that moves back and forth between
Cislunar Space and Mars orbit.
Cyclers are interesting devices that focus
heavily on that minimum energy Hohmann Transfer,
as they essentially make a single long eccentric
loop around the Sun moving between those two
bodies, in the case of Mars cycler, it spends
5 months going from Earth to Mars, spends
another 16 months out past Mars, and another
5 months again back to Earth’s orbit, then
repeats the process every 26 months.
You could think of it like a big empty train
that drives a scenic route but never stops.
You’d still have to expend fuel as normal
to get people, equipment, and supplies to
the Cycler, but at least you’d have a big
comfortable living space for the trip once
you did.
You could also potentially be producing that
fuel needed to fuel those ships and bump that
asteroid into the cycler orbit from the asteroid
itself.
So which way is best, Mars First or the Moon
or one of these others?
For my part I still would say Moon First.
It still seems the most probable path for
a strong and safe emergence into the solar
system, but as we saw today there are other
options and strong arguments for each.
Indeed there’s many more than we looked
at today for those who want to explore the
topic more themselves.
One word of warning about those, and about
our own points for today, so many of the plans
drawn up, or arguments in support of, one
of these Mars or Moon endeavors are either
based off technology that’s always changing
or reliant on technology we don’t have yet
or don’t have fully prototyped and time-tested
yet.
One small and minor technology could be the
difference between Mars or Moon First, simply
making one much easier or safer.
Or, one of the other locales we suggested.
In the end, time will tell, but I’d still
put my money on the Moon as the best shot,
of course I wouldn’t mind being proven wrong.
For me and so many others, we don’t really
care which happens first, so long as it happens,
and sooner, rather than later.
It’s been a busy week here on SFIA, in between
our two regular Thursday episodes we had a
two-part episode on the Geopolitics of Space
Colonization with WhatifAltHist and our scifi
Sunday episode, Annoying Aliens, which had
an extended edition episode on the Top 10
most annoying fictional aliens over on Nebula.
And we’re still not done for the month and
will get to our upcoming schedule in a moment.
First though, today’s episode was focused
on Mars vs the Moon but I mentioned the possible
alternate candidates beside either, and I
wanted to spend more time on Venus’s pros
and cons but didn’t want to shift the episode
focus off the Moon and Mars, so we will be
having a brief extended edition of today’s
episode considering Venus First over on Nebula,
our streaming service.
And if you’re looking for more content on
Mars, there’s a number of great shows on
the Red Planet, like Packing for Mars, over
on Curiosity Stream.
If you’d like to see that extended edition
of today’s episode, looking at Venus First,
Sunday’s Annoying Aliens Top 10 list, or
any of our other extended episodes, those
are available on Nebula, our streaming service
where all our episodes air early and ad and
sponsor free, alongside some exclusive episodes
like our Coexistence with Aliens series.
There’s also many other excellent creators
there who put out exclusive or bonus material.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos, to offer Nebula for free as a bonus
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using the
link in our episode description.
That lets you see content like “Packing
for Mars”, and watch all the other amazing
content on Curiositystream, and also all the
great content over on Nebula from myself and
many others.
And you can get all that for less than $15
by using the link in the episode’s description.
So after 4 episodes in a week, one a two-parter
and two extended editions, we will be catching
our breath until next Thursday, where we will
celebrate our 300th regular episode here on
SFIA by leaping into the distant future to
look at the End of Earth.
Then next Sunday, July 25th, we will have
our Monthly Livestream Q&A, don’t forget
to join us then to get your questions answered.
Then in two weeks we’ll have the third episode
of our new series, Galactic Domination: The
Galactic Laboratory, which will finish us
out for July, on the 29th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
