In the future we may settle billions and billions 
of planets across this galaxy and maybe beyond,  
but might these be eclipsed by far 
greater numbers of megastructure habitats? 
Hello everyone and welcome to Science & Futurism 
with Isaac Arthur as we celebrate reaching 750,000  
subscribers to our show, shortly before we 
celebrate 9 years of this show next month.  
As you may know, that first episode was a summary 
of types of Megastructures and we did a new and  
improved version last year, the Megastructure 
Compendium, our longest episode to date and  
the only one with someone else - my wife Sarah - 
helping do the narration. While I was producing  
that episode I realized that it had left out a key 
piece of discussion that the first episode had,  
about why our future might see us preferring 
megastructure habitats over terraforming planets,  
and the pros and cons of both. And the overlap 
too, as some megastructures are essentially  
planets, indeed some like the Birch Planet 
are the biggest planet you could ever make. 
We had also just gotten data back 
from Nebula, our streaming service,  
that folks were preferring short bonus episodes 
over Extended Editions specifically, which we’d  
been doing the prior year, so I decided to make 
Planets vs Megastructures as an episode there,  
and having been making around one a month since 
then, and while I like having that extra content  
for our paying audience, and some of those 
bonus episodes wouldn’t do well on youtube,  
I’ve always meant to share those videos to Youtube 
after a year or so of Nebula-exclusive access,  
and us hitting 750,000 Subscribers 
seems a great time to start doing that,  
with a new one every month or two. Of 
course, if you don’t want to wait on those,  
you can see all those nebula exclusives and 
extended editions, including this weeks’ new one,  
retrocausality, by clicking the link to 
join Nebula in the episode description. 
Also as a headsup, I’ve only re-recorded this 
introductory segment and since then have had  
quite a lot of speech therapy and surgery on 
my tongue, so you may notice a difference,  
and even more of one if you go back and watch that 
original megastructures summary episode afterward.  
The show has both stayed the same and shifted a 
lot since then, and it’s been a joy to produce,  
and I can’t say thank you enough to every 
subscriber who helped makes this show possible  
by tuning in every week. And with that said, 
grab a drink and a snack, and let’s get started. 
Welcome to Planets vs Megastructures, 
a Nebula Exclusive and something of a  
companion video to our episode The Megastructure 
Compendium, which at nearly 2 hours length,  
didn’t seem like it needed anymore content added 
into it. That episode itself was a remake of our  
original episode on Youtube back in 2014 and for 
all that it was 4 times longer than the original,  
for all the new and improved content, it left 
out the context of what that original episode was  
really all about. Which was to introduce all those 
awesome megastructures to folks as an alternative  
to planets, and also to scifi writers so they 
could have some new – and in my opinion – more  
realistic settings than random planets with a 
single outpost on them, as is so common in scifi. 
Now we’re principally interested in the 
realistic pros and cons of megastructures  
compared to planets today but I did want to 
include that fictional worldbuilding aspect  
just because so much of that original 
episode was about that too. Plus,  
for most of us, this is also daydream fuel too.
I should also add that all of this depends  
on the megastructure under discussion as 
well. Principally today we mean cylinder  
habitats. Obviously if we are discussing one 
of our BWC Megastructures like a Flat Earth,  
something you build just because you can, its 
pluses over a natural planet are a lot harder  
to justify… alternatively many megastructures 
have nothing to do with planet substitution.  
A big power beaming array works just as 
well for planets as swarms of habitats,  
same for the various weapon and defensive 
platforms or megastructures that are essentially  
just replicas of planets. Alternatively 
an artificial star orbiting a large  
rogue planet in the depths of interstellar 
space exists to make that planet habitable. 
So the three big pros of megastructures 
as a concept are that they use less mass  
than planets and you can put them more places, 
and third, when it’s a habitation structure,  
it’s easier to mimic most earth conditions.
The usual big cons against them are that  
they need maintenance, that they require 
building whereas planets already exist,  
that they’re fragile compared to planets, 
and that they take enormous cost to build. 
There’s a few other points but I want 
to address those categories foremost. 
So planets versus megastructures, first point, 
planets take more mass to build. On the one hand  
this is absolutely true compared to a rotating 
habitat. You are standing on a lot of ground,  
depending on where you are on the planet, it is 
6,371,000 meters or 21 million feet to the core,  
and that’s of thick rock and magma and a lot 
of molten iron. A space station though probably  
only needs to be around a foot or at most a meter 
wide to serve as good protection from radiation,  
and micrometeors, especially if we’re talking 
about a solid slab of steel or granite or  
similar. If we instead think of Earth as 
being several million sheets a meter deep,  
that’s an awful lot of ground for space habitats. 
Millions of times as much using the same mass. 
Now that is very minimalist, you’d probably have 
several meters of landscaping, but even if were  
talking a kilometer or mile wide sheet of ground 
and water underneath folks living in a rotating  
habitat or shell world, which would seem extreme 
overkill, you’re talking about getting thousands  
of times the surface area from the same 
mass. What’s more, those are rare materials,  
virtually the entire universe is hydrogen 
and helium, unless we throw in dark matter,  
which only adds to that ratio if we’re talking 
about the rarity of good planet or megastructure  
construction materials, like iron or carbon.
So even if people can’t stand living in cylinder  
habitats with spin gravity or we never invent 
artificial gravity, you’ve got the option for  
giant shellworlds, and there’s actually a sweet 
spot not much smaller than Saturn where you could  
be keeping a shell supported by the compressed 
gas pressure of the hydrogen or helium inside,  
if active support is out of our reach, even when 
we’re talking thick shells meant to simulate deep  
landscape and hold atmospheres. The pressure of 
the air lifts back against the ground’s weight,  
essentially the Edersphere or Ederbubble we 
discussed in the Megastructures Compendium. 
Given how much of the Universe is hydrogen, helium 
and dark matter, we might see a lot of these style  
of artificial planets too, as they represent a 
decent way to keep gases contained for eventual  
use and the natural gravity makes it easier to 
store them without leaking while also removing  
the enormous gravity burden of brown dwarfs 
or stars for removing them later if you want  
them for fuel. Alternatively big rotating habitats 
will probably tend to have non-rotating protective  
superstructure and thick-walled tanks full 
of hydrogen and helium makes for a nice  
storage tanks and protective armor.
So on point 1, that they are just way  
more efficient with mass, that one seems 
hands down a winner for megastructures. 
On point 2, the advantage of megastructures is 
not just that you can put them where you want  
but also that they are generally more mobile too. 
A planet can be moved and we discussed how in our  
episode Planet Ships, much as we can alter day 
or year length, but these are extreme brute force  
efforts comparable to flat out building a planet 
in terms of importing or moving mass. And they’re  
not quick, you don’t just move a planet one day, 
alternatively most cylinder habitat megastructures  
are inherently mobile. They can pack up and 
leave if they don’t like their neighbors and  
for the same reason that they need less mass, 
they need way less fuel to move too. I suspect  
a spaceship with a habitation drum will be a 
lot lighter and more built with regular motion  
in mind but it’s an obvious and trivial safety 
feature to put engines on a cylinder habitat. 
What’s more, especially with things like O’Neill 
Cylinders and other smaller habs, its easier  
to get agreement to move, as its more like one 
town voting to head out and leave their larger  
conglomeration than an entire planetary population 
wanting to. So too, given that the whole ground is  
artificial, and that individual homes are likely 
to have fears of vacuum decompression in mind,  
it might be normal for such habitats to have 
docking ports through their hull where people’s  
individual homes essentially parked, so your home 
might be something you could move like an RV,  
a personal spaceship, if that habitat was leaving 
and you didn’t want to. Potentially your entire  
land parcel too, I can imagine ways in which an 
individual segment might be modular on habitats,  
especially any hammer hab design, which can be 
easily adapted to any ring or torus variety. 
Though that brings up the first counterargument 
against megastructures, that they are fragile  
compared to planets and of course that does depend 
on the megastructure. One thing to remember is  
that while there’s thousands of kilometers of 
rock under your feet to absorb damage on a planet,  
that’s under you, and attack comes through 
above, so you’re only protected by thin  
air… which is handy in many cases, but still 
isn’t exactly a bunker. We are also floating  
above a giant sea of molten and radioactive 
metal that’s prone to exploding out through  
volcanoes and often get whacked by asteroids, 
so viewing a planet as super-safe is not a  
great idea, just ask the dinosaurs, or Pompei.
Alternatively, a cylinder habitat might have  
several meters of hyper-hard structure under your 
feet, in addition to the dirt and rock of your  
landscaping, and that is between you and outside 
attack, plus as I often mention I think they’d all  
have a superstructure surrounding them and that 
might be hundreds of meters or more of graphene  
tanks filled with hydrogen that could just soak 
up damage. Plus habitats can be segmented to  
provide protection, and innately are too, give 
that it take millions of the smaller ones to  
equal a planet in living area. As a plus, since 
it doesn’t mass much, you can move the thing from  
dangerous spots and your own gravity isn’t adding 
to the strength of any weapons aimed at you while  
dragging yours back down like a planet does.
This one I’d have to call a draw though just  
because an entire planet, and digging yourself 
deep into it, is a pretty nice defensive place to  
be, especially as most are much smaller than earth 
and aren’t going to have huge magma cores and deep  
gravity wells. An asteroid base, especially a big 
one like Ceres, is one enormous castle and you  
could build hundreds of kilometers deep without 
problems. So too you can hide in the clouds of gas  
giants, although presumably inside megastructures 
like the Chandelier Cities. Its also pretty  
trivial for a civilization to have sensors and 
weapons outposts to protect from natural threats  
like asteroids, and you can still be deploying 
non-habitation megastructures for power, industry,  
and defense. Alternatively those habitation 
megastructures offer a lot more people and a  
lot more locations to defend, meaning its much 
harder for someone to wipe you out, because you  
not only don’t have all your eggs in one basket 
but have so many more eggs and baskets this way. 
Now the third advantage, specific to habitation 
megastructures, is that they can be made more  
Earth-like in most ways. You have that one 
big issue with spin-gravity habitats of your  
neighbor’s house and lawn being in your sky rather 
than adjacent to your yard but there’s a lot of  
tricks for making the sky blue and dealing with 
the up-curving horizon, like more hill terrain  
stuffed fulled of aerogel. You can also do a lot 
of shallow lakes on habitats for little mass and  
enjoy normal weather and blue skies that way. Day 
length, weather, seasons, and gravity are easily  
simulated as the same as Earth, whereas you’ll 
not find many planets that are very Earth-like  
and relatively few that can be terraformed to 
near-Earth conditions without massive efforts,  
especially for day length and season length.
Every star has a different habitable zone and  
different year length that would imply. Now 
you can fix all that with solar mirrors and  
shades like we might do to Venus, you 
can ever move the planet or add mass,  
but all of those are really getting to the point 
where you are using so much time and energy and  
needing so much manpower – or robot power – 
that you’re basically in the megastructure  
zone anyway, and the artificial shellworld 
variety, not the O’Neill Cylinder variety. 
One the one hand that actually hurts them from 
a fictional standpoint because a lot of authors  
are looking for that weird alien landscape and 
setting, so an Earth-clone wouldn’t seem ideal.  
However megastructures allow vastly more variety 
than planets would. It’s a nice option they can be  
made Earth-like, its not a requirement, and 
I suspect many would be very strange places  
intentionally. If you’re looking for awe-inspiring 
settings, a billion-mile long river valley of a  
Topopolis or Thousand mile tall mountain or deep 
valley on some Ringworld or Orbital or Mega-Earth  
is pretty cool, so too is a Smoke Ring, with zero 
gravity and mountains floating through the air.  
And while I’d bet 99% of space habitats would 
follow the formula of being the normal Earth  
habitat, your suburbs and cities or space farms, 
that remaining 1% would vastly outnumber planets  
given that you can make a million times the living 
area from the same mass, and way more stations  
than planets since they’d generally be smaller, 
meaning trillions of times as many habitats as  
planets, if not quadrillions, and even if only 
1 in thousand of them aims for very alien that’s  
still way more of them. A galaxy worth of alien 
landscapes in a single solar system’s Dyson Swarm.  
And they can all have unique ecosystems without 
the problems of invasive species, that’s why  
space habitats make such nice nature preserves.
It also circumvents that whole one-horse town tiny  
little outpost on a giant planet that’s ubiquitous 
in scifi, or the monolithic culture for an entire  
world, since smaller habitat structures are towns 
or cities, so universal language and customs on  
them wouldn’t be weird, including ones that 
would seem absurd for an entire planet to hold  
for generations as seeming kind of non-functional, 
like a planet of monks or warriors or accountants  
or scientists, or techno-primitivists. It would 
be entirely plausible to have a resort O’Neill  
Cylinder or campus habitat or monastery habitat, 
or an intentionally weird one where every effort  
had been made to make it surreal or a nature 
preserve for some extinct animal or some dangerous  
genetically engineered super-dinosaur. Or the 
world engineered to have giant turtles for islands  
or bird-people with wings and low gravity. 
Especially as a megastructure civilization  
is one that’s implied to be of immense overall 
scope, able to go for Kardashev-2 or Dysonian  
scales. I view these as pluses for potential 
authors but also for us in our actual future. 
So continuing with the cons, the next one is that 
Megastructures need building and need maintenance  
and that’s mostly true. Key caveats are that 
terraforming an entire planet is way harder  
than people tend to assume and it isn’t quick, 
building a habitat and then building more when  
you need them is easier, but then so is building 
a dome on a planet and more as you need them.  
However its important to recognize that building 
a dome – especially as it does need a floor  
because natural planetary regolith is likely to 
be toxic and viciously sharp – is really in the  
same scale as building a spacehab. A small domed 
community of a few hundred or thousand versus a  
small cylinder hab of similar scale is really in 
the six of one, half dozen of the other category,  
although in a practical economic sense 
there’s bound to be a clear winner,  
it isn’t likely to be an orders of magnitude sort 
of difference, more of a difference between wood  
and brick and steel or stone house construction.
I think folks assume if you land on a planet and  
dome some of it you’re going to have a claim 
on that whole planet too but realistically  
I don’t see that happening. There’s no real 
reason any community of a few hundred or even  
thousands colonist would expect to be able to 
claim more than as far as they can see on the  
horizon without someone else feeling free to 
land and claim that too. With a space habitat,  
it really is yours, you built it in its 
entirety. Same, from a story point of view,  
some conflict between colonists or some military 
scifi wanting to focus on a regiment or battalion  
involved in a fight is a lot more plausible when 
you’re on a county-sized space habitat, not a  
planet. Whereas if you want truly insane scales, 
Mega Earths and Dyson Spheres permit that in ways  
classic sci-fi space opera galactic empires don’t, 
and don’t require FTL handwaves to exist either. 
Now there is that maintenance aspect, though 
I’d point out that real planets need that too,  
especially ecologically, and a terraformed planet 
is likely to need that even more. Especially as  
you terraform it and start getting mudslides 
and tsunami from glacial detachments and so on. 
The assumption is that you’re either creating 
a self-sustaining ecology through genetic  
engineering and sheer ecological skill 
or you’ve got tons of robots doing it.  
And we do assume this is all getting done by 
robots and the reality is that technology will  
be available. To create vast robot workforces 
which mostly build themselves. You need them for  
megastructure building or planetary terraforming.
This isn’t 1940’s robot scifi anymore either,  
we are right to be worried about artificial 
intelligence being a possible threat to us but we  
also know just how much work robots can do without 
having anything like a true brain. Your robot  
vacuum cleaner isn’t an android pushing a vacuum 
cleaner, and it isn’t going to rebel and kill you.  
Vast swarms of constructor robots aren’t going 
rebel and aren’t going to need huge brains to  
do their work, so the idea that we wouldn’t 
build megastructures in favor of terraforming  
planets – which is also vastly labor intensive 
too – out of fear of a robot rebellion doesn’t  
hold water, anymore than getting rid of hammers 
and toasters does, fearing they might rebel. 
And at that point the specific concerns about 
construction cost and maintenance drop a lot,  
especially as raw energy and raw resources are 
more relatively valuable when labor is ultra cheap  
and robotic, so since the mass and energy cost to 
make megastructures is less than planets, I think  
they win even this point. So too, I suspect even 
a non-robotic civilization could maintain their  
megastructures by hand in many cases once built.
All that leaves where Megastructures are concerned  
is that maybe we wouldn’t build habitation 
ones because we wouldn’t have traditional  
biology anymore if we’re posthuman or in an 
AI machine mind dominated future. However,  
they even more so wouldn’t need planets except 
for raw materials but would still probably  
need many of those megastructures, just not the 
biology focused habitation variety in favor giant  
computers and power collectors or similar.
So in the end, while I don’t think our  
future is one only of planets or only of 
megastructures, I think its going to have way,  
way more of the latter. As we saw today, in 
the contest of Planets versus Megastructures,  
Megastructures win hands-down, even if 
those are robotic hands or alien tentacles.
