This episode is brought to you by Skillshare.
In a world where you have everything you could
desire, and everyone else does too, the one
thing you might desire the most is a sense
of purpose.
So today we are going to be looking at the
more philosophical side of the future as we
contemplate how people, and civilizations,
can maintain or create a sense of Purpose
in what we call a Post Scarcity Civilization,
a future where material things are super-abundant
and survival is a given.
This topic won our Facebook fan poll, and
it is a rather BIG topic for many reasons,
not the least of which being that before we
can discuss what might give purpose to humans
of a very different future culture, we need
to consider what provides purpose for humans
of our current one.
And I think that’s a good place to begin,
because this was a very hard script to write,
and re-write, and re-write again simply from
the title “Creating a Sense of Purpose”.
Creating, not finding, not discovering, creating.
But it’s also important to note that we’re
talking about a sense of purpose.
We can feel something without it being true,
and things can certainly be true and real
without our having any sense or awareness
of them.
And really, it’s having a deep sense of
purpose to our lives that makes us feel right
with the universe—whether that sense is
actual knowledge of truth, or a pleasant narrative
our culture came up with to make us feel better
and function better, a sort of cognitive software
patch.
So that’s what we’ll focus on, having
and achieving that sense of purpose.
For some discussion about whether life has
inherent purpose or meaning, totally apart
from our awareness of it, we discussed that
in our episode, “Why Life Exists”
But as an aside, the belief that life and
the universe simply have no purpose or meaning
or intrinsic value is called Nihilism.
In its core form, Existential Nihilism, it
is the belief that life has no meaning, that
all morality is meaningless, and that even
truth is meaningless.
If you have watched much of the show you can
probably guess I’ve a low view of that philosophy,
and indeed tend to use Nihilism like a curse
word, at least in its pure form, there are
countless variations and I don’t know them
all so won’t use a broad brush.
Nihlism essentially extends out of the notion
that science doesn’t indicate life has meaning
or purpose, while ignoring that since its
inception science has been acknowledged to
be incapable of addressing such concepts.
In spite of this, folks get surprised that
science fails to detect abstract concepts.
If you use a metal detector to hunt for comedy,
you will not find it, and no the answer isn’t
to get a detector that finds paper or a device
that can play digital media to detect a comedy
book or video.
Science can’t detect abstract concepts,
like purposes and meaning, and it can’t
detect humor either, it can just measure laughter.
Similarly stuff like love, hate, happiness,
justice, and so on leave physical footprints,
hormones attached to emotions or serving as
their means of transmission, but they are
not the thing itself, which is abstract.
So unsurprisingly science finds no meaning
or purpose, and yet it's hard not to see that
absence and figure it probably means nothing
is there.
Especially in a civilization where science
has done so much for us, we are prone to thinking
it’s the only way to find valid answers
or that questions it can’t answer have no
answers.
Even when we don’t, when we say the other
areas of knowledge have value too, so often
it's in the voice of the parent assuring their
child that just because their sibling is a
valedictorian going to the Ivy League on a
football scholarship next year, doesn’t
mean they don’t love them just as much.
So science doesn’t allow us to prove life
has a purpose, but it has given us so many
other really good answers to other things,
therefore if it can’t find a purpose to
life, then life probably has no purpose.
The assumption that the Universe works this
way is essentially the mindset we see envisioned
in the Cosmic Horror genre written by folks
like H.P.
Lovecraft, and it makes for amazing fiction
but it's no place I would want to live…
to be fair it isn’t implied the folks living
in those stories want to live there either,
they just have no choice.
So where would I want to live?
Well ideally a Post-Scarcity Civilization.
This is a concept we discuss a lot on the
show, but as a reminder a post-scarcity civilization
is one in which there are no scarcities of
important resources, they’re cheap enough
that everyone can have an abundant supply.
But this doesn’t mean infinite supplies
of everything, which wouldn’t really work
well in a finite Universe.
Neither does this mean an end to work or economies.
Manufacturing is a smaller sector of the economy
than the service industry for instance.
In the Star Trek universe, we see folks giving
haircuts and serving drinks in Ten Forward,
Benjamin Sisko’s father running a restaurant,
and Mr Boothby the Starfleet Academy gardener
dispensing wisdom to cadets who consider him
as wiser than their professors.
You could build robots to do those jobs, and
in Star Trek it is assumed that the folks
doing it are doing so for enjoyment or even
as it's their life calling.
So in a world absent crushing concerns over
food, shelter, and basic services like medicine,
where survival and a standard of living well
above survival are accomplished with minimal
human work, a post-scarcity society is really
one with a scarcity of anxiety over basic
human needs and wants.
This is important to a discussion of purpose
because for much of history, day to day purpose
was simply survival, our ancestors were focused
on finding their next meal and safe place
to sleep.
Getting and keeping those was their main purpose,
and only folks better off generally had time
to worry if it all had a purpose, let alone
to feel anxious about lacking a sense of purpose
and to pine for one.
I’d like to focus on this point because
of how scarcity, and a lack thereof, alter
decision making, both individually, and at
the group level.
This is best embodied by two concepts, Decision
Fatigue and the Scarcity Trap.
Decision Fatigue, also called ego depletion,
is the recognition that making decisions exhausts
and stresses a person, making each subsequent
decision worse and harder until the fatigue
is removed.
This can involve major decisions or minor
ones, but a person with great resources can
strip the minor decisions out in favor of
habits and quick, easy decisions.
And while all decisions generate fatigue,
there is a big difference between a well-off
person deciding what color of frames they
want for their glasses, and someone deciding
whether to get glasses or groceries, because
they only have resources to do one or the
other.
The Scarcity Trap is where a person making
that decision will be fixated on how much
they need a given item and get more of it
than they need, or focus decisions on acquiring
it.
This has a huge effect on both the behaviour
of individuals and groups, and generally pushes
us toward making unwise decisions out of panic
or desperation.
And when a group as a whole has these scarcities,
it can often drive what folks focus on for
improving their social status or what decisions
the group makes, and in both cases, often
very unwisely.
As an example, Humans need air, and there
is a finite supply of it.
But we are effectively post-scarcity where
air is concerned, because a reasonable person
would feel no anxiety about its scarcity or
acquiring their next breath.
Sure, a person might have a pathological fear
of running out of air, or an illness that
makes breathing difficult.
They might worry about air quality, or have
suffered a rare traumatic event that made
that next breath hard to obtain, but our civilization
is not shaped by widespread anxiety about
spontaneous suffocation.
We don’t expend vast efforts stockpiling
air, hoarding it, managing access to it, making
money off of it, showing it off to our friends,
or fighting wars over it.
We can recognize its value, but the decision
to take that next breath or the fear of where
it will come from aren’t influencing our
culture or eroding our judgement.
In the developed Western world, clean water
is similarly abundant, the scarcity of it
having been solved.
We need air and water, but our environment
and society provide them so abundantly that
they are essentially a background.
To be sure, resources like food or water influence
cultures in thousands of ways: peoples who
develop next to big freshwater lakes are very
different from those living in deserts, and
if you have to pay for your air it's going
to have a big influence on your culture, even
if it’s really cheap.
Post-scarcity is not the same as people not
knowing or caring about where their needs
come from.
For that matter, someone who grew up poor
and often went to bed hungry but later became
a billionaire is still likely to show behavior
influenced by that earlier want of food.
They might glut themselves at every meal,
or obsess over never wasting a scrap or letting
others do so, or something else far more moderate,
but that stamp is always on their brain.
Civilizations influenced by scarcity might
specifically aim to ingrain their youths with
such deprivations too, like raising them in
humble circumstances, or on virtual worlds
where they lead more difficult lives, in order
to put potentially useful stamps on their
brains.
We often use Maslow’s well-known Hierarchy
of Needs as a way of judging how far into
post-scarcity a civilization is, and in what
ways.
Maslow’s Hierarchy is a pyramid of human
needs or wants, with basic physiological needs
like sleep or food or air at the bottom, and
more sophisticated or abstract needs like
friendship, security, or self-esteem at higher
levels.
There’s debate about the format of the hierarchy,
and objections to what wants and needs should
be placed on which tiers, or how they’re
divided up, but we’re just using it here
for a familiar example.
In a post-scarcity civilization, most of those
basic bottom needs are fairly well covered,
but it might extend to higher needs and wants
as well.
Unsurprisingly, things like purpose will need
to be there in some way, though one can argue
that our biology and society adapt to solve
those problems through assigning ‘purposes’
which check those needs.
The reason this poses a potential problem
is that in satisfying these needs, we also
eliminate the purposes tied to them, so as
a society becomes increasingly post-scarcity,
it might also fall victim to its own success,
with a bunch of bored but hedonistic layabouts
spending all their time glutting themselves
and demanding new entertainments, since they
have no underlying motivations to do anything
else, except perhaps ensuring that society
continues to function at the status quo.
And this society doesn’t need much to function
if they’ve got Star Trek technology.
We are not shown the person who used their
replicator to build a spaceship, with its
own replicator and holodeck and fusion plant
and hologram doctors, or the average citizen
who flew off to the middle of nowhere to wallow
in a personal paradise.
But Scott Adams, the creator of the Dilbert
comic strip, famously mused that if the Star
Trek holodeck were ever invented, it would
be humanity’s last invention because no
one would ever do anything else after that,
and it’s easy to see where that would be
a temptation.
But hedonism is often a product of boredom
or apathy as much as desire.
Pleasures can get old, but this may lead us
to redouble our efforts toward them rather
than simply moving on, because moving on can
get old, too.
And pleasures that have lost their novelty
can still provide distraction from feeling
a lack of purpose.
So the notion is that we may have to invent
some sort of purpose for everyone to follow.
I think I worry about this less than most,
because I’ve always figured if purpose and
morality really are just human inventions,
our ancestors already have a proven track
record of being good at making them, and we
are more clever than they.
None of this is new thought, folks have contemplated
whether or not morality and purpose were human
inventions rather than discoveries since at
least way back to Classical Greece and probably
well before, it’s certainly a common thread
in philosophy and theology all over the world’s
ancient civilizations.
My usual reminder to folks is that there’s
a lot more of that pyramid beyond basic physical
needs, and we often have a greater desire
to see those fulfilled.
I don’t think that access to an infinite
supply of sex, drugs, and rock and roll is
going to result in everyone spending all their
time partying.
Every generation tends to be worried the next
one is indulging in bad vices or over-indulging,
and it’s probably not a coincidence that
these worries seem connected to needs and
desires that either did not previously exist,
or ones that were somehow more difficult to
satisfy.
I could imagine a world where air was limited,
like a new colony on Mars or the Moon, having
folks who worried their hedonistic offspring
would spend all their time hyperventilating.
But most things we enjoy have a point of optimal
satiation, and a point of diminishing returns.
We also have any number of sufficiently well-off
people nowadays or in the past who had various
vices they could have indulged constantly
yet did not.
Granted we have a ton of folks who are spoiled
or self-indulgent too but I’m not really
sure access to the ability to indulge correlates
to a desire to do so, just a capacity for
those who do.
And let's not fool ourselves here, if you
are watching or listening to this show you
are probably living better than 99% of humans
who ever existed and certainly in many regards.
They might think of us as spoiled self-indulgent
brats, they might be right too but I think
not, and that greater prosperity has let us
indulge in things they did not, like addressing
civil rights or economic inequality.
But scarcity of a thing can drive desire for
it.
Pepper used to be a luxury good in Europe,
and some folks so valued it that once their
means allowed for it they overused it in every
dish they could, and while I’d imagine there
have been examples of pepper addiction or
hoarding down the years, it doesn’t really
seem to be a thing society worries on much.
Same for any number of other spices whose
rarity and trade drove whole economies in
the past.
Scarcity followed by abundance does not equate
to a problem of overuse.
If anything, for a lot of luxuries it’s
only their rarity that makes some people fixate
on it.
That’s a thing to keep in mind when we contemplate
scarce resources in advanced civilizations
like being the owner of one of the few remaining
copies of Detective Comics #27.
We might call it a silly desire to seek to
own a physical copy of the first story with
Batman in it, especially given that you can
see scanned copies of it, and it's honestly
not very good.
It still sold for 1.5 Million dollars at an
auction last November.
Alternatively abundance can lead to something
getting boring and for certain habits or desires
that can lead to constantly needing or wanting
a new fix, a new toy, some new variant on
it.
Variety is an inherently difficult desire
to sate.
Too much chocolate ice cream gets boring,
and you want 32 new flavors to indulge in,
though that reference is rather dated now
with easy access to thousands of ice cream
flavors.
This is not necessarily going to become pathological
though and we also have to remember that the
same sorts of technologies that can hypothetically
produce the perfect new drug are also the
sort that can hypothetically cure an addiction
by flipping a switch.
Of course, this brings up the other worry,
the dark mirror of the Post-Scarcity Civilization,
the Post-Discontent Society, one in which
needs are not so much met as bypassed.
People are simply made to be content and fulfilled,
with the usual assumption being mind-control
or indoctrination or something blinding them
to their lot.
It is one option though for giving folks a
purpose, a post-discontent society in which
deep senses of purpose and fulfillment are
chemically or cybernetically imposed directly
onto our neurology.
That’s a favorite shared nightmare of both
me and the term Post-Discontent’s originator,
Jerry Guern, that a civilization might go
that path--and maybe more disturbing, that
folks might knowingly embrace it.
That someone who was plagued by a feeling
of purpose being an illusion might voluntary
have a purpose wired into them as a certainty
and have their memory of that uncertainty
erased, a bit akin to Cypher from the Matrix
betraying his fellow crewmembers in exchange
for being restored to the fake reality in
the Matrix.
And if your civilization is really good at
neurohacking, you would skip the eating filet
mignon and imagining that you’re a rich
actor, and just cut directly to states of
pleasure and permanent fulfillment you were
trying to gain from those achievements.
For my part I don’t think we ever really
need to worry about folks running out of purposes,
at the very least we are darned inventive
and darned good at self-deception.
So if a sense of purpose and meaning really
are mere conceits of humanity, then humanity
might be too smart to be deceived by the illusion.
However I think it more likely we would just
be smarter at crafting new and better illusions.
Incidentally I do not believe purpose is a
human construct or that life has only the
meaning we give it, but it does remain one
of my favorite albeit unlikely Fermi Paradox
Solutions, that advanced civilizations come
to be so smart and rationale that they can’t
avoid seeing how illusory and fake purpose
and meaning are and commit mass suicide, either
the quick way in despair or the slow way from
not seeing the point of building things or
raising children.
It doesn’t work as a Fermi Paradox solution
incidentally, I’m just fond of it for the
same reason I enjoy reading books in the Cosmic
Horror Genre.
First it assumes there is an illusion to see
through, which I don’t personally believe
but again can’t prove.
Second, it assumes the folks seeing through
it are all going to see through it at once,
and destroy themselves.
But that would require everyone in your civilization
to psychologically collapse over having their
illusions taken away, which is something only
the most rare and extreme humans do.
In practice you would expect two surviving
groups, the ones who guessed what drove others
to destroy themselves and took actions like
we just suggested, to burn a contrived but
purpose-giving conviction into their mind
or that of other folks, and another group
that just refused to even accept the premise.
They and their descendants are going to be
fairly resistant to that scenario in much
the same way we contemplate for folks who
avoided really addictive drugs or virtual
reality, if their civilization has big chunks
of itself going off to use those to the point
the civilization is collapsing, they will
still survive and pass on an intense distrust
of those options to their kids.
And again, we should only assume a post-scarcity
civilization is one wallowing in its own hedonistic
indulgence if the society and its individuals
actually want to.
If they have some other purpose that they
see as more important than that, they will
have the tools for keeping those indulgences
from interfering in pursuing those goals.
The same way most living human beings don't
use heroin, even if they can afford it and
even though heroin reputedly feels really
great, our descendants will have to consciously
refrain, as a society, from going down certain
indulgent paths that will lead to ruin.
Such being the case, what purposes are available?
Can we use existing ones or do we need to
create new ones?
Now we’re not necessarily contemplating
wildly new purposes either.
After all, with our civilization’s advancement
and the resulting free time available to many,
the growth of education, sports, games and
hobbies, and all types of other fulfilling
activities, has grown significantly.
Exploration, for instance, is a classic and
there’s a whole unexplored galaxy out there
with probably quintillions of mountains and
trenches we might climb or SCUBA dive into.
We also modify our own personal purposes a
lot and often they have some deeper purpose
too, or background motive, like a desire to
be the first at something or pre-eminent at
something and that’s a desire a classic
post-scarcity civilizations can not fill for
everyone.
There can only be one world champion at a
given sport, one richest person, one nobel
prize winner in a given science for a given
year, only one person owning the last copy
of Detective Comics #27.
Although to be cynical for a moment, folks
might flee into virtual reality and have their
brain tinkered with so they believed they
were that champion.
Forget about illusions so good they feel real,
and imagine self-delusions so good you can’t
even know that they aren’t real.
You don’t even know you’re in it because
you voluntarily had such knowledge removed
from your mind and maybe even had a constraint
added to prevent you noticing any indications
it was fake.
That seems like such a terrifying tool, like
some Virtual Reality equivalent to Nuclear
Weapons or Heroin, a civilization destroyer.
And it might be too, because however addictive
a virtual realm might be for us, being able
to fully believe in the lie is even more powerful.
But before we get lured into dreading that
existential crisis, let’s remember that
it should be just as easy for someone to have
their brain imprinted with a strong compulsion
to never go down that road, or to have a contract
written up giving someone power of attorney
to yank them out of VR and brain-zap them
back into reality complete with a desire not
to return to that fake world.
So you set yourself up with a brainwash that
keeps you from wanting to spend eternity in
such indulgences and always have some sort
of timer or such on your use of it.
Then someone could go enjoy their vacation
in VR believing they were a comic book hero
and leave that with total recall of it, but
entirely able to return to normality.
I do believe it will be a challenge in the
future for people to find a purpose, same
as it is now, but fundamentally I just can’t
see it being any harder than now or for them
to have any new insights on the topic brought
to them by more advanced science.
Knowledge and Prosperity give us many things
and will give people in the future more, it
can give you new ways to find a purpose or
pursue one, but it shouldn’t deprive us
of a sense of Purpose.
Technology has consistently helped free us
from the chains limiting us, and liberating
us to pursue purpose, and there’s nothing
liberating about a lack of purpose.
Our ancestors lived in a harsher world than
us, and being preoccupied with overcoming
its scarcities and hardships gave them a pretty
clear sense of purpose.
Even if mere survival doesn’t seem like
a very inspiring purpose to us, it is quite
compelling.
This is part of why we fear the horn of plenty
in a post-scarcity world will take away what
we need the most, challenge and purpose.
And yet, technology and knowledge have freed
us from being so preoccupied with mere survival.
They have solved many of our problems, including
many of the problems they caused.
There’s no reason to suspect that finding
a sense of purpose will be a sudden exception
to that trend.
I do believe it will be a challenge in the
future for people to find a purpose, but I
see no concrete reason to believe it will
be any harder than it is now.
And a major advantage they’ll have over
us is that their latest scientific insights
into the issue will stem from far more advanced
science than ours.
And again, just because science can’t speak
to abstract concepts like if life really has
a meaning or if you have a purpose, does not
mean it can not help us with the issues involved
in contemplating the topic.
And there’s a final, personal thought I’d
like to close this episode on.
This goes back to the discussion about this
proposed episode’s title and the big response
it got in the Facebook poll.
I can’t help but feel there was an unspoken
question in there, as to how can we find a
sense of purpose today, in our own world?
I often say the worst vice is advice, but
at risk of ignoring my own, I’ll try offering
some up on that matter.
Our world isn’t quite Post-Scarcity, but
it’s certainly Post a lot more Scarcity
than our grandparents’ world was.
And there are plenty of signs, some subtle
and some not-subtle, that our society is fraying
at the edges psychologically.
Relatively very few people in the developed
world are actually starving, but stress is
abundant and many are plagued by loneliness
and depression, having trouble finding meaningful
relationships or work and hobbies that bring
them any sense of purpose.
To make matters worse, the people and organizations
eagerly offering their suggestions to you
on how to find your sense of purpose sometimes
have their own purposes in mind, not yours.
Well, here’s what I can offer, if you’re
feeling a lack of a real sense of purpose.
Explore.
Keep yourself continually taking in and experiencing
new pursuits, new ideas, and new people.
Whatever is going to give you a sense of purpose
in life, it will be birthed from one of those.
People often look at science fiction or fantasy
as escapism from reality, and it can be, but
it can also be the way to explore to find
your place in that reality.
The important thing to take away from those
examples is that on the day you first encounter
the pursuits and people who will be the most
important to you, that will give your life
its deepest sense of purpose and meaning,
you probably will not be able to recognize
them as that.
You’ll have no idea how important they’ll
be to your life until they’re in it for
a while.
And that means that if you’re searching
for them, you’re searching for something
you won’t recognize when you find it.
And that means you simply have to invite as
many new experiences and people into your
life as you can, though while being responsible
about it.
I’ve often mentioned how lucky I’ve been
in the friends and mentors I’ve gotten to
have in life, and almost all of them were
first encountered by bizarre coincidence,
usually months or years before we’d meet
again and become friends.
My best friend Bill I first saw while passing
by a new platoon at boot camp, not long before
I was to graduate, where the Drill Sergeant
was busy chewing them out and smoking them
while one of them grinned on evilly through
the whole thing, and we would meet again on
another continent a few months later, where
I’d recognize him by that grin.
My other best friend Jason shared a hometown
with me and we never met till on yet another
continent, in a warzone, and just in passing
until bumping into him at home.
Not long after he’d introduce me to my future
wife Sarah, though it would be years before
we became good friends and more till we started
dating and got married.
Each one of them would play a big and totally
coincidental role in me forming the channel
years later.
I’ve lost track of all the peculiar coincidences
life has offered, and all the forks in the
road taken or not taken, but there were a
lot of lessons and experiences along the way.
If nothing else, the journey is often as interesting
as the destination.
And those experiences will change you.
Or at least they’ll draw out parts of you
that you didn’t know were there.
Don’t fight that, invite it to happen.
Push yourself toward that kind of change.
Try new things that are well outside your
current set of interests, though again, responsibly
and carefully.
Meet people of different kinds than you’ve
known.
And especially, if there’s something that
intimidates you, go practice at it.
Don’t focus on trying to get an opportunity
or self-enlightenment from a given experience,
just enjoy the experience.
If you’re helping out at a charity, or helping
a friend, focus on giving help, not on how
it might help you feel better.
It’s been a rough year, there’s no shortage
of folks who could use a hand, and if it's
been a rough year for you, giving others a
hand might make your year feel a bit better.
And so, until you discover that sense of purpose,
that exploration, that seeking of purpose,
can be what gives you your sense of purpose…
again sometimes the journey is as interesting
as the destination, and becomes the destination
itself.
The great thing about living in a Post-Mostly-Scarcity
civilization as we do, is that we have unprecedented
opportunities to explore in this way, by modern
travel, learning new things online, and connecting
with people in distant corners of the globe.
I’ve met countless awesome folks while doing
this show I’d never have been able to meet
in prior times.
Future generations will be even freer than
us, to be certain, but we still enjoy greater
freedom to create our own lives in that way
than any generations before us.
Don’t miss the chance to do so, you are
not likely to regret it.
So we have a few announcements along with
our schedule coming up, but first, given that
our topic was about creating a sense of purpose,
and how often I get asked how to start your
own youtube show or podcast, it's probably
fair to acknowledge that a lot of my own purpose
and optimism comes from doing the show.
Our hobbies and work shouldn’t exclusively
define us but they’re a big part of who
we are and often a big part in filling us
with purpose and feeling of motivation.
If you’re thinking maybe doing a show or
podcast is something you want to try out,
I’d recommend Marques Brownlee’s “YouTube
Success” course over on Skillshare.
He’s funny, inspirational, and highly educational.
Fundamentally though, adding new skills to
your toolbox is probably one of the best ways
to work toward finding or creating or enhancing
your sense of purpose, and Skillshare is a
great place to do that.
They have a ton of useful classes on virtually
every topic.
Perhaps you’re trying to adjust to working
in a new environment or just looking to pick
up some new skill or hobby, Skillshare has
a course for it, whether you’re a beginner,
a pro, a dabler, or a master, Skillshare has
thousands of classes on a wide variety of
topics from experts to help you learn.
Skillshare is an online learning community
for creatives, where millions come together
to take the next step in their creative journey,
and Members get unlimited access to thousands
of inspiring classes, with hands-on projects
and feedback from a community of millions.
If you’d like to give it a try the first
1,000 people to click the link in my episode
description will get a free trial of Skillshare
premium so you can explore your creativity.
Act now, and start learning, today.
Before we get to our upcoming episode schedule,
I’d like to thank Jerry Guern, one of our
longtime editors, for his help with this challenging
episode.
If all this discussion of purpose has you
in a mood for some deep fictional ponderings
on the topic, I highly recommend Jerry’s
6-minute metaphysical fantasy story, aptly
named “Purpose”.
I won’t spoil any of it, but I recommend
you go listen to it over on Jerry’s short
story channel, which is aptly named, “Jerry’s
Stories”.
I’ve put a link to “Purpose” in the
Description below and as an in-video card.
So we were talking about Purpose for humans
in the future, but what we call humans now
might not be entirely accurate down the road,
as genetic, cybernetic, and robotic sciences
improve, and next week we’ll be exploring
the concepts of transhumanism and post-humans.
Then we’ll close out April with our Monthly
Livestream Q&A on Sunday, April 25th at 4pm
Eastern Time, and close April out with another
look at the Fermi Paradox, on April 29th,
as we contemplate the impact Multiverses and
the Many Worlds Interpretation of Quantum
Mechanics might have on encountering alien
intelligences.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
