Whether it’s Yavin IV or Endor from 
Star Wars or Pandora from Avatar,  
science fiction has shown us many planets 
with life that were actually moons,  
but as science begins showing us our 
first real exomoons, we may discover  
that some already have life on them, or may 
make good candidates for future settlement. 
Earth has one of the largest moons in 
the solar system and the only moon of  
significance around a rocky planet, indeed our 
Moon is 5 or 6 times more massive than Pluto  
while Jupiter and Saturn’s largest Moons 
each have nearly half the mass of Mercury. 
Now, the reality is that our solar system is 
probably not a very representative example of  
what there is out in the Universe, indeed 
Earth’s Moon has long been suspected of  
being particularly anomalous and possibly 
a critical factor in why Earth has life.  
But with the exception of our Moon around our 
planet, which may or may not be bizarre in  
galactic terms, we have every reason to think that 
a planet as big as Jupiter could have moons which  
are fully as big as Earth. We have even found 
thousands of planets bigger than Jupiter – most of  
them warmer and closer to their star than Jupiter.
Now, that’s probably not the norm either,  
any more than 7 feet or two meter tall humans 
would be, but they sure are easier to spot in  
a crowd. In our hunt for exoplanets we see 
the biggest and brightest worlds that tug  
on their star most easily. Indeed, it's very 
likely that the first exomoons we spot will  
disproportionately be the big and warm ones 
orbiting big and brightly-lit gas giants. 
This raises the questions of if life could 
naturally arise in systems similar to Earth,  
but on their moons rather than on planets 
themselves, and whether or not we would  
choose to colonize these systems, 
and that is what we’ll look at today. 
First we should start by asking what the 
fundamental differences between a Moon  
and a Planet are, and for that matter, 
a double planet. This is a little tricky  
since we don’t really have a fully agreed upon 
definition of a planet, but generally, any large  
body orbiting a star directly is a planet, and any 
body orbiting another which in turn orbits a star,  
is a moon. It's trickier in a binary planet 
case, where two bodies orbit each other. 
Also, if you’re curious, a moon can 
have a satellite too, or sub-satellite,  
though stability can be tricky. This is usually 
called a submoon, but there are a number of terms  
suggested for that, from moonitos or moonettes 
to moon-moons or ‘moooons’ with four O’s. And  
I want to contemplate them today too, along 
with a Double-Moon. A good fictional example  
of this would be the Death Star II, which 
orbited the exomoon of Endor in Star Wars. 
But the real difference from a planet to a moon 
are that its day length is essentially the time  
it takes to orbit its planet, that it can be 
tidally heated by that planet significantly,  
and that it will almost inevitably be 
tidally locked to that planet, the sub-moon  
and double-moon case being examples of exceptions.
To see what that truly means, let’s imagine I live  
on Endor for the moment. I recently let my kids 
see the old Ewok films, so I’m reminded how much I  
would hate living there, and that canon wars over 
Star Wars predate the Prequels or Disney films.  
Now, details are scarce and inconsistent on 
the world, as it is fictional – incidentally,  
we will use the term ‘world’ generically for any 
planet, moon, dwarf planet, or even very large  
space habitat – but wookiepedia tells me it has a 
rotational period of 18 hours and orbits every 402  
days – which I am assuming means that that’s the 
planet’s time orbiting its sun – irritatingly also  
called Endor, though we’ll call them Endor Prime 
and Endor’s Sun for simplicity. This is a decent  
inference as the Moon of Endor would be expected 
to orbit Endor Prime in the same amount of time it  
spun on its axis once. We expect very nearly every 
naturally occurring moon to be tidally locked,  
always showing the same face to its planet.
This amusingly means that one side of the  
Moon can always see Endor Prime and the 
other never does. A civilization on the  
outer hemisphere of the planet gets the same 
daylight and nighttime as the other side,  
but would never see that planet or know of it till 
it reached its age of sail perhaps. Which might be  
quite the shock to them when they first saw it.
The other half of the moon would be the inner  
hemisphere, always pointing to the planet, that 
planet is vastly larger in the sky than the actual  
Sun is, and solar eclipses might be very common 
events, potentially daily, and far longer than the  
brief ones here on Earth, when our Moon briefly 
eclipses the Sun. Indeed this will be the darkest  
time they have, given that during their night time 
their Planet will be glowing far more brightly  
than our Moon does being that it's so much bigger.
We are told Endor has a diameter of 4900  
kilometers, barely a third of Earths, and if we 
assumed Earth’s density, Endor would mass about  
an 18th of what Earth does and about 4 times 
what our own Moon does. That is probably being  
generous too, Earth is the densest known object 
in our solar system and the densest known Moon,  
Io, is only 60% as dense, probably owing to 
it being the closest of Jupiter’s big moons,  
with an orbital period of 42 hours, causing it 
to be a tidally-wracked volcanic world, spewing  
lighter elements from its volcanoes. If Endor 
did have such a density, Earth’s, its gravity  
would be around a third of ours on its surface, 
and more like a sixth if it was comparable to Io. 
This is not a good candidate for holding an 
atmosphere, though we’re told and shown that  
Endor has a breathable atmosphere. The other thing 
to keep in mind is that unless Star Wars Standard  
Hours are way different from ours, that is one 
very fast orbital period. Of Jupiter’s 60 or  
more moons, only 4 are closer to Jupiter than 
the Galilean Moons, the big visible ones, and  
only they have periods of 18 hours or fewer, with 
Io being next at 42 hours, Europa next at double  
that, Ganymede next at double that again, and 
Callisto slightly more than double that, at 16.7  
days. And again, that’s how long the Sun takes 
between sunrises too, minus some mismatch in terms  
of sidereal orbit vs solar time or planet time. 
Incidentally it is quite common for multi-moon  
systems to be in orbital resonances where the 
period of one is an integer multiple of another. 
Now, the more massive a planet is, the shorter 
it takes an object to orbit at the same distance  
from its center, or the barycenter anyway, as 
orbit goes on the combined mass of the system,  
not just the planet. Jupiter’s got a huge mass, 
and is fairly standard for gas giant density,  
with Saturn having a very low density, making it 
rather wide in size and probably explaining why  
its nearest Moon takes almost a full day to orbit, 
while Jupiter’s closest satellite takes just 7  
hours. We don’t know the Mass of Endor Prime but 
it makes matters easier if it’s a lot more massive  
than Jupiter. Orbital Period goes with the inverse 
square root of mass, so quadruple the mass,  
half the orbital period at the same distance from 
the primary. A Jovian that is 9 or 16 times more  
massive than Jupiter having an Earth-sized or 
Endor-sized moon seems entirely plausible and Io  
would orbit those at a third or a quarter of its 
current rate of 42 hours, 14 or 10 hours, meaning  
a bigger Moon that was at the 18 hour mark would 
probably not be the volcanic death trap Io is. 
I probably don’t need to point out that Endor 
isn’t very scientifically realistic regardless,  
even if its primary was on the hazy line between 
brown dwarf and red dwarf, a period of 18 hours  
is going to be dubious while allowing that world 
not to be shaken like a ball of Jello. Of course,  
it might well have been pretty volcanic and 
maybe derived its thicker atmosphere from that,  
hard to say, as all life on the world was 
presumably wiped out a few days after the Death  
Star II exploded right next to it, which ended 
the dual abomination of the Empire and the Ewoks. 
24 Hours is more viable as a probable 
Earth-like exomoon but mostly only  
around Brown Dwarfs. Realistically if you 
need that day length, go find a planet,  
which arguably is what the moon of a brown dwarf 
would be anyway, given that they’re failed stars.  
That potentially leads to the question of what 
you call a body orbiting a stellar remnant,  
though I think planet still applies, and if 
we need any differentiation in a multi star  
system in terms of what we call an object 
orbiting 1 star as opposed to another,  
or one that orbits both. The word 
Planet would do, but I’d speculate  
that civilizations that arose in such systems 
would have specific words for each of them. 
Native environments like that certainly have an 
impact on culture and life. For instance, most  
habitable moons, or Gaian Moons for shorthand, 
probably have a day length somewhere between a  
couple Earth days and a week or more. Generally 
we consider something a potentially stable orbit,  
as a moon, or submoon, if its orbital distance 
from the planet is no more than a ninth of the  
orbital distance that planet is from its star. 
That is a very loose rule of thumb incidentally. 
That does mean though that you could potentially 
have life arise on a sub-moon of a Hycean Planet  
orbiting a Brown Dwarf that was binary to a red 
Dwarf which in turn orbited an F or A type star  
which in turn orbited a giant, though for life 
to have arisen it would have had to have had  
enough time pass for that giant to have turned 
into either a neutron star or a black hole,  
and yes, planetary systems can survive supernovae, 
they’d just have their surfaces blown off and need  
to re-cool, but that sort of event could cause a 
lot of moon or submoon formation in the process.  
That is a very unlikely system to exist, let 
alone for it to be stable, but not super-unlikely,  
and it would mean the satellite of a satellite 
of a satellite of a satellite of satellite,  
and I suppose we could add on to that by having 
it be orbiting a dwarf galaxy remnant which is  
gravitationally bound to a medium-sized galaxy 
that’s slowly being absorbed by a bigger one. 
It is pretty hard to say what qualifies as typical 
out there, but we suspect places like Jupiter’s  
Moon Europa of having life because it has tidal 
heating that would allow its suspected subsurface  
oceans to be churned up and given energy that 
would permit life to form and survive. Maintaining  
an open-sky atmosphere like Earth has, or 
Endor had before the blasted remains of the  
Death Star crashed into it, is harder.
And yes, for Star Wars enthusiasts,  
I’m aware they eventually did acknowledge the 
possibility of Endor Holocaust to retcon that  
the rebels put up all sorts of shields and 
tractor beams to save the Ewoks. But unless  
they were a lot less tardy than the writers 
retconning that, which seems unlikely since  
they would have had mere hours and they would 
presumably have been still fighting the Imperial  
Fleet or rescuing all those damaged ships, then 
I don’t buy that. Admittedly I might be biased,  
I hated the Ewoks as absurd and consider them an 
irritating stain on an otherwise excellent film. 
Can life be comfortable with a day 
that is 48 hours? Or a whole week,  
168 hours? I think so, though it would 
be hard to adapt to that as a colonist.  
For natural life, the big issue is that it makes 
photosynthesis less appealing as a power source,  
since it means a need for longer storage times, 
for your sugars while you wait for more sunlight,  
while at the same time your tidal heating sources 
should be much stronger. The reflected light  
of the planet the moon orbits, huge though it 
might seem in the sky, isn’t likely to reflect  
enough light to run photosynthesis though we 
could imagine a moon whose ecology was driven  
by the unequal but significant power sources of 
Sun, Tidal Heating, and reflected planet light,  
for the inner hemisphere, which is very hard not 
to call moonlight as it fills that functional hole  
only far, far brighter. In any event I do not 
see 48 hour or week long day lengths as a major  
hurdle to life in and of itself, or civilization.
There’s an interesting look at that on Colchis,  
the homeworld of the Word Bearers in Warhammer 
40,000, which was a planet, and one three times  
bigger than Earth and with a 170-hour-long 
day – just over a week - and 4.8 year long  
orbit of its Sun. There the human colonists have 
developed a different calendar over the centuries,  
and with a day lasting 7 times what ours 
is, they had 7 subdays, Dawnaway, Mornday,  
Long Noon, Post-Noon, Duskeve, Coldfall, and 
High Night, which would make more sense than just  
having your dawn be call Monday and progressing 
through the week until the Sun set on Fridays. 
I don’t recall if the world is described 
as having much seasonal variation,  
though if it had much axial tilt and 5-year-long 
years, you would have some very big variations  
by latitude in temperature in your year-long 
winter, where the sunshine might only last a  
quarter of your week-long day. That planet does 
not sound like a nice place to live, but the  
only book I know that was set there doesn’t 
describe it as even vaguely pleasant anyway. 
Moons might have similar issues as they don’t 
have a classic season – their axial tilt is  
with respect to their planet, not their Sun, but 
they would definitely have parallels, although  
probably more muted in most cases. For instance, 
a moon with a week-long day is very plausible,  
and for those living in its terminator with 
respect to the planet, much as with a planet  
tidally locked to its sun, that planet will 
rise and set a bit due to libration. This  
means that some parts of the moon would get 
to see their planet, or part of their planet,  
and how much they saw would depend on both the 
time of day and time of the planetary year. 
Libration comes in a few types and basically 
comes down to the fact that orbital mechanics  
rarely involves perfect circles and that planets 
and moons are roughly spherical, not perfectly  
spherical, and not point-like objects. Which 
means that if you and I are both on the other  
side of Earth at dawn and dusk looking at a full 
moon, I will be looking at the moon at a slightly  
different angle than you, same for two folks 
standing on the north and south pole, this is  
libration in longitude and latitude respectively. 
So too, the Moon is not in a circular orbit,  
but rather a rough ellipse, and orbits Earth at 
an angle, and so the bits you see, in spite of  
being tidally locked, alter a bit from that too.
Also, while something tidally locked does orbit  
a planet as often as it spins, things spin on 
their own axis at a constant rate, same number  
of degrees per hour, but their orbital velocity 
does change. We move around the sun faster when  
we’re closer to it, and the same for the Moon with 
regard to us, so even though the same face stays  
with us in general, it will lag behind as the Moon 
is falling closer to us and will catch up later,  
and as a result we see a slightly different face.
All in all, we can see 59% of the Moon from Earth,  
so long as we are patient and mobile in our 
observations, and this same sort of thing will  
apply to tidally-locked planets around suns 
and to exomoons around planets, which act as  
very bright moons for them. These are not going 
to be analogous to an Earth season in intensity  
but they would be noticeable and likely still have 
a biological impact, but surely a cultural one.  
Again though, none of this would be a barrier 
to life there, but it would be a headache for  
colonists to adapt to, and we need to be 
mindful of that in fictional portrayals. 
Pandora, the setting for the film Avatar and its 
recent sequel, is a near-Earth Moon fictionally  
set to orbit Alpha Centauri A, also called Rigil 
Kent in the real world, as we were discussing a  
few months back in our episode Journey to Alpha 
Centauri. Pandora has no submoons of its own  
but is one of 13 moons orbiting the primary 
planet, the gas giant Polyemphus, reportedly  
slightly smaller and denser than Jupiter. We’re 
told Pandora has a diameter 90% of Earth’s, and  
is .72 Earth Masses, making it basically identical 
in density to Earth, with 80% normal Earth gravity  
and a slightly thicker atmosphere, though at a 
lower pressure and a much different composition,  
and apparently the book “the Science of 
Avatar” lists it at 26 hour day length. 
I don’t own the book so I’ve only got that 
as secondary reference from someone saying  
so on reddit, along with Pandora not being 
tidally locked to the planet, so grain of salt,  
especially as the author is Stephen Baxter, one 
of the precious few scifi authors who knows his  
science and mostly sticks to them in his books, 
so I’m going to guess he did his legwork and gave  
either proper values or had some necessary 
handwave to match something forced in by the  
storyline. Again unless the gas giant was on the 
brown dwarf scale, having a 24 hour day and not  
being a tidally-wracked death world would be 
a stretch. Though if it isn’t tidally locked,  
which we could contrive an explanation 
for, then any number of day lengths  
are available just like with normal planets.
We can add one too, as colonists. Our normal  
trick for altering the lighting on a planet 
with weird day lengths is to put some orbital  
mirrors or shades up in a 24 hour period, 
that’s a lot trickier with a moon though,  
as the distance for a 24 hour orbit around it is 
likely outside that 1/9 orbital distance rule of  
thumb we mentioned earlier. That a moon can’t be 
stable if its orbital distance from a planet is  
more than a ninth the distance that planet is from 
its sun, and the same rule applies to submoons. 
A 24 hour orbit of Earth for instance, 
which for us is geosynchronous, occurs  
at 40,000 kilometers from Earth, a tenth the 
distance to the far less massive moon, meaning  
perturbation from the Moon is pretty small, and 
not even a thousandth the distance to the Sun.  
Many large moons would have a 24 hour orbital 
period around them for a satellite or submoon that  
was safely inside that 1-to-9 ratio. Perturbation, 
especially with other moons around, is going to be  
a big deal but when it comes to solar mirrors and 
shades we can correct even pretty big deviations  
by remembering they’re basically solar sails, 
and thus can function as Statites or Lagites,  
see our episode the Megastructure 
Compendium for more details on those. 
When it comes to large orbital stations though, 
rather than thin mirrors, things like O’Neill  
Cylinders, then those higher orbits get a lot 
trickier, and you probably would need computers  
constantly coordinating landings and takeoffs 
of ships from them to help with station-keeping.  
We have often contemplated settling moons 
of gas giants though, see colonizing Jupiter  
for more discussion, and in many cases these 
mini-solar systems will be preferable colonization  
targets so long as you’re not focused on having 
a planet with classic open air and skies. 
I thought we would wrap up today though by 
considering two hypothetical Earth Twins. First,  
we will look at an effective double planet, 
Njord, twinned to its larger partner Skadi,  
an Ice Giant, named for for Norse Ice Giantess 
and winter goddess Skadi, and her husband Njord,  
and hopefully I’m not butchering the pronunciation 
too much. Second, we will look at the planet Jill,  
orbiting the Brown Dwarf Tarter, which we’ll 
say is 50 Jupiter Masses. Jill Tarter is  
the astronomer who coined the term Brown 
Dwarf and is the former director of SETI,  
since I don’t feel like trying to 
borrow any more names from mythology. 
Now, Ice Giants are generally fairly dense 
compared to smaller gas giants, Saturn is the  
least dense planet but once you go up in mass 
much beyond that, Gas Giants and Brown Dwarfs  
all fall into a fairly narrow range of diameters 
and just keep getting denser till they hit the  
conditions to ignite as red dwarfs. Skadi is not 
as big as Neptune but rather a Hycean Planet eight  
times as massive as Earth, and Njord orbits it 
roughly every 24 hours at a distance of around  
55,000 miles or 89,000 kilometers. This is the 
orbit around the barycenter, which won’t be in  
either planet. As we discussed way, way back in 
our double planets episode, we loosely set the  
definition of double planet as when the masses 
are close enough that the barycenter – the place  
both bodies actually orbit, is not inside the 
larger world, like it is for Earth and the Moon. 
Njord and Skadi both have life on them, likely 
of shared origin, life started on one, and some  
asteroid impact or volcano managed to spread some 
small and tough microbes to the other. Unlike some  
examples in scifi, they do not share atmospheres 
you can fly between, Onderon and Dxun from Star  
Wars coming to mind, and I don’t think you could 
achieve that except by artificial means like we  
had with the Acheron River in Colonizing Pluto.
Njord is tidally-locked to Skadi but not the  
reverse, and again has an Earth-like mass, day 
length, and year too, orbiting a slightly dimmer  
K9 star, Njord is cooler than Earth and would 
be more so but enjoys tidal heating from Skadi.  
Skadi itself has deep oceans under a thick 
hydrogen-rich atmosphere and nothing from  
Njord could survive there without help, but 
many larger organisms live on Njord in its  
vast and dark seas. Thus, when technology arose 
on Njord, their Apollo project had no special  
problem reaching Skadi for orbiting, but getting 
robot scout machines down to the surface and able  
to transmit back up took a few more decades 
and their first crewed machines didn’t take  
place for a few decades later, when they were 
roughly parallel to modern Earth technology. 
Those were necessarily colony missions from 
the outset because the escape velocity from  
Skadi is almost double Njord’s or Earth’s, and 
so getting there is easy and so is getting down  
to the surface. But to stay in touch they 
needed to leave both orbital facilities and  
large blimp outposts in the atmosphere. 
Down on the surface, the settlements are  
essentially a mix of boat and submarine, as 
they need to keep a lower pressure inside  
than the very high surface pressure of Skadi.
For this reason the Njord didn’t enjoy any special  
advantage in early colonization efforts, Skadi’s 
close proximity and being host to life made it  
easier to get to and a big focus for their 
civilization. Afterall, Skadi is more than  
twice as wide as Earth and 5 times closer than 
the Moon is to Earth, making it 40 times wider in  
the sky of Njord than the Moon is on Earth, and 
over a thousand times brighter. Making it very  
present in the psyche of the people of Njord, even 
compared to our own relationship with the Moon,  
hanging there as a vast blue ball dimmer but 
much bigger than their more orange-colored sun. 
What’s more, there’s an entire large continent 
on Njord that is on the outer hemisphere of the  
planet and over which Skadi is never visible, 
and there are sometimes harsh feelings between  
the people of that continent and the inner 
hemisphere, who accuse them of worshipping Skadi,  
and are firmly convinced the giant kraken of 
Skadi are the embodiment of the demons of yore.  
So it was a hard effort to get to Skadi and didn’t 
translate too well onto any of the other worlds in  
their star system, none of which got an outpost 
let alone a colony for a few more centuries. 
Over on Jill, the largest of the moons of 
the Gas Supergiant or Brown Dwarf of Tarter,  
the process was a bit different. There 
too the star is a bit dimmer than our own,  
and Jill and Tarter are not even vaguely 
double planets, as Tarter outmasses Jill  
16,000 to 1. Jill orbits Tarter 661,000 miles or 
1,064,000 kilometers out, and does so every 24  
hours. Tarter is far more massive than Jupiter, 
nearly 50 times as much, and yet it actually has  
a smaller radius than Jupiter does. Thus, it is 
still huge in the sky of Jill, but not nearly as  
much as Jupiter is to Io, or Skadi is to Njord, 
even though it vastly outmasses both combined. 
It’s about ten times wider and a hundred times 
brighter than our own Moon, and it has a massive  
magnetic field that causes amazing aurora’s on 
Jill. Jill has its own submoon, the somewhat  
unimpressive Jack, which orbits every 36 hours 
and even though much closer than our own moon,  
is just a few hundred kilometers in radius, 
so isn’t drowning them in sub-moon-light.  
It was very easy for the first astronauts from 
Jill to reach Jack, it's just not as far uphill  
as our moon is, and Jack and Jill are but two 
of over 100 known moons in orbit of Tarter,  
which also has its own Trojan Asteroid Belt, each 
half of which has more bodies in it than our own  
trojans and Asteroid and Kuiper Belt combined.
So for the people of Jill, spreading to the  
mini solar system around Tarter was relative 
child’s play, hampered only by the rather high  
levels of radiation in space there. Within a few 
centuries of their first experiments with rockets,  
they had an outpost or colony on every rock worth 
naming, and even a few real space-based nations.  
After all, while getting off Jill was no easy 
task, all those smaller moons had low gravity  
and were far closer to each other than planets 
in our own solar system, even allowing real-time  
if rather laggy phone calls. They came to think of 
themselves more as the Tarterish than Jillianites,  
and were in a great position to launch 
themselves into interstellar space. 
Once out there of course, they generally found 
the moons of gas giants far more preferable as  
future homes, and their own SETI efforts were 
rather hampered as it was centuries before they  
ever thought to try to find Earth-sized moons 
that directly orbited Suns all on their own  
and spawned life. It just didn’t occur to them 
to look for life on those occasional pale blue  
dots they saw around some stars, especially that 
one with the 4 gas giants, the biggest of which  
was barely a flyspeck compared to Tarter and 
much too far from its own sun to host life.
So we’ll get to our schedule and announcements 
in a moment, but as a quick sidenote,  
this episode was originally titled Colonizing 
Giant Moons but the script changed focus a bit  
during writing. I recently made a bonus episode 
that’s a loose companion to today’s topic,  
contemplating how we could colonize binary star 
systems, that is out exclusively on Nebula,  
my streaming service, and explores more of what 
the problems for life emerging on, or settling on,  
worlds that aren’t your traditional case of 
one big planet orbiting one single yellow sun. 
Also for folks who didn’t know, outside this 
channel I wear a number of additional hats and one  
of those is overseeing elections in my area. I’m 
still on the governing board but I just stepped  
down from being the Chairman of that the same day 
I took over as the President of the National Space  
Society, last month. One of the more hair-raising 
things we have to deal with are the non-stop  
cyber-attacks on election security, one of the 
more serious ones having happened just this week,  
and thankfully all have been foiled without 
getting to the last lines of defense. It’s both  
a grim reminder though how pervasive cyberattacks 
are now and on a happier note, that you can defend  
yourself very well by taking some simple steps, 
like never using the same password at different  
websites or different accounts, always checking 
the address on email sent to you, and switching  
two-factor authentication on to everything.
Another critical piece of the puzzle to help  
shield you from having your browsing and personal 
data spied on is using a virtual private network,  
or VPN, like NordVPN, because it ensures that with 
just 1 click your data and browsing is getting  
encrypted and sent through one of their many 
thousands of servers throughout the world.  
An added benefit of which is that I don’t have 
to worry about viewing or shopping limitations  
based on where I am, like if some video is 
blocked in whatever country I’m visiting. 
But NordVPN isn’t just a VPN, their 
Threat Protection shields me from malware,  
trackers, and ads while their Dark Web 
Monitor notifies me if someone leaks my  
credentials and their Meshnet allows 
me to connect to my devices remotely  
and securely. My data is always protected 
by next-generation encryption, and NordVPN  
doesn’t track or share what I do online.
NordVPN’s new Proxy Browser Extensions,  
make it even easier to protect your 
privacy, let you bypass censorship,  
and keep you safe while you browse, use 
browser-based tools, or play browser games,  
and even customize it to decide which website 
sees your real IP address or your VPN’s IP. 
To try NordVPN out, risk free with a 30 day money 
back guarantee, go to NordVPN.com/isaacarthur,  
and enjoy NordVPN on up to six 
devices, on any major platform,  
with 24/7 customer support to help you whenever 
you need it. That’s NordVPN.com/isaacarthur.
As a headsup, while we usually have our Monthly 
livestream the last weekend of each month,  
my wife and I are off for our anniversary this 
last weekend of April and next month, for Memorial  
Day weekend, I’m in Frisco, Texas helping host 
the International Space Development Conference,  
so our livestreams are the second to last weekend 
for both April and May, and we’ll be having our  
monthly livestream Q&A, Sunday, April 23rd at 4pm 
Eastern time. Then we’ll be returning to Earth and  
the near future to talk about Smart Cities and 
the future of automation in urban environments  
and how that will change them. Then we’ll jump 
into May with a return to the Fermi Paradox,  
to discuss Dysonian SETI, and how we might 
find Kardashev 2 civilizations. Then we’ll  
look at a lot of the common misconceptions about 
life, the Universe, and Everything, on May 11th. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other 
ways, you can see those options by visiting  
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can 
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early  
and ad free on our streaming service, 
Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
