This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
For Christmas I got my friend one of those
step counters to wear, but it's telepathic
instead of bluetooth, because it’s the thought
that counts.
So it’s another Scifi Sunday here on Science
& Futurism with Isaac Arthur, where we explore
concepts out of science fiction and ask if
they can be science fact or how we might be
able to pull off something very similar under
known science.
And today’s topic is telepathy, an absolute
staple of science fiction in the 20th century.
Now it's hardly absent from modern scifi either
but I think psychic abilities in general seemed
much more plausible to folks before we started
having both complex computers and powerful
brain scanners that gave us a clearer picture
of how thinking worked and how hard natural
telepathy would be, much akin as we learned
that there’s a long step between powerful
computers and intelligent androids.
Now for today’s purpose I am going to be
working from the standpoint that ESP, telepathy,
telekinesis, precognition, retrocognition,
pyrokinesis, and a host of other psychic abilities
are entirely fictional or fraudulent but I
will add from the outset that this could be
wrong.
We will discuss some of the evidence for it,
and try to do so fairly, but evidence for
psychic abilities is at best limited while
open confessions of fraud and common sense
counterevidence is very abundant.
What do I mean by that comment “Common Sense
Counter Evidence”?
The precognition example is why the person
able to see the future hasn’t won the lottery
or made a killing on the stock market, in
favor of doing fortune telling in person or
even by phone.
This is what we often bring up in our Alien
Civilizations and Fermi Paradox series where
a given chain of reasoning for the behavior
of an alien civilization just skips over some
seemingly obvious and massively beneficial
alternate path.
One example would be abducting humans to collect
DNA from them when robbing graves, or lifting
it off skin cells left on coins, letters,
or garbage would seem vastly easier.
As an example of simultaneous alien and paranormal
cases, I was once given the case of an alien
speaking through a medium, in a similar case
to someone in the afterlife speaking through
one, and told that this was their means of
interstellar faster than light communication,
they telepathically reached out and spoke
through a distant host.
When asked how this could be validated the
answer was the obvious, report the occurrence
of a supernova whose light you have seen that
has not yet reached us but will shortly.
And such a thing is easily calculable and
any species at our level or higher should
have no problem fulfilling this request inside
a few days given that the Open Supernova Catalog
seems to add a new dozen candidate Supernovae
every day or two.
Now that only really works for the specific
cases like a medium where you are able to
ask questions of someone who should have the
answer, someone getting random flashes of
the future might get random images of spacetime
from all over the galaxy and trying to construct
a historical narrative from that is going
to be pretty hard compared to even doing something
like taking a thousand random pictures from
social media in the last decade and assembling
an idea of world events from them.
Stories often feature this sort of random
precognition and very appropriately show all
the ways knowledge of the future without clear
context can make you jump to bad conclusions.
So we don’t casually accuse people of fraud
for making claims like that, of just thinking
they’re getting random snapshots of the
future or similar, but any service they offer
for which they want to receive money or influence
should be easily testable.
If a person can see what card someone else
is holding, either by remote viewing or telepathic
mind reading, then they should have made a
killing at playing cards in Vegas and while
an individual might claim they think that
is cheating and wouldn’t do it, or have
done it but won’t admit to it less the casino
come to demand their money back, it would
seem unlikely we wouldn’t have found at
least one person who had these abilities and
gotten rich that way and been caught in the
act or confessed later.
I will also add that examples of police or
intelligence agencies employing psychics or
mind-readers is not even vaguely positive
evidence.
First, we had tons of honest to goodness respected
scientists who believed in psychic abilities
back in the day, so non-scientists thinking
it works is hardly a surprise just because
they are a government agent, and second, of
course our governments looked into, same for
aliens and a ton of other things we were or
are skeptical of.
We’re thorough, and we operate by consensus
a lot, and that means if a team of 10 people
has 8 who think psychic abilities is bunk,
1 who is on the fence, and 1 who is a believer,
we go ahead and check into it anyway.
Two other caveats though for fellow skeptics,
on this and other matters.
First, when it comes to the paranormal or
supernatural it is important to remember that
science is the study of the natural universe,
the supernatural by definition isn’t included
in that, and we start with a deductive bias
of assuming any phenomena will be of a natural
kind, which slants us against things outside
of the natural or even just outside our known
natural phenomena and functions.
I don’t think we have a lot of alternatives
but we can’t magically wave that away, and
it is flat out unscientific to say that science
will answer any question we currently do not
have an answer for, that is a leap of faith
justified by science’s fairly solid track
record.
Second, while I love Carl Sagan and consider
him something of a personal inspiration for
career and style, his popularization of the
idea that “Extraordinary Claims require
Extraordinary Evidence” also known as ECREE
or the Sagan Standard, has caused that idea
to be used way to casually in often the wrong
way.
For one thing, we don’t get to decide how
much evidence we get of any phenomena, and
what we find ordinary or extraordinary is
often subjective.
Often what we mean by this is what it takes
to prove something to others, so you’ll
need more evidence to convince your boss you’re
late to work because a UFO abducted you than
if you just said you got a flat tire, because
flat tires are a well known, common occurrence--not
that that proves it was the reason you were
late.
The general notion there is that one option
was mundane and easy to believe, and the other
was neither, thus there’s a way lower threshold
for convincing people that mundane event occurred.
However we should always keep in mind that
99 occasions of something happening in some
fashion doesn’t mean number 100 did too,
nor that if 99 claims of something have been
debunked or proven lies that incident 100
will be too.
Which in regular terms means that skeptical
is not the same as cynical or being a jerk,
and as tempting as it is to roll your eyes
at new claims of the paranormal or a perpetual
motion machine or what have you, you should
not because a lot of science has been on the
backs of highly unbelievable things turning
out to be true.
On the other side of that coin, asserting
something and assuming it’s true unless
you’re shown proof it's wrong is bad logic.
I get photos of strange lights in the sky
from folks all the time, and I have no idea
what they are, mundane object or UFO, and
so I haven’t ‘debunked’ their claim,
but they haven’t ‘bunked it’ yet either,
so to speak.
If you’re making a claim of the paranormal
or a perpetual motion machine, the burden
really is on you to give a polite and well-laid
out proof at least, with proper details and
presentation.
At the same time we probably want to be careful
to keep some humility about what the sciences
have proven and toward claims that seem at
odds with it.
And to return to telepathy, the simple answer
is that virtually all the experiments and
evidence done on it and other related extrasensory
and psychic phenomena involved experimental
methods or data that leaked like a sieve.
However there was a ton of such paranormal
data and it basically got blasted out to everywhere
in popular culture.
We see similar with a lot of modern phenomena
too and repetition tends to lend credibility
to ideas, even though we all know it should
not.
But again with telepathy it really wasn’t
viewed as terribly wacky.
There’s a March 1933 article on Testing
for Telepathy from E.E. Free, Ph.D. that was
in Scientific American that is just one of
many examples of it showing up in a popular
and credible format and that was fully fifty
years after the term Telepathy was coined
by Frederic Myers, one of the Founders of
SPR – the Society for Psychical Research,
of which the aforementioned Dr. Free was part.
This year marks the 140th anniversary of the
SPR’s founding in 1882 and in all that time
the SPR’s vigorous studies of parapsychology
has not resulted in them, as a group, being
willing to make any assertion of proof when
it comes to telepathy, mediums, apparitions,
ghosts, or a ton of other phenomena.
They have exposed a lot of fraud down the
years too and please don’t get the impression
this is a pro-phenomena group.
Arthur Conan Doyle, the famous creator of
Sherlock Holmes, resigned from the SPR because
he thought they required an overly restrictive
standard of proof.
So, essentially, Sherlock Holmes thought their
standards of evidence were too high.
Regardless, one of the key things mentioned
in Dr. Free’s article is the general assumption
that if telepathy or similar are real, then
this trait should be universal in humans even
if very modest.
This line of reasoning is something we see
in Isaac Asimov’s Foundation novels – in
which there are telepaths – by asserting
it was a trainable skill in everyone, and
this notion is very common in science fiction
of that period.
It admits to certain biological issues though.
First, our studies of the brain weren’t
finding any organ or bit of the brain that
seemed to be sensitive to external brain signals
or emit any sort of signal we could decode
as thought, and that becomes a much stronger
argument against as we get into the modern
era of advance computing, MRIs, and signal
decoding.
Second, it is hard to imagine what evolutionary
purpose many of these abilities would have
served.
It isn’t that hard to imagine a value to
an organ allowing us to speak mentally, the
existence of ears and vocal cords seem to
support that, the problems is I don’t need
a special organ for that when I already have
those.
I don’t need telekinesis when I can use
my mind to control my hands and feet to walk
over and move an object.
And we now have a much better idea how insanely
difficult it would be to create a genuine
real time mind-reader, so the effort to duplicate
something we already have from a practical
standpoint seems implausible, and also that
it should be something dormant we are not
aware of.
I know my hands and ears and eyes exist, if
I didn’t, if I couldn’t use them, then
they would represent ridiculous expensive
objects serving no purpose, a big no-no in
evolution.
It’s also hard to see how early limited
forms of these could develop, when we already
have eyes and ears and mouth and hands, into
an evolutionarily useful progression of weak
to better.
Now this isn’t universal.
Precognition is an obvious advantage, indeed
our brains are very heavily setup to engage
in predictive simulation with that in mind.
Though as Frank Herbert demonstrates in his
later Dune novels, one very obvious adaptation
evolution might come up with is blurring someone
from other people’s precognition.
Dune is one of many examples of psychic abilities
in fiction, much like the Foundation, and
those two series are usually considered the
#1 and #2 scifi book series of all time on
most lists I’ve seen, number 3 is often
listed as the Ender’s Game series, which
features a telepathic alien hive mind.
I’d say that more than half of the classic
scifi book series do have them too, and even
higher in popular scifi TV series – I’m
not sure if I can think of a single scifi
TV series produced during the 20th century
that had more than a single season and didn’t
have telepathy or similar in it.
I think there’s also some wishful thinking
in there too.
I have it on fairly good authority that Asimov
and Clarke and a lot of the other greats from
the 1960s genuinely believed that we were
doomed to nuclear apocalypse and only some
sort of telepathic hive mind being developed
could prevent that and certainly that’s
an option that shows up in a lot of works,
like Asimov’s Foundation Series and Arthur
C. Clarke’s Childhood’s End.
If you think the world is doomed without telepathy,
maybe it makes it just a bit easier to believe
the phenomena might already be present.
Incidentally this does not mean any of them
believed in current human telepathy, some
openly did, but some vocally did not, and
some probably were thinking of it as an evolved
superhuman trait or something engineered like
technological telepathy that we’ll come
back to in a bit.
However, we should keep in mind that a lot
of folks believed in hive minds with telepathy
of some sort as a very real thing at that
time and it did often seem the logical explanation
for things like ant colonies and beehives.
That they used some sort of signaling method
we just missed, natural but unknown or even
mundane but weak like radio.
It turns out they did communicate invisibly,
it just turned out to be by chemicals we termed
to be pheromones in 1959 and our knowledge
of them was really very limited for a long
time, indeed they are still pretty mysterious.
Unlocking those may have vast agricultural,
ecological, and economical benefits.
I mentioned the Sagan Doctrine earlier, which
many translate as, when it comes to scientific
explanations, keep it simple first.
The easy claims, the simple ones, should be
investigated first and have lower standards
of evidence.
That point can be debated but it tends to
ring true on telepathy, and again it's only
as we have seen the sheer complexity of brains
through greater study and technology while
finding other existing methods of communication
that we can really say that telepathy is not
simple.
Before that, it really made a lot of sense
to assume we could sometimes read each other’s
mind.
We can, humans are amazingly good at interpreting
all sorts of indicators in each other’s
behavior and physiology.
It’s just we did it as something we learned
as little kids, getting the basics methods
down at ages we often do not remember, so
that the method is often entirely subconscious.
When we’re little babies we learn all sorts
of very simple communications, sending and
receiving, and we keep doing a lot of them
through our lifetimes so that they often show
up even when we are being intentionally dishonest.
Now consider that in the context of something
like Twin Telepathy, a very popular notion
throughout human history in one form or another,
and one I’ve even heard suggested as a byproduct
of Quantum Mechanics.
Now Quantum get’s hijacked for a lot of
quackery but one principle in there is the
spooky action at distance notion implied by
quantum entanglement of particle pairs, or
twinned particles, so to speak, and the usual
reasoning is that twins often do have private
languages, including body language, but it
doesn’t operate at a distance, yet seemed
more common in twins than in other friends
or relatives.
This particular version of telepathy, sometimes
called Clairsentience or a Mind Link, is often
thought to work better for twins.
Common examples would be one twin burning
their hand and the other twin feeling it a
thousand miles away at the same moment without
a telephone, especially when it's severe or
intense.
Needless to say proof of that is hard to obtain,
with the severity qualifier, obviously it's
very easy to poke twins to see if the other
felt it and this has been done tons of times
with no good evidence it's true.
It’s also fairly parallel as a concept to
a wizard’s familiar who are animals the
wizard keeps as a pet and can see or hear
through the eyes of as a scout or spy or messenger.
This is a very simple example of something
technology can make come true.
We could presumably do this today with any
dog trained to seeing-eye dog levels and given
a power supply for a phone, camera, and mic,
like some modern version of the St Bernard’s
cask.
Wiring that in as BCI – brain-computer-interfaces
– is obviously a higher level of tech but
one we’ve made a ton of progress in.
Similarly, something like remote-viewing no
longer seem as awesome when you can control
a distant camera by remote on your phone and
pick that up at the store for thirty bucks.
We have a lot of technology readily available
at our fingertips that makes such options
less arcane and more mundane, while also giving
us a much clearer picture how difficult the
invention actually was for evolution to try
to tackle.
And again, to try to tackle without it being
obvious.
We know about our hands and eyes and ears
and such, we use them, we know all of our
classic five senses – hearing, sight, smell,
taste, and touch – but we seem unaware of
any sixth sense.
But looking for one isn’t wrong, and indeed
these days we think the number is more like
18, not 5, so the hunt itself wasn’t wrong
even if its target was off.
These extra senses aren’t really very arcane
either, three are Itch, Pain, and Thermoception
– our sense of itchiness, pain, or hot and
cold turn out to be distinct from touch in
general, same for muscle tension, and awareness
of your body part locations.
We appear to be magnetically sensitive in
a very limited way but have documented it
strongly in many birds and other critters.
Indeed such magnetic sensitivity was sometimes
suspected as the natural means of telepathy,
based on early encephalograph technology and
partially vindicated by MRI brain scanners,
or Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
Some are arcane mostly in concept, like we
have a sense of time, which I remember rolling
my eyes at the first time I heard it phrased
as a sense like the big 5 but on reflection
was more of a ‘Oh, yeah that would be something
we really would need built in at a cellular
and nervous level’ and obviously shows up
in things like circadian rhythms.
And again, in all of that it shouldn’t seem
so strange we would have an unknown sixth
sense, even if it would need to be labeled
19 or 20 at this point.
Though I would use it instead as a reason
why we shouldn’t look down our noises at
all the folks who give it plausibility, especially
in the past.
More importantly though, at least for this
show, it seems strongly indicated to be part
of our future.
Now it is quite possible we may develop machines,
or genetically engineer organs even, that
are capable of scanning brains more accurately
than a modern MRI, and at a distance too.
This is not too concerning because it is unlikely
to happen in a vacuum and is easily countered.
Yes a tinfoil hat can indeed screw with such
a brain scan method and it would seem almost
inevitable that any device capable of reading
brains would be based on a technology that
could more easily scramble or interfere with
the signals.
Needless to say, it also requires huge computing
power to interpret any of those images and
signals into an actual thought and probably
long study of that specific human’s brain
while observing their interactions with their
environment too, individual human brains are
pretty unique in terms of their software or
wetware.
However, I wouldn’t view either of those
as major hurdles we wouldn’t be able to
overcome, it just means you aren’t likely
to ever see a brain scanner you could buy,
plug in at home or carry in your pocket, and
instantly use to scan random strangers thoughts.
I should also note that while a lot of us
do a lot of our thinking in words and phrases,
if you have ever stopped to pay attention
to what you were mentally speaking to yourself
it's often pretty jumbled and abridged and
way past what we tend to see from folks mumbling
or talking to themselves which usually is
pretty far from conversationally clear.
I sometimes forget to pause the recording
when I stop mid-script to handle something
and it’s a very good mic so it can pick
up my mutters and its usually borderline incomprehensible
even by my mumbly, speech-impediment standards.
There’s a bit I deleted from our last episode’s
script recordings which has me stopping for
a few moments and muttering “Need wife pen”
followed by a growl.
As best I can tell this represented a summation
of me thinking of a birthday gift for my wife,
wanting to jot it down before I forgot then
get back to recording, and complaining that
this same wife has a habit of borrowing pens
off my desk so I couldn’t find one.
I don’t know if we use the exact same bits
for mental thinking as sending words to our
vocal cords.
I just tried thinking words while saying something
else for a couple minutes and failed everytime,
which proves nothing, maybe you can, maybe
I could with more practice, but I should rather
expect that even if we could decode the signals
connected with us mentally speaking, we would
find them about as revealing and informative
as my three word frustrated growl about pens
and gifts.
I’d also bet on those being the easier brain
signals to decode coherently.
Telepathic mind-reading and telepathic message
sending tend to almost always be paired up
in scifi, but I think that too is from that
early and overly simplistic perspective from
our limited understanding of the mind back
in the 20th century.
It is much easier to imagine creatures developing
an alternative communication method using
some other sense than an actual brain reader,
again we have apparently got at least 18 senses
and many could provide one or more means of
communication.
Though given that pain is apparently one of
them, its rather terrifying to imagine that
evolving as a communication means.
Admittedly it is plausible enough, especially
as a general concept rather than strictly
in terms of terrestrial biology.
Some critter develops a method of emitting
a signal that stimulates pain receptors and
can either use that to scare predators or
rivals off, or to stun potential prey, and
overtime they develop a refined whisper version
akin to needle pinpricks that they can talk
with.
So when landing on an alien world, don’t
rule out the possibility they might have some
unconventional but painful ways of saying
hello.
Though the habit of encountering aliens who
can instantly read our minds right after encountering
us is at least as absurd as deciphering their
language or vice-versa from a few minutes
of speech.
They, and a future humanity, might very easily
have technological telepathy equivalents of
radio or just brain implants and BCI wiring
us directly not the internet, but that’s
not going to make for a fast connection and
translation so the systems – or brains – can
easily chat, in spite of being alien.
I also would not expect any species to be
unaware of how their brains send info and
the ways that can be monitored or recorded,
and it wouldn’t be surprising for everyone
to have scramblers and shields on their person
against spying even while they had antenna
and receivers specifically for communication
how and when they wanted.
This is the big one, either as some evolved,
genetically engineered, or technological pathway,
telepathy is not likely to be useful for spying
or ever result in casually allowing folks
to share thoughts without privacy, which seemed
often to be considered one of its selling
points in a lot of scifi, no more lies or
hiding, though in other works is seen as the
ultimate tyrannic police state.
Cultural views on such things might shift
over time, and even cyclically, but I suspect
the main purpose of technological telepathy
in the future will be to let us more quickly
and clearly share and interface words, images,
or ideas as we wish to, not unintentionally,
and likely with safeguards against accidental
sharing at least as strong as safeguards against
spying.
So is there telepathy now?
I don’t think so, it just seems like we
would have more solid evidence for something
so many have claimed and to which so many
of us would hardly object to being true.
I am open to any strong evidence to the contrary
but if you’re claiming precognition, I will
only accept that in the form of upcoming supernovae
or winning lottery number, next week’s by
preference.
Will we have telepathy in the future though?
Well, you don’t need to have precognition
to know that a lot of these mind powers have
some value, whether natural, mystical, or
technological in origin, so I would bet telepathy
will be coming to a brain near you.
So it’s a new year now and we have a lot
of episodes coming up for Early 2022 and we
will get to those in just a moment, but first,
odds are if you’re a fan of this show you’re
a fan of learning and maybe your new year’s
resolution was to put a bigger focus on learning.
If so, today’s sponsor, Brilliant, is a
great partner for that voyage and it does
help to have one, as January 1st resolution’s
often are February’s fading memories.
Whether you’re exercising your mind or your
body, a good partner and a good pathway are
critical to keep your moving and no one does
STEM-learning like Brilliant.
The best way to learn is at your own pace,
when and where you want on the topic’s that
intrigue you and that’s what makes Brilliant’s
methodology so effective.
Brilliant has an ever-growing catalogue of
courses in math, science, and computer science
that help you learn concepts by working through
them yourself in visual, hands-on ways.
In recent months, Brilliant has been tirelessly
revamping their courses to introduce even
more interactivity, and their brand-new Logic
course is an excellent example.
Packed with opportunities for hands-on problem
solving, exercises like their robot order
puzzle open up your mind and help you look
at problems in a completely new way.
To get started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or click on the link in the description, and
the first 200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
So that will wrap us up for today but this
Thursday we will be returning to the Civilizations
at the End of Time Series for a look at the
Big Rip, the cosmological model that might
see the Universe torn to shreds trillions
of times sooner than we normally expect things
to end.
After that we will explore the notion of using
nuclear bombs to terraform Mars and other
worlds.
Then we will close out January with our Livestream
Q&A on Sunday, January 30th, at 4 pm eastern
time.
After that we’ll be starting February off
with a look at the Future of Solar Power.
Now if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe
to the Channel and hit the notifications bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below.
You can also join in the conversation on any
of our social media forums, find our audio-only
versions of the show, or donate to support
future episodes, and all those options and
more are listed in the links in the episode
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
