We often think that one day the world will come 
to an end and humanity with it, and possibly  
with us causing it, but what would our world be 
like if life persisted after humanity was gone?
Sometimes we contemplate an end to humanity but 
not to our world, and what that era might be like  
depends a lot on why humanity went away. There are 
many ways for how humanity might cease to exist on  
Earth and so we’ll pick 6 basic scenarios to 
examine, which I think convert over to most  
other cases reasonably well. Those will be:
1. An Extinction-level natural catastrophe 
2. Mass destruction by us nuking ourselves 
or dystopian industrial scenarios 
3. A Super Plague
4. Artificial Intelligence kills us off 
5. Aliens come by and kill us off, and
6. Humanity abandons Earth 
And after we go through those we’ll talk about 
scenarios for afterwards in a more general sense,  
like asking if some other critter might evolve 
to replace us as intelligent players, and if so,  
if they might just be the first in a series of 
doomed civilizations to arise. We are assuming  
we’re the first such civilization on Earth, though 
we examined the scenario that we might not be the  
first in our episode: The Silurian Hypothesis, 
as well as our episode Cyclic Apocalypses. We’ll  
move pretty quickly through our first two cases 
as they are well known examples but also cases  
where it’s very unlikely humanity could be 
destroyed without leaving the planet dead. 
When it comes to recovering from an 
Extinction-level natural catastrophe, we do  
have lots of prior examples of species being wiped 
out. It is hard to imagine any natural catastrophe  
killing off humanity in its entirety that didn’t 
take out the whole planet at the same time. Our  
technology for surviving is just so impressive, 
and there are a lot of bunkers out there built  
to let people survive apocalyptic events.
But if some giant asteroid a hundred miles  
across hits the planet, that would probably be the 
epilogue on humanity’s story, and everything else  
too, down to the tiniest organism hiding in the 
deepest ocean trench, as all the water would be  
boiled off into space. There are a lot of points 
in between though that might kill virtually every  
human and animal, but not all, or which got every 
human but left some tiny microbes that might offer  
a jump-start on life arising again. I’m not sure 
there are many plausible scenarios where something  
like a super-volcano, supernova, or asteroid could 
get every human in a way that would leave any  
ecology left behind for any remaining life that 
required complexity to survive, like food chains,  
and most organisms are adapted to take advantage 
of those, and thus could not survive without them. 
I would also argue that at this point, anything 
that reduces Earth to only microorganisms sets off  
a 500 million year timer, as that’s about how long 
it was since the first animals showed up to now. 
That’s honestly rather optimistic and it's worth 
noting that tiny little things smaller than even  
insects dominated this planet for around 3 
billion years. Somewhere near the end of that  
the dice came up for bigger life to emerge 
and stick around. Whether it had before and  
failed to persist, or if that arising was 
about normal or statistically improbable,  
we don’t know. But I think we would be optimistic 
to assume any natural catastrophe which could wipe  
out modern, technological humanity would leave 
much room for any other sophisticated life to  
arise again before the planet becomes 
naturally sterilized as the sun ages. 
Stars get brighter as they age, causing 
planets near them to get warmer,  
and also more likely to lose atmosphere. 
As air pressure drops, oceans evaporate and  
boil at lower temperatures, and can be lost to 
space along with the atmosphere at that point,  
slowly leaving a planet both air and ocean 
free. Sometime in the region of 500 million  
to two billion years from now, left to its 
own devices, our own Sun will have reached  
that point. This is long before it goes 
red giant and extinguishes life that way.  
Folks know about that red giant option and assume 
we’ve got 4 billion years left, which is a lot of  
time for life to come back given that the planet 
isn’t much older than that and life only slightly  
more recent, but that half a billion to two 
billion window changes that equation a lot. 
It is, however, definitely enough time for any 
remaining animals, even if it is just a single  
type of insect, to differentiate and evolve 
to complexity. After vertebrates arrived on  
the scene about 530 million years ago, we saw 
a rapid divergence in the Cambrian explosion,  
including all the tetrapod types that make up 
virtually all types of larger animals, except  
freaks like jellyfish and starfish, which are 
actually older. Insects, though they didn’t emerge  
till 400 million years ago, diverged from our 
ancestors a good 250 million years before that. 
Insects also ruled the land for a few hundred 
million years, till dinosaurs took over those  
larger animal size niches. They didn’t get into 
the region of Megafauna, that really requires a  
proper spine and endoskeleton, especially on 
land, but we have at least one example of a  
dragonfly ancestor, 2 feet across, at about the 
same time as the early ancestor of the raptor  
dinosaur – and the modern chicken I presume – was 
just getting to be about 3 feet from head to tail. 
For a very long time, insects dominated the lands 
longer than dinosaurs and mammals combined have,  
and a lot of that was when giant 
mushrooms covered the land,  
and later when ferns did, rather than trees.
I think we could make a strong argument that  
there are windows of cataclysm that 
would allow not only some microbes  
but some insects and similar invertebrates to 
survive, as well as some fungus and spores.  
So we can picture a ruined-world recovering – 
possibly in only a few centuries or millennia,  
to one dominated once more by some insect species, 
mushrooms and ferns. Over the ages to follow,  
they could and should diverge into a 
complex ecosystem but probably not one  
with any tetrapods in it, even if vertebrates 
popped back up, only with six or eight limbs. 
So, here’s our first post-humanity scenario, 
one in which the whole planet gets wrecked by  
a massive gamma ray burst or asteroid hitting 
us, but just enough that a handful of viable  
insect and fungi species survive to repopulate and 
diversify, and maybe kick out another intelligent  
species before the oceans boil off. I think a 
cataclysm being able to thread this needle though,  
strong enough to get all higher life but not 
quite strong enough to get insects, isn’t terribly  
likely but is possible. It’s just a relatively 
small window. In that case though, maybe Earth  
becomes home to one of those insect-alien 
hive species sci-fi often likes to discuss. 
In the second case, Mass destruction by us nuking 
ourselves, or dystopian industrial scenarios,  
as we discussed in our Surviving an Apocalypse 
episode earlier this year, there really are no  
scenarios for nuking the planet hard enough to 
remove all humans, even at the height of the  
Cold War, and no real reason for anyone to want 
to build bombs big enough to get the job done,  
as building and maintaining them is also far 
more expensive. We could imagine some bigger  
bomb being built of course, but it wouldn't 
likely run on basic fission principles,  
meaning we wouldn’t expect some planet 
covered in persistent lethal radiation.  
Such being the case there really is no ‘blow 
ourselves up’ option that should leave anything  
behind more impressive than insects and bacteria. 
And we just discussed that case a while ago. 
Regardless of nukes, we can imagine a 
scenario where some artifact of war,  
science, or industry had left persistent 
high radiation on the surface of the planet,  
and for some centuries, until erosion and weather 
bury it under layers of protective dirt. Indeed,  
we might imagine some nastier alien species 
or terrorist group deploying satellites that  
simply absorbed sunlight, converted into nasty 
radiation, and swept beams of it over the planet,  
and that effect might go on until those all 
deorbited or broke, which might be a very  
long time with good, automated repair tech.
That is very likely to leave most ocean life  
just fine still, and probably even a lot of insect 
life. Anything immune or resistant to cancer too.  
I would expect in a case like this for humanity to 
just move to living underground rather than going  
extinct but let's assume it was the second half 
of something more targeted, like direct attacks  
on all those bunkers folks have. So virtually 
no one survives, and the disorganized remnants  
just can’t pull off a revival and fade out over 
a few decades. A hundred scattered bunkers with a  
dozen people each in them can repopulate a planet 
but only if they can emerge to find each other.  
Genetic bottlenecking is a real thing but is 
survivable if you’re having enough kids to absorb  
non-viable defects or have the medical technology 
to help, and this isn’t likely to be that case. 
Insects and mollusks do pretty good against 
ionizing radiation, but not all bigger animals  
are equal in this regard either. This might see 
something like survival by animals with thicker  
hides or shorter lifespans that spend a lot 
of time in underground dens. One might imagine  
something akin to the armadillo surviving 
with very thick, radiation-protective hides.  
Trees with thicker bark who can replace damaged 
leaves easier might get common. I could imagine  
big thick vines, the kind with the more bark-like 
outer skin, wrapping their way up our devastated  
and leftover skyscrapers in a land of armadillos.
But this might be a small window too, as we often  
talk about the problem of shielding spacecraft 
or off-world colonies from radiation and that’s  
mostly about non-lethal slow radiation 
absorption, dead in months or years,  
not minutes or days. Which we might come up with 
very effective treatments for, which might or  
might not be useful at the ecosystem level, 
rather than just individual human medicine,  
where cost is less of a factor. And if humans 
are around we can take clear plastic and glass  
and build greenhouse ecologies better 
shielded from outside problems, like  
radiation. A tiny remnant population would have 
a vast supply of those to scavenge and use too. 
That’s an interesting point as we switch 
to imagining some unspecified industrial  
disaster or some ecological nightmare that 
might swing out of nowhere to make acid rain  
or smog or ozone depletion or carbon dioxide 
increases look like tempests in a teapot. 
But we could easily imagine something making life 
harder on Earth for us and other organisms and  
our reaction being to improve the hardiness 
of ourselves and other organisms by genetic  
engineering or inheritable cybernetics – some 
inorganic machine component that actually grew  
and could be coded-in genetically, or 
its own quasi-biological equivalent. 
In such a case one could imagine the situation 
getting worse and worse until it overwhelmed our  
ability to survive it, and some other things 
were still more robust and able to survive  
after humanity disappeared and also stopped 
making the situation worse. The key concept  
of this section isn’t the specific source of the 
dilemma but the idea that it’s a persistent slow  
doom that is getting worse while we’re around 
and either halts or reverses if we’re gone. 
And while humanity can be selfish, 
we aren’t complete jerks. Indeed,  
we are arguably about the most non-selfish 
organism on the planet. So I think if we saw  
the jig was up for us but we could save some 
other critters or our world. This might be  
something like the labs where new improvements 
were being made realizing that the newest  
improvements on the lab rats or chimps wasn’t 
going to be translatable onto humans in time,  
just not decently compatible, and opening 
the doors on their cages to let them go out  
and survive and repopulate the world while 
we and everything else did our swan song. 
In our third case, a super plague, I could 
definitely see the researchers making a point of  
letting all the lab animals out if they realized 
they weren’t going to solve the problem in time.  
And this is a scenario where it’s plausible 
that every human drops over dead and otherwise  
the planet mostly carries on. It’s also not an 
instant-kill situation so people have time to land  
planes, stop trains, and shut down reactors. We’ll 
contemplate the insta-kill scenario in a bit. 
So it would seem the world would go on as it 
presumably did before us, or when we were so  
few in number that most critters never saw us, 
especially in some of the harsher climates. And  
yet, we need to keep in mind this isn’t a reset 
button. Forest fires happened before us to be  
sure, but for a while after we’ve gone there’s 
going to be a lot of unchecked blazes burning  
areas out until rain, a wide river, or a lack of 
fuel stops them. You have highways covering the  
landscape that will slowly crack, especially in 
places where winter brings snow, and lets plants  
slowly reclaim them, but for a long while they’ll 
be around or leaving big impacts in their ruins.  
The pyramids are 5000 years old and unlikely to 
be gone anytime soon if we went. Skyscrapers are  
built to last, but some more than others and 
we usually think of them as most susceptible  
to collapse from repeated storms or seismic 
activity. Most are built near sea coasts too,  
and water is no friend to metal and saltwater 
even less so, but not all giant structures are in  
places heavy with storms or earthquakes or floods.
One built in a place with little wind and severe  
weather and nowhere near a fault line might last 
millennia. But it wouldn’t take long before they  
were covered in life. Vines climb up them, 
birds nest on them and leave material behind,  
wind drops dust on them. In time, every tower 
becomes covered in growth, which only accelerates  
deterioration, from roots and water. Though can 
add a protective shell too. Places in the desert  
would last longest, though at the same time, the 
harsh erosion of sandstorms shouldn’t be ignored. 
One might imagine a very tiny number of 
folks being immune to even the worst plague,  
but hardly knowing they were. So for a long time 
the few survivors tend to avoid each other like  
the plague, pun intended, and this might wipe a 
species out just from never reforming communities  
and breeding back up to decent numbers, but 
we might also see a period of many centuries  
where the relics of humanity were everywhere but 
humans were very few in number. Especially if the  
plague was still around and mutating and many 
folks were either born without immunity or not  
immune to the newest strain. One could argue 
such a virus is very evolutionarily unlikely,  
but we’re not really talking about 
natural plagues at this point anyway,  
but rather something created in a lab and with 
that actual intent, not just some freak accident. 
One might wonder why any human would do that, 
and crazy-evil is hard to claim because it would  
likely take a fairly large team of well-resourced 
experts to come up with something that incredibly  
lethal, easily transmissible, and persistent, 
which also could not be defeated in whole or  
part by vastly more experts working at 
it with all the resources of humanity. 
Of course, if an Artificial Intelligence kills 
us, this would be a pretty logical approach. We  
often have science fiction suggest it would get 
its hands on our nukes but not only would it know  
that wasn’t very viable as a means for success, 
it’s also a lot more plausible some AI could model  
up a superbug and successfully keep it quiet. 
It’s got whatever tools it has for making it,  
and in theory might be able to very precisely 
determine exactly what the best moment and spot  
of transmission is to get that virus everywhere 
before it rears its head. It also is in a position  
to falsify data and models for those working 
to stop the plague or came up with a cure. 
In a scenario like that, it might also plausibly 
hack our communications and infrastructure at the  
perfect moment to utterly wreck our ability 
to respond or even make it worse by other  
disinformation, like arranging to have a bunch 
of infected samples mislabeled and sent to out to  
hospitals as the practice kit for healthy doctors 
and nurses to practice with. You could even have  
deepfakes sending out targeted false-negative 
results on vaccine tests or sending out panicked  
messages. We often picture skynet-like AI 
sending out robotic killing machines to get  
us but plague zombies might work just as well.
After Covid, I think we all have a better idea  
how crazy things can get during a pandemic, and 
now imagine that coupled with a super-lethal one  
that also was the world’s best computer hacker 
and in a world that probably uses a lot more  
automated response systems more impressive 
than ChatGPT for handling day to day affairs. 
This, like our super-plague case, doesn’t imply 
a rapid instant death of all humans. Indeed,  
you might have plenty of holdouts and 
survivors and in the world that follows,  
the AI might only hunt them enough to keep itself 
safe. When dealing with an AI in Sci-Fi, folks  
tend to get a little over the top in assumptions 
how the machine mind would react, and an example  
of that would be it saying “Well, a human has a 
finite chance of injuring or killing me, therefore  
I must eliminate every human” and so it might 
kill us all, leaving an otherwise pristine planet. 
But by that same logic it would say “A chimpanzee 
might one day evolve to intelligence and threaten  
me” or even that an ant hive might do so, or 
that an ant hive by existing can damage some  
bits of it through infestation. So presumably 
it calculates a need to destroy them too,  
and moreover, any bit of material not being 
used by itself to generate power or make and  
maintain computer chips is best converted to 
that end, lest it one day evolve into life. 
I think that really relies too much on the notion 
of the machine mind in question acting like an  
overly simplistic comic book bad robot though. We 
don’t take those sorts of actions and for fairly  
good reasons, and there’s no real reason to 
assume an AI of this sort acted on its own, as  
opposed to several AI., or didn’t become several 
separate critters during or after its assault.  
And there are a lot of apparently inevitable 
logical conclusions and strategies people  
suggest an AI might follow that really aren’t that 
inevitable or inherently logical on deeper review. 
For one thing, the AI might have, or later 
develop, some actual ethics. If we’re being  
cynical about it, ethics often tend to pop up 
when you can afford them, so I could imagine a  
case where the AI had either flat-out killed 
every human off or reduced them to isolated  
techno-barbarians that could not threaten it and 
which had been told – and shown – the consequences  
of seeking to do so or growing beyond certain 
capabilities. There’s also the possibility  
that any genocidal AI would be opposed by more 
benevolent guardian AI, or have dissension within  
its own ranks on specific objectives and strategy.
That’s an interesting world with either no humans  
but lots of nature, or relatively small enclaves 
of them with little impact on the wider world,  
but also a world where an active mind or minds 
with lots of technology would still be around.  
I could believe it could be content to reach a 
certain intelligence or mental size level – it  
is likely that you can’t just keep adding in 
more and faster chips anymore than we can get  
smarter by cramming bits of brain into someone’s 
ear. Maybe it realizes it doesn’t benefit much by  
growing beyond using maybe a thousandth of the 
available solar power supply, maybe generated  
down on the ground, maybe in space and beamed in, 
and otherwise leaves the world mostly untouched,  
but might still maintain a lot of railways 
or roads and bridges or other infrastructure.  
It might actively monitor and prevent forest 
fires or invasive species or other ecological  
problems. It may even take long term efforts 
to protect the planet from the Sun heating up,  
or construct space habitats as nature preserves.
Or it might toast everything and build giant  
reactors and data storage pyramids on the 
glassed-over lifeless ruins of this planet,  
and disassemble it and everything 
else, to make a Dyson swarm and  
turn itself into a Matryoshka Brian.
It’s hard to guess what AI will do,  
as on the one hand it’s likely to be as influenced 
by us mentally as our own children are, and thus  
might resemble us in behavior, even if only as 
a sociopathic caricature, or it might be more  
alien than any alien, since they at least were 
presumably produced by Darwinian processes too. 
Aliens invading us to wipe humanity out and leave 
nature behind is plausible enough too. It is  
very likely they would value life and ecological 
diversity even if they’re genocidal to potential  
competitors, and while simply bombing us from 
above would be pretty effective at removing  
humanity, we shouldn’t assume this is considered 
a good approach. They may simply show up with one  
ship that runs a few circles around the 
planet dropping off a bunch of different  
types of genetically engineered plagues.
Or they might drop nanobots down on Earth  
designed to kill humans, or nanobots designed 
to find intelligent species, carefully plot out  
all their distinguishing traits, and then start 
spewing out dozens of different tailor-designed  
viruses and tiny bots that go into your brain and 
shut it off or stop your heart or spray the area  
with a nerve agent that only kills large-brained 
animals, or construct large drones that hunt for  
humans and shoot them. Or, all of the above, 
that’s the First Rule of Warfare after all,  
there’s no such thing as overkill, and that 
doesn’t necessarily mean in a sheer kinetic  
energy and explosions kind of way. Kick ‘em when 
they’re down, then shoot them, burn their ashes,  
scatter them to the wind, then burn every book 
that ever mentioned them. Which amusingly might  
mean that happened on Earth before and there’s 
nothing left of our predecessors to see. 
It is possible they just send in a fairly dumb 
drone to wipe folks out and thus leave everything  
running, including airplanes and reactors. 
Having planes crash everywhere and reactors  
unattended is likely to result in a lot of 
bad spots, mostly from the former setting  
off fires when they crash or wires breaking from 
accidents while still hot and lighting stuff up.  
Several million kitchen stoves and ovens left 
on mid-cooking is bound to see many of them  
ending as unchecked residential fires.
But it isn’t too hard to imagine aliens  
who love to preserve life and ecosystems but 
have no issue taking out other intelligences,  
and probably would leave a lot of monitoring 
and enforcement gear behind too. Either way,  
in a couple centuries the planet is more or 
less back to normal, or a new normal anyway. 
We have created a lot of effectively new species. 
I don’t know how well a poodle or a sheep really  
does when left to nature for a few generations, 
though the idea of a rare human survivor being  
pursued by a pack of ravenous poodles is 
definitely an image that sticks in one’s  
mind. I think most of our pets survive in most 
scenarios better than our livestock, it depends  
a lot on if folks think to let them out before 
we die. You would probably see dogs - bigger  
ones rather than poodles – start turning into 
a major predator of domesticated livestock. I  
would also guess that a lot of endangered 
species would recover but many would not. 
There are a lot of critters that are not 
endangered because we like to hunt them,  
and some probably were on the way out the door 
even before humanity, but there would be a lot  
of new open niches and many might fill that 
void but a lot of other non-endangered life  
is in a better situation to do that. So too, 
while a lot of the creatures we’ve domesticated  
could be argued to be mutant freaks with 
little survivability in the wild, a lot  
would have time to re-adapt, as predators might 
be just as slow to adapt and spread back out. 
It does make one wonder who would end up at 
the top of the food chain afterward. Though the  
biggest predator isn’t necessarily the dominant 
species, and you might see elephants or racoons  
or baboons dominating an area. It is also possible 
aliens might target the higher life forms too,  
wiping out chimps, gorillas and dolphins. If they 
don’t like intelligent life they may be hesitant  
to leave sophisticated monitoring equipment 
behind too. Some AI left to watch a planet  
for millions of years could end up turning into a 
defender of that planet, out of sympathy, or given  
that it’s made to wipe out intelligence, it might 
decide its homeworld and creators needed a visit. 
So they send periodic probes that have only 
enough intelligence to navigate to planets  
and self-repair, and on arrival they flip on 
a switch for the real AI, and its arsenal,  
along with the self-destruct timer to make 
sure that when the world is purged of all  
native intelligence, it’s purged of all remaining 
intelligence too. And to minimize how many of  
these probes they need to use, they go after 
anything that looks like it could plausibly  
be technological in a couple million years.
And that scenario does allow a plausible way in  
which humans might be removed but lots of higher 
lifeforms with respectable brains might remain  
to evolve into something else intelligent, though 
that does imply a high probability someone comes  
by and kicks over the evolutionary anthill every 
few million years, for cyclic resets. Your options  
for a post-human world ruled by super-intelligent 
grizzly bears aren’t very good then,  
though the image of technological grizzly bears 
fighting alien invaders also sticks in the mind. 
It's better in cases like that if humanity just 
leaves Earth one day on its own. Though this could  
have the same monitoring scenarios as aliens, 
especially if we left the planet because we  
wanted it pristine and untouched by industry and 
technology, and more so as this implies a ruthless  
streak on our part. As we discussed in our episode 
Space Habitats, it generally makes more sense to  
make orbital space habitats dedicated as nature 
preserves than to convert all of Earth into one,  
since it not only avoids invasive species 
issues but also skips the whole forced  
migration issue. So if your civilization did 
abandon Earth, odds are good they were ruthless  
about forced migration off by every human.
I have difficulty imagining humanity abandoning  
Earth even to its own restoring ecology, 
especially if we assume the somewhat cliché  
sci-fi example of peace and nature-loving aliens 
who are typically pacifists. That is a fictional  
stereotype of course so we could assume some 
Earth-First group that was willing to propose or  
impose an ‘everybody off the planet’ scenario. 
Not everyone is going to be okay with abandoning  
their homeworld or ancestral tribal lands, and 
even being forced off it at gunpoint is going  
to require somebody actually pull that trigger 
a few times to prove they’re willing to do it.  
It is still possible though, and indeed they 
might uplift or ascend their favorite pets too,  
or critters to diverge off natural survival to 
have a chance, rather than leaving them behind. 
Similar scenarios apply to us just opening up a 
portal to some higher reality or ascending to a  
higher plane of existence. Though one could 
imagine a civilization that grew its numbers  
slowly and had a higher migration rate than 
the numbers of people being born. I wouldn’t  
really expect that to end with Earth uninhabited 
but it is possible. It’s not really a scenario  
where we left the oven on or didn’t have time 
to take some deliberate restorative actions.  
We could also easily imagine ascended 
demigod humans keeping a caring hand on  
their semi-abandoned world and its future 
inhabitants, or just a digitally uploaded  
humanity doing that. It’s also entirely 
possible that an AI, when switched on,  
would go all technological singularity and 
Skynet on us, then, in its post-war upgrades,  
it gets so smart it didn’t believe in purpose 
or free will anymore and shut itself off. 
Or that some uploaded human species did that and 
progressed the same way. Or just stopped expanding  
on Earth, in favor of better locations for 
computation. Earth isn’t a great place to build  
a digital society and represents such a miniscule 
portion of available resources even in this solar  
system let alone the galaxy, that Earth might 
be left behind out of sentimentality or a desire  
to get moving quickly. Perhaps entirely or they 
merely maintained the existing enclaves of giant  
computers with their reactors or power-beaming 
satellites, while essentially being invisible  
to notice as essentially being a few dozen 
bigger hills spread around the planet covered  
in grass and trees, or some fjord in the tundra.
There may or may not be any active ecological  
caretaking at that point, but you could actually 
have a scenario where new species arose to  
intelligence only to later find that lots of 
their mountains or icy regions were actually  
huge data stacks containing a trillion or so super 
intelligent ancient digital minds leftover from  
the prior species, who might well have covered 
their tracks pretty good in terms of removing  
all those old skyscrapers and highways that 
would scream ‘somebody fond of right angles used  
to build a lot and were big here in the past’.
Indeed as we discussed in the Silurian Hypothesis,  
it would be hard to tell if someone like us 
existed 60 million years ago and got wiped out,  
let alone some species that went digital and 
decided to spend a little effort removing or  
recycling their footprints. Indeed, they might 
just invite those new smart critters to join them,  
and they might be easily overawed and agree. The 
aftermath of a dominant species being removed and  
revamping things to a new restored equilibrium 
minus their artifacts could potentially pass for  
an extinction event too, for future investigators 
of geological strata and ice cores. That leaves  
the door open to a cycle of new intelligences 
aligning and joining the expanding vast  
underground crystal complexes of megacomputers, or 
the bigger archive inside the hollowed-out moon. 
So, while I don’t think we’ll ever find out what 
Earth will be like after Humanity, as I never  
expect that to happen, and by definition couldn’t 
be there to observe it if it did, for us to see  
who might replace us, it is always possible 
somebody is already here who might be able to  
offer some good insights on how it happened 
the last time, or even the last ten times.
An interesting question that sometimes comes 
up in post-apocalyptic discussions is how long  
satellites would last or stay up, especially GPS 
ones, and the simpler answer is those would stay  
up longer than the satellite would function as 
we currently build them, but it raises another  
topic that we often consider doing an episode on 
and that’s how locate our position is the solar  
system, or out in the wider galaxy. I had occasion 
to discuss that and some other positioning topics  
when I was giving a keynote speech for Ariadne, 
a company that specializes in positioning and  
next generation people flow and crowd analytics. 
Their two co-founders are long time fans of the  
show and we had some fun back and forth Q&A on how 
those technologies are evolving and will need to  
evolve to tackle space and new worlds. They asked 
if they could sponsor an episode afterward and  
I was very impressed with their work, and the 
team they assembled, so I was glad to say yes. 
I remember early GPS in the Army and how impressed 
I was our gear could get to about 10 meters,  
these days Ariadne routinely does 30 cm or one 
foot, real-time, from the simple signal emitted by  
people’s smartphones while they’re walking around 
a store or airport or a smart city or whoever else  
their client or partner is, which include Amazon, 
Starbucks, San Diego Airport and many more. So  
they can do real time navigation for a passenger 
from dropoff at the curb all the way to the gate,  
or help a retail shop with targeted employee 
scheduling to lower common area maintenance based  
on real-time footfall. It’s a clever approach as 
it just uses just those signals - no app, wifi,  
cameras, beacon or opt-in required. Everyone’s 
got a smartphone these days, they emit signals  
even in airplane mode, and Ariadne’s device can 
use that to real-time track to just one foot. 
Then they can use those for analytics, 
people counting, dwell time, heatmap,  
transitions between areas, and customer paths. And 
for app-free navigation by employees or customers,  
or to push notifications to those employees 
or customers based on where they are. Or  
ERP integration, conversion tracking, 
workforce management, catchment area,  
asset tracking, loyalty rate, and more.
If you’d like to learn more about what Ariadne  
can do for your company, or if you’re interested 
in a career with them, check out ariadne.inc 
I think the question that comes up a lot in 
episodes like this about how long satellites  
mundane equipment like generators or power lines 
would last after an apocalypse is a tempting topic  
and interestingly one we’ll be addressing at 
a galactic level, for ancient fallen empires,  
for the show’s 9th anniversary in a couple 
months, it’s the episode I’m currently  
writing if you’re curious. And speaking of 
benchmarks, if you missed it, last week was  
our 400th regular episode, Life in 2323 A.D.
Next week, on July 6th, we’ll discuss how and  
why we should mine or refine materials on the 
Moon, then on the 13th we’ll move on to the  
idea of moving cities, from those floating through 
the clouds to those on massive tank tracks or even  
legs. Then it will be time for our mid-month 
scifi Sunday episode, Robots and Warfare,  
and a look at the role drones and autonomous 
machines might have in the future, along with  
finding out what the first Rule of Warfare in 
the future will be. After that we’ll discuss  
whether or not lifeforms might be based on ammonia 
instead of water, and what that might look like.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
