So here we are on New Year’s Eve, getting
ready to head into 2019, the 50th Anniversary
of the Moon Landings, but it also happens
to be the 35th anniversary of an article Isaac
Asimov wrote on December 31st, 1983 for The
Toronto Star, which they recently reprinted,
predicting the world of 2019.
We already did our year end episode, and for
that matter our own predictions for 31 years
from now for the year 2050 a couple weeks
back, but since Asimov is still the Grandmaster
of science fiction, even 27 years after his
death, and my namesake, and since we’re
skipping this month’s livestream, it seemed
worth taking a bit of time to look at the
world he saw for tomorrow.
A link to the article is in the video description.
On the eve of 1984 he starts off by noting
that he picked 35 years ahead because George
Orwell’s novel 1984 had just celebrated
its 35th anniversary.
Interestingly it’s also the year my favorite
film, Blade Runner, is set in, which had come
out the year before.
Asimov definitely paints a more optimistic
future than that film.
He begins by noting 3 concepts that had come
to dominate our thinking at the time: Nuclear
War, Computerization, and Space Utilization.
He chooses to assume we won’t have had a
nuclear war by 2019, not because he thought
it unlikely but because he didn’t see any
point in examining a future where that happened.
Similarly he notes the possibility of a modern
Luddite rebellion smashing up all our technology,
but focuses on a future where that does not
occur.
His second prognostication, computerization,
is unsurprising coming from the man who coined
the term robotics, and was indeed a dominant
factor in the decades that followed.
Seems an obvious one nowadays, and in truth
was hardly a shocking one then either.
Personal computers had started hitting the
market a few years before, and Asimov himself
was the spokesman for Tandy/Radio Shack’s
TRS-80 computer, which had an amazing 4 Kilobytes
of RAM.
But he had been predicting that computerization
would have a big impact on the future long
before 1983.
In addition to the term Robotics, he also
coined the term Psychohistory, the notion
we’d predict large-population human behavior
with computers.
It’s true that we’re nowhere near the
accuracy Hari Seldon’s work in the Foundation
Series would have required, and as we discussed
in our episode on psychohistory, probably
can’t be that accurate, but that series
takes places tens of thousands of years in
the future, and we already do use computers
to predict major trends in human behavior.
Asimov’s third prognostication for 2019,
space utilization, was, like most predictions
made about space travel shortly after the
Apollo Missions, not wrong but a little optimistic
about the schedule.
He puts quite a focus on mining the moon and
building power satellites, something we talked
about on the show quite a lot this year--and
like Asimov then, we still talk about it as
something that might happen in a generation
or two.
Perhaps they’ll say the same in 2050, but
putting too much emphasis on timelines being
pushed back is too cynical.
We do have a lot of tech that futurists of
the past predicted.
Sometimes we get it sooner, sometimes later,
sometimes never because we got something better
instead.
Sometimes it’s just more complicated, after
all space utilization or fusion power or robotics
are areas we’ve made huge strides in.
Maybe Asimov was so optimistic about the ‘when’
because he assumed that if we somehow didn’t
obliterate ourselves in a nuclear war by 2019,
it’d be because we’d managed to link arms
and start creating the future together.
Not many writers or futurists of that era
imagined we’d neither destroy ourselves
nor unite in peace but keep grinding along
just on the brink of wars for decades.
Call it the Fulcrum Fallacy, a tendency to
assume the future will either be utopian or
dystopian, rather than somewhere in between
but probably a little better overall than
before.
What I really want to focus on today are his
predictions about what would become known
as the Digital Divide, between those who have
computers, technology, and the skills to use
them, and those who do not.
As well as the importance he places on continuing
education for new jobs, with more skills required
and less tedious, menial work involved.
Few of us would disagree with that, but I
wanted to call my namesake out on what I see
as his one big error here--albeit one that
I think most folks today still make.
Asimov states that he expects a lot of problems
transitioning to this more automated and educated
society, but that it should be over by today.
It clearly is not over, and I think he missed
the boat there by assuming it was a one-time
problem rather than one we expect to have
constantly for quite some time to come.
He notes we’ve done it before, for the switch
in focus from agriculture to industry a century
prior, but I think that’s what causes his
error here, because it wasn’t a single event,
it’s something we’ve been tackling as
long as we’ve been around.
I note though that reaction and adaptation
are hardly specific to improvements in technology,
so we screw up our thinking a bit by trying
to look at change and adaptation as technology-specific.
A farmer or herder needed to think and adapt
to more than just new plow designs or crops,
they had to adapt to localized climate changes,
shifts in taxes or leadership, shifts in trade
or competition, supply and demand for what
they produced or needed for that production,
and so on.
This is the human condition and not technology-specific,
that’s just a big factor and bigger focus
nowadays.
Twin to that, while the digital divide is
real enough, it’s just another in a long
line of specific factors that varies by time
and place.
A Blacksmith working in a seaport was going
to fare a lot better if he had some knowledge
of ships and what damage seawater does to
metals and what techniques help minimize that,
while one working inland better know about
plows and hoes and horseshoes, and both need
to know what their town needs and what their
neighbors tend to need or produce already.
A hunter-gatherer needs to be constantly adapting
to changes in migration, terrain, survival
in that terrain, what kind of arrowhead works
better on a deer than a wolf or a marauder,
and which fruits and nuts and roots grow where,
can be eaten or not, how they can be stored,
prepared, etc.
We are clever apes, we react, we tinker, we
engage in abstract thought and we adapt, and
that’s what made us dominant.
One other small mistake he made, another that
many folks still make, is to say that while
new technology often eliminates many jobs,
it always make new ones.
Of course many feel the error there is that
it always makes new jobs, which we’ll get
to in a moment, but he’s confusing jobs
with tasks, and I think a lot of folks do
that.
I mentioned earlier he was the spokesman for
some early computers and he talked elsewhere
of being rather intimidated by them and taking
quite some time to adjust to using a word
processor over a typewriter, indeed he never
entirely did so.
That wasn’t his job though, he was a writer,
and it’s really only when a very specific
task makes up the entirety of a job that technology
can sweep a job away.
We don’t have many typesetters anymore for
instance.
Back in 1957, Asimov wrote a short story called
Galley Slave, predicting the use of robots
to proofread books, a near miss on the prediction
of spellcheck in word processors, though he
made up for that by his prediction of some
of the frustration caused by speech to text
software in his Second Foundation novel.
Even a job synonymous with a task that seems
to disappear often has not.
Take the milkman, eliminated by cheap refrigerators,
cars, and grocery stores.
Only it wasn’t, every grocery store still
has milkmen, it’s just that they have a
broader job as they have to stock several
products, not just milk, and on the back end,
there are certainly plenty of folks still
employed tending and milking cows and transporting
and processing that milk to get it to the
store.
Modern methods might be eliminated down the
road too, as the “milkman” may come back
in the form of delivery drones specialized
to handle food items.
I would not be surprised if future houses
start featuring a drone door or window for
securely and automatically dropping off goods
unaided, or if cows are put out of business
by vat grown synthetic milk.
Grocery stores and retail in general, after
exploding in size during the last century,
might wither during the next, as we discussed
in the Santa Claus Machine a couple weeks
ago.
But the basic truth remains: we need food,
it must be created, moved, stored, and prepared.
The individual tasks involved can vary a lot
and change often, and sometimes jobs focused
on a specific task can simply end, but most
often are merged into a broader job or use
fewer humans.
100 people did a specific task full time before,
now only 10 do, or 100 do but they do a dozen
other tasks too.
They don’t really get eliminated much because
those core needs still exist and humans are
supremely flexible.
We don’t have very many blacksmiths anymore
but we produce far more -- and more sophisticated
-- metalwork.
So this goes to the notion that we’d eventually
just have fewer jobs, not enough for everyone.
We can’t automatically rule it out that
one day, maybe even soon, our automation will
get so good that only specific intellectual
and creative tasks will remain, and only the
best of the best at that specific area will
have work.
Or even that creative jobs might be taken
over by AI, but as long as we have things
we need and want we will simply expand into
providing those.
Offices, factories, farms, etc all change
their output and improve their product, creating
new tasks to fulfill expanded demand for a
product or improvements to that product, or
new varieties.
We don’t make phonographs or records much
these days, but those were never the true
product; easy and quality access to music
was.
Yet that looming possibility of no jobs tends
to imply something a bit sinister, the notion
that the Digital Divide or wealth stratification
will reach a point where an elite few have
everything and the rest have nothing, either
no work or make-work made because the aristocrat
would rather have someone scrubbing their
floors instead of machines that do it better
and cheaper.
Ignoring the very cynical attitude implied
there, which I tend to think says more about
the speaker’s mind and behavior than their
targets, it doesn’t really hold up to inspection.
Asimov, like many of the folks of his period,
also expressed concerns about over-population
and we see in a lot of science fiction this
dystopian culture born out of technology and
fear.
He tended to be more optimistic than many
others, but it’s still there.
This notion that an elite few might have all
the benefits of technology while others did
not, when historically what has usually happened
is the elite few get it first, and as they
use those prototypes, the tech gets better
and cheaper, while the benefits of that tech
and others make people more prosperous on
the whole, so more can easily afford that
now-cheaper widget.
If you’ve got a machine that can do all
or most other tasks we need people for now,
including building other machines, it’s
true that you don’t need many or even any
workers anymore, but what it overlooks is
that all you have to do, just one person and
one single time, is tell that machine to build
a copy of itself and donate it to someone,
and tell them to pay it forward.
An unemployed society is not in itself a bad
thing, but a starving society is, and you
can only get an unemployed society if you’ve
eliminated a need for workers, which can only
happen if you don’t need anyone to work
to fulfill anyone’s needs.
All the indications are that people will always
need people to do the newest and most varied
jobs, so perhaps the real fear is simply the
fear of change.
Now that level of automation has its own potential
problems, like a potentially hedonistic civilization,
something we discussed in the Post-Scarcity
Civilizations series this year and which Asimov
discusses in many of his robot stories.
But looking at his predictions for 2019, and
his stories in general, something like 500
books as the man could write like a demon,
he is often criticized for being too optimistic
about technology and the human future.
I’d go the other way.
If the aptly-titled Grandmaster of Science
Fiction had one fault, I’d say it’s that
he was a bit too pessimistic about people
in general.
I, of course, often get accused of the reverse,
but I go into this New Year as optimistic
as in previous ones, exactly because I tend
to think humans on average are rather smart,
adaptable, forward-thinking, and have good
intentions.
There’s always some new problem over the
horizon, but we’ve done well at tackling
those and making things better for everyone.
Admittedly not always as good as we could,
but I think that we will continue to improve.
On space and New Horizons in general, we’re
still not quite done for the year . I’ll
be making a short appearance on Launch Pad
Astronomy’s 24-hour livestream from APL
hosted by astronomer Christian Ready as the
New Horizons space probe makes its rendezvous
with Ultima Thule.
Streaming will be from noon on New Year’s
eve to noon on New Year’s day, Eastern US
time, and will be having a lot of guests,
including our good friends Fraser Cain and
John Michael Godier.
Times are still a bit tentative as I write
this, but I should be on at 3:45 pm Eastern,
December 31st, and it should be an exciting
event.
We will also of course have our usual Thursday
episode on January 3rd, on Virtual Worlds,
to begin our fifth year here at SFIA, and
I hope to see you then,
and until then Happy New Year!
