378 The Omega Point January 19, 2023
Recorded: Nov 11 2022
 
Written by
Isaac Arthur
 
Editors:
Briana Brownell
 
Konstantin Sokerin
(don’t forget to add your name here)
 
***********
[sponsor]
 
When looking at imagery of our Universe 
and the web like layout of galaxies to  
form superclusters and voids, the resemblance 
to neurons and brain cells is striking though  
probably coincidental… but it does 
suggest a compelling idea: what if the  
fate of our Universe is to be turned into one 
immense, god-like mind, at the end of time?
 
Today we’ll be continuing our look at possible 
Fates of the Universe and Civilizations at  
the End of Time that we began way back in our 
episodes on Black Hole Farming and Iron Stars,  
and most recently in our look at 
the Big Rip where expansion of the  
Universe occurs faster than we think, 
slowly tearing everything apart. 
 
In today’s topic, we will see the reverse End 
Times scenario: the Big Crunch, where the Universe  
eventually stops expanding and begins contracting, 
possibly eventually crunching back down to a  
singularity, a path toward what physicist 
Frank Tipler calls Omega Point Cosmology.  
In Frank Tipler’s view, all the matter in the 
Universe moves toward becoming part of life and  
intelligence and ever more impressive states of 
it, and as the Universe begins to contract, this  
contraction can fuel that life and intelligence. 
This intelligence can survive and indeed thrive  
eternally during this outcome, eventually reaching 
a point of godlike capabilities: what’s known  
as the Omega Point. In addition, we’ll cover 
everything from technological singularities to  
quantum consciousness and resurrection to other 
cyclic models for the Universe and even God. 
 
So, big topic, and one absolutely not likely to 
cause any disagreements and flame wars, I’m sure.
 
We have a couple points we should start off by 
acknowledging though. First, while neither the Big  
Rip or Big Crunch can be ruled out entirely yet, 
neither is in favor with the scientific community  
at this time. The Big Crunch was one of the most 
popular scientific theories for how the Universe  
would expire throughout the 1970s and 1980s and 
it was our deepening knowledge of Dark Energy  
and an accelerating expansion of the Universe in 
the later 90’s and early 2000’s that pushed it  
out of favor, along with its close cousin, the Big 
Bounce, which is where the universe expands, then  
contracts, then expands again, in an endless cycle 
of Big Bangs. And indeed we have modern versions,  
like Roger Penrose’s Conformal Cyclic Cosmology, 
which we will also cover briefly today.
 
And again I say the Big Crunch is ‘out of 
favor’ because our default assumption was  
that eventually gravity would kick in against 
any inertia causing expansion of space and the  
universe would slowly fall back in on itself, and 
this doesn’t happen with Dark Energy, but since  
we have no idea where Dark Energy comes from, what 
it is, how it operates, if it operates at the same  
rate constantly, or if its supply is infinite, 
we’re not exactly in a position of authority to  
say the Big Crunch is definitely out. It was the 
theory that I and most currently active physicists  
basically grew up on and if you read sci-fi from 
that era, you’ll encounter it almost constantly.
 
The second thing is that while the Big Crunch is a 
scientific theory, like most scientific theories,  
especially those dealing with the fate 
of the Universe, it generates a strong  
desire to put it into our worldview and so 
you get lots of philosophical, theological,  
or ideological ponderings on it. These can range 
from deep and well thought out discussions to  
sophomoric ones of course. Sometimes these 
are resurgencies or adaptations of previously  
created concepts and today’s example, the Omega 
Point, is one of these cases. The Omega Point  
Cosmology that followed later is just one example 
of the influence of that philosophy on science. 
 
The Omega Point is also considered a strong 
influencer of the concept of a Technological  
Singularity, which is also tied up in Omega Point 
Cosmology and as a result is very wrapped up in  
lots of early AI, transhumanist, and post-human 
concepts and philosophy. Indeed it is even keyed  
into the Gaia Hypothesis, the idea that our planet 
might itself qualify as alive in some fashion,  
which we were discussing a few months back 
and which led to this topic being mentioned  
then requested by a lot of the audience and 
resoundingly winning in our first-ever image poll  
here on youtube for selecting an episode topic.
What that means though is that since the Omega  
Point has its origin as a theological concept 
influenced by science, it has a lot of folks  
who support or attack it mostly on that basis, as 
its viewed negatively by many thinkers as being  
rather mystic and religious while also being 
viewed by many theologians as not just wrong  
but more than a bit heretical, as it not only 
involves Darwinian Evolution but extends that to  
the assumption that all inanimate matter evolves 
toward becoming alive, then intelligent until all  
matter evolves or is incorporated into either God, 
or some part of God or infinite parallel to that.  
This makes it a touchy topic and one not 
particularly loved by cosmologists or western  
theologians, though also very popular with both. 
Nonetheless, to cover the topic properly we will  
need to enter that realm and that’s probably 
why we’ve never done an episode on this topic  
before. At the same time, the concept has had 
such a huge impact on science, science fiction,  
theology, philosophy, and culture that 
it definitely is worth knowing about.
 
So we’ll try to treat it with respect in that 
regard while still focusing principally on its  
scientific points, and the pros and cons of those. 
That’s a discussion that’s going to be detailed  
and require some thinking, so you might want 
to grab a drink and snack for some brain food.
 
We don’t want to dwell on the theological 
speculation too much but we need to set out  
some of the history behind these ideas. By the 
early 20th century, science was really converging  
on the notion that the Universe was vast and 
old, even older than our world, which itself  
was far older than we had assumed. This wasn’t 
even really a religious doctrine at this time, it  
was simply what so many assumed: that mankind had 
been around a real long time, potentially on the  
order of thousands of years. It’s not that they 
didn’t think the Universe and Earth were ancient  
and immense, it is just that a lot of zeroes were 
missing compared to our current figure for their  
ages. And it makes sense in an era where, barring 
some basic work in Archeology, we knew history had  
started some time before ancient Greece and the 
writings of Herodotus but there was no reason to  
think it had started much longer ago than that. 
Scaling up the age and size of the cosmos to  
include billions and billions of stars, many older 
than our own and likely many with planets like  
our own, really changed our worldview and we see 
contemplations like the Omega Point on one hand,  
and others like H.P. Lovecraft’s Cthulhu-ian 
Cosmic Horror genre. It also attracted a lot of  
theologians to study the sciences and try to match 
them up to doctrine in some fashion, and indeed  
one of the largest pools of early scientists 
were clergy of one religion or another.
 
So what was the Omega Point concept? Teilhard 
de Chardin originated the idea sometime in the  
earlier half of the 20th century, along with the 
notion of the Noosphere, which we’ll get to in a  
second. His writings in “The Phenomenon of Man” 
wouldn’t be published till after his death in  
1955. Teilhard de Chardin was a paleontologist 
and Jesuit priest, as well as highly decorated  
veteran of the first World War, and his work 
had a huge influence on the Jesuit Order,  
not to mention a lot of scientists and 
thinkers of that era, and indeed to this day.
 
Teilhard’s Omega Point is more focused on 
Darwinian Evolution than on cosmology. The  
cosmology aspect of the Omega Point came after 
his death, as did the notion of a Technological  
Singularity, as computers were still very new. 
It focused on the notion that evolution was not  
centered on humanity, that it had begun long 
before us and would keep on going too. His  
philosophy was that this evolutionary process 
begins with inanimate matter becoming alive  
in that first amoeba and proceeds to an eventual 
future state of Divine Consciousness. Our current  
step, as humanity entered the biosphere, created 
the Noosphere, the cognitive layer of existence.  
As time and evolution proceed, this Noosphere 
will gain coherence and move to a final point  
in which all matter and energy will have reached 
that Divine Consciousness, what was dubbed the  
Omega Point, in reference to God as the Alpha 
and Omega at the beginning and end of time.
 
If that’s sounding a bit familiar to you, 
us evolving into a higher, godlike state,  
it is probably because it was so influential on so 
much science fiction and new age thinking of the  
60’s and 70s. Since his works were very frowned 
on by the Roman Catholic Church of the time,  
I daresay it added a bit of rebellious flavor to 
the topic. That’s a bit before my time, though it  
definitely influenced my parent’s generation and 
my parents personally. I had a very interesting  
theological upbringing with one Catholic and 
one Jewish parent who both met while studying  
science in California in the 1970s. Yes, both 
my parents were hippies, and this was one of the  
many varied spiritual concepts I got exposed to 
a lot as a kid and have a nostalgic fondness for.  
Omega Point Cosmology gets a lot of criticism, 
much of it justified, though some unfairly harsh  
and prone to both ad hominem and argument 
by ridicule, which I always dislike. 
 
One of those is that while Teilhard is considered 
a bold thinker, he takes a lot of liberty with  
scientific terms and energy is a critical one in 
there. He defines both ‘Tangential Energy’ – which  
is the normal kind in physics – and ‘Radial 
Energy’ which is psychic or spiritual energy  
that accumulates over time to reach that Omega 
Point, and maybe best translates as information,  
or souls, or both. That would be fine 
if he didn’t tend to often use them  
interchangeably. We do this a little bit too with 
the different types of energy, except for us,  
information wouldn’t be measured in units of 
physical energy like heat or mass or kinetic  
energy are, and can’t just be substituted in 
and out. This sort of flawed equivalence in  
pondering philosophical concepts, along with 
having some interesting concepts hinging on  
tricky cases in math and logic involving 0, 1 and 
infinity, often result in conceptual problems.  
We discussed these kinds of problems more in 
our episode “Things Which Will Never Exist”
 
Anyway, the Omega Point theory has 4 formal 
properties. First that humans will escape the  
Heat Death of the Universe. Teilhard’s version is 
that Radial Energy, being psychic or spiritual,  
isn’t subject to entropy like normal or Tangential 
Energy, which we argue inevitably transmutes  
into Heat Energy, as opposed to Mass or other 
types. For context, this would be saying your  
soul is essentially indestructible, and the energy 
associated with it is thus unable to be run down  
by entropy into some lesser form of energy like 
heat. In Tipler’s later, arguably more scientific,  
version, this is because of the big Crunch. There 
is also an alternative approach in something along  
the lines of Freeman Dyson’s Eternal Intelligence 
concept, which we’ll also discuss in a bit.
 
Second, the Omega Point has the property that 
it does not exist within the timeline of our  
Universe, but rather is at the edge of time or 
end of time. This notion can be seen as important  
because if your goal is something infinite, the 
finite progression of time is a pain. For example  
in the case of a technological singularity, 
we usually talk of a computer able to begin  
as just a bit smarter than a human, then able to 
make another computer just a little bit smarter  
than it was, or an upgrade to itself, which does 
likewise. This eventually snowballs into a being  
that grows ever smarter until it is godlike, 
however since that often means infinite, no matter  
how many times you double the intelligence of a 
critter it is still a finite number, not infinite,  
unless you have an infinite amount of time to 
do it in. There is a special case though if  
the steps to each doubling take less time each 
progressive doubling, akin to Zeno’s Paradox.
 
This one can often get you what I sometimes refer 
to as a retro-causal god, one that descends from  
mankind or mankind’s artifice to become godlike at 
a later date and then goes back in time to create  
the Universe. A Big Bounce version of this is seen 
in Isaac Asimov’s classic short story, “The Last  
Question”, when humans begin creating ever better 
computers as they journey out into the galaxy and  
keep asking it how to stop entropy or reverse the 
second law of thermodynamics, and the computer  
keeps replying “THERE IS AS YET INSUFFICIENT 
DATA FOR A MEANINGFUL ANSWER” and appropriately  
its response is always in all-capital letters, as 
at the end of time, long after humanity has died  
off or merged with it to escape the Heat Death of 
the Universe, it finds itself contemplating the  
question in the absolute darkness left after 
and at the end of the story speaks the words  
“LET THERE BE LIGHT”. And there was light –
It's a beautiful story and often considered  
Asimov’s best short, also our first SFIA 
audiobook of the Month and was first adapted  
to audio for a planetarium show by Leonard 
Nimoy way back in 1966, when he was first  
playing the role of Spock on Star Trek.
An issue with a big bounce deity of that  
type in Asimov’s story is wondering what 
happened to it going forward or to its  
presumed predecessor who would have set off the 
event in the last iteration of the Universe. 
 
Anyway these difficulties with infinity and 
finite numbers takes us to our third property,  
which is that the Omega Point can be thought of as 
being cone-shaped, where a slice of it from base  
to tip has a certain finite area but the final 
tip is zero. And that’s the same infinity issue we  
just discussed only backward, whereas I can double 
something over and over and never reach infinity,  
I can cut it in half over and over, shrink it 
more and more, and never reach zero either,  
and this has been a philosophical conundrum since 
at least the time of the philosopher Zeno of Elia  
in the 5th century BC, which is the notion 
that if you take a step toward a wall that  
covers half the distance to it, then another 
step to cover half the remainder, then another  
covering half of the now smaller remainder, 
and so on, that you never reach that wall.
 
Nonetheless a cone is a real object with a 
point-like tip, kind of, and is an example  
of a singularity, there at the tip, which is what 
he is using as the reason for finite stuff going  
to zero or infinity, and you could say if the 
Big Bang began with an infinitely small point,  
stepping back in time by going to each point 
at which it was half its size would never get  
you to zero but it clearly must have started that 
way. Though as we’ve discussed in other episodes,  
we do not know that the Big Bang was point-like 
and that is a topic of great debate in cosmology.
 
However, I said a cone’s tip was “point like, 
kind of” because as best as we can tell nothing in  
nature is infinitely divisible, you get a smallest 
indivisible bit, which cannot be cut further down,  
which is where we get the word atom from 
in Greek even if it turned out that title  
was given at least a couple steps prematurely 
above nuclei and quarks and maybe strings too. 
 
Whatever cones end with in math, in nature 
they have a finitely wide atom at their tip,  
and we do not know the Big bang had a infinitely 
tiny origin point or that black holes condense  
into them either, but that’s been the common 
belief so that’s addressed in properties 3 and 4  
with the cone example, and 4 follows on by saying 
that this cone-shaped volume of the Omega Point  
is a finite thing. It is reminiscent of Thomas 
Aquinas’s speculation about how many angels can  
dance on the head of a pin, only our pin is a 
cone and the question might be about how many  
angels you need to merge together to form a god, 
and perhaps how you can turn men into angels.
 
Critically it is the idea that we are on 
a path to evolving into something higher,  
and from there it goes to the notion that Earth 
and humanity must eventually be compressed into  
an infinitely small dot, and I gather Teilhard 
de Chardin was not expecting humanity to engage  
in space travel beyond our world or considered it 
irrelevant. This final dot is the Omega-Point God,  
something infinite, or infinitesimal, attached 
to something else manifestly finite. 
 
To move onto Frank Tipler’s Omega Point 
Cosmology, this extrapolates out to the  
whole Universe. As Tipler is a mathematical 
physicist and cosmologist his reasoning in  
those regards is much more solidly explained 
than Teilhard’s, though we’ll still be skimming  
over that and hopefully I summarize it correctly 
enough. Tipler’s still alive and kicking as of the  
time I’m writing this so can always correct me 
if he feels I explained it wrong, but I believe  
the notion was first publicly introduced in his 
1984 book The Anthropic Cosmological Principle,  
which may be stated as “Intelligent Information 
Processing must come into existence in the  
Universe, and, once it comes into existence, will 
never die out”. This parallels Teilhard’s notion  
of Radial Energy not being subject to entropy, 
of being a pathway to true immortality. 
 
Here, though, we will introduce two similar 
notions, Tipler’s own Cosmological Omega Point and  
Freeman Dyson’s Eternal Intelligence. The Omega 
Point relies on the Big Crunch scenario and the  
Eternal Intelligence on the Heat Death of eternal 
expansion rather than gravity dragging everything  
back together. By the way, that 1984 book 
co-written with John Barrow is where we get  
the Hart-Tipler Conjecture of the Fermi Paradox 
that we discuss so often on this channel. 
 
It also has a discussion of using von 
Neumann Probes and what it tells us  
about the Universe was highly influential 
on myself and a lot of other futurists,  
including Anders Sandberg. We’ll be 
borrowing Sandberg’s criticisms of  
Omega Point later, but I share with him a 
great deal of respect for Tipler overall,  
and for me, the Hart-Tipler Conjecture was 
the stepping stone for the Dyson Dilemma  
concept I presented in the first episode of this 
show’s first season, back in January of 2015.
 
Now Freeman Dyson, who is one of the most 
beloved thinkers and inspirations of this show,  
had proposed the Eternal Intelligence concept in 
1979, in his excellent paper “Time Without End”,  
inside the framework of the Heat Death of the 
Universe by proposing that since the amount of  
energy needed to perform a single computation, or 
thought, is inversely related to the temperature,  
that if a civilization had a finite amount 
of Energy stored on hand as the stars all  
died out, that they could expend some of 
it, say half, to run their computers – or  
brains – at the current temperature. 
In Dyson’s Scenario, as the universe expanded and  
cooled more, to say, half that prior temperature, 
they could expand half of the remainder, and since  
it's half the temperature, they get twice the 
computation per energy used, so the same as they  
got the first time. Now they only have a quarter 
of their stored energy left, and have had two  
equal sized periods of thought, one fueled by the 
first half of their energy reserve, and the second  
by expending a quarter of that original. Now the 
Universe has cooled again to half the temperature,  
and they expend another eighth of their reserve 
and get another third but equal amount of thought.  
As with Zeno’s Paradox, they never run out 
of energy, but they keep on thinking. 
 
Each period they must go slower, from an external 
perspective, as they slowly use their power to  
think, but they never run out. Their subjective 
time is stretched over ever longer eons as  
the universe cools ever more and they use their 
stockpiles ever slower, but they have an infinity,  
or near infinity at least, of thought and 
experience, and the outside is a dead and  
boring place anyway, so it hardly matters 
to them that the clock runs faster outside.  
Those who remember our discussions in Black 
Hole Farming and Iron Stars will remember  
this concept, but there we delved into more 
practical limitations of storage and decay,  
whereas Dyson focused on it mostly as a basic 
theoretical concept and a fun thought experiment.
 
Tipler’s approach is essentially reversing for 
the Big Crunch scenario, as the Universe begins  
to contract, rather than expand, from gravity 
finally slowing that expansion then reversing it,  
the Universe instead begins to warm up. Here 
he assumes, as we often do on this channel,  
that in the deep future every bit of the Universe 
we – or some other alien civilization – can reach  
will have been turned into some artifice 
serving humanity or those aliens, probably  
giant computers on which post-biological life 
has uploaded itself. All the Universe has been  
transformed into either power plants, computers, 
or reserves awaiting use to fuel and repair those,  
and we or our descendants are uploaded onto 
this megacomputer, the notion there being  
that we all merge into one enormous megamind, 
something dwarfing even a Matryoshka Brain. 
 
Now as the universe contracts and the temperature 
rises, this contraction can power this Megamind.  
Indeed we tend to assume there are many megaminds 
at this point, who will begin merging as the  
Universe contracts. As contraction continues, 
the time it takes to send signals between various  
nodes of the ever more unified mind decrease, 
and the energy available for thinking rises,  
in the opposite fashion to the Dyson Scenario, 
Tipler’s one has subjective thinking speed rising  
ever faster relative to the surrounding 
Universe, as it grows smaller and hotter,  
in reverse of the time after the Big Bang. 
As the end approaches, that final moment,  
subjectively, becomes infinitely long, or 
close to it, with all those remaining minds or  
megacomputers crammed into one and thinking with 
virtually no signal lag or power limitations. 
 
We’ve drawn this example in the case 
of evaporating black holes civilization  
living around black holes as they grow 
brighter and brighter before flaring out,  
or living as a Matryoshka Brian around a star 
going Supernova, or in the case of the Big Rip,  
if you could tap dark energy for power 
near the end, which is easier there.  
When we’ve discussed it though we’ve usually meant 
it as a very powerful last burst of consciousness,  
not an eternal one, though I won’t deny I’ve often 
used poetic phrasing like a last frozen moment of  
eternity to describe it, and in context it 
might be some single second that subjectively  
felt like trillions of years. An outsider sees an 
explosion lasting a heartbeat, but those inside  
experienced eons, whole civilizations rose and 
fell and rose again, in that single moment.
 
Anyway the Big Crunch version of this is Tipler’s 
Omega Point Cosmology, and it goes a step further  
by saying this is truly infinite and is also 
the literal resurrection scenario for humanity  
discussed in Christian Eschatology, as you’d have 
the ability to simulate or emulate anyone who  
had ever lived before and eternally, from their 
perspective. This is where a lot of the popularity  
and also objections start coming from. There’s a 
great science fiction trilogy by Frederick Pohl,  
the Eschaton Trilogy, that actually handles 
humanity encountering two powerful and ancient  
alien empires who fight to control that 
eventual Eschaton, and unfortunately the  
last book came out about the same time the 
Big Crunch theory was losing its foothold as  
a major contender for the Fate of the Universe.
All right, so what are the problems here? Well,  
the big one nowadays of course is that the Big 
Crunch is not a major contender anymore. We  
should note that this has no bearing on Teilhard 
de Chardin’s original premise or how it influenced  
concepts like Technological Singularities. As I 
mentioned earlier, we haven’t actually disproved  
that the Universe might collapse on itself 
one day, though I think the argument for that  
option is not strong at this time. Also, there’s 
other way the universe might collapse on itself,  
like Vacuum Collapse, and for that matter there 
are crunch-like or cyclical options in concepts  
like String Theory, M-Theory, and Brane Cosmology, 
to which I’ve heard folks adapt Omega Point to  
with varying degrees of skill or rigor.
Tipler obviously gets a lot of flack for  
basically interpreting this as proof of not 
only some eventual near-god forming – which  
is certainly normal enough in futurism and 
transhumanism concepts – but a very real and  
infinite and specifically Christian one, and 
we are essentially bypassing that part of it,  
as this show is not about attacking or defending 
any given theology, and this is where most of the  
criticisms lay or are rooted out of, and you can 
go read his reasoning and criticisms and rebuttals  
of those and the rebuttals of the rebuttals of 
it elsewhere. If you do, I’d recommend Tipler’s  
books themselves and some online essays by him, 
and for criticisms, Anders Sandberg, as he treats  
the topic respectfully and in detail. You can 
also see some arguments for and against it,  
or modifying it, from David Deutsch, who is best 
known for his contributions to Quantum Computing.
 
For the science of it, Tipler makes 
5 basic claims for his argument,  
which I’ll just quote from his web page. 
(1) the universe is spatially closed (has  
finite spatial size and has the 
topology of a three-sphere),
 
(2) there are no event horizons, implying the 
future c-boundary is a point --- the Omega Point,
 
(3) Life must eventually engulf the 
entire universe and control it,
 
(4) the amount of information processed 
between now and the final state is infinite,
 
(5) the amount of information stored 
in the universe diverges to infinity  
as the final state is approached.
Which, to summarize and simplify,  
if the amount of information you can process and 
store between now and the end of the Universe  
is infinite, then every bit of information, 
including a recording of your brain, is in play.  
Tipler has updated the theory and argument to 
account for more modern cosmology, including  
a Quantum Omega Point and also in the context of 
the Many Worlds Interpretation of Quantum. We’ll  
discuss some of those notions in our upcoming 
Multiverse Warfare episode coming out next month  
right before Marvel releases Quanutmania and we 
get to see Kang the Conqueror join the MCU. 
 
One of those flaws or issues with 
it though is black holes themselves,  
as they do have event horizons and 
we’ve observed them at this point,  
and they would seem to very much interfere with 
the option for infinite growth of information.  
Though again we have no idea if information is 
preserved inside black holes or not and that was  
the source of a long and legendary debate 
between Stephen Hawking and Roger Penrose,  
who shared the Wolf Prize for their work together 
developing singularity theorems and black holes. 
 
Penrose, who finally got a much deserved and 
delayed Nobel Prize in physics in 2020, is  
himself no stranger to bold and contested ideas. 
Many know him from his hypothesis on Orchestrated  
Objective Reduction, also called Orch OR, which 
argues that consciousness could originate at the  
quantum level inside neurons, which has a lot 
of supporters and detractors and might make a  
fun topic to cover all on its own sometime. But he 
also offers another Big Crunch parallel cosmology,  
Conformal cyclic cosmology, which he detailed 
in his 2010 book, Cycles of Time, and which also  
might make for a great episode on its own, but 
it draws its notion from the possibility that we  
might see the ghosts of long dead black holes 
in the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation  
that evaporated by Hawking radiation. It is 
believed that black holes slowly give off power,  
as photons of light, as they age and shrink 
in mass, and give off ever more and more  
quickly till glowing briefly for a moment like 
a star, before finally evaporating completely.
 
The reasoning here, and its relevance to 
Big Crunch and Omega Point, is that time  
moves slower the faster you go as you approach 
light speed, but at the speed of light itself,  
no time passes. For Photons, particles of light, 
they experience no time themselves, and most, once  
emitted, will never be reabsorbed, and grow less 
likely to as the universe expands and ages, and  
thins out. And if all matter including black holes 
eventually disappears as it turns into photons,  
then eventually all the mass or energy left in 
the universe is photons which experience no time  
in their frame of reference. And that means every 
frame reference left behind has no time passing,  
which means that any given point might have 
several photons pass through it over a given time,  
as they journey around, but to them they all 
went through that point in the same moment and  
each photon will cover an infinite distance in 
its journey that to it takes no time at all. 
 
You can argue this means that, once all those 
other reference frames experiencing time  
disappear – at the end of time, rather literally 
– then the universe is actually infinitely dense,  
as there’s no longer any meaningful way to measure 
distance or time, and this is essentially a Big  
Crunch condition, all the energy in the Universe 
is now in a spot with no distance or time again,  
just like at the hypothetical Big Bang. 
This is not a total reset incidentally,  
as it posits we should be able to see the 
signature of gravitational waves caused by  
collisions of black holes in prior iterations of 
the Universe, called Aeons in the theory. Black  
hole collisions or mergers are enormous events 
that dwarf supernovae in their power release,  
and as you may recall, we first witnessed one only 
a few years back. I’m not sure if Conformal Cyclic  
Cosmology operates if Proton Decay isn’t 
a thing but it’s a fascinating option and  
I think you could make the case that the Omega 
Point reasoning could switch over here, though  
possibly more the Dyson Scenario we normally 
contemplate for Heat Death, Eternal Intelligence.
 
Of course the notion that the Universe might 
eventually be turned into one gigantic brain,  
albeit a finite one in size in duration, does 
work under any of the known models for the  
Fate of the Universe. It is the infinite size or 
duration that’s problematic, and we’ve discussed  
mind-bendingly huge but finite versions many 
times on the show. If you’ve seen images of the  
Lanikea Supercluster of Galaxies we live in being 
compared in shape and appearance to brain cells,  
it’s not terribly hard to picture our 
Universe as one enormous mind already.
 
So there’s Omega Point in a nutshell, 
there’s a lot more reasoning of course,  
and more rebuttals and variations but that’s 
a good place to start if you’d like to learn  
more. For my part, as I’ve mentioned, I’ve 
always found it fascinating as a concept,  
and I imagine after today you can see why, as it 
opens the doors to so many interesting ideas and  
discussions, which I’d encourage everyone 
to have in our comments section below,  
though as always with courtesy, as the topic 
does tend to ignite some fiery discussions,  
but it’s winter when this episode comes 
out so it might help keep you warm. 
 
To paraphrase my favorite poet Robert Frost’s poem 
Fire and Ice, Some say the world will end in fire,  
Some say in ice. From what I’ve tasted of 
desire, Omega Point Cosmology is for those  
who favor fire, and Eternal Intelligence 
will suffice, for those who favor ice.
 
Incidentally if you’re looking for more on 
major currents theories of beginnings and ends,  
there’s an excellent look at the topic by 
Professor Jim Khalili over on Curiositystream,  
“The Beginning and End of the Universe”. Since 
writing this episode though I decided that I  
wanted to spend a little more time discussing 
Roger Penrose’s Conformal Cyclic Cosmology than  
we got to today, and so we’ll be doing a 
short bonus episode over Nebula on that  
topic. We often do extended editions of the 
episodes over on Nebula but by popular request,  
especially when it’s a standalone topic, we’ll be 
doing them as separate shorts going forward rather  
than adding to the episode. And you can find all 
of SFIA’s content over on Nebula a few days early  
and ad free, again, no commercials or sponsors 
messages, and that includes both our audio-only  
versions and our new 4k Ultra-HD episodes.
Nebula is the largest creator-owned streaming  
service out there, and I’m very proud to be one of 
its cofounders, as its allowed so many creators to  
have an additional platform they can work on, safe 
from Youtube’s mercurial algorithms and seemingly  
ever-longer and more intrusive ads. So it let’s 
us offer options like our extended editions and  
bonus content like we’ll be having today and some 
Nebula Exclusives like Planets vs Megastructures  
and the Coexistence with Alien series. 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by  
itself but we have also partnered up with 
CuriosityStream, the home of thousands of  
great educational videos like “The Beginning 
and End of the Universe”. That lets us offer  
Nebula for free as a bonus if you sign up for 
CuriosityStream using the link in our episode  
description. Again, you can get Curiositystream 
and Nebula for less than $15 a year, just use  
the link in the episode’s description.
So today we were seeing ways civilizations  
might endure even the death of stars and the end 
of time, and next week we’ll look at an option  
for reaching those stars, as we consider the 
possibility of using asteroids as spaceships,  
both interplanetary and interstellar. And 
the week after that we’ll consider how to  
terraform new worlds once we arrive at them. 
Before that though, next Sunday, January 29th,  
we’ll have our monthly livestream Q&A, at 4pm 
Eastern Time, where you can submit questions  
in our chat and have them answered live.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can also  
help support the show on Patreon, and if you want 
donate and help in other ways, you can see those  
options by visiting our website, IsaacArthur.net. 
You can also carry on the discussion by leaving  
comments on the episode or visiting one of our 
social media forums, like those on Facebook,  
Reddit, and Discord, where thousands of 
members join in discussions of science  
and futurism. And links for all of those 
options are in the episode’s description.
 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
