The goal of science is to understand 
and master the Universe around us,  
but could our skill grow so great that 
we could learn to warp reality itself?
 
Possibly one of the hardest truths about shifting 
from science fiction to a science-realistic look  
at exploring and settling the galaxy is that 
leaping around the place at faster than light  
speed is probably never going to be possible. 
Still, there are some hypothetical technologies  
like Warp Drive that seem to offer the 
possibility of FTL travel, moving around  
the galaxy in years or maybe even days or moments.
However, we focus so much on this aspect of those  
sorts of technologies, that we often overlook what 
other things warping space and time might allow,  
and some of these are even possible under known 
science. So, I thought today we’d contemplate how  
we warp space, how we might be able to if we ever 
got our hands on negative mass or energy, and some  
of the cool technologies allowed under both known 
science and some more hypothetical options. We  
will not just be talking about warping space and 
time, as there are other quantities or qualities  
we might change, like probability and luck.
We’ll be looking at everything from FTL to  
perpetual motion machines, or how to make enormous 
storage spaces, and the major topics we’ll cover,  
in order, are: Warping Spacetime, Negative Mass, 
Spaceship Propulsion, Forcefields & Shields,  
Reversing Universal Expansion, Matter Creation, 
Superstrong Materials, Cloaking, Hammerspace,  
Tractor Beams, Time Manipulation & Stasis, 
Ultra-fast Communication, Vacuum Energy,  
Universe Creation, Probability Manipulation 
& Luck, and finally Perpetual Civilizations.  
And we’ll try to ask what sort of impact those 
would have on a society if they possessed those  
technologies. Lots of topics to cover so we’ll 
be here for a while, and you might want to grab a  
drink and a snack, and don’t forget to hit those 
like and subscribe buttons while you’re at it. 
When it comes to Warping Space Time, we probably 
want to begin with the basic case of just normal  
old space, we’ll get to spacetime and negative 
matter and tearing spacetime as we go. And I  
think folks know of this mostly with either 
the classic grid-paper or rubber sheet case  
of seeing the moon orbit the Earth, or the 
Earth the Sun, and press down on that grid,  
which can actually give you a bit of a backwards 
idea about what’s happening, since gravity  
contracts space around it, rather than stretching 
it out, but the visualization is a popular one. 
Let me instead suggest an actual 3D version of 
this and just picture a basketball or any other  
hollow sphere, which we’ll say represents a region 
of space. I could fill that sphere up with water,  
around 430 cubic inches or 7 liters worth. 
However, if we put a lot of mass or gravity in  
there, we would suddenly find that it wouldn’t 
hold that much water anymore, and less as we  
added more mass, ignoring that mass is taking 
up space itself, as in this case the water is  
just our analogy for spacetime and isn’t getting 
pushed out. That basketball, or region of space,  
looks the right size, but it's crunched down 
inside, there is literally less space inside  
there than your math tells you there should be.
Indeed, if the mass is all concentrated near  
the center, and we divided that sphere 
into shell regions based on how far from  
the center they were, we would find the 
actual volume of each successive shell,  
as we got closer to the center, was even more 
reduced than we would calculate that the previous  
shell was. It’s getting more contracted, more 
warped, as we get closer and gravity goes up. 
Now, if it were actually a black hole in 
the center, things get different and indeed,  
spacetime might even rip, but even in a mundane 
sphere of mass like Earth, this warping continues.  
At Earth’s center, where net gravitational 
force is zero because there’s equal mass  
and force pulling on you in every direction 
to cancel out, the warping is nonetheless at  
its highest. Space is most condensed, and time 
runs slowest there at the center of the mass. 
So too, you don’t actually need mass for this 
effect, any form of energy does the warping.  
For most objects, virtually all their energy is 
in mass format, but ultra hot object or those  
with incredibly high spin rates - or kinetic 
energy – like neutron stars, do bend spacetime  
significantly from their heat and kinetic energy, 
and a large pack of photons all together, while  
having no mass, will also bend spacetime. Under 
Einsteinian relativity, we generally consider  
gravity and its stretching of spacetime to be 
unified concepts, the presence of large amounts  
of energy – usually as mass – warps spacetime 
and causes the effect we think of as gravity. 
Gravity is a strictly attractive force 
though, so it only contracts spacetime. It  
only makes space condense and only makes 
time slow down. Not expand or speed up. 
Negative Mass is a type of hypothetical matter 
with the opposite warping effect of normal matter.  
Space expands and time speeds up. In the rubber 
sheet analogy, the weights or spheres on the sheet  
lift the sheet rather than stretch it down, and in 
our earlier basketball analogy, we would find that  
it would now hold more water than we calculated, 
not less. More space and faster time. This is  
how the FTL effect is explained for Warp Drives.
When it comes to Spaceship Propulsion, Negative  
Mass, as well as other alterations to reality, 
can be used for fast and low-energy non-FTL travel  
too, which avoids causality-violation 
concerns, or time travel paradoxes. 
We have no known examples of negative mass or 
energy, though there is a ‘kinda’ case with  
vacuum energy which we’ll get to later. 
If it exists or could be made to exist,  
and had the properties we think it has though, 
then you could put some normal mass on the front  
of a ship and some negative matter on the back 
of a ship and you have a spaceship which will  
move without any propellant or outside effort. 
See, a property of negative mass particles is  
that they are believed to gravitationally repel 
both positive and negative mass, unlike positive  
mass which is believed to pull on both positive 
and negative mass. Therefore, two positive mass  
particles pull toward each other, two negative 
mass particles repel each other, and a positive  
and negative mass particle will actually shove 
the positive mass away from the negative mass,  
while pulling the negative mass toward the 
positive mass, resulting in the positive mass  
particle being chased by the negative one.
This is what we call a Gravitational Dipole  
Drive or Reactionless Drive. This does not imply 
FTL directly though, but the effect is a ship  
eternally falling down a gravity well. 
The negative mass is expanding space  
or essentially putting the back end of your 
ship ‘uphill’ while the front is contracting  
it and putting the front downhill, and regular 
energy does that too, as would negative energy,  
so negative mass isn’t required if you 
can generate negative energy instead. 
How this gets to FTL is a bit more complicated, 
see our Warp Drives episode for the details,  
but essentially this ship isn’t moving through 
space, it is letting space expand and contract,  
or warp, near it, propelling it through space 
but without any propellant. I should note that  
we do have an example of space expanding already, 
and that is dark energy and the expansion of the  
Universe in its entirety, and indeed most of it is 
expanding away from us at faster than light speed.  
Dark Energy and Hubble Expansion do not 
operate on the same principle here, exactly,  
but they do give some hope that the rules of 
reality permit something like negative matter  
to exist or to otherwise produce that effect.
The gravitational Dipole Drive is a specific  
subset of these sort of drives, using a 
ship stretched between two massive spheres,  
regular and negative mass, but the 
entire category of Bias, Diametric,  
and Pitch Drives contemplate warping some feature 
of reality to move a ship. Generating a negative  
energy pocket to emulate negative mass is just one 
example, but in theory you could just as easily  
flip the gravitational constant on one sphere to a 
negative value, or increase or decrease the power  
of the Electromagnetic force behind or in front of 
the ship, or reduce the inertial mass of a ship.  
Warping physical constants is probably not 
possible and would tend to have huge secondary  
effects which folks forget though. For instance, 
you might make a ship whose hull could alter  
how much drag it had, but if this is being done 
through some sort of alteration of how atoms work,  
it might unbind those atoms or kill the crew 
as the laws of chemistry and viscosity suddenly  
change. Everyone has a heart attack when their 
blood won’t pump through their veins anymore. 
We can also protect spaceships with shields 
or forcefields, not just move them, by use  
of negative mass. Normally, something like 
a projectile or laser beam is going to gain  
energy as gravity pulls on it, speeding up or blue 
shifting as it approaches a massive object, which  
makes them hit harder, but a negative mass field, 
or negative energy field, would slow projectiles  
and red shift light beams. While it’s doing so, 
every punch you throw is being accelerated or  
blue shifted as it leaves your ship, while every 
shot your enemy gets you with has been slowed  
or weakened. And there’s no particular reason 
this couldn’t be used as a personal force field  
or on a smaller vehicle, except that it really 
does take a lot of mass to do much of anything  
gravitationally, so, something like that might 
work better for megaships or giant space stations. 
Again though, we’re not just limited to 
contemplating warping reality by use of gravity,  
it might be some field that did this specific 
effect or it might be one that caused space  
to massively expand around a ship, like with 
Hubble expansion, so that while it was active,  
your enemies would have to shoot through 
a bigger volume of space toward you,  
and everything redshifted or slowed on approach. 
Though with a method like this, what we’ll call  
a Hubble Shield, your own shots are weakened too, 
plus there’s no real reason why that newly-added  
space would disappear when the shield went 
down, which might make for an interesting type  
of pollution. Your galaxy is slowly falling apart 
from excessive creation of new pockets of space,  
causing a localized Big Rip effect.
The opposite effect, something that  
caused space to shrink, like a vortex sucking 
spacetime out of it, could potentially be one  
serious doomsday weapon if it was the equivalent 
of ripping a hole for the universe to drain down,  
but assuming there was a limiter on that, you 
could use something like a targeting generator  
that laid that field down on an enemy ship or 
produced it from a generator you could load  
onto a missile to aim at them, that suddenly 
made it so virtually every shot curved in on  
the target and hit with more punch. One can 
imagine a specialized ship in a fleet whose  
job it was to put that beam on an enemy capital 
ship so the fleet could pound it twice as hard. 
On the flipside you might be able 
to shield yourself from gravity,  
allowing you to hover over places or even escape 
black holes, as well as being awesome for space  
travel and building enormously tall structures. 
Something like being able to emit new space via  
artificial Hubble Expansion toward the source of 
that gravity might give you gravity shielding too. 
We could reverse Hubble Expansion and Dark 
Energy if we seriously scaled up a device  
for sucking in bits of spacetime, and a process 
like this would probably be a power and energy  
generator, not something you needed to supply 
it with to run. Spacetime has energy in it,  
as we’ll discuss in a bit with Vacuum Energy, 
so collapsing or destroying bits of it should  
produce energy. This would probably make 
for one heck of a terrifying weapon too,  
in bomb or ray format. Space near, or 
inside, the target starts disappearing  
and replacing itself with huge floods 
of newly released energy and radiation. 
However, we don’t know how Dark Energy 
works or where it comes from, if anywhere,  
so it might be something that eventually runs out 
and the Universe would then stop expanding, indeed  
it would eventually collapse if that energy ran 
out. But we have no reason to think it would, and  
that it is essentially an infinite power source, 
which you could then harvest to run a civilization  
eternally. Such being the case, we don’t know what 
form of energy that harvested energy would take,  
maybe particle and anti-particle, 
photons, maybe regular old matter,  
I wouldn’t be surprised if it came out formatted 
like things were right after the Big Bang either. 
Energy can be Converted into Matter if you 
have a sufficient power source that isn’t  
deriving energy from mass, causing a surplus 
of power but maybe a deficit of matter with  
which to build things out of. But you can turn 
one type of energy into another, especially  
if you have an infinite power supply so that you 
don’t need to worry about your efficiency rate.  
Additionally, if you have various reality-warping 
technologies, it should be possible to bias the  
rate at which various bits of matter are produced, 
and you may be able to create types of matter  
which normally wouldn’t be able to exist.
Superstrong Materials might be generated by  
any number of reality warping techniques, like 
locally increasing the electromagnetic force  
or strong nuclear force to bind nuclei or atoms 
together stronger, or create stable atoms vastly  
larger than uranium or even the hypothetical 
island of stability. We also have no idea  
how strong materials made out of the other four 
quarks, charm, strange, top, and bottom would be,  
as all our normal matter is made of just up and 
down quarks, plus electrons, and you might have  
matter with muons or tau particles instead 
of electrons, or even warp reality to alter  
their basic properties or create entirely new 
fundamental particles. A proton of double mass  
or half charge, or something new that flicked back 
and forth between positive and negative charge,  
somewhat like neutrino type oscillation.
We could also imagine a mixture of negative  
matter with neutronium – the hyper dense material 
neutron stars are made out of – to make something  
that surpassed adamantium in strength but was 
lighter than aluminum, or mithril, and be stable  
and potentially even insanely heat resistant 
given its sheer thermal capacity. Or we might  
make changes to other material properties, like 
thermal conductivity, electrical conductivity,  
specific heat, half-life, friction coefficient, 
viscosity, transparency and opaqueness, how well  
it interacted with other particles, and indeed if 
it could interact with neutrinos or dark matter. 
Direct Warping of Spacetime can also accomplish 
effects like Cloaking, as a given bubble of space  
might just fold in on itself to hide an object, 
or warp right around it so that light and other  
particles could just detour. Though one can 
imagine ways to detect effects like that,  
such as a radar beam that had a built-in timestamp 
.Like if you were transmitting the date and time  
rather than just a big pulse of radio, and 
you could notice if the radio wave came back  
just a little slower or faster than it should 
from some seemingly empty place, though still  
very hard to do in empty space. In practice a 
one timepad of time specific numbers would be  
better than the actual timecode built into your 
pulse too, as that would be harder to emulate. 
There are many other ways we could imagine warping 
reality to cause invisibility or other stealth  
effects too, though each that come to mind do 
offer some implied way to detect it; even an  
option like creating a huge bubble of space inside 
a smaller region, so you could hide a whole fleet  
or planet inside a spot the size of basketball, 
but that still leaves something to detect. 
Hammerspace is the nickname for when we make a 
big pocket of space somewhere, as a call out to  
the old Looney Tunes cartoons where some character 
would pull a big hammer or mallet out of thin air  
to whack someone else on the head with, and this 
is also often called a Bag of Holding. It’s joked  
that many shows or movies where characters have 
guns they fire like crazy but never deem to need  
to reload have hammerspace ammo magazines.
We also see a different application in  
Doctor Who with the Tardis, which is 
bigger on the inside than the outside,  
having some sprawling complex of rooms squeezed 
into something the size of a police box.  
As I mentioned a moment ago, this makes for a 
rather good method of stealthing a ship – or  
a civilization – as you might squeeze a whole 
fleet or planet into something basketball-sized. 
However, you need to think about the side-effects 
of this, like what’s happening to all the heat  
generated inside that basketball, or police 
box. It’s great for storage but not if you  
want to be doing anything inside. As we often 
mention in regard to future mega-civilizations,  
how fast a planet or Dyson swarm can radiate heat 
into deep space controls how much power they can  
use, because if they exceed their radiating rate 
they’ll get hotter. How fast stuff radiates heat  
is based on its temperature and its surface area. 
So if you only have a square meter of basketball  
or beach ball-sized space to radiate heat, 
but you’re running an entire battlefleet or K1  
civilization in there, either you’re going to get 
roasted pretty quick as heat rises, or that bit of  
warped space is going to punch all that heat out 
of its limited surface area by growing hotter. 
In the case of a K1 civilization, that would be 
about 2x10^17 Watts coming out of a single square  
meter, which would represent a temperature of 
about 1.4 Million Kelvin, with a peak wavelength  
in the X-Ray range and gushing of plenty of 
visible and ultraviolet light. Not any stealthier  
than a planet. Though it might take time to warm 
up, and for that matter it’s a great way to cool  
something off too, since it would be getting 
way less new sunlight in to warm it that way. 
It also depends on how you’re doing 
your spacetime bending, for instance,  
something like a shellworld around a black hole, 
especially a big natural black hole or even a  
supermassive one like a Birch Planet, is bending 
spacetime a lot, time runs slower there and space  
is more compact nearby, but light is curving 
in from any nearby star so it isn’t missing  
light from that compaction. However that light 
is blue-shifting, which would be a way to make  
a red dwarf star nearby a little brighter 
and whiter when it got to the megaplanet.  
We usually assume the larger ones are using 
artificial sunlight made close at hand on the ones  
that are more massive than actual suns anyway.
You could also use tricks with gravity or  
spacetime warping to just make a star 
brighter or cooler, we could red-shift  
or blue-shift light coming out of it, or do 
that right above the planet we want to light,  
or we might increase gravity in the core, or the 
probability of fusion occurring. Incidentally  
this can be done in mundane fashion by simply 
placing two polar statite mirrors over a star,  
bouncing their light back on the star to heat it, 
which is called Starboosting, or to increase the  
equatorial brightness out from the Star, 
as we looked at doing for Alderson Discs. 
In this same vein of thought, you can also make a 
planet radiate heat faster by expanding the space  
right around it, and it just depends 
on how easy this tech is to work with,  
as you might have some expanded shell of space 
around a planet for low orbit with stratoscraper  
spacetowers reaching into it that were one 
part spacedock and one part radiating fins,  
giving you more room for spaceships to dock and 
maneuver too. You might also be able to dissipate  
heat faster by locally altering the physical 
constants covering how much energy is emitted  
by a hot object or carried in a photon it emits.
Tractor Beams are another example of how we might  
warp space. This can obviously be a product of 
directed gravity, or anti-gravity, something  
like a gravity laser, but we might also imagine 
we learn to warp things in a directed rather than  
omnidirectional fashion. You could then have a 
planet that emitted most of its gravitational tug  
off its polar regions making it easier for ships 
to land or take off from the equatorial range.  
Directed gravity also makes for a great way to 
launch a ship or slow it down, or for that matter,  
launch a bullet, shell, or escape pod.
Assuming your gravity is roughly uniform  
coming down the barrel or being pushed 
by a beam, everything accelerates evenly  
so we don’t get those uneven crushing effects 
from high-gee acceleration. This means you can  
launch ships very quickly – and possibly simply 
powered by an uneven gravity field over your  
planet or structure – without hurting the crew 
on board. Needless to say, an uneven tractor beam  
could be a pretty vicious weapon all on its own, 
ripping ships and people and even planets apart. 
While time travel is one obvious way to use 
spacetime warping, Temporal Manipulation  
offers a lot more options than just that, 
including ones that wouldn’t automatically  
open the door to time travel and paradoxes. 
A Temporal Tractor Beam for instance might  
be something you could use to yank things from 
the past or future, or might let you just cause  
time to run slower or faster under its influence. 
Same for slow time bubbles or fast time bubbles. 
You might have regions of a planet or 
megastructure space habitat where time  
ran slower or faster, maybe even the equivalent 
of freeways where time sped up to speed up travel  
without dangerously high collision speed. Indeed, 
you might use this for tricks like accelerated  
growth, or faster heat radiation, but you have to 
be mindful of unexpected problems. For instance,  
if I suddenly slow time down in a bubble right 
around me, not only is that likely to have weird  
effects at the border where atoms are interacting, 
but in that bubble where time is running at,  
say a hundredth the normal speed, everything 
should be rather blurry outside from the  
fast forward effect. However, I’m also getting 
100 times the photons hitting my eyeballs and  
body every moment. So I should be getting very 
hot and need some serious sunglasses at noon. 
A planet placed in a slow time bubble, like 
Kricket from Douglas Adams’ novel Life,  
The Universe, and Everything, has this same 
issue, you need to be setting up some sort  
of mirror field with this, or solar shades, to 
drop the sunlight down to a rate your planet can  
absorb at its relative time passage. Same for 
cosmic rays or you might lose the atmosphere.  
A fast time bubble would seem like an awesome 
way to build up your forces or resist an attack,  
or to do science and production in general, but 
now you need to increase the sunlight coming in. 
For a controlled stasis field, just a place 
where time moves very slowly or not at all,  
this can be a problem. For instance, one issue 
with freezing people for very long interstellar  
voyages, those of several centuries, is that our 
bodies contain small amounts of radioisotopes,  
and the equivalent of 3000 years of half-life 
decays would be a lethal radiation dose for  
most people. Your own body killed you.
Particles keep decaying even when it’s  
cold. This isn’t an issue in a stasis bubble, as 
presumably time itself is stopping or slowing so  
radiation decay with it, but radiation coming 
in from the background is, and on Earth.  
Natural background radiation tends to run a few 
millisieverts a year, half of that is inhaled or  
ingested, so it presumably isn’t an issue in a 
slow time bubble – though, where you’re getting  
your air from in a fast time bubble is a concern 
– and that still leaves around a millisievert a  
year you’re absorbing in your slow time bubble.
A sievert will get you light radiation poisoning,  
and a few will usually kill you after a month or 
two, more than 10 might kill you in minutes. That  
means your stasis field better have some 
thick shielding on it, or a century in,  
it will make you sick, a millennia will give you 
a modest chance of death after a month or so,  
and ten thousand years will give you 
acute radiation poisoning that will  
soon see you wishing you were dead for 
the few remaining hours of your life. 
And a lot of places are way more radioactive 
than the average, both in terms of regions,  
and specific places, like your nuclear reactor 
powering your underground bunker and its stasis  
fields, which passed the workplace safety limits 
easily so nobody thought to mention it was ten  
times the normal dosage. Or your spaceship, where 
radiation is probably a lot higher, or even on  
a mountaintop bunker, with less air protecting 
you from cosmic rays. A fast time bubble you put  
someone in might also cause them to detonate, 
albeit it would probably be their asphyxiated  
or starved corpse, just from all the heat or 
radiation they’re leaking out with nowhere to go. 
These sort of effects are very important to 
consider with any sort of reality warping.  
I should also note that Stasis can potentially 
be done under known physics by placing lots of  
gravity nearby, which you might be able to do with 
careful stable arrangements of micro blackholes,  
though these probably need to be in the 
gigaton plus range, to avoid Hawking  
radiation incineration, and you will need a lot 
of them, but this would work under known physics. 
When it comes to Ultra-fast Communication, 
very thin lines of fast or slow time,  
much like compacted areas of space, can be great 
for allowing objects or signals to move quickly,  
and this need not necessarily violate causality or 
require insane amounts of power or negative mass.  
In this same way, we could contemplate a very long 
thin corridor of some hyper-dense material, which  
would slow time down inside it and compress space, 
but you can’t send a signal down that, it would  
get absorbed by all that matter. Though, as we 
discussed in our Dark Matter episode, since dark  
matter interacts with normal matter and photons 
either very little or not at all, a message might  
travel down one undistorted or attenuated even 
over light years. We called that a Dark Telegraph  
in that episode, see it for more details.
Compressing spacetime itself might have  
a similar effect, but takes us to the concept 
of Vacuum Energy. Space is never really empty,  
there are always stray atoms or photons moving 
through, but even a shielded volume sucked free  
of material will still have lots of particles 
and antiparticles popping in and out of existence  
constantly. There’s a lot of debate as to if it is 
possible to ever tap this for power, and how much  
you’d get out if you did, but if you can compress 
spacetime or alter reality to make these virtual  
particles last longer or remain around, it would 
make for an amazing source of matter and energy,  
though it’s the sort of thing that could 
conceivably cause a big bang like effect as well. 
Universe Creation by playing with vacuum energy or 
even by just chopping off new bubbles of spacetime  
or existing sections as sub-verses seems very 
plausible if you have reality warping technology,  
and may occur unintentionally as a result of 
playing with spacetime or physical constants  
too much in an area. You might also make 
universes that were of more dimensions,  
or where time curved around like a loop, or space 
was shaped like a donut or ring, running back  
around on itself. One’s where laws of conservation 
of momentum or energy didn’t apply or other types  
of matter existed or even types of dimensions or 
traits that didn’t exist in this universe. You  
also might be able to travel to other universes 
this way, or get them leaking in. Which might  
be problematic if a neighboring reality with twice 
the gravitational constant you have starts leaking  
into your sun, rapidly accelerating fusion rates.
Probability Manipulation & Luck is another way  
you might alter fusion rates of particles. Your 
typical proton banging around in a stellar object  
will ricochet off of other protons many billions 
of times before we get the result of them sticking  
together and transmuting from a di proton into 
deuterium, a proton and neutron, and while winning  
at the lottery or dice might seem an obvious 
way to profit off messing with probability,  
being able to screw with probability at an atomic 
level probably allows very cheap fusion, long  
lasting rare isotopes, and would have a lot of 
applications beside simply being an amazing power  
source and weapon. As an impact on a civilization, 
it might turn games of chance into games of skill,  
and really mess with things like insurance rates. 
I could imagine someone committing murder by  
increasing someone’s chance of having an accident. 
Or alternatively, reducing the odds of accidents  
or catastrophes which bring civilization 
to crisis or even collapse. When folks say  
something like “anything that can happen will, 
given a long enough period of time”, that doesn’t  
hold when you can warp the nature of reality 
itself, and play with time and probability. 
If you want to have a Perpetual Civilization, you 
need a perpetual supply of power and matter, and  
there are a number of ways that warping reality 
could allow a perpetual motion machine or other  
eternal power supplies, some of which we discussed 
earlier. But if you can play with time and space  
and probability to harness unending resources and 
predict catastrophes or reset from them, or to  
suck spacetime in to power yourself and keep the 
galaxies from flying apart, well there’s no reason  
you couldn’t last for the better part of forever. 
After all, when you can warp reality itself,  
it lets you change the rules of the game.
Of course it lets other people do it too,  
and I could imagine some terrible wars 
being fought by those with these abilities,  
ripping spacetime apart and causing waves 
of paradoxes to crash into each other.  
I don’t think it would be an understatement to 
say that such conflicts could threaten reality  
itself… but then again, the winner might be 
able to reforge a new one of their liking  
afterwards.
[outro] 
So as a quick reminder for those in 
the Dallas, Texas region, this weekend  
is the 2023 International Space Development 
Conference, starting today, Thursday May 25th,  
and running through Sunday the 28th. That 
is hosted by the National Space Society,  
which I have the honor of being President of, and 
I’ll be there Friday Afternoon through Monday. I’m  
certain it’s going to be awesome and informative 
as usual, and if you come by, make sure to come  
up and say hi. We are not having our usual end 
of the Month Livestream Q&A this weekend though.  
Hopefully we had it last weekend, that was a bit 
in the air as of when I wrote and recorded this. 
So today is our last episode for May though we 
still have an episode image poll coming up this  
weekend to help select future episodes, which I 
hope you’ll take a minute to vote in. Speaking  
of future episodes, next week we’ll begin June 
with a trip to the edge of the Solar System,  
to discuss Colonizing the Kuiper Belt.
Then in two weeks, we will explore how  
we can build enormously tall and strong 
structures in Space Towers. Then it will  
be time for our scifi Sunday episode, and 
a return to the Alien Civilization Series,  
for a look at Higher Dimensional Aliens. And in 
three weeks, we’ll ask what it would be like if  
we or some other more advanced civilization sought 
to construct artificial afterlives. 4 weeks from  
we will celebrate SFIA’s 400th regular Thursday 
episode with a look at life in the year 2323 AD. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
