This episode is brought to you by World Anvil.
 
Many of us dread a future in which we don’t 
have any money. But that might not feel so  
bad actually, as long as the rest of the 
world doesn’t need any money either.
 
So a topic that comes up a lot in discussion of 
the future is what the economy might look like and  
how money might change in the future, or if it has 
any role at all. A look at a future without money  
is probably one of our most requested topics, 
from both advocates and detractors of the idea.  
So I thought we would try to address all 
of that today and not ask ourselves if a  
society without money is good or not, 
or even just if it’s possible or not,  
but how it might come about and function. 
As we do in our alien civilization series, where  
we’ll take a hypothetical type of civilization and 
ask if the scenario makes sense or how it might  
exist. Needless to say this is a touchy topic 
and I’ll do my best to present it neutrally. 
 
Where money is concerned, the reason 
people hope it might cease to exist  
is usually the easiest part. A lot of folks 
feel money is bad in and of itself -- or at  
least that it’s a poor choice of a life goal or 
becomes the life goal of far too many people.
 
Of course they say money is the root of all 
evil… except they actually do not say that.  
The quote is from the Apostle Paul, and is in 
Greek so translations vary, but the original  
is “The Love of Money”, specifically calling out 
greed not the concept of currency, and it isn’t  
“All Evil” but “all kinds of Evil”. This seems 
like an important distinction to make since if  
we’re assuming money is the root of all evil, then 
we must get rid of it. Whereas if we’re saying  
greed for wealth spawns a lot of bad things, 
then our focus is more on ridding ourselves of a  
behavior manifested around a tool, not the tool.
That’s not unique either, and it comes up in  
regard to a lot of future technologies or 
challenges. We often worry about how to  
handle poorly understood potentially dangerous 
new technology that might end world hunger  
or might bring about the apocalypse. Or both. 
Whether it is a pen or sword, money or guns,  
axe or keyboard, many tools tend to have large 
amounts of bad behavior manifested around them.  
And it would be equally overly simplistic 
to say either ‘the tool isn’t to blame’  
or ‘remove the tools and the problem goes away’. 
Obviously an inanimate physical object can’t  
be blamed for anything, you decide 
how to use a knife or dollar bill,  
but it would also be dishonest to pretend they 
don’t affect us. In an obvious and extreme case,  
we know that strong addictive narcotics can affect 
our behavior and decisions in ways we won’t have  
the strength to control, so most of us voluntarily 
decide to just keep them out of our own reach,  
and there’s at least a case to be made for 
keeping them out of everyone else’s as well.  
Once you’ve done that, it’s legitimate to at least 
examine the question of what else society might be  
better off finding a way to live without.  
Such a civilization might decide it needs  
to do without other advantages, like people 
born more attractive or smarter than others,  
rather than born to a wealthier family. 
And they might be able to do that too,  
setting everyone to the same high IQ or 
attractiveness, or permitting variety in both but  
scoring it, like the point buy system many role 
playing game use for character building, you make  
a character and assign more points to intelligence 
or charisma or physical strength and so on. 
 
That is not specifically pertinent to a 
lack of money but it's important to ask  
why or how a civilization has done away money, 
or maybe never had it in the first place,  
and if that might lead to the pursuit of 
parallel concepts. They probably would have  
the cybernetic and genetic technology to make 
folks smarter or stronger or better looking,  
and also probably to alter people’s thinking 
so they just weren’t greedy, or weren’t heavily  
impacted by other people’s looks or charisma. 
Or they could approach the problem from the other  
end and alter people’s thinking so they’re 
no longer bothered by inequality. That’s a  
bit of a frightening idea to say the least and 
it dovetails into one of our favorite sinister  
concepts on the channel, the Post-Discontent 
Civilization, in which everyone has been made  
content through neuro-hacking, whatever 
their workload or social status. They live  
in a slum when not working 16 hour shifts, 
and they’re perfectly content with that.
 
But even if our hypothetical enlightened 
civilization just sticks to doing away with money,  
we need to ask what they are replacing 
money with because they probably do need  
an accounting system. Your civilization might 
have such abundance that food, water, shelter,  
medicine, computers, jetpacks, and flying cars are 
all too trivially easy to get for anyone to bother  
selling them. They may have local councils 
that vote on what to do if someone asks for  
something atypically big, like a house made of 
solid platinum, or who controls a finite and  
locked resource like a particular parcel of land. 
They may pool resources to build megastructures  
the size of continents. But all this still 
needs to be accounted for and prioritized. 
 
Let’s pause to ponder 
exactly what we mean by that,  
money as a tool for accounting and prioritizing. 
Imagine for a moment that you are the enlightened  
organizer of all production for an enlightened, 
non-greedy but still productive civilization.  
And let’s start with a simple problem like how 
much steel your society should produce next year  
and of what types. Well, your upper limit would be 
your maximum physically possible steel production,  
a limit that could be set by a number of factors, 
including the number and size of foundries,  
the amount of iron ore coming from the mines, 
and scrap steel coming back from old projects,  
or the amount of energy available to melt 
all that metal and operate those foundries.  
Indeed it could include devoting 
huge portions of your other resources  
to ramping up steel production as a crash project 
if you suddenly needed a few trillion tons more.
 
However, it is unlikely you’ll run every 
industry at maximum capacity every year,  
so you’ll need to figure out how much steel you 
really need. You’ll probably figure this out by  
breaking it down by product. How many steel 
ball bearings, razor blades, hood springs,  
harvester blades, deck plates, helicopter 
engine blocks, two-inch nails, and steel cable  
does your society need next year? So you 
start with the first item on your long list,  
ball bearings, so you ponder how many bicycles, 
water pumps, wood lathes, and fan motors you’ll  
need bearings for? How many bicycles you 
need is an even more complex question…
 
And I’m sure you see where this is going. You 
would need unfathomable amounts of up-to-date data  
about every detail of our economy before we could 
even begin to develop fair methods of deciding if  
one person’s need for a bicycle outweighs another 
person’s need for more razor blades, or how to  
prioritize one city’s need for sewer grates vs a 
farm’s need for harvester blades. And we haven’t  
even talked about the manpower necessary to gather 
all that data and make all those micro-managing  
decisions. Neither have we talked about how much 
energy the steel industry even gets next year,  
since the food, manufacturing, and military 
sectors need energy too. Oh, and all of this comes  
after you’ve somehow made your subjects not greedy 
and your legion of bureaucrats incorruptible.
 
And we can’t just dismiss this concern by saying 
that money will go away when we’re post-scarcity  
and there are no more such conflicts 
over resources, because even in a  
post-scarcity society, demand for goods may 
rise until there may be such conflicts again.  
We always say on the Show that ‘The Sky is 
not the Limit’ and people can dream big,  
like terraforming or building entire worlds simply 
to allow it to be used as a nature preserve. 
 
And untangling this sort of mess 
is exactly what money is handy for.  
If the ball bearing industry outbids the engine 
block manufacturers for the available steel,  
that can be viewed as a tacit decision on 
society’s part that ball bearings are needed  
more at this time than additional engine blocks. 
And if the steel industry buys up all the energy  
and leaves less for agriculture, food prices will 
rise presumably until agribusiness can buy up more  
energy and a new temporary balance or equilibrium 
is achieved. It’s a far, far from perfect system  
that gets priorities backwards quite often, but 
it spares us needing that vast army of intrusive  
data gatherers and micro-managers. Such data 
gathering or micro-managing might be done anyway,  
but money is the default way of doing this.
Now the two common objections I and others often  
make to hypothetical moneyless societies is that 
frequently folks achieve this moneyless society  
on paper by either utterly ignoring gaping flaws, 
plotholes, or issues with their concept or by  
basically just renaming money, such as your 
VR or holodeck time. As an example having some  
ration tokens in a post-scarcity everybody got 
that you could apply to atypical acquisitions,  
things beyond normal need for living comfortably, 
is not the same thing as money but mostly in that  
it is inferior to it, lacking quite the same 
flexibility. So too, something like a social  
credit score, where how many likes or dislikes 
a person got somehow translated to ability to  
acquire things, suffers from being like money 
except most available to popular people,  
and a way of strangling those who want to be off 
the beaten track, either by being unknown and  
isolated or by holding unpopular views or stances 
or even just not wearing the newest fashions.
 
So we want to beware of ‘money by another name’, 
but at the same time we don’t want to broaden  
the concept to the point of being meaningless. 
Money is a nicely liquid and mathematical easy  
way to engage in exchanges or even monitor 
inventories and production across the board.  
It also lets you often measure how effective or 
popular a given product or community effort is as  
folks select to trade or give funds to it. However 
simply being a tool for accounting or measuring is  
not money. If you have a million products all with 
different and changing values, rating those in  
their dollar value is handier than measuring each 
in terms of every other one, but this is simply  
assigning a new unit, no different than measuring 
a thing’s mass or weight in kilograms or pounds,  
its length or height in feet or meters, its 
brightness in candle-equivalents or watts, and so  
on. You’ve specifically declared a dollar to be a 
unit of common economic worth in a case like that,  
and I don’t think you could be calling something 
money if it was not functioning in that way. 
 
So a civilization that holds a vote on whether 
or not to approve someone’s atypical request – a  
solid gold house or a giant spaceship to be used 
as a personal yacht for instance – could not  
be said to have their votes translate to money 
equivalents. On the other hand, they presumably  
need some way to measure how much resources they 
have on hand, and what their incoming flow of them  
was, to be deciding if they could approve the 
1000 big requests they got that year and also  
how to rank them by effort or resources used and 
possibly by how much that person or persons making  
the request had previously asked for or were 
willing to promise not ask for down the road,  
in other words, a means of measuring debt. 
However this is not automatically money,  
even if in many setups it will be as near enough 
as to make no difference. But not in all cases.  
If we imagine a civilization with a Star 
Trek Style replicator that converted matter  
to energy and vice-versa seamlessly, then your 
only issues are available mass to use and the  
time it occupies the replicator performing 
that service, and that latter might not even  
matter since you can presumably tell the machine 
that its next task is making a copy of itself.  
This isn’t a story or game after all 
that needs a rule about not asking the  
genie for a million wishes as your first wish. 
In that case, all that matters is if the process  
is causing a permanent loss of mass and energy, 
and how much. We already have units for mass,  
energy, and time, something which is exactly 
identical to one of those is not money. And  
I’d further justify that by looking at 
what such a civilization would be like,  
something Charles Stross examined in his novel 
Singularity Sky. If you’ve got a machine that  
can make anything, indeed which might not even 
be bound by Conservation of Energy or the Laws of  
Thermodynamics for all we know, then it’s a little 
hard to figure out how such a society would even  
operate, let alone how its economy should work, 
given that supply and demand are key to that.
 
A Hive Mind, like the Borg from Star Trek, has 
plenty of interactions and also presumably keeps  
detailed inventories and analysis of its resources 
and expenditures, and of how efficient those are,  
but it’s not using money or doing economics.
By this same reasoning then we could say a  
civilization where everyone has identical or near 
identical goals doesn’t need money either. Note by  
identical goals we can’t be ignoring individuality 
here, since two people with the goal of personal  
survival very much do not have identical goals, 
anymore than the cat and mouse or spider and fly  
do. However if we are contemplating the classic 
super-enlightened society we often see in science  
fiction – what are often called Space Elves – then 
they might genuinely not need currency for the  
same reason a Hive Mind doesn’t. None of them have 
any conflicting and competing ambitions and goals.  
We could also argue that a society that so rarely 
had conflicting or competing objectives, and those  
minimal and easily resolved by some process 
of arbitration, is not using money either.
 
Just as a sidenote, as we go through these kind of 
examples there are going to be bits that stick out  
as ‘ah-ha’ moments, like when I said arbitration I 
imagine many of you thought “Courts arbitrate but  
you have to hire a lawyer or pay them from the 
public coffers, and free lawyers appointed by  
the state aren’t as good as some expensive legal 
team”, and that is certainly true. However, folks  
by and large do not like the idea that the success 
of one’s case should hinge on how much lawyering  
you can buy, so a post-scarcity civilization might 
decide to take things a step further and use an  
AI or have every advocate randomly assigned to 
each dispute like judges and juries usually are.
 
Of course, unless your lawyer is one of those 
incorruptible devoted-to-duty Space Elves,  
the only incentive that advocate had 
then for doing a good job is reputation,  
and while that might be enough that also raises 
another common example of ‘just money by another  
name’, in this case your social reputation. Now 
reputation is not the same as money but has a  
lot of parallels and a lot of modern marketing 
is just reputation-building for a brand name.  
It’s also critical to exchanges in small groups 
like tribes or clans where favors and social  
status are the primary currency, though again 
that’s getting a bit broad with the term money.  
Reputation is also hard to do math and 
accounting with, though many a marketing  
firm would love to be able to change that.
It's probably worth asking if that is fair though,  
if we really should be using those broadest 
definitions for money in contemplating a society  
without it, and to that I’d just say your mileage 
may vary. We have no universal definition for  
money and nobody has some exclusive right to set 
that definition either. Nobody anointed a given  
dictionary or economics professor the exclusive 
right to set an ironclad definition across all  
time, languages, and cultures for what is and is 
not money, or any other term for that matter. 
 
So if someone wants to use a definition so broad 
that it would include an accounting chart for  
inter-family activities and exchanges, then I 
can’t say that’s wrong. Nor could I say it was  
wrong if someone wanted to limit that definition 
specifically only to voluntary exchanges of  
goods and services between entities. I’d just 
point out that in the former, you now need to  
be able to justify a parent hugging their kid 
as an economic transaction, and in the latter  
you presumably need to justify paying taxes as a 
voluntary exchange, which requires some caution  
so you don’t accidentally also include 
getting mugged as a voluntary exchange. 
 
For today’s purposes we will assume there’s some 
definition of money in there which is not so broad  
as to include every human exchange of any kind nor 
so restrictive it starts ignoring obvious examples  
of money. We will also bypass systems too small 
or primitive to bother with creating a medium  
of exchange and accounting, for instance you can 
argue that many civilizations didn’t have money,  
they had barter, and this is true but hardly 
indicative of some great enlightenment,  
but rather of just not having developed currency 
as a technology or practice yet. When their  
chieftain or warlord rolls up to your village gate 
demanding fifty wagonloads of grain or he’ll torch  
your town down, that’s not enlightened by any 
standard other than maybe the Klingons, and I  
don’t think him demanding a signed promissory note 
for the grain or its equivalent in other goods  
alters the morality, merely the sophistication. 
I hate to keep picking on Star Trek,  
but in it the Federation is said to have no money 
while folks like the Captains are regularly shown  
to have far more influence, resources, and 
power than the average person. We’re told that  
humanity has evolved beyond accumulating things, 
to quote Picard in the episode the Neutral Zone,  
talking to stockbroker who had been frozen for 
centuries and revived. "A lot has changed in  
the past three hundred years. People are 
no longer obsessed with the accumulation  
of things. We've eliminated hunger, want, the need 
for possessions. We've grown out of our infancy."
 
And yet we see Picard, and everyone else, 
repeatedly valuing things and having  
prized possessions. I’m also not sure what that 
cultural growth is, to be less driven by greed,  
when you have holodecks and replicators and 
abundant clean energy, but isn’t it possible  
someone else would value Picard’s original 
copy of Moby Dick enough to steal it? Also the  
writers never specify what that growth was and it 
could be pretty sinister, like brain implants or  
genetic modification to make them less greedy or 
ambitious or self-interested. However this access  
to abundance is critical to the concept. They are 
clearly a post-scarcity civilization, and this is  
one where there’s just so much abundance there’s 
no need to compete for basic survival needs,  
which a cynic might argue makes having ethics 
cheaper. Their morality costs them nothing. 
 
There are plenty of things that just 
represent desirable items that can’t  
be subject to post-scarcity, fame, prestige, 
unique items and so on. Here though is where  
Picard’s comment needs a second look, because 
while its obviously acknowledged that they don’t  
need to struggle with each other for basic 
survival goods, food and medicine and such,  
and thus there’s no grocery store selling 
food anywhere, anymore than we have stores for  
air or encyclopedias anymore, he doesn’t say they 
don’t have things they desire and strive for. 
 
Instead he says, “People are no longer 
obsessed with the accumulation of things.”  
This is probably the critical aspect for 
contemplating how we could actually have  
a functioning society without money, you’ve 
got to change how folks behave, and to do that  
you have to change how they think. Which is where 
various forms of alteration to human education,  
genetics, and so on might play a role, sinister 
or enlightened, edifying or indoctrination.
 
But we also need to ask what ‘things’ 
people were accumulating and now aren’t,  
given that we’ve already noticed the various 
crewmembers accumulated plenty of stuff and  
they also clearly value personal comfort.
It is horribly over-simplistic and a false  
dichotomy to say human desires classify 
as strictly physical and material or  
intellectual and spiritual, and that the 
latter is inherently better in all cases,  
and presumably Trek doesn’t think so either though 
it probably depends on which writer you ask.  
Humans do have certain primary focuses though. 
There’s a lot of disagreement about what those  
are and how to classify them. The classic 7 deadly 
sins of pride, greed, lust, envy, gluttony, wrath,  
and sloth along with their polar opposite vices 
is one example, and we have many versions of that  
outline and many parallel examples. Let’s borrow 
from a more modern and somewhat controversial one,  
Moral Foundations Theory, which offers six 
critical values humans tend to have. Those  
are Care vs Harm, Fairness vs Cheating, Loyalty 
vs Betrayal, Authority vs Subversion, Sanctity  
vs Degradation, and Liberty vs Oppression.
And to show some obvious conflicts on priorities,  
we obviously think it wrong to inflict pain 
or hardship on someone, or leave them in pain,  
care vs harm, but we will use them as punishment 
in the Fairness vs Cheating or Justice value,  
and we often measure someone’s nominal sanctity 
or purity by how much they’ve voluntarily suffered  
or sacrificed to maintain that purity. You 
could also have a civilization that absolutely  
valued fairness at sporting games but applauded 
trickery or cheating in other games or in war,  
bluffing at poker or ambushing an enemy, 
so while a culture might be obsessed with  
one of these values over another, they also 
might have a pretty broad spectrum of how,  
when, and what flavor they were obsessed with.
I’ve no idea which of these the Federation valued  
and when, it’s a fictional Universe of many 
different authors, though I’d be curious in the  
comments which one or ones you thought the Star 
Trek Federation of Planets focused on compared to,  
say, the Romulans or Klingons. But the Klingons 
clearly like to accumulate ‘things’ only for them  
it's mostly martial victories and the appearance 
of honor. An advantage of a post-scarcity society  
is that you probably can get away with having 99% 
of your population be warriors too, especially  
given that this does not imply it is either a 
full time job or interferes with learning other  
skills. But we couldn’t say that a civilization 
focused on honor, as opposed to personal purity,  
doesn’t have a potential need for money. Even 
ignoring that both might be quantities based  
on other people’s opinions, and thus subject to 
marketing or bribery, it's obviously easy to win  
many victories with a bunch of warships and 
combat troops, or to keep yourself pure by  
hiring others to do all your farming or cleaning 
or less undesirable tasks which might taint you.
 
What exactly do they value? Because it is probably 
fair to point out that economics and money are not  
limited to trading widgets and material goods, 
they are the exchange of valued things for each  
with relative values determined through supply and 
demand. We already discussed how broadly we should  
define money today though, and so we can say 
that the Federation could still have stuff they  
valued and exchanged around without specifically 
needing money. If someone is a teacher who prizes  
knowledge and respect, and a student comes to 
them offering respect and asking for knowledge,  
that’s certainly an exchange but it's not money. 
But those 6 values or 7 deadly sins or whichever  
are important because a culture could, through 
indoctrination or genetic alteration or surgery  
presumably remove or prune down how 
much people wanted of such a value  
or to commit such a deadly sin. 
Of course you can also correct needs for  
these by sheer technological abundance. So, let’s 
imagine a civilization like the Federation where  
you really need not worry about where food, water, 
and electricity were coming from, or any random  
widget. Either they are dirt cheap or supplied by 
government, with replicators, 3D printers and vast  
fusion-powered hydroponic growth labs where robots 
harvest food, and spin your clothes, and so on. 
 
What actually needs to be bought or traded?
They’re a democracy and meritocracy where most  
folks are highly educated and community-minded 
so where volunteers aren’t drawn to a task,  
they probably would have no problem 
with conscription instead of taxation.  
That’s a classic approach in places where 
trade and coinage haven’t really formalized and  
stabilized, all the small landholders owe their 
feudal lord X number of days per year of service  
and by and large you can rely on their 
personal ethics, pride, and sense of honor  
to tackle an assigned task with enthusiasm. 
Robots help with that too, because if you drew  
the short straw and are assigned the worst job 
around, you don’t have to clean the town sewers,  
just supervise the robots doing that. Amusingly 
a moneyless society operating on this principle  
might view sloth as their new worst problem, over 
greed, and suggest some evaluation system of work  
along with rewards and prizes. You want to avoid 
sloth and seek to do so by appealing to greed,  
pride, gluttony, or lust for that matter. To put 
it tactfully, many a young man who volunteers to  
help with a popular cause is often suspected 
by his peers of hoping to become more popular  
with young ladies by doing so. On that topic, 
same as we might contemplate eliminating money,  
it is not hard to imagine a future civilization 
is one where culture and policy have little to  
do with romantic motivations because everyone 
is glutted on virtual reality, sexbots, and  
emotional support bots. Or in someway satisfies 
other needs, or limits or removes other needs.
 
Which is one way to be without money, 
just create a society that can easily  
produce basic physical needs and strongly 
disapproves of the desire for anything else.  
On the flip side, a hyper-individualistic society 
might be one without money too. Let us imagine  
that by the year 3000 AD we have invented reliable 
and non-rebellious artificial intelligences,  
cheaply abundant power like compact fusion or 
matter-to-energy converters, gotten very good  
with automation and nanotechnology, and have very 
good 3D printers and life extension technology.  
And even assuming we still had patent laws, 
pretty much every technology or copyrighted  
bit of entertainment from a century earlier 
till back to now was public domain and fit  
on a harddrive you could put in your pocket.
Anybody who wants has the ability to jump on  
a spaceship and fly off to any corner of the 
galaxy with a tank full of fuel which can run  
their virtual reality utopias and 3D printers 
and automated food production and maintenance  
and medical facilities for a million years 
before needing to refuel. A refueling that  
could be done at any of ten trillion minor 
planets with a bit of raw material or ice.  
They certainly might have plenty of reasons for 
folks to interact and exchange, but it's really  
hard to imagine how a formal currency would 
continue to exist especially on the outskirts  
for those folks who basically left because 
they wanted to be away from civilization. 
 
Time lag is also a real issue for maintaining 
currencies between star systems, you almost have  
to have a powerful over-body dictating the 
value of the currency everywhere and when,  
so that you could trust the money you 
spent to buy something 100 light years away  
will still purchase it when your cash 
arrives. Barring that you probably have  
to shift to a commodity currency – where some 
specific item like gold or hydrogen or such  
is the money. That’s doable but probably 
could only be reliable if technology had  
plateaued, since commodity currencies are so 
vulnerable to any big shift in availability.  
Raw elements like gold or platinum or hydrogen 
are fairly universal at the interstellar scale  
so a galactic empire is not subject to having its 
gold standard or hydrogen dollar collapse in value  
from a sudden discovery of a large new supply. 
But it is still vulnerable to disruptive  
technology, like a device that makes extracting 
precious deuterium for fusion reactors from gas  
giants ten times easier, or opening a new 
source, like letting you pull it from stars,  
or blowing up an entire hydrogen economy by 
inventing a black hole power generator. 
 
Now realistically there is a point where either 
your technology does plateau, in which case a  
commodity currency is more viable, or your 
technology has just kept snowballing the way  
it’s been doing in recent centuries until you have 
god-like powers that permit individuals options  
even a post-scarcity civilization couldn’t dream 
of offering. That’s certainly another option for a  
society without money. Presumably a civilization 
of demi-gods does not need money either. If you  
tend to subscribe to the notion that humanity’s 
eventual fate is something along those lines,  
like the Q from Star Trek or the Ascended beings 
from Stargate or many other scifi stories,  
then that would seem like one where money 
wouldn’t be in play, though even there  
you might still have an informal currency 
of favors owed and gambling debts paid.
 
So that’s some of the more abstract 
paths to maybe not having money.  
One last one for the day. It is entirely 
possible a civilization with good enough  
robotics might put a superintelligent AI 
or group of them in charge of making sure  
everything was supplied and gave it some algorithm 
for achieving optimum distribution of needs  
and arbitrating and prioritizing conflicting 
or large requests. I’m not sure I’d want to  
live under such an AI’s thumb, even if it was 
benevolent and competent, but whether I’d like  
that or not it is probably a doable setup 
and one that would not require a currency.  
This is something we looked at more in our episode 
Machine Overlords & Post-Discontent Societies.
 
I suppose as a whole, the take away from today 
is that most of the suggested methods for going  
moneyless probably don’t quite work out in 
practice, and maybe aren’t as desirable as  
they sound like, but that they probably could 
be made to work if folks wanted it enough,  
or if their culture was different enough 
– like a hive mind or ascended beings or  
ultra-individualistic post-scarcity loners – 
that it simply didn’t serve a role for them.  
 
Fundamentally though, the galaxy is a big place, 
and offers us billions of worlds to try things  
out on, so I suspect we will see many try various 
approaches to going without money and time will  
tell how successful or viable that might be.
… 
 
I was mentioning earlier how everybody has 
a different idea of a utopian future world,  
and wants to create that world, even 
if just in their mind or a novel,  
and I also mentioned how certain technological 
paths, in combination with certain social ones,  
for good or ill, might result in people getting 
to assign points to various traits for themselves,  
or their kids, like we see with various point buy 
systems in role playing games, both video games  
versions and classic pen & paper ones. I’ve played 
my fair share of both down the years and tried my  
hand at writing fiction too. Based on comments 
on the show down the years, I know it's a pretty  
popular set of hobbies with all of you too. 
If you do enjoy worldbuilding, either for writing  
fiction or running games or just daydreaming, 
then you know that a lot of the development  
time and mental energy gets burned up just trying 
to organize your notes and build the framework,  
and there’s been a ton of attempts at making aids 
and creative development tools down the years,  
but most have either had a steep and foggy 
learning curve, or not really provided  
anything much better than pen and paper and 
maybe word processor and paint program do. 
 
That’s where I was amazed by World Anvil, 
it’s overflowing with tools that help with  
worldbuilding, and while it is also quite 
intuitive to use, they have a big arsenal  
of tutorial videos that that lets you quickly 
create and easily organize all the ideas going  
through your head, and if you’re running 
an RPG, of making it easily accessible  
and clearly understandable to your players. 
World Anvil, the award-winning worldbuilding  
toolset, lets you quickly create settings and 
flush them out to very deep and interactive  
levels, everything from leaving notes on 
maps and smaller maps to alternate timeline  
tracking for your world’s history. Whether you’re 
managing a campaign or writing a novel, whether  
you’re making city or dungeon maps or family 
genealogies, whether it's scifi or fantasy genres,  
World Anvil lets you forge your setting better and 
easier than anything I’ve ever worked with before,  
and it has a free version so you can 
share it with others, and selectively,  
so they’re not seeing secret content. And you can 
also incorporate ways to monetize your content,  
such as Patreon or Kofi or your own storefront.
World Anvil offers wikipedia-like articles for  
your world setting, interactive maps, 
timelines, an RPG Campaign Manager  
and a full Novel-Writing Software, all the 
tools you’ll need to run your RPG Campaign  
or write your novel, and never lose your notes 
again! If you’d like to give World Anvil a try  
and let it help you forge new worlds, just 
click the link in this episode’s description!
 
So that will wrap us up for September but we’ll 
jump right into October by asking how in a  
vast space empire of countless trillions someone 
could stand out, then on October 14th we’ll ask  
how we might feed all those folks, as we look at 
the future of farming in the next few decades and  
beyond. Then We’ll have our October Sci-Fi Sunday 
Episode, Sentient Planets & World Consciousnesses,  
on October 17th to discuss the popular 
scifi idea of living and thinking worlds,  
and if they might occur naturally or be created 
by high-tech civilizations. Then we’ll take a look  
at the concept of Convergent Evolution, aliens 
who look or act like us, and then at artificial  
intelligence who might also act like some of us, 
the misbehaving ones, with a look at Criminal AI.
 
Now if you want to make sure you get notified when 
those episodes come out, make sure subscribe to  
the channel, and click the notifications bell, 
which you might want to do again if you already  
have, as a lot of folks have been telling me and 
other creators that they’re not getting notified  
about new episodes by Youtube anymore, of 
shows they’ve been watching for years. 
 
Also if you enjoyed the episode, don’t forget 
to hit the like button and share it with  
others. If you’d like to help support future 
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, and patreon and 
our website are linked in the episode description  
below, along with all of our various social 
media forums where you can get updates and  
chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
