This episode brought to you by Brilliant.
In the future, as we journey out to distant  
stars, we may encounter aliens that are 
warlike and aggressive. On the other hand,  
when contemplating humanity’s past, that might 
be the pot calling the kettle black.
 
Today we’ll be continuing our long running 
Alien Civilization series by looking at the  
concept of Belligerent Aliens, and as the title 
implies we’ll be examining hypothetical alien  
civilizations like the Klingons from Star Trek 
who all seem to go around with their jaw out and  
eyes blazing looking for a fight. The ones who 
seem easily offended and utterly undiplomatic.
 
However, we’re also be examining what’s sometimes 
called the Biologist View and the Historian’s Take  
on the Fermi Paradox, the big question of 
where all the aliens are, that we explored  
a bit last month in our Scifi Sunday episode 
on Sentient Planets and World Consciousnesses.  
In that we commented that the default perspective 
of Biologists on the Fermi Paradox tended  
to be the Hart Conjecture – named for Michael 
Hart, the gentleman who coined the term Fermi  
Paradox – that biological origins incline 
species to expansionism and belligerence,  
and so we’d expect most civilizations to reach 
and colonize space to share that tendency,  
thus such civilizations are probably pretty 
rare or else the galaxy would be colonized.  
But the key notion for today is 
that biology tilts to belligerence,  
and also we get the Historian’s default 
view, that Technology implies Belligerence,  
and that all of history is a battle with the 
status quo, creating new technologies to fight  
your environment and fate itself, an inherently 
belligerent view. Or so the reasoning goes.
 
So both of those perspectives incline 
us to assume we would meet folks out in  
space who are aggressive, though aggression and 
belligerence are both fairly relative concepts.  
Aggressively scouting space and 
colonizing empty systems peacefully  
is very different then attacking other folks 
colonies and nature does not just encourage  
belligerence. Indeed in higher lifeforms it often 
encourages heavy cooperation and with humans even  
cross-species cooperation like our relationships 
with any number of farm animals or pets.
 
Which brings up the third perspective, the 
Physicist Perspective or Sagan Perspective,  
that any civilization we meet in space 
must be fairly enlightened and peaceful,  
because the science they have is so advanced to 
permit journeying through space that it implies  
access to destructive technologies that make an 
atomic bomb look mundane. You either have mastered  
your destructive impulses by then or your species 
is done for. Of course mastering your destructive  
impulses might just mean you’re very good at being 
destructive, just very careful when you are.
 
Incidentally, while these are called the 
Biologist, Historian, and Physicist views  
on the Fermi Paradox, I’ve never noticed any 
particular consensus among the academics of  
those fields for those perspectives. I’m 
a physicist for instance, and one for whom  
Carl Sagan is an obvious role model, and yet I 
decidedly tilt more to the Biologist Perspective,  
not the Sagan Physicist Perspective. Intelligent 
life is probably quite rare, because if it wasn’t,  
the universe would already be teeming over in 
life. But there’s a lot of truth to that Sagan  
viewpoint, if you have weapons that can sterilize 
whole planets, you need to have come up with some  
way of managing that or you won’t be around to 
colonize the stars, except maybe the ashes of  
your planet flying out at interstellar speeds 
from the exploded remains of your homeworld.
 
So in that respect a war-like species more 
aggressive than humans would seem improbable,  
no Klingons in space, and indeed Sagan’s 
viewpoint was very influenced by the Cold War  
and he and many others figured humanity as-is 
was too violent to survive to the stars,  
let alone a Klingon Empire, and they were 
an analogy for the Cold War in Star Trek.  
I didn’t agree at the time, and while we would 
be fools to ignore concerns over weapons of mass  
destruction or other technological 
ways we might obliterate ourselves,  
I don’t think planet-ravaging nuclear war 
was ever very likely and I don’t think most  
folks worry about it these days the way 
they did when I was a kid. Nonetheless,  
it would seem really hard for a belligerent alien 
race to exist without wiping themselves out.  
We’ll define a Belligerent Alien Race today as 
one significantly more belligerent than humans.
 
Now is this justified?
Well, kinda.
 
First, as is often the case in science 
fiction we have a lot of tropes and  
cliches in play and folks like the Klingons 
are what are often called a Planet of Hats,  
a world where all the inhabitants share some 
single defining characteristic. In this case  
the Proud Warrior Race, which also includes the 
Kree from Marvel Comics, as well as the Shi’ar,  
though I don’t think they’ve made a debut in the 
MCU yet. There’s the Sontarans from Doctor Who,  
and of course the Daleks and Cybermen are 
decidedly Belligerent Aliens if not specifically  
the Proud Warrior Race. We have the Green 
Martians from the classic John Carter of Mars,  
who never voluntarily were unarmed, the Idarans 
and the Affront of Iain M. Banks Culture Novels,  
the Kzinti from Larry Niven’s 
Ringworld and Known Space novels,  
the Mandalorians, Chiss, and Wookies from 
Star Wars, and countless other examples. 
 
Other Planet of Hats examples that would count 
as Belligerent would be the Hutts of Star Wars,  
the giant and ancient slug creatures who make up 
Gangster and Criminal overlords of that setting,  
or the Muuns, the Bankers, who colonize no 
other worlds but aggressively loan money  
for the expansions of others and get a share of 
that investment. Which is a good reminder that  
belligerence, aggression, and expansion can come 
in many forms. The Ferengi of Star Trek are every  
bit as aggressive as the Klingons, Romulans, or 
Borg, and each of these in different flavors.
 
Now we tend to lampoon scifi and fantasy 
franchises for these planets of hats and with  
good cause, it tends to be lazy writing and the 
sort of stereotyping that makes everyone assume  
all Americans are cowboys or a thousand 
other stereotypes for every culture that  
are often even less flattering. Of course they 
often have some halfway sane basis in fact,  
and its not like its unusual for folks in 
the states to emulate that iconic cowboy  
appearance or behavior in some fashion. We 
don’t need everyone to be a cowboy any more  
than other countries need their folks to serve 
as knights or samurai or legionnaires or hunters,  
but they often remain idealized figures for 
us and a post-scarcity advanced civilization  
can probably get away with having 
99% of its population being soldiers,  
and indeed all grizzled veterans of ten thousand 
battles from the advantages of virtual reality.
 
It's also worth remembering there isn’t anything 
stopping people from multi-classing, so to speak,  
just because everyone was a soldier doesn’t mean 
they aren’t also lawyers, scientists, doctors,  
poets, merchants, and so on. Heck I’m a war 
veteran and spent the better part of a decade  
as a soldier. I’m also a scientist and a teacher 
and a public official. Indeed for a lot of human  
history, being a soldier was a job almost every 
military age male performed at some point or was  
expected to be able to, and dominant professions 
aren’t uncommon either. For most of human history  
if you visited a civilization more than half of 
its people would have called themselves a farmer,  
or a hunter, or a gatherer. These often 
had a hundred flavors and sub-categories,  
like a wheat farmer, but then so does soldiering.
The Sagan Perspective posits that a civilization  
capable of traveling to new worlds also is 
capable of destroying them, and that’s very valid,  
based on known science and why here on SFIA we 
say there’s no such thing as an unarmed spaceship.  
That’s the first rule of warfare when it 
comes to space naval engagements, bigger  
engines means bigger guns. If a ship can outrun 
you, it also probably doesn’t need to runaway. 
 
A spaceship engine capable of traveling 
to new worlds carries energies in it  
that dwarf a nuclear bomb. However in 
this same vein of thought we need to  
acknowledge that such civilizations probably 
also have radical life extension technology,  
mind augmentation, virtual reality, and advanced 
teaching methods. Those aren’t prerequisites  
of getting to another world like that powerful 
spaceship is, but those technologies will likely  
be ours before a human foot sets down on an alien 
world around an alien sun for the first time.
 
Such being the case, the ‘typical human’ in 
a spacefaring era and thus the typical alien  
in one should be assumed to be potentially vastly 
more skilled than you or I. There is a chance that  
AI and superior automation might make everyone a 
lazy dolt lounging in virtual utopias while robots  
wait hand and foot on the drooling morons they’ve 
become, but then they probably aren’t doing much  
colonizing and exploring either – though their 
robots might be and they might be belligerent too.  
But let’s assume whoever we encounter in space 
comes from a civilization that does have those  
technologies that we will likely develop at least 
a little bit in this century. So the random alien  
farmer or merchant or scientist you meet might 
be a warrior too, indeed its entirely likely  
they will be some badass genetically modified, 
mind-augmented cyborg who’s had centuries to  
learn skills but probably only needs days to 
master what would take us decades to learn. 
 
The other end of that is that while a culture 
might be very diverse in its interests,  
the parts foreigners and aliens encounter might 
tilt heavily in certain directions. Your explorers  
may run a wide spectrum of personal interests and 
behaviors, but they probably all share a tendency  
to curiosity and risk-taking. Your border posts, 
garrisons, and fleets probably have a martial  
culture and your roving merchants, your rogue 
traders on the outskirts of your civilization,  
probably have some common behaviors that are 
not your cultural norm either. And given the  
time lag of space travel, this may be all another 
civilizations knows of you for centuries, these  
folks on your outer edge whose behavior is an 
outlier. Possibly even your pirates and exiles.
 
It's probably worth noting though, getting back 
to the notion that we would expect aggression  
and belligerence to be universal present 
if not necessarily dialed up to 11,  
that I’m not familiar with any extant 
culture on Earth with no martial past.  
Even some strongly pacifist groups 
like the Amish are very much  
influenced in that by their past, emerging 
from a region that was no stranger to war. 
 
The basic notion often in play with the Sagan 
Perspective is that civilizations have given up  
their violent origins and that’s entirely possible 
I suppose. My normal complaints about this in  
scifi is either that they seem to have discarded 
any concept for aggression – which can be entirely  
peaceful – and often look down in disgust on 
humanity for not having abandoned violence yet.  
Which strikes me as weird, if you’re defining 
someone as young and primitive for still doing  
something you used to do long ago, spitting 
on them over it would be like trashing old  
human cultures for a ton of primitive or barbaric 
practices common back then but since abandoned,  
usually by reason and explanation 
of why its bad and unnecessary.
 
What we really wouldn’t expect civilizations 
to do, for all that it is common in scifi,  
is to ignore their primitive neighbors. They may 
limit their involvement out of a version of the  
Star Trek Prime Directive against interference, 
they may try to avoid being too interventionist  
or even missionary, but they won’t ignore them.
And this is coming back to that wider meaning of  
belligerence summed up in that conclusion 
that “Technology implies belligerence”  
because the pursuit of technology is a 
rejection of status quo and fatalism.  
Folks can debate if concepts like Free Will or 
Good and Evil and Right and Wrong really exist,  
or if we even exist or if anything we do really 
matters, but don’t expect those to be debates  
alien civilizations have anymore than we do, which 
is to say mostly academic ones. This isn’t to say  
they would think they had everything right, but 
cultures that don’t believe they have an inside  
track on what’s right and don’t encourage folks 
to think their actions matter don’t prosper.
 
There was an article in Forbes a few years back 
titled “8 Traits That Are Scientifically Proven  
To Predict Future Success”, and the first two 
came as no surprise to me, they were a capacity  
for delayed gratification and conscientiousness, 
two notoriously accurate benchmarks for success.  
But the third one surprised me for a moment 
then seemed like a ‘no-duh’ right afterward,  
and that was a belief in free will and 
that they had a capacity to choose and  
be in control of their life. And I have a heck of 
time imagining how a civilization could last long  
if at the very least its decision-makers didn’t 
believe they were in control or that they should  
be. It’s certainly a point one can debate but 
this is the notion really encapsulated in that  
concept of technology implying belligerence. 
You only seek to master your environment and  
invent technology because you want to wrestle 
fate, you’re not content to die of disease or  
from bad weather or locusts taking your crops. 
Indeed, you only have crops because some of  
your ancestors stopped being content with what 
naturally grew and began cultivating and storing,  
delaying gratification of eating an animal or seed 
now in favor of growing them to herds and fields.
 
Now a civilization might abandon that mindset 
down the road but it’s the one they should be  
starting off with when they start off to the 
stars, and given light lag and divergence,  
all their various colonies should be their own 
growing and evolving seeds sprouting in the face  
of new worlds and challenges. And also probably 
lauding those folks who were their explorers,  
conquerors, inventors, and so on, 
their folks who were belligerent.  
I mean honestly, take 10 random famous historical 
figures or your own list of role models and ask if  
they had that quality, and one realizes that even 
pacifist figures like Ghandi or Martin Luther King  
Jr were both very belligerent individuals, they 
were absolutely not content with the status quo  
and believed they could change it and fought to 
do so, they just didn’t use or encourage violence.  
Honestly it's hard to envision a figure folks 
thought of as inspirational or heroic or a  
role model whose personal philosophy was 
“Nothing matters, nothing is worth doing,  
no behavior or state is worth aspiring to, 
aspiration itself is foolish”. And even folks  
who tend to publicly take one of those views were 
usually railing against it, not glad it was so. 
 
Such being the case, we aren’t really 
expecting alien civilizations not to have  
that style of belligerence, even if they’re 
not specifically warlike and combative. 
 
So we’re shifting back and forth today from 
saying belligerence is challenging fate  
and its other more common meaning of being 
willing to pick fights with other people,  
but it's an acknowledgement that at a 
grand cultural level there’s some overlap.  
The vicious genocidal Daleks of Doctor Who, the 
Conquering Assimilationist Borg of Star Trek,  
the Megalomaniacal Dark Lords of the Sith of Star 
Wars, or the Parasitic Warlord Goa’uld of Stargate  
are all belligerent and all think they’re 
in control. Even when such groups say they  
are fated to win or have a grand destiny 
it's an assumption their actions matter  
and that change is good, not the Status Quo. 
However these groups are all pretty monstrous  
and one might say that if that’s belligerence, 
we want nothing of it. Better to go extinct as  
a species than to turn into some malevolent swarm 
ravaging all before us. Fundamentally though we’re  
talking about it as a motivating force, rather 
than the various ethics and morals that are meant  
to restrain or shape or focus it. Even limiting 
ourselves to a warlike type of belligerence  
doesn’t necessarily mean they’re the bad guys – 
they could just be a group that was more prone to  
violent solutions to problems. The bad guys are 
on the loose attacking the galaxy and they show  
up with a fleet to fight back while other might 
still be trying to negotiate, and circumstances  
dependent that may have been premature 
escalation by them or blind disbelief and  
appeasement by those seeking to negotiate, akin 
to Neville Chamberlain prior to World War 2.  
 
There’s a famous quote from Mayor Salvor Hardin 
in Isaac Asimov’s classic Foundation series,  
“Violence is the last refuge of the incompetent” 
which somewhat ironically perhaps was written  
during World War 2, that sounds very 
good but maybe isn’t the best advice,  
your mileage may vary, but few would deny that 
whether or not violence is a good solution, even  
in self-defense, it is a solution folks often tend 
to turn to even when they probably should not,  
and I think most of us would agree on that.
However, we need to step back and ask,  
in the context of aliens and 
biology, why we agree with that,  
and if aliens would?
Why is a violent solution wrong?  
Or more kindly, wrong except in self-defense 
or maybe not the ideal first option.  
Because an alien might look at someone misbehaving 
and think killing them made perfect sense. 
 
Now we need to keep in mind 
that in a post-biological setup  
a species might have pretty different factors in 
play and stuff like death might not mean anything,  
or the same thing, same as how a warrior 
culture might exist and be full of veterans  
simply because they have very good simulations and 
virtual reality. Their culture also might believe  
in a great afterlife for warriors and think 
killing their enemies was doing them a favor.  
Indeed this might be literally true if they 
harvested and uploaded their victims' brains.  
 
In nature though, unrestrained violence isn’t 
usually an option inside a species for dealing  
with problems. If every Klingon gets into a fight 
about once a month that leads to a fatal stabbing  
about 1 time in 12 or once a year, from adulthood 
onward, of say 18, then that means by 19, half of  
them dead, they have a half-life thereafter 
of a year and only a quarter remain at 20,  
only an eighth at 21, and by age 30, only 1 in 
4096 survive, just 250 out of every million who  
turned 18. And keep in mind that would only mean 
the average 30 year old had slain a dozen foes,  
not exactly epic warrior status. Only 
about 1 in 16 million would make it to 42,  
having slain 2 dozen foes, and only 1 in 69 
billion would make it to the ripe old age of 54. 
 
Now that actually might be doable under certain 
biology. Humans are not the norm in that we take  
more than a dozen years to mature and rarely 
have multiple births and usually have a few  
years between those. We tend to assume that’s the 
norm for aliens but why would it be? Indeed we do  
sometimes hypothesize that human’s having that 
pair of traits, low fertility and long maturity,  
is part of the reason we have technology and 
civilization but the argument isn’t particularly  
strong let alone ironclad, we may cover it in more 
detail in a future Fermi Paradox episode though.  
Long Maturity may not even be needed 
for a big brain and intelligence,  
and we can’t rule out insect hive levels 
of reproduction in intelligent animals. 
 
And a species that followed that 1 year adult 
half-life in males, but not in women and children,  
and was not monogamous and was pretty 
fertile really could sustain that death rate.  
And we can’t assume our style of reproduction 
and genders either, they might be a creature  
that divided amoeba like and ‘killing someone’ was 
basically where you stabbed them in the brain and  
caused the critter to split into two new critters 
missing much of their prior memories and opinions.  
In a weird case like that the norm for parenthood 
might be seen as going out and murdering someone  
you disagreed with so you could raise the 
two children that they split apart into.  
Such a culture is likely to have 
some very weird views on violence.
 
The other problem is birth control. Humans don’t 
breed very quickly and take a long time to mature,  
so we can’t afford to be losing people 
left and right to accidents and disputes,  
hence the tribe sees violence, especially violence 
leading to death of a tribe member, as a bad thing  
by and large. It has to and presumably this is 
true for anything following our basic pattern,  
low births, long maturity. However, every species 
will grow in numbers because of technology. They  
would have evolved to be producing enough of 
themselves through birth and maturation to  
exceed those who died, at a minimum replacement 
numbers and indeed more so because they can’t  
go migrate to new ecosystems and expand territory 
and tribe numbers without some occasional surplus.  
With technology though, with that belligerence 
toward nature, comes fewer deaths to accidents,  
fewer deaths to starvation or disease or anything 
else early technology can help out with a bit. 
 
Thus numbers grow because they’re 
not dying as soon on average.  
This is a critical problem for a species that was, 
say, prone to having more kids than humans that  
matured faster than humans and which were pretty 
physically tough too. Your default Klingon or  
alien warrior race. They might be pretty big into 
fighting and killing each other to climb the ranks  
but that actually might be a childhood or 
young adult behavior, culling the herd,  
and you could easily imagine them having 
expressions like “If you’re not willing  
to even fight for your own place and status, how 
could we ever trust you to fight for the tribe’s?”  
which in certain circumstances might resonate as 
well or better than “If you’re willing to kill one  
of our own just to advance yourself, how could 
we ever trust you with the fate of our tribe?”  
From a naturalist perspective the tribe would 
tend to trust those whose activities were seen  
to improve the tribe’s status, which depends 
on way too many specific circumstances. 
 
All we can really say is that their belligerence 
needs to be restrained in some fashion or  
fashions that prevent them self-obliterating, and 
which also permit them to maintain their overall  
numbers and infrastructure. So they can’t be 
trashing their own cities while fighting either. 
 
There’s an example in the novel Horus Rising by 
Dan Abnett that comes to mind. This is from a  
book series and setting whose motto is “In the 
grim darkness of the future there is only war”  
and is where we get the term ‘grimdark’ from, 
so its probable no surprise the example comes  
from the soldier-protagonist, Captain Loken, 
relating to a story collector how they once  
encountered a species that was so warlike 
it had designated certain spots or arenas  
as the only place they could fight. Thus 
when the humans showed up to invade,  
their warriors all gathered in those arenas 
expecting battle, and Loken’s commander,  
the titular Horus, opted to bomb those 
arenas rather than go land troops there. 
 
So a civilization needs some rules restraining 
their belligerence but obviously needs to beware  
encountering those who choose not to follow those 
rules themselves. And we could mock the arena  
example except that when you think about it, from 
a strategic perspective, any such rules are going  
to need to be a bit arbitrary and the best way to 
win is always going to be to break those rules, so  
we often need those indoctrinated in pretty hard 
and we can also note that Scorched Earth tactics  
and Total War – nominally what happens when both 
teams choose to ignore those rules – mostly only  
happens when there’s just those two teams, not 
a lot of internal factions vying for power and  
outside third-parties who might jump in 
to hurt the side that broke the rules.
 
I think then we could conclude that it is very 
likely you would have civilizations with somewhat  
arbitrary rules for what was fair in war, but 
probably weren’t blindly obedient to those rules  
to the point of suicide, and also that they would 
have notions for escalation and de-escalation of  
conflicts, and diplomacy and arbitration. Though 
these might look a lot different from our own  
views of them with various aliens, and of course 
they might not extend such fair play options to  
other aliens. At the same time if they have a 
history of fighting, it probably means they have  
a history of fighting each other, man’s most 
dangerous predator being other men after all,  
and if they are still around it probably 
means they have also developed notions like  
tolerance for the alien among them to minimize 
fights or durations and severity of fights. 
 
They also would presumably realize that if they 
arose in the galaxy and started encountering other  
civilizations, it would strongly imply they will 
eventually wander into one much older and tougher  
than them who it might be nice not to go to war 
with, that is the first rule of warfare after all,  
never pick a fight with someone bigger 
than you, and those older tougher aliens  
were probably in a position to have seen all 
your previous interactions with other aliens,  
if you tried to work with them or just 
tried to wipe them out or conquer them.
 
So let’s bring this episode in for a 
landing, much like an alien invasion fleet.  
Obviously if we are using that broadest meaning 
of belligerence, the one implied by pursuing  
technology, then belligerence is probably a good 
thing but if we’re limiting it to warlike, then we  
can say that they have to have some restraints 
built in against self-destructive behavior.  
However we can’t say what those will be 
universally, they are just too variable  
to their specific biology and civilization. 
So I don’t think we could say that the Sagan  
Perspective was right in assuming advanced 
civilizations roaming the stars were all peaceful,  
that in the cheerful brightness 
of the future there is only peace,  
but it would seem like to live among the 
stars, utilizing the power of the stars,  
you need to have at least some restraint on 
any violent and belligerent tendencies, or  
your saga in the galaxy, your space opera, will be 
a very short one. Hopefully our own is not.
 
So to celebrate the newest adaptation of the 
classic Dune series to the Big Screen we did  
an episode on Folding Space this past weekend, 
and we got to discussing topology, one of the  
more fascinating areas of geometry and math, 
and along with game theory it is one of those  
topics that’s pretty important to understanding 
cosmology or guessing at alien behavior, and it  
is amazing how often mathematics is crucial to our 
understanding of the unknown, and also to simple  
daily real world tasks. It’s a common refrain 
that learning algebra or geometry or calculus  
is pointless because you won’t use them much, but 
I can assure you that much like learning to read,  
once you know them and get practiced with 
them, you will find daily uses for higher math.  
Just like any tool, you won’t know when to use it 
until you’re experienced and comfortable with it,  
once you do though, you see its use everywhere.
Of course first you do have to learn to use those  
tools right which means learning to use them in 
intuitive and handson fashion, not memorizing or  
regurgitating facts for a test, and our friends 
over at Brilliant focus on doing just that,  
by embracing interactivity and feedback for 
handson and intuitive learning. Now Brilliant  
has always focused on interactivity, but earlier 
this year, Brilliant upped the interactivity on  
their platform to a whole new level, like with 
their newly updated Geometry Fundamentals Course,  
and they continue adding in more and 
more interactivity to all their courses.
 
It's never too late to start learning something 
new, and math and science are no exceptions to  
that, and Brilliant can help. Brilliant 
is an interactive STEM-learning platform  
that assists you in learning concepts by 
visualizing them and interacting with them,  
which is hands-down, the best way to learn.
On Brilliant you can just pick a course you’re  
interested in and get started, be it the basics 
or advanced. If you get stuck or make a mistake  
you can read the explanations to find out more and 
learn at your own pace. Knowing and understanding  
Math, Science, and Computer Science unlocks 
whole new worlds, and if you’d like to start  
your journey to them, you can try out Brilliant 
for free and get 20% off a year of STEM learning,  
click the link in the description down below 
or visit: brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
 
So that will wrap us up for today but we will 
be back next week for Thanksgiving to discuss  
the concern that focusing on space exploration 
might imperil us handling problems back here  
on Earth, as we look at how Space Colonization can 
save Earth. Then we will wrap up November with our  
Monthly Livestream Q&A on Sunday, November 28th 
at 4 pm Eastern Time. December will start off  
with a look at how miniaturization and digital 
mind uploading can impact the Fermi Paradox,  
and we will follow that up with a look at Upcoming 
Advances in Material Science on December 9th.
 
Now if you want to make sure you get 
notified when those episodes come out,  
make sure subscribe to the channel, and if you 
enjoyed the episode, don’t forget to hit the like  
button and share it with others. If you’d like to 
help support future episodes, you can donate to  
us on Patreon, or our website, IsaacArthur.net, 
and patreon and our website are linked in the  
episode description below, along with all of our 
various social media forums where you can get  
updates and chat with others about the concepts 
in the episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
