This episode is brought to you by Brilliant
As we journey outward to the stars to claim  
new worlds, many might make the trip fleeing 
pursuit, and against a determined enough hunter,  
even the vast voids of interstellar 
space may not provide you sanctuary. 
So, one day you or your civilization decide 
your safety is imperiled and you wish to ensure  
that safety by going to the most remote place 
you can find, and today we will be discussing  
why you might make this move and how you could go 
about it. Our main focus will be living outside of  
galaxies, not between them, but we will be 
contemplating everything from hiding inside  
more remote parts of interstellar space, 
up to migrating to a cosmic void today.  
This episode is a quasi-sequel to last week’s 
episode on Deep Space Habitats and a quasi-prequel  
to next month’s episode, Alien Refugees, and while 
you don’t need to have seen Deep Space Habitats to  
understand this episode, you might want to watch 
that episode first, as its the basis for how you  
could find the energy and resources to dwell 
in what is essentially a barren nothingness. 
Now, to understand our concept, we need to set 
the stage by repeating the point from last week  
that interstellar space is a vast sea of near 
nothing, even compared to the emptiness of  
interplanetary space. Earth is one tiny pale blue 
dot in the immensity of interplanetary space,  
occupying less than a trillionth of what we might 
consider the Habitable Zone of our Solar System,  
which itself is perhaps a millionth 
of what we might think of as the  
interplanetary space in our Solar System, 
out to Neptune, Pluto and the Kuiper Belt. 
And yet this is a tiny fraction of the volume 
of interstellar space itself, even in its vast  
emptiness, it is but billionths of the volume 
of our Oort Cloud and the vast gaps between even  
our nearest neighboring stars, which, in turn, 
are even more empty than interplanetary space.  
As we saw last week, we don’t need that 
much improvement in our technology in  
order to be able to live and live well even 
in the dark depths of interstellar space,  
and in theory it should be a place that attracts 
few competitors and in which hiding is easier.  
Amusingly though, it’s also where you’d put your 
best detection gear since noise is minimal. There  
are also lots of actual stars in intergalactic 
space too, it’s just much thinner than inside  
the galactic disk; enough to build relay chains 
to other galaxies. So in that regard there’s  
likely to be lots of old science stations and 
even settled star systems in intergalactic space. 
But stealth in space is no easy thing, for my 
part I don’t think it’s truly possible to hide  
from an enemy who wants you dead badly enough, 
even in the dark void between stars. Nonetheless,  
it would require a very determined foe 
and not one that is acting out of fear.  
If we control interplanetary space and a whole 
star, some tiny refuge of a few thousand folks  
buried into an icy cometary body a lightyear from 
my star means so much less than nothing to me as a  
threat. They’re not out producing us, and we are 
getting way more research and development done  
every day then they’d get done in a millennia. 
Realistically, it’s not some tiny pacific island  
with a small tribe living on it versus a major 
nation, it’s the entire human civilization  
and infrastructure versus one lone flea sitting 
on a plastic bottle floating in the ocean.  
They just are not a plausible threat, so 
if you’re hunting them, it’s because they  
either specifically have someone or something you 
want or they’re just obsessed with killing you. 
As to what might be someone they want, that might 
be a pirate crew or leader, or maybe a dangerous  
political rival living in exile – and such a 
civilization might have people living thousands  
or millions of years. That’s a long time to build 
a reputation or a grudge. As to precious things,  
maybe a priceless relic, but I think we would 
have to be talking something like the Shroud  
of Turin or the Black Stone of Mecca, the 
preserved body of some leader or prophet,  
or hunting for Arthur’s Excalibur or the Holy 
Grail, if they had confirmed magic powers. So too,  
some hacker who had gotten the codes and 
one-time pads for an interstellar empire’s  
dirty secrets archive or Fort Knox equivalents 
of wealth, or dangerous stowed-away technology  
might invite such a hunt, but we also have to 
keep in mind that trying to find some old hermit  
guarding the Holy Grail in a tiny stealthy rock 
need not even be in the same solar system. The  
galaxy is huge after all and it’s hard to imagine 
what might compel hunters to seek something out  
through billions of star systems, let alone their 
vastly larger empty interstellar regions. Plus  
often the best place to hide something is going 
to be a safety deposit box in the capital city,  
stealth and hiding come in many forms.
Fundamentally, Interstellar space is so  
empty and enormous that if someone is hiding a 
small sanctuary, you have to be very motivated  
to go find them, especially something 
more covert like a post-biological one  
run on ultracold computers. Indeed, there are 
even emptier places inside our galactic disk  
where the spacing of stars is much lower and 
the galactic halo even more sparse. So going  
extra-galactic would seem unnecessary. 
Nonetheless, you might do this for  
ultra-ultra-cold computing, as extragalactic space 
is even colder though not by an immense amount,  
there’s still the cosmic microwave 
background radiation to contend with. 
As time passes, that cooling makes computing more 
efficient, as we looked at in our civilizations  
at the end of time series, people might save their 
fuel for the Dark Age 100 Trillion years from now  
where they’ll get more efficiency from it. 
We’re not contemplating Faster Than Light Travel  
or Time Travel today, though odds are if you’ve 
got one you’ve got the other, and hiding at the  
Edge of the Universe in a Temporal Sense, at the 
End of Time or back at the Big Bang is certainly  
an option. The Period of 380,000 years after the 
Big Bang until the Surface of Last Scattering,  
when Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation 
was originally emitted, is an even place  
to hide than inside a Star, another concept we’ve 
contemplated as an option for a sanctuary before. 
Still, to return to why you need to hide, I can 
see some astronomical bounties being offered if  
someone stole the Shroud or the Black Rock, and 
interstellar empires might consider offering  
someone an entire planet of their own to be 
a modest bounty compared to their economy. 
Of course, someone choosing to hide need not 
necessarily be making a realistic estimate of how  
much people want them. It might be that they were 
an infamous pirate with a big price on their head  
but nothing that motivated any real searches, 
nonetheless, they think they need to flee to  
the edge of reality itself to have any chance. 
So too, while we might imagine a genocidal race  
hunting down survivors, or alternatively a 
war crimes tribunal hunting down the fleeing  
leaders of a genocidal regime, it's even easier to 
imagine that the folks being hunted are paranoid  
and perhaps even grow more so as time rolls by.
So, why extragalactic sanctuaries beyond just  
extreme paranoia? Well, they do offer 
the advantage of being even more remote,  
while at the same time, the basic principles 
of deep space habitats still apply.  
Indeed the gas density in the intercluster medium 
– the region of space between neighboring galaxies  
as opposed to intergalactic medium in general – 
isn’t that much lower than in more barren parts of  
a galaxy, for those opting to use a power supply 
that consists of sucking in ionized matter to run  
fusion, or black hole power generation. We also 
hypothesized using dark energy or vacuum energy to  
power your deep space habitats last week and that 
would be just as effective outside of galaxies. 
Indeed, anything running on dark energy 
or vacuum energy would work just as well  
anywhere in the known universe, even cosmic voids, 
but those are only about an order of magnitude  
less dense in terms of matter than the mean 
cosmic density anyway. With sufficient technology,  
and potentially even just controlled 
fusion, any of these places can be home. 
Now, a couple months back, in our episode: 
Lost Space Colonies, I pointed out that a  
great place to hide would be on the rimward side 
of one of the stars at the edge of our galaxy  
or in intergalactic space. You put a statite there 
to keep your facility pinned behind that star  
relative to the galaxy, rather than orbiting it, 
and it’s going to be very hard to find you there,  
hiding on the dark side of the Sun, so to speak. 
You’re hanging as close to a star as you can – and  
that might even be effectively in its upper 
reaches – so folks only see you if they just  
happen to be leaving the galaxy and decide to 
turn their telescope backwards to stare at the  
backside of that star and watch close enough to 
see the tiny fleck of your space habitat there. 
Which they might do. Unlike interstellar 
space, anything near a star or big object,  
represents a tiny fraction of preferred 
space or valuable real estate,  
including stars and black holes, and barring 
travel time, it’s almost easier to search all the  
interplanetary regions of an entire galaxy than 
the interstellar space of just a few star systems,  
but you are now contemplating million-year 
hunts, not just multi-generational ones.  
The other problem is that such places 
are valuable real estate, so, eventually,  
someone is going to want to colonize it, but the 
same is fundamentally true of interstellar space  
if one waits long enough and civilization 
can colonize it usefully, which is implied  
by your being able to live there indefinitely 
too. If you can live there, so can others.
Timelines matter a lot, because, as we noted in 
Deep Space Habitats, a small cylinder habitat  
is quite capable of powering itself for 
longer than Earth’s life around the Sun,  
potentially far longer, just by having an 
equal mass of fusion fuel as it has station,  
and that fuel is vastly more abundant than the 
raw materials for building habitats themselves.  
Ironically, the kinetic energy the 
ship, or habitat, or raw materials,  
needed in order to get out of the galaxy, moving 
at roughly .2% of light speed, represents fuel  
needs greater than the habitat or ship would 
need, to run life support for potentially  
a million years or more, maybe a lot more.
Now, it is important to understand that escaping  
the galaxy and escaping our gravitationally bound 
cluster of galaxies isn’t quite the same thing,  
and the appeal of the latter is that once you get 
out into the true deep, the dark energy of the  
Universe’s expansion is going to aid your escape, 
and you don’t really need to bother slowing down,  
once you feel confident you’ve reached the 
point where your speed plus the Hubble Expansion  
is going to carry you beyond search, you can 
just spread some sails out to slowly gather  
intergalactic gas and dust, very slowly 
decelerating you while adding to your fuel  
reserves. This is going to be a long process 
at every level, billions of years perhaps or  
even more, but it’s worth remembering that you’re 
probably talking hundreds of thousands of years of  
travel to get out of your galaxy and maybe a lot 
longer if you’re trying to be stealthy about it,  
not moving faster than other natural objects. 
Though you might not be aiming for stealth. 
To illustrate the options, let’s consider a 
protracted flight scenario. We’ll begin sometime  
in the 42nd Millenia, in a case where there are no 
aliens, but where humanity has already colonized  
and diverged so much that its various offspring 
and creations might as well be alien. Indeed,  
even in the Sol System, the trillion minor worlds 
host millions of different sentient species.  
Humanity’s descendants and experiments, and the 
descendant’s of those experiments. This includes  
things so alien to humanity of the 21st century 
that they would not even have appeared in fiction.  
Some of those, like the giant technorganic ants 
of the Derzhavin Hollows of Mercury are benign,  
a quasi-hive mind that placidly 
trades metal ores for supplies. 
They have changed little since they were made 
to help exploit Mercury’s resources in the late  
3rd millennia, almost 400 centuries ago. Others, 
like the vicious Returners from Barnard’s Star,  
having been more violent, as they have fought 
a 400 year war down the spacetower arcology of  
North Akna Montes, seek to purge all the inhumans 
from the vast spacescraper, as defined by whether  
or not they still have the genetically modified 
wings their ancestors got during the early days of  
Venus’s colonization, from where their colony ship 
launched 38,000 years ago. In the 400 years since  
they seized the spaceport, they’ve managed to 
fight their way down to claim over 70,000 levels,  
each level being a vicious battlefront akin 
to the trench warfare of World War One. 
This sort of thing has gotten a lot more common 
in the last couple millenia, old factions that  
left to colonize the stars coming home to try 
to reclaim what they see as their birthright.  
It’s estimated that humanity, and its descendants, 
have claimed over a million star systems  
and sometime around the 30th millenia, those 
settlers around other stars finally came  
to outnumber those who dwelt around the 
vast Dyson Swarm and Deep Space Habitats  
of humanity’s original solar system, which 
itself contains over a trillion sovereign  
nations. It is estimated that at any given moment 
in Humanity’s birth system, there are 200 million  
wars going on, and that 3 million people die 
every single second throughout those war fronts,  
roughly 100 trillion people a year. For 
a given definition of the word ‘people’,  
a term whose definition is often being disputed 
and frequently is the reason for a given war. 
Those disputes and others, claim three 
times as many people every single hour  
as were alive on the day the first person 
stepped on the Moon, and more every day  
than had ever lived in all of Earth’s history 
before the first person was born off Earth. 
Those figures don’t include any conflicts out 
in Sol’s own Oort Cloud or any of the other star  
systems, nor any of the post-material entities 
and people living entirely in virtual realities  
in most cases. It also doesn’t include a 
lot of sub-sapient machines and creatures. 
Many will point out that such massive numbers 
of conflicts and casualties are fundamentally  
a relative thing, that just because more 
people die every minute than died during  
humanity’s wars of the ancient industrial 
age, doesn’t mean things are more violent.  
Quite to the contrary, we are vastly less 
likely to die of war as an individual now.  
Nonetheless, many folks point out that the numbers 
of wars and deaths have risen proportionally  
in the last few centuries, and talk about the 
need to bring the solar system back under one  
common banner. They say that if there’s going 
to be wars, they should at least be for the  
good purpose of bringing stability and peace 
to the Solar System, a War of Unification. 
And many of you think it might be wise to leave 
the solar system before such a thing occurs,  
especially as many of those trumpeting Unification 
don’t seem to view that as including everyone,  
and you’re not sure if you would be on that list 
or want to be. What exactly we are doesn’t really  
matter, but we think of ourselves as human, 
personally anyway. So, we and many others  
decide to go build a deep space habitat, buying 
the rights to an old rock in the Outer Oort Cloud  
that a mercenary group recently purged of 
pirates. They had to work pretty hard to get  
the coordinates for that rock in the first place 
so charged us a fair amount more to ‘lose them’. 
The trick to stealth in the solar system in 
the 42nd millenia is the same as it is on any  
crowded shopping plaza or boulevard of any big 
city throughout history: everyone sees us, and  
nobody cares. Now, the thing about a sanctuary, 
is that it isn’t a very good one unless people  
know it exists and can flee to it, but since we 
went and got a nice stealthy base off the radar  
we would rather keep it as hidden as we can.
So, we need a gateway facility and probably  
more than one. Then we have to decide if these 
gateways are public or secret themselves with  
a long road to reach, so to speak, and if we are 
aiming for a stealth approach of actually hiding,  
or hiding in plain sight, we also need to be 
deciding how we can keep our reputation clean,  
how we can avoid working with unsavory sorts 
or them double-crossing us, and how we rule  
our sanctuary. For instance, can people leave 
if they want to? If so, are there conditions?  
Can they communicate to the universe around 
them freely and if not, how do we police that?  
Are we willing to violate privacy, willing to 
scan brains or give people psycho-indoctrination  
to keep secrets? Are we willing to use 
lethal force to prevent leaks or runaways? 
It isn’t entirely lost on us that we could easily 
end up every bit as ruthlessly authoritarian as  
some of the factions and leaders who keep talking 
about the need for peace and security at any  
price. A lot of this is all hypothetical 
and we’re mostly out in deep space now,  
because things seem to be worsening and 
we are maybe a little paranoid, but we’re  
preparing for the worst and we want secure and 
discreet ways to get information, supplies,  
and those seeking sanctuary. We will take anyone 
– almost - and so long as they agree to our rules. 
Out in the broader galaxy, colonization continues 
but there’s a lot more conflicts in more settled  
regions than even back in the Sol System. By 
and large, the galaxy is a pretty chaotic place,  
though humanity has still only reached out to 
a small pocket of it a few thousand light years  
wide. A lot of Sol’s nearer neighbors seem to 
be more aggressive to each other and internally.  
These are the older systems within a hundred 
lightyears of Earth that have been settled for  
tens of thousands of years now, and every 
star near them is long since colonized and  
developed and home to quadrillions. Many had 
been shipping raw materials back to the Solar  
System for millenia and funding colony missions 
to deeper space and many feel both robbed by Sol,  
deserted by their own colonies, 
and crowded by their neighbors. 
So, it seems like we’ve barely had a chance 
to get our sanctuary prepared before we start  
seeing border wars in the Oort Cloud between 
various minor deep space kingdoms, many just  
proxy wars between more powerful interplanetary 
nations in neighboring solar systems. The notion  
of Unification and Empire seems to be getting 
more popular too, and by the 44th Millenia, one  
confederation of factions controls over a fifth of 
the Solar System’s people and resources and seems  
to have made a lot of new allies among various 
colonies in the light century wide inner sphere  
of great old systems. We decide our deep space 
habitat, which is increasingly not too secret,  
is not distant enough anymore and we decide it 
will now be a gateway to a new sanctuary far  
from the Inner Sphere and these Unification Wars.
We figure we need to be leaving the local bubble  
entirely, and we have a very loose coalition 
of other secret and not so secret allies with  
similar goals to ourselves, many are the exiles 
of defeated states in these conflicts. Space is  
three dimensional so it’s decided that we will set 
off in different directions but keep in contact,  
with various secure one-time pads and protocols 
and a cell-based structure to help if anyone gets  
captured or turns traitor, or traitor again, 
many of our allies used to be enemies. This is  
good because an awful lot of our allies go dark 
during the bloody few centuries that see the rest  
of the Solar System placed under one unified rule. 
That ruler really isn’t anything anyone would call  
human either, at least not back when we were 
born, thousands of years back, but then again,  
that might be the pot calling the kettle black, 
in this case the kettle really hates us personally  
after dozens of centuries of criticizing it, and 
we’ll just call that ruler ‘Kettle’ henceforth. 
Kettle seems to have gotten an empire together 
at this point and is calling for a Great Crusade,  
out to reclaim all of humanity’s lost worlds. 
That seems to be Kettle’s priority, but we suspect  
Kettle would cheerfully send an armada light years 
out of its way to find us and put our metaphorical  
head on a spike. So, we personally opt to hide 
outside the main galactic disc and everyone  
seeking to join us is routed on a very long path, 
especially as it takes thousands of years just to  
get a signal to where we are going, and where no 
human has yet reached. We opt to build our first  
quasi-extragalactic sanctuary on the south side of 
a red giant in the lower depths of Omega Centauri,  
an ancient Globular Cluster and the largest one 
in our Galaxy, where roughly 10 million stars  
are packed into a region only 150 light years 
across. Omega Centauri is 17,000 light years from  
Earth and contains more stars than humanity 
had settled when the chaos back home started. 
It’s hard to coordinate a sanctuary over 
tens of thousands of years, but we can move  
a lot faster than empires can conquer, and 
before long, our sanctuary at Omega Centauri  
has instead turned into one of the largest 
empires of the galaxy in the 2022nd century.  
This or that armada or refugee fleet seems to 
be constantly joining us in our dense cluster,  
where stars are so tightly packed they are often 
just light days, not light years apart. The last  
one to join us fought a 150 century rearguard 
defensive, chased by the True Empire, as it calls  
itself these days, from world to world and system 
to system, burning one after another to ash,  
while entire colony fleets were sent to do nothing 
but build fortress systems that could resist and  
buy time and burn resources in a scorched galaxy 
warfare approach. One refugee making it in,  
has the somewhat singular claim of having their 
parent, grandparent and great grandparent for 100  
generations back, each die in a different star 
system, defending the retreat of their nomadic  
empire. An awful lot of our unintentional empire 
is made up of defeated kings, disgraced admirals,  
and other unsavory folks who were worse 
than any distant tyrant on ancient Earth. 
What qualifies as a person is even vaguer 
these days, many of the warships joining us,  
fleeing the True Empire, don’t have any crew, 
they are the person in question, a sentient ship,  
and not many folks have classic meat brains these 
days, at least in Omega Centauri. You can flee so  
much faster by being a digital signal after all.
We know it's just a matter of time before our  
Sanctuary is attacked, a few thousand years at 
most, so we plan a retreat. Some plan to flee to  
other galaxies or less settled parts of our own. 
Others plan to die fighting or to try to disappear  
into the massive blackhole at the Center 
of Omega Centauri, 40,000 solar masses,  
an ancient remnant of when the cluster was a dwarf 
galaxy, long before there was any Earth, let alone  
an empire emerging from Earth gobbling up star 
systems with greater rapidity than any black hole.  
Some simply choose to build the fastest 
and most well-stocked ship they can  
and hurl themselves into space propelled by 
enormous Stellasers and Nicoll-Dyson Beams,  
heading out at nearly light speed and with no 
hope of ever returning and a great likelihood  
of finding themselves in galaxies that life 
will have already developed and conquered in. 
Not us, we want to ensure that there will 
always be a sanctuary, so our technique is  
somewhat parallel. We aren’t leaving ourselves 
just yet, not exactly. Our sanctuary will be  
billions of years from now, and near no galaxy, so 
nobody has a motive to come there for resources.  
What we’re doing is hurling out a string of 
massive artificial worlds, each with a black  
hole at its center, and containing vast amounts 
of supplies. Each will act as a relay to the  
next ones out, and each will follow a slightly 
zig-zagging pathway, so that no one can target  
them with light-speed quick superlasers. The 
pattern of each zag is random but predetermined,  
so that they alone know where they’re going 
to be, except for those relays further out. 
When Omega Centauri finally falls, we’re the 
last to leave, one jump ahead of armadas of  
ships that outnumber a locust swarm and each 
with weapons capable of leveling worlds.  
But we take no ship ourselves, first, 
broadcasting a powerful signal out galaxy-wide,  
listing a large number of space-time coordinates 
folks can send a signal to that will be picked  
up by one of our many disposable relays that 
the various planet-ship gateways will string  
out from themselves, so they can’t be targets 
directly. Then we do what we advised others to,  
and we transmit our mind digitally to the first 
gateway, leaving the Milky Way more than a million  
years after we left Earth the last time.
When we awake, it is inside a space station  
of epic proportions, as big as a solar 
system, and surrounded by utter darkness,  
even to our post-human senses that 
could see better than most telescopes.  
Far, far away, we can see the vast darkening 
globe that once was our galaxy and many others,  
merged together to form some unknown megastructure 
we recognize only by its red-shifted light,  
it appears to be peaking at the source at about 
double the temperature of the Cosmic Microwave  
Background radiation, which itself is far cooler 
than it used to be, and it is red-shifted as  
appropriate for something that we keep a distance 
and velocity of 99% of light speed away from,  
accounting for Hubble Expansion.
That’s because this station keeps itself  
intentionally at just short of the cosmological 
event horizon from what once was the Milky Way,  
so that others may transmit themselves 
down our relay gates to reach us,  
here at the edge of space and so far forward in 
time that there are no longer any natural stars,  
only one vast hyper-efficient computer 
simulating unimaginably huge virtual  
worlds to serve as sanctuaries to 
all. Last to leave but first to arrive  
as we followed the most straight path, 
we wait patiently for others to come,  
knowing no war fleet can ever reach us, and that, 
at last, we have reached our true sanctuary.
So I was intentionally a bit vague today about who 
and what are protagonist and antagonist were but  
the implication is that both are post-human and 
change a lot over the course of the million-year  
long timeline and the epilogue a quadrillion 
years hence. Nonetheless they’re definitely  
not running on classic brains anymore and yet 
they probably are still using neural networks,  
what are own brains use and what was often 
predicted future supercomputers would use and now,  
today, more and more of them use ever-better 
neural networks to do ever more impressive work. 
But it's still a mystery field to most 
folks, like a lot of math and science,  
and yet they don’t need to be. Our friends 
over at Brilliant have created a number of  
interactive courses on Neural Networks that will 
walk you through the topic of Neural Networks and  
many other areas of Math, Science, and Computer 
Science. These topics are often thought to be  
hard to learn but they don’t have to be, they are 
much easier to learn with interactive examples,  
everything is. The best learning is hands-on 
and interactive learning, hands down,  
and Brilliant has worked tirelessly over the years 
to offer more and ever better interactive learning  
options for math, science, and computer science.
These topics often seemed hard in the past  
because there were so few interactive 
options compared to other topics,  
but now Brilliant makes it easier for anyone to 
learn, be it the basics or advanced materials. 
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own pace, 
learn on the go, and learn something new. To get  
started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur 
or click on the link in the description,  
and the first 200 people will get 20% off 
Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
So today’s topic was about escaping to a sanctuary 
from the perspective of building it for others  
far from home, and we’ll take a look at it from a 
different perspective next mont on August 4th with  
an episode Alien Refugees. As for next week, we’ll 
return to the Fermi Paradox to ask where all these  
enormous habitats and megastructures we discuss 
on the show might be and what their apparent  
absence indicates about the Universe. After that 
we’ll look at two of the most mysterious things  
in our Universe, Black Holes and Dark Matter, 
and if dark matter might be black holes. Then  
we’ll close July out with our Monthly Livestream 
Q&A on Sunday, July 31st, at 4 pm Eastern Time. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social media  
forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
