Today we’ll be finishing up our look at
Dyson Spheres with Matrioshka Brains, sun-encompassing
supercomputers of almost inconceivable computational
power.
So far we’ve seen how these object, Dyson
Spheres, also known as Dyson Swarms or Stellar
Engines, can be used to make more living area
for people, to transmute lighter elements
into heavier ones, to move ships and planets
and whole solar systems, and even to blow
up planets and systematically sterilize every
planet in a galaxy.
We’ve also mentioned how none of these purposes
needs to be exclusive, and today’s example
is no different.
You don’t need to devote all of sun’s
power just to computer processing.
But the Matrioshka Brain partially subverts
that.
While it certainly permits other functions
its architecture tilts heavily toward near
exclusivity.
The very name itself references the Matrioshka
doll, a series of nested dolls, each inside
the last, because of the way it recycles power
at each subsequent layer.
It’s geared toward maximizing the efficiency
of a computer rather than simply dumping solar
power into computers.
Most descriptions of Matrioshka Brains just
describe them as a giant computer without
explaining the name.
But it wasn’t picked out of a hat by Robert
Bradbury when he introduced the concept about
8 years back.
Giant star-powered computers, or even whole
planets converted into computers like the
Jupiter Brain are nothing new.
They were a fairly common staple of science
fiction even back in the 1950s though the
increased miniaturization of computers tended
to make them less common.
It’s just hard to imagine why you’d ever
need that much computing power.
If you’ve seen the Transhumanism or Simulation
Hypothesis videos on this channel though,
you can probably guess at why you might.
Storing Trillions of trillions of uploaded
digital human minds, whole brain emulations,
or simulating whole universes, is one of the
reasons why you might build computers like
this.
And of course a third is that it might be
one single immense brain, as the second half
of the name implies.
Even as huge as such brains are, potentially
having processing power in excess of 10 to
the 49 Hertz, trillions of trillions of trillions
of times faster than our best modern computers,
there’s still a lot of things that would
take even a computer like this eons to make
a dent in.
Concepts like the Library of Babel, a hypothetical
Library of the sort you’d expect the infinite
monkeys working at typewriters would create,
would barely be scratched by such a fast reader
over the whole life of the Universe.
And that’s something we’ll talk about
more at a later date.
Particularly in the context of how many genuinely
unique, as opposed to arbitrarily unique,
ideas and even personalities can exist.
After all, while we can argue that a book
with only a few words changed at random is
essentially the same book, and with the human
mind is constantly changing a little bit here
and there, it is hard to argue that a specific
exact pattern of information is genuinely
meaningfully unique.
And we may need to extend our notion of uniqueness
to represent a potentially rather wide spectrum
rather than a single specific pattern.
We’ve looked at that notion in terms of
consciousness and identity and I think sometime
in the near future we need spend some more
time on such concepts.
But I’m digressing, back to the Mega-computer.
Why these are nested layers is to allow you
to absorb sunlight and then run calculations
at a high temperature, which then gets emitted
as waste heat, then in the next layer absorb
that waste heat and run more calculations
and emit your waste heat at a slightly lower
temperature, and so on.
If you picture a classic solar power computer
you have a panel absorbing sunlight and running
calculations and having cooling fans and heat
sinks purging that heat.
A simple sun-encompassing computer would simply
be this scaled up to wrap around the sun,
either as a rigid sphere of statites, ultra
thin objects that can float on sunlight like
a sheet of paper over a floor vent, an extension
of the solar sail concept, or as a swarm of
classic satellites.
The Matrioshka Brain scales this up vertically
too, by adding more layers beyond.
At each layer the frequencies of light are
being decreased, red-shifted, to higher states
of entropy.
It’s a bit of a skyscraper approach where
the generator, a star, is down in the basement.
There’s a limit as to how many layers you
can have, but it’s squeezing the sun for
every calculation you can get away with.
You convert matter, specifically hydrogen,
one of the lowest entropy things in the Universe,
into calculations, one of the most useful
things in the universe, recycling your energy
at every step.
Of course no recycling process is perfectly
efficient, but you can think of it a lot like
water conservation, where you use your bath
or dishwater to water your garden.
Any good machine tries to do this, get a second
or third or fourth stage where your waste
and leftovers act as the fuel for another
process.
Without going into the thermodynamics of heat
engines, it’s usually easiest to picture
one of these devices as a series of nested
thin rigid spheres, though that is hardly
necessary or ideal.
Each successive layer is cooler, and I find
it easiest to think of each layer as four
times further away than the last, since that
makes it half the temperature.
Now you can take my word on that if you’re
not math inclined but to review that fairly
quickly, in space where the only way to cool
objects is through thermal radiation, a roughly
spherical object’s temperature will always
be related to its total surface area and the
power it is emitting.
This also controls its peak wavelength.
Which for the sun for instance, our yellow
dwarf, is actually in the green range.
Colder objects red-shift that peak frequency,
hotter objects blue shift.
But the fusion that drives the sun is not
producing green photons or yellow ones or
any other visible photon, down in the sun’s
core where fusion happens it’s all gamma
radiation.
Those gamma rays get absorbed and re-emitted
as simple heat and the sun radiates that heat
the same as a glowing red hot bar of metal
or an incandescent light bulb.
Since the power radiated by any object, per
unit of surface area, rises with the fourth
power of temperature, if you double its temperature
it will emit sixteen times the power, and
if you half it, one sixteenth.
The sun emits at the frequency of light we
see because that’s the frequency an object
with that much surface area can emit that
much power without getting any hotter.
So to radiate the same power, but at half
the temperature, our second sphere would need
to be four times wider, since a sphere’s
surface area goes with the square of its width,
four times wider, 16 times the surface area,
and therefore half the temperature.
Now I also like using these half-temperature
steps because it plugs in easily to Carnot’s
thereom, that no engine operating between
two heat reservoirs can be more efficient
than a Carnot engine operating between the
same reservoirs, and the efficiency of a Carnot
Engine is 1 minus the temperature of the cold
reservoir divided by the hot reservoir.
In this case the reservoirs would be two adjoining
layers of the Matrioshka Brain and since each
layer is half the temperature of the last,
each step is 50% efficient.
So if we had our first layer at 1000 Kelvin
and our next layer at 500 Kelvin, one a bit
closer to the sun than the planet of Mercury
and one a bit further, we’d get an efficiency
of 1 – 500 divided by 1000, or 1 minus one-half,
or one half, or 50% efficiency.
You might be wondering why we couldn’t just
jam another layer between those two, and let’s
say we did, at what would produce 750 Kelvin,
about where Mercury would be.
Well that first pair would have an efficiency
of 1 minus 750 over 1000, or 1 minus .75,
or 25%, not very efficient at all, and the
next layer would be 1 minus 500 over 750,
1 minus two-thirds or one-third or about 33%.
So you’re not really getting much advantage
by just cramming in more and more layers.
Particularly since that peak wavelength represents
a peak that’s pretty wide.
As I said the sun’s peak wavelength is in
the green range, but it emits plenty of light
all the way up in UV range and more than half
its light is emitted below the edge of red
light in the infrared range of spectrum.
That math we just did for the Carnot cycle
is the absolute maximum efficiency physics
allows, practically speaking you won’t even
get that.
And you’d need to do your spacing to optimize
the next layer, for instance if you’re using
semiconductors to convert photons into electricity,
essentially how solar panels work, you want
to optimize your waste light to work best
with those.
And if you’ve got yourself a substance that
is very good for 10 micrometer wavelengths,
the peak wavelength at 290 Kelvin, or 62 degrees
Fahrenheit, and another that works well at
15 micrometers, which corresponds to 190 Kelvin
or -118 Fahrenheit, it makes sense to match
your layers up to that.
We’ve no idea what sort of specific mechanical
or chemical constraints will apply to control
that optimization so we can’t really say
much about how many layers and their spacing
we’d have.
And indeed you don’t have to have discrete
layers.
This works perfectly fine in a swarm format
too, more of a fog or cloud around a star
then discrete layers.
Your fundamental limit is the temperature
of the star, and how hot you can make your
computers and related equipment run at, for
the bottom layer, and for the top layer the
sort of ambient temperature of your area of
the galaxy or Universe has and how much construction
material you have.
The whole Universe is saturated with photons
at about 2.7 Kelvin, which happens to be about
the transition point from infrared radiation
to microwaves, and why we call that Cosmic
Background Radiation as CMR or CMBR, Cosmic
Microwave Background Radiation.
Way back in the day it was a much higher frequency,
shorter wavelength.
Back when the universe was younger, about
400,000 years old instead of about 14 billion,
the Universe was a pretty dense and opaque
fog of a place.
And quite hot too, basically the entire Universe
was the temperature of a star’s surface,
all glowing white hot plasma, but it was cooling
down from the Universe expanding and finally
reached the point that atoms with nuclei and
electron shells could exist and when they
popped up the Universe wasn’t opaque anymore
and photons could travel long distances without
scattering and getting absorbed.
Since the nature of the expansion means that
no matter when you’re around there will
always be photons from that era just showing
up where you can still see that initial wad
of photons and they are everywhere.
But they redshift, get weaker, over time as
they had to cover more and more space to have
arrived by now and that space was expanding
and red shifting them.
If you measured that CMB some billions of
years ago it would have been a higher temperature
and frequency.
Indeed for a while after this original event
the whole sky would have visibly glowed and
it’s only relatively recently it left the
infrared range and entered microwaves.
One day, far in the future, The Cosmic Microwave
Background Radiation will become Cosmic Radio
Wave Background Radiation and the coldest
spots in the Universe won’t be 2.7 Kelvin
but thousands or even millionths of a Kelvin.
That will be important when we get to the
Black Hole Farming video in three weeks.
Right now that’s your bottom limit though,
and in fact it’s a bit higher because there’s
plenty of other ambient light kicking around
especially inside a galaxy with all its stars
emitting light and random particles whacking
into things that sets a slightly higher minimum
temperature.
This is what I mean about never being able
to hide a Dyson Sphere when I talk about that
in the context of the Fermi Paradox.
Even ignoring the very obvious gravitational
anomaly of a missing solar system, which would
be easily seen by any Kardashev 2 civilization,
and the way it would block light from the
other side of it, it still emits waste heat.
That’s how the Matrioshka Brain works after
all.
If we didn’t have any of that background
radiation hitting our Dyson Sphere and warming
it up, we’d still need to make it very big
to get it down to 2.7 Kelvin.
Our Sun’s surface glows at about 6000 Kelvin,
if we wanted it to glow at half that temperature,
as I mentioned aarlier, we’d need a shell
around it 4 times wider.
And if we built a shell around that sun where
Earth was at it would glow at the temperature
Earth does, around 300 Kelvin, at Earth’s
distance of 1 AU, one Astronomical Unit.
At 4 AU it would be about half that temperature
or 150 Kelvin, 75 Kelvin at 16 AU, out near
Uranus, and at 64 AU a bit out past Pluto
it would be more like 40 Kelvin.
At that point all the background radiation
starts actually being significant to temperatures
but if we just ignored that, to get a sphere
at about 100th Earth’s temperature’s or
about that background temperature of the Universe,
you’d need to have 100 to the fourth power,
or 100 million times the surface, which would
need a width at the square root of that, or
10,000 times as far away from the sun as Earth
is.
10,000 AU in radius, about a six of a light
year or two light months in radius, and double
that for its diameter or width, which incidentally
would be about 4 million times wider than
the sun and take up 16 trillion times the
surface area.
That’s a pretty big object to miss seeing
and again it won’t actually be that temperature
since it’s also absorbing and re-emitting
all the background radiation hitting it from
outside.
You could never get a Dyson’s exterior layer
down to that temperature.
Sometimes folk suggest to me that it might
be close enough to that temperature to hide,
since there are warm and cold spots in the
CMB, but I think most folks don’t realize
that those cold spots for instance, the big
giant ones that bother cosmologists, being
colder than the 2.7 Kelvin everything is supposed
to be, are actually a lot less than a thousandth
of Kelvin off from the norm of 2.7 Kelvin,
70 millionths of a Kelvin normally.
If you had a variation of even thousandth
of a Kelvin it would show up to us, now, with
our modern tech, like if someone took a big
white canvas with slightly off-white shades
and maybe a few very light gray spots then
put a big black mark on it.
To dampen that down so a Dyson might pass
for a warm spot, it would need to be so large
you’d end up needing to move other star
out of the way to avoid including them, which
as I mentioned a couple episodes back is not
exactly a covert and subtle thing either.
But let’s stick with the 10,000 AU radius
for a moment, the one with 100 million times
the surface area of the Classic Dyson Sphere.
I’ve mentioned before how you don’t need
much more than a large asteroid or maybe a
very small planet to build a very basic Dyson
Swarm, if it’s just very thin, but something
with a hundred million time the surface area
would need 100 million times the building
material, which would require hundreds of
stars worth of material.
And it’s kind of hard to imagine why that
would be considered a practical idea, especially
considering that fusing all that construction
material up from hydrogen would release a
few hundred times more energy than the sun
would emit over its whole life.
Again not a very subtle or covert thing to
do.
So we can’t really use that top reservoir
of 2.7 Kelvin for computation nor to hide
a Dyson.
It’s impossible not too mention insanely
impractical to try to come close to it.
You can make a pretty good case for building
your swarm all the way out Pluto, since you’d
only need a couple thousand times the normal
Dyson Mass, not a hundred million, and since
at those temperatures you can still basically
disregard background radiation, but past that
you begin getting seriously diminishing returns.
That dynamic changes a lot if we’re using
black holes instead of suns as our engines
and if the CMB has dropped down to a lower
temperature, but we’ll look at that more
in the Black Hole Farming video in a few weeks.
Now I already mentioned the Carnot Limit on
efficiency of heat engines, and a Dyson Sphere
is definitely one of those, but in the past
I’ve also mentioned something called the
Landauer Limit, which puts the absolute maximum
on how much computation you can get out of
a processor for a given amount of energy and
at a given temperature.
Our computers nowadays don’t run anywhere
near that limit, it’s the sort of thing
that lets you run millions of supercomputers
or whole brain emulations off the power of
a light bulb, but it also needs to be considered
for a Matrioshka Brain and I was a little
disappointed nobody seems to have done an
analysis on that.
See the star’s luminosity, it’s power
output, puts a maximum on how much power each
layer has to do calculations with, and Carnot
tell us what percentage of that we can actually
convert to do work with, in this case calculations,
and again if you’re going in powers of 4
for your distance, halving the temp at each
step, that would be 50%.
But Landauer tells us how many calculations
we can do with that power, or how much power
each calculation takes minimum.
And that’s linear to temperature so your
inner and hotter layers do less computing
than your outer layers.
If they are running at that limit each successive
layer, at half the temperature, is actually
doing twice as much work in terms of calculations.
It’s not really smarter though since it
may be doing twice the thinking but is spreading
that out over 16 times the area.
So smarter but slower perhaps.
Signal lag is a pretty big deal for such things.
But only if they’re a singular intelligence.
We usually envision it that way, that’s
why it’s a Matrioshka Brain, but it hardly
needs to be singular.
You can run tons of smaller minds, human ones
or much larger, and not really have that lag
issue.
I think in the Transhumanism or Simulation
Hypothesis video I said based on current approximations
of the computing power needed to run a human
mind you could do it with a solar panel about
the size of a postage stamp, but let’s be
a bit more formal about this and in the context
of the nested layer Matrioshka Brain.
Let’s just say for the moment that everything
is running perfectly so we only need to consider
Carnot and Landuaer Limits.
Now it’s fairly simple to recognize that
only your last layer really matters, each
one above it would do half the processing
and one plus half plus a quarter plus an eighth
and so on add up to two, which would negate
that 50% efficiency from the Carnot Limit,
and that’s almost regardless of what your
star’s temperature is, that when contrasted
against the CMB you end up with near 100%
efficiency.
The real power comes from how cold your last
layer is, not the how hot your star is, though
this only works this way if you can actually
compute down at the Landuaer Limit.
Anyway you can calculate for each discrete
layer and add them up, but it will always
roughly approximate the last layer running
at just under 100% efficiency and calculating
at that temperature.
And the whole thing works out to about 10
to the 49th Hertz of total processing.
Which is about 40 orders of magnitude, ten
thousand, trillion, trillion, trillion times
more processing power than whatever device
you’re probably watching this on and 34
orders of magnitude more than our current
best guess to simulate a human mind.
So hypothetically your Matrioshka Brain could
run 10 to the 34th or 10 billion, trillion,
trillion emulations of people simultaneously
and in real time.
That’s a lot more than the about 10 billion
people we have on earth or about the 10 billion-billion
we’d expect a classic Dyson Sphere could
hold.
Though in the upcoming Arcology and Ecumenopolis
videos we’ll see those are a couple orders
of magnitude shy of a plausible comfortable
maximums.
But that’s still a couple orders of magnitude,
not a couple dozen.
And if you scaled this up to be galaxy encompassing,
having one around each star, you could add
10 or 11 more orders of magnitude on to come
out at around 10 to the 44th or 45th power.
And none of these folks would really need
to worry about lag time for their own thoughts
at least.
Even if they were running a lot faster than
a normal human mind or a lot bigger.
The power plant for a mind at that hot bottom
layer is smaller than a pencil dot, and even
out on the outermost layer we’d still be
talking about a normal sized modern solar
panel.
Now it’s pretty obvious what you’d do
with all that processing power if you’re
emulating people, and I generally don’t
think of it as emulation, a mind is a mind
whether it’s running on brain cells, computer
chips, or a million monkeys or ants each replicating
the action of a brain cell, like we discussed
in the Transhumanism video, but whichever,
you use that processing power to run people.
On the other hand if we’re talking about
one big mega-mind, or problem solving tool,
it’s kind of hard to imagine what you’d
do with all that computing power.
Especially an up-gunned version of this where
you need calculate really quickly and build
it around a giant star with a much higher
surface temperature and tens of thousands
of times more power, like Spica, or even bigger
ones potentially millions of times brighter
than our sun.
Or around a neutron star.
For when you need to solve the secrets of
the universe or the gajillionth digit of Pi
on a tight schedule I suppose.
And the answer to what you’d do with that
much processing power is I have no damned
idea.
I generally tend to think things like how
to break the speed of light or laws of Thermodynamics
or jumping into other Universes is either
flat out impossible, no matter how much brains
you throw at it, or something you could probably
solve with a lot less than a God-mind, which
is the only meaningful way to even look at
a Matrioshka Brain as a singular intelligence.
I have no idea what they’d spend their time
thinking about but when you’ve got the processing
power to simulate trillions of worlds simultaneously
through their whole history in an eye blink
without working up a sweat it throws some
strange light on concepts like the Simulation
Hypothesis.
We talked about super-intelligence a couple
weeks back and beyond defining it generally
we couldn’t make much headway and I’ve
never seen a fictional example any of the
tons of scifi novels and short stories I’ve
read that have managed to represent anything
significantly smarter than a human in a way
that felt believable to me let alone something
of this sort of leviathan capacity.
Okay so that was Matrioshka Brains, which
closes out our look at Dyson Spheres too and
sort of brings us to the end of the Megastructures
series in terms of scale.
We can go beyond this in terms of scale to
look at galaxy spanning structures or even
ones using multiple galaxies, but it really
is just an increase in scale, not concept.
We can and will go beyond these in terms of
time, to look at how objects like these might
continue to exist in slightly different ways
when you can’t use stars anymore when we
look at black hole farming in three weeks.
But before that we’ll be heading way back
down in scale to look at Arcologies, giant
structures that are sort of a mix of skyscraper
and space station that we can build here on
Earth, and following it up the next week with
an extension of that idea to look at Ecumenopolises,
planet spanning cities, and we’ll have some
fun poking holes in some of the misconceptions
around these.
Especially the notion that they’re sterile
dystopian hive cities of concrete.
Arcologies and Ecumenopolises are too connected
for me not to treat them as a single subject
even though we’ll be breaking them into
two videos, so we will be going back to back.
Especially because there’s a lot of material
to cover since a proper Ecumenopolis has to
also take into account the sort of swarms
of space stations, satellites, and habitats
around the planet that would be every bit
as much a part of that world city as ports,
railroad yards, and suburbs are to major metropolitan
areas now.
So those are our topics for the next three
weeks.
Arcologies followed by Ecumenopolises followed
by Black Hole Farming.
If you want alerts when those and other videos
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed the video, please like it and
share it with others, and if you’d like
to support the channel you can visit us on
Patreon.
Questions and Comments are welcome, and as
always, thanks for watching, we’ll see you
next week, and have a Great Day!
