We often see folks arguing about whether or
not space exploration should be done by robots
or manned missions.
We don’t talk as much about whether or not
space colonization should be done by robots,
or the advantages of robots over humans.
So today we will be looking at Colonizing
Titan, the largest moon of Saturn and slightly
larger than the planet Mercury, a claim only
Jupiter’s moon, Ganymede, can match.
Yet while both are larger than Mercury, their
combined mass is actually less.
Both are far less dense than Mercury, Earth,
or the other two inner planets, Venus and
Mars.
In the first two episodes of this series we
looked at Mars and then Venus, one with virtually
no atmosphere and the other with one far more
massive than Earth’s own.
Genuine atmospheres are not common in our
solar system, and ignoring the gas giants,
you can only find them on two planets and
one moon: Earth, Venus, and Titan.
Unlike Venus, where the atmosphere is super-hot
and thick and mostly carbon dioxide, Titan’s
own atmosphere is mostly nitrogen like our
own with an atmospheric pressure about 50%
greater than Earth’s.
Of course you can’t breathe it because there’s
no oxygen and because the temperature of Titan
makes Antarctica look like an oven in comparison.
Titan is so cold it is thought to have cryovolcanoes
on it, shooting out not magma but water, molecular
hydrogen, and other volatiles.
Which may be the reason why it has so much
ethane and methane on it, and butane and propane
as well.
Titan has many lakes on it, but they’re
not water.
If you wanted to think of Titan as a planet
of ice covered in lakes of oil, and methane
seas, that would basically be on the nose,
and it’s maybe a good thing there’s not
much free oxygen around, or you could light
the whole place on fire.
You could walk around on Titan in a well-insulated
suit and oxygen mask, but if you stood still
you’d start melting the surface where you
stood, and if you went for a swim in one of
those lakes, it would steam around you and
boil until eventually it froze you.
This is Titan, the frozen flammable gold mine
of the solar system, with hundreds of times
more natural gas and other hydrocarbons than
Earth.
With an atmosphere thick enough to allow easy
aerobraking to land on and with a gravity
well similar to our own moon.
It’s easy to land on and easy to leave,
with vast quantities of rocket fuel just lying
there to suck up, add Oxygen, and burn your
way back to orbit.
This is Titan, a place far enough away that
if you are still using chemical fuels for
rockets it’s probably beyond your range
to make much use of, but it’s there, in
case we never master fusion or make dependable
fission drives; It’s the solar system’s
ultimate chemical fuel depot.
And this is Titan, a place so far away from
the Sun that it receives just 1% of the sunlight
Earth does.
It has a lot of appeal in many solar system
colonization plans for its riches, and yet
at the same time it is so much less tempting
of a place for humans to ever colonize.
We often see it as a lynchpin of a future
solar economy, able to provide hydrogen and
nitrogen to places like Mars that have very
little of either, or Venus, which has plenty
of nitrogen but very little hydrogen.
Titan, while cold, is rich in everything you
need for life except warmth.
Yet were you to warm it up, it lacks the gravity
to hold those organic riches; and if you introduced
oxygen, they’d soon incinerate.
As we’ve discussed before, there is no place
you can’t terraform if you want to badly
enough, but it is worth asking if those things
which make a place unlike earth might actually
be beneficial.
So, let’s take up the persona of our traveler
again from earlier episodes to get a human
perspective.
We first visited Mars and dwelt there for
a decade, then came back to Borman Station
in orbit around the Moon and were convinced
to travel to Venus and dwelt there for many
years in their floating cities.
Now, once more, we’re returning to Borman
Station, the hub for early interplanetary
travel and trade, with the intent again to
see Earth once more.
Things have hardly been static on Earth, Mars,
or the rest of the inner solar system all
these years.
There are habitats scattered around Earth’s
orbit and mining operations on many asteroids
out in the belt, some slowly becoming permanent
settlements.
So folks are discussing getting some genuine
trade going on in the solar system.
The long consensus is that Titan is a potentially
invaluable node for such trade, but the lure
of space exploration and settlement is beginning
to fade a bit.
The idea of flying off to Titan isn’t that
appealing.
It used to take years to get a probe out to
Saturn; ships are far faster now but it’s
still a long trip.
When your spaceship runs on chemical fuels,
you have to make almost the entire ship out
of fuel and still follow the most optimum
energy paths throughout the solar system.
These typically involve Hohmann Transfer Orbits,
which I’ll discuss later, but they don’t
look anything like a straight line.
Normally all the planets move so much relative
to each other that it is rather pointless
to think of straight lines anyway, but Saturn
takes 30 years to orbit the Sun and is almost
ten times further from it than Earth.
The two planets are never closer than 8 AU
– astronomical units, the average distance
of Earth from the Sun – and never further
than 11.
That is a long way, but on the other hand
you can get a message there and back in under
three hours, which isn’t really long on
normal email timelines.
If a spaceship could sustain a one-gee thrust
constantly, it could accelerate halfway there,
for 4 to 5 days, flip over and slow down and
arrive in about 9 days.
Of course such a ship would be traveling at
over 1% of light speed.
This is actually quite conceivable for a genuine
fusion powered ship; indeed, it is fairly
modest compared to hypothetical maximum speeds
for such a vessel.
But it’s also quite wasteful of energy.
Even such a fast ship is not traveling in
a particularly straight line, and Saturn won’t
have moved much during that time.
It’s important to keep in mind though that
even if you can go that fast, most of the
time you won’t want to.
Interplanetary trade is a complex enough topic
that I’ll give it its own episode in a month
or so, but when you’re engaging in bulk
transport of billions of tons of raw materials,
it pays to be frugal with your energy and
follow those slow paths.
This is essentially what Titan offers too:
huge amounts of nitrogen and hydrogen and
hydrocarbons, all of which are in short supply
in the inner solar system and needed in massive
quantities for making earth-like habitats
and living areas.
But here on Borman Station, we find out that
folks have some other ideas about what Titan
might be useful for.
While potential terraformers are talking about
ways to warm Titan up, others are pointing
out that being cold has its own benefits.
At the core of all industrial and computational
processes is thermodynamics, and how efficient
those are.
Even things like solar panels that folks don’t
think of as having anything to do with big
steam or oil-fired engines are limited by
this and the key constraint is that such engines
operate on an energy transfer between two
reservoirs, a hot one and a cold one.
Take two equal temperature reservoirs and
no work or power can be extracted from them.
No engine can ever be more efficient than
the Carnot heat engine, and its maximum efficiency
is given as one minus the ratio of the cold
reservoir over the hot one, with temperatures
in absolute scale, typically Kelvin.
Back on Earth, a heat engine whose cold reservoir
was at room temperature - about 300 Kelvin
- might have a hot reservoir of 400 Kelvin,
a bit more than boiling water.
Such an engine can produce work or power at
no better efficiency than 1 minus 300 over
400, or 1 minus three-fourths, or one-fourth,
or 25%.
That is not terribly efficient.
Yet that same engine running on Titan, where
the average temperature is only about 100
kelvin, is one minus 100 over 400, or one
minus one fourth, or three fourths or 75%
efficient.
Heat is also a big deal with computation.
Computers build up ferocious amounts of heat
and need massive amounts of cooling to operate.
But even beyond that, Landauer’s Limit kicks
in, which is the maximum theoretical limit
for classic computing efficiency, and that
is directly related to temperature.
Halve the temperature, double your maximum
computations for the same amount of energy.
I’ll come back to this a little later.
Now you can produce cold temperatures anywhere,
but you usually have to expend considerably
more energy refrigerating a warm place than
it’s worth.
Up in space this is a bit worse, because you
can only get rid of heat by radiating it away,
and radiating heat is dependent on the total
surface area of the object doing the radiating
and the temperature it is at.
Except that scales up far faster with temperature,
with the fourth power, so if you double something’s
temperature it radiates heat away 2^4 or 16
times faster.
Mercury and Venus are almost ten times as
hot as Titan and radiate 10^4 or 10,000 times
the energy from the same surface area.
But Titan is big and cold, so you can use
conventional cooling processes by running
cold fluids over the hot, heat-generating
object and cooling it, then pumping the hot
fluids away.
What this means is that on Titan you can run
many industrial processes and electronics
at ultra-high efficiency and use Titan’s
atmosphere as a massive space radiator.
Now, of course, one can’t dump an infinite
amount of heat on Titan.
Every joule of energy you add raises the temperature
a bit.
But the hotter the moon gets the more quickly
it gets rid of heat.
By taking its current average surface temperature,
which is 98.3 Kelvin, and picking a new average
temperature, say 100 Kelvin, this shows how
much power each radiates off per square meter,
take their difference, and multiply that against
Titan’s whole surface to find out what the
thermal energy budget is.
By doing that, the amount of power that’s
usable without warming the place up even more
can be calculated.
We’ll skip the rest of the math.
What’s really useful is that Titan can dissipate
up to 31 Trillion Watts, which is almost double
the total power generation of humanity in
the early 21st century.
So in industrial terms you could get away
with running all the planetary industrial
output of humanity at that time several times
over again and at a far higher rate of efficiency
and without having to worry about impacting
Earth’s climate with excess heat and other
chemical pollutants.
That makes Titan a potential industrial powerhouse,
the titan of interplanetary industry, because
everything it does is more efficient, and
it can do a lot of it.
Its low gravity and thick atmosphere allow
very easy transport from the surface to space
and vice-versa.
On Borman station, folks are talking about
this option, but as of yet no person has even
set foot on Titan, and the furthest manned
missions to date have been out to the moons
of Jupiter.
We haven’t set foot on Earth in a generation,
and plenty of fascinating things have been
happening there too.
So we go home to Earth and get to see all
the new changes.
Giant citadel arcologies with whole metropolises
living inside them and still finding ample
room for factories and farms and forests inside.
Cities floating in the ocean or snugly warm
in the polar ice.
Cities kilometers under the sea or deep inside
mountains.
For all the millions of people now living
in space, in the orbital habitats or off colonizing
planets and asteroids, many more are colonizing
humanity’s home, turning desert and tundra
green, creating structures so vast they each
could have housed and fed the entirety of
pre-industrial humanity.
We can see why no one is rushing off to colonize
Titan; there are plenty of places left still
to explore on Earth, and even Antarctica in
the winter time is far more hospitable than
Saturn’s distant moon.
Now for all that few manned missions have
been far from Earth, but there’s been no
shortage of unmanned robot missions.
There’s not much need to send a manned mission
out to Jupiter to take ice core samples from
Europa when a robot can do it cheaper and
better.
There’s always an assumption though, that
a manned mission must eventually follow, certainly
if you mean to colonize the place.
But do colonies and outposts need people on
them?
Folks are able to create automated mining
outposts, all done by robots who, at most,
need occasional oversight from people.
Does an asteroid mining facility really need
any people on it?
Or would it be enough just to have the crew
of a ship perform some checks and maintenance
on the machinery while picking up the refined
cargo.
Indeed does that ship even need a crew?
It’s not much of a leap to imagine machines
that could repair themselves and handle reasonably
complex tasks and problems without even considering
human level artificial intelligence, but you
don’t necessarily need the ability to repair
your robots.
After all the big advantage of advanced automation
is that it can do most manufacturing tasks
with little to no human labor and even minimal
oversight, so if you have robot miners that
can operate fairly autonomously you probably
have that same option for the factories making
those robots back home.
You don’t really need to repair them, but
you probably could, and you probably could
automatically.
You probably don’t even need to send more
probes or mining drones out either, because
they can potentially manufacture everything
they need to make more of themselves.
I’ve talked before about self-replicating
machines, and people tend to think of these
as tiny little robots, but they hardly need
to be and the first ones probably wouldn’t
be.
Nor does each need to be able to do it on
its own.
A factory capable of producing every component
in that factory is a self-replicating machine.
You could easily imagine vast factories down
in the ice on Titan all monitored and controlled
from a few manned orbital facilities, maybe
occasionally sending down a team in insulated
pods and suits if necessary, but do you even
need people there?
Would anyone even want to be there?
Some maybe for the adventure or potentially
high pay, but who would want to actually live
there?
So, could Titan be truly colonized in the
future with few to no people living on it?
Just a massive factory and computer farm taking
in raw materials and energy and information
and exporting material?
This would be an entire moon where deep below
its atmosphere, submerged under the ice and
lakes, entire city-sized computers and factories
exist.
And while there’s an energy budget to avoid
melting, where is it getting that energy?
Oh, Titan is covered in the same hydrocarbons
used in combustion engines but there’s no
free oxygen to use with it, and it takes a
lot of energy to remove oxygen from water
or rocks to burn it with those hydrocarbons.
Uranium or Thorium for fission is an option
and odds are that Saturn’s 61 other known
moons have plentiful supplies of those.
It’s very easy to move around those moons;
there’s very little gravity.
Of course, solar power would seem to be out
since a solar panel near Saturn only gets
about 1% the light which one near the Earth
would get, but you could put your panels at
the focus of a cheap parabolic dish -- just
shiny plastic or metal to focus light on it.
It’s not like a few square meters of tin
foil cost anything like as much as a square
meter of solar panels, and space to put them
is no problem.
There’s no reason to care if they orbit
Titan and block what little sunlight hits
the place since that would only increase the
Thermal budget.
Or you could have power satellites much closer
to the sun that just beamed energy out to
Titan; not even to the moon itself, trying
to cut through that thick atmosphere.
The orbital velocity around Titan is quite
low, as is its gravity, so building a space
elevator or an orbital ring with power lines
right down to the surface is not that hard.
You could even have colonies living inside
of floating cities in the upper atmosphere
attached to tethers that are anchored to the
surface and use receivers to capture the beamed
energy.
And if one has viable fusion power plants
there’s no shortage of hydrogen or deuterium
on Titan itself.
Unlike the inner planets where hydrogen tends
to be too light to stick around in truly large
quantities, Titan has tons, as does the planet
it orbits.
Most folks reject the notion of letting robots
do all our exploring, and would not see a
point in letting them do our colonizing, but
that does not mean that every object humans
colonize has to have an end-state of being
principally for human habitation.
In the sorts of massive economies and industrial
infrastructure a solar system working its
way towards Kardashev 2 status might have,
especially one with good automation, it’s
possible for an entire giant moon like Titan
to be entirely colonized even if it just had
a handful of folks living at the stations
at the top of a space elevator, while millions
of tons of raw materials and manufactured
goods left up that elevator every minute.
Folks talk about a future for humanity where
there’s far better automation.
Might not this be a more likely set up and
use for a place like Titan than having people
actually trying to live there and start up
a real civilization of millions of people?
Back to our story, we live on Earth for about
a year, but find Earth’s gravity crushing.
Earth’s culture is also alien to us because
we’ve been away for so long.
The final straw is when we get bad news from
a doctor that we’ve developed a rare, incurable
cancer because of the decades spent without
a magnetosphere protecting us.
So, just as one would expect of such an adventurer,
we decide to go back to being a pioneering
colonist!
A mission is planned for Titan to setup automated
factories and a mega-computational capability.
It’s very expensive setting up and maintaining
people on a mission like this so only a skeleton
crew will be sent to oversee the project and
mostly they are there to make sure nothing
gets out of hand with Titan’s manufacturing
facilities and AI capability going rogue.
We sign onto the mission.
Artificial intelligence is now well advanced.
I mentioned before that the fundamental theoretical
limit on classic computing is called Landauer’s
Limit, and that the colder it is the better
it works too.
The energy needed to flip a single bit at
Titan’s temperature is just one zeptojoule,
a gigahertz processor could run on just one
trillionth of a watt.
You recall the 31 trillion watts in our energy
budget for Titan?
If computers used just one of those trillions,
a trillion, trillion gigahertz processors
can be run, and it’s generally believed
you only need maybe 10 to 100 million to emulate
a human mind.
So for just a few percent of the available
energy budget on Titan, there you could operate
a computer able to emulate the minds of the
entire human population a million times over.
Even if you’re nowhere near Landauer’s
limit, that much energy at those kind of temperatures
and cooling rates allows you to run some very
serious computing operations.
More than enough to oversee any sort of automated
manufacturing you had going on.
Heck, unlike Earth whose core is mostly molten
iron, Titan’s core is mostly silicon, so
you’re hardly short of stuff to make computers
out of.
Folks are understandably a bit nervous about
things like totally automated factories and
megacomputers and artificial intelligence
being set up around Titan.
The skeleton crew joke that they are really
just there with self-destruct devices if the
Titan wakes up and starts manufacturing battleships
and talking about exterminating humanity.
They end up referring to it that way too,
not talking about the factories or computer
banks down on Titan doing that but rather
Titan itself.
Most of these folks will stay in orbit around
Titan, check the files coming from Earth to
be run on the giant computers below and send
the results back, or provide hospitality when
a ship shows up bringing in metals or taking
away mining equipment for other moons.
Once the mission arrives at Titan, we are
initially tasked with directing the robots
that set up manufacturing on the moon itself
and that build an orbital ring covered in
huge receivers, sucking in transmissions from
the inner system and sending data back, launching
huge pods of nitrogen and hydrogen off to
Mars and Venus and the various asteroid habitats
trying to build settlements and cities in
space.
After everything is set up, we move to overseeing
day-to-day operations.
Visitors occasionally want to visit Titan
and the skeleton crew always shrug and say
go ahead.
Nobody has made a shuttle-sized reactor so
the shuttle runs on chemical rockets and there’s
no shortage of fuel below.
Once the shuttle lands, a visitor has to wait
till things freeze back over because the shuttle’s
rockets evaporate and melt its landing space.
Visitors are often disappointed as they expect
some sign of all the massive industry below
but there was no real need to do it on the
surface.
You can essentially melt your facilities down
where you need them and a lot of it’s underground
or under the lakes.
Back on Mars, the big argument was over whether
or not to colonize the planet or colonize
the orbital lanes above it and just mine the
planet for resources.
Here, the only signs that civilization has
arrived is the orbital ring above and the
tether rising up to it.
Occasionally you can see some barge carrying
material to one of those automated ports at
the bottoms of the tethers or a submarine
pop up from under the lakes.
It’s a strange place and inhospitable, but
in many ways the more logical outcome of space
colonization.
Humans need all the moons and planets for
their resources, but very few offer much reason
to live there, rather than build your own
habitats to your own specifications in more
hospitable places, and in many ways the vacuum
of space or the inside of a modest asteroid
is more habitable.
Humans could build domes here, and could insulate
them to leak little heat so they didn’t
melt the ground they sat on and sink.
They could light them so they didn’t exist
in the dim twilight of a lunar surface far
from the Sun and deep beneath an atmosphere,
but ultimately, to what end?
You might do a few, surely some folks will
want to visit and others might be employed
there, but while there is immense material
wealth on Titan, you’ve little motivation
to live there to get it if you don’t need
to be there to get it.
Our automation gets better every day, and
it doesn’t really need to be that smart
to just build the same thing over and over
again and suck up atmosphere or scoop out
ice to transport to other worlds.
In an ultimate sense, Titan’s key export
is cold itself, and all the advantages that
offers, but it’s not a nice place to live
and to make it such a place decreases those
advantages.
While the notion of an entire moon the size
of a regular planet being a huge automated
factory and processor is somehow a little
creepy, it’s worth noting that it’s not
any creepier than any other deserted moon
or planet, which is all of them.
Titan really is an invaluable resource to
colonizing the solar system, it can be a key
hub of an interplanetary trade, but that doesn’t
mean many or any people need to live there.
This is a very different way of viewing colonization,
much at odds with the classic image from science
fiction, yet in some ways seems far more realistic.
Just because humans colonize a place, doesn’t
mean a lot of folks need to actually live
there, and just because a lot of folks don’t
live there, doesn’t mean it isn’t colonized.
The skeleton crew occasionally head down to
the surface of Titan, but after the excitement
of the first couple of trips, all of them
prefer to live in the orbital ring rather
than in the hazy twilight on the freezing
surface.
Unlike them, we are perfectly happy and at
home on the surface of Titan and it’s not
because we have been colonizing for decades,
but rather it’s because we’re not a member
of the skeleton crew.
Instead, we were one of a number of people
who uploaded their consciousnesses into an
AI core before leaving Earth and are now housed
in the Titan supercomputer.
As I said earlier, folks were worried about
an AI running amok, and it was felt that using
an AI that was allowed to self-develop was
a bad idea.
Instead, human volunteers were found to cross
the digital divide and become transhuman AIs.
That was seen as a lot safer for all concerned.
It was just the sort of thing that appealed
to us as the next frontier.
An entire industry has subsequently developed
where people, tired of corporeal life or unable
to continue with a corporeal existence, decide
to upload their consciousness into the Titan
mega-computer, so we are now far from alone
and the surface of Titan has become a colony
of a different sort - one that has lots of
humans existing in it but one that, at the
same time, has no flesh-and-blood humans at
all.
Over time, Titan could house more virtual
humans than all the flesh-and-blood humans
in the entire solar system, including colonies
and Earth itself.
Despite its hostile alienness, Titan could
be set to be the biggest home of humanity.
That doesn’t mean you can’t have quite
a large colony of flesh-and-blood people around
gas giants.
Those giant planets and their many moons can
form a surprisingly self-sustainable civilization
like a miniature solar system, one where travel
to and from is quick and easy and communications
are fast enough you can chat with your lunar
neighbors real time.
That’s something we’ll examine more in
the next episode of the series when we look
at colonizing Jupiter, and we’ll look at
colonizing those moons and forming such a
mini-solar system, with an extra focus on
Jupiter’s icy moon Europa and its subterranean
oceans, as well as discussing how we could
colonize a gas giant itself, not just its
moons.
Before we get to that we will take some time
to examine the idea of Interplanetary Trade
in a bit more detail, and even interstellar
trade concepts.
We’ll be looking at a lot of the classic
ideas from science fiction and seeing how
plausible they are, and if not what our alternatives
are.
A pretty crucial part of that is going to
be Hohmann Transfer Orbits, or HTOs, and the
Interplanetary Transport Network, and it’s
vital to trade for places like Titan where
most of exporting is going to be either data
moving at light speed or huge quantities of
raw materials and bulk durable goods moving
slowly from place to place in automated vessels.
Hohmann Transfers are crucial to modern space
travel, and will continue to be even if we
get awesome high-tech engines.
I’ve been meaning to discuss Hohmann transfers
for a long while, but keep flinching back
from it since it would require us to work
through examples to really understand it,
and that’s best done at the individual’s
own pace.
But if you want to know how slingshot maneuvers
and HTOs actually work, and be able to look
at them the way a rocket scientist does, then
I recommend that you check out Brilliant.org,
our newest partner.
They just put out an entire course on the
dynamics of orbits, including a project where
you learn the physics of the HTO as you design
your own mission to Mars, which I found remarkably
straight-forward and intuitive, and I recommend
that you check it out.
I can never overemphasize how handy that math
and science skill-set is to have in your mental
toolbox, because of all the extra layers of
concepts it opens up for you to explore, and
Brilliant is a great place to do that.
They’ve got everything an aspiring space
traveler would need — from Classical Mechanics
to Differential Equations to their new course
on Astronomy — you can dive right in at
whatever your skill level is and explore at
your own pace.
To support the channel and learn more about
Brilliant, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription.
That’s the subscription I’ve been using
to explore concepts like HTO.
A couple weeks back we looked at the notion
of Uplifting, enhancing animal minds to the
human level, and next week we’ll be looking
at some of the way you might be able to do
that or to enhance the human mind to super-intelligence
in Mind Augmentation, a concept explored in
our October Book of the Month, Revelation
Space by Alastair Reynolds.
We’ll be looking at that topic and some
of the themes explored in that novel.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
