This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. 
Get access to my streaming video service,  
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
They say nothing travels faster than light, and 
yet virtually all of the Universe is moving away  
from us faster than light can travel, 
out at the Edge of the Universe.
 
So today we are continuing our faster than light 
series by travelling all the way out to the edge  
of our Universe, and also asking what we mean by 
edge and how many edges we might actually have.  
As a fairly notorious skeptic about us 
ever harnessing faster than light travel,  
beating entropy or making perpetual motion 
machines, I find it a bit ironic how often  
I have to tell folks about the big, glaring 
exceptions to these concepts, and the physical  
laws that make them apparently impossible. 
The First Law of Thermodynamics tells us energy  
is neither created nor destroyed, 
that it merely changes in type,  
with that energy being fundamentally conserved. 
But Energy is not conserved, not in all cases,  
we have known that for over a century now, nearly 
as long as we’ve known the laws of thermodynamics.  
It is implicit in the Big Bang Cosmology 
that our Universe began at some point  
with lower entropy than now and with the 
same energy as now, where none was before. 
 
We can say maybe it came from somewhere else, 
as is sometimes suggested for Dark Energy,  
but that just kicks the can down the road 
and is logically flawed for Thermodynamics.  
Under Thermodynamics, Entropy is only foreordained 
to eternally increase in a system if it is a  
closed system, and the moment you say ‘maybe 
that matter or energy came from somewhere else  
or a prior iteration of the Universe’ you just 
said ‘maybe the system is not closed’, which  
is fine, again it just kicks the can down the 
road to assuming something beyond our Universe,  
and we’re not bothered by kicking cans down 
the road in science so long as the can arrives  
where it is supposed to be. Which for a lot of 
theories is apparently the recycling center.
 
So today I want to discuss why physicists don’t 
seem reluctant to tell folks energy is conserved,  
entropy always increases, and the speed of light 
cannot be exceeded, when in reality energy is  
not conserved, entropy does not always increase, 
and most of the matter in the Universe is moving  
faster than light relative to most observers.
Welcome to Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur,  
where we just go ahead, grab our 
paradoxes by the horns and embrace them.
 
All right, let's start by discussing how 
we currently believe the Universe works  
versus what we thought back when the Laws 
of Thermodynamics were getting set in stone.  
The current interpretation of the Big Bang 
Theory by most folks is that the Universe  
used to be a single point, or erupted from such 
a point, and expanded to its current size and  
continues to expand. This is not quite correct 
but it gets the basic bit right, the Universe  
appears to be expanding in all directions and 
from this we assume it used to be smaller.  
There is no evidence for or against it being 
point-like at the beginning incidentally,  
that’s just a reasonable deduction from the fact 
that it gets smaller and smaller the further back  
in time we look as far back as we can look. 
Folks often wonder what’s outside the Universe  
or what it’s expanding into, and what we 
would find if we flew out past the edge.  
I have heard a lot of people answer back that the 
Universe expands into nothing at all or that the  
Universe has no edge. It’s possible that either 
may actually be the case, but there’s no evidence  
for or against, and there are many other options. 
With no offense to any cosmologists out there,  
there’s obviously been tons of speculation 
and modeling of how our Universe is laid out  
and where it came from, or how it might not 
have needed to come from anywhere at all,  
but while popular media often gushes about this or 
that theory there’s not much supporting them, even  
the nicest of the models, and it's resulted in a 
lot of folks being very assertive about how the  
Universe isn’t expanding into anything at all.
We don’t know that, we just know that it doesn’t  
seem to be expanding into anything else and 
that speaking as though it was an explosion  
widening out implies it's just the matter of 
the Universe expanding into a big empty space.  
That’s not what the Big Bang was, it 
was the expansion of spacetime itself,  
with space actually stretching out, not matter 
expanding into some existing empty space  
from some sort of big explosion. I’ve heard a lot 
of analogies offered, usually involving balloons,  
to illustrate how we are stretching space, 
but the one I’ve come to favor is just to  
imagine you were making a map of some fantasy 
world or dream home or garden or whatever,  
on a computer. If you decide to make it larger 
by changing the map scale, your fantasy home or  
kingdom hasn’t actually expanded into anything.
At the same time though, it did, in that it  
expanded on your harddrive. If the map went from 
1000x1000 pixels and you resized it to 2000x2000,  
the notion of what it expanded into and how it 
expanded gets a bit abstract. That’s the key  
thing about the Universe expanding, we don’t 
know that it isn’t expanding into anything,  
we just know that it is not expanding into 
existing empty space. How it does this and why,  
we do not know: and indeed the computer 
analogy might be right on the nose.
 
Again though, this does not mean it actually 
expanded into nothing, indeed some of the big  
bang variants I’ve heard of include that the 
Universe is vastly older and bigger, and just  
had big bangs erupt in it occasionally. We also 
don’t know that it wasn’t infinite from the moment  
of the Big Bang either. We just know our bit of 
spacetime stretched out from something smaller,  
and we can only see back to when the Universe 
was around 370,000 years old, but it was pretty  
tiny back then. The bit we can see anyway, 
though still bigger than a modern galaxy..
 
The further you look out, the more red-shifted 
the light from those objects is, meaning the  
faster they are traveling away. This is linear 
too, double the distance, double the speed they  
are moving away from us, and you need not factor 
in any Relativistic Lorentz equation for speed.  
It’s not like approaching the light speed limit on 
matter or a ship speeding up, where each new burst  
of energy has less effect on the total speed 
as you approach light speed ever closer. It  
is just the product of new bits of space popping 
up or stretching or whatever the heck it does. 
 
Whatever that heck it is, it appears to 
happen everywhere at roughly the same rate so  
double your distance, double the speed the object 
moves away in totally non-Einsteinian terms. At a  
certain distance it is 60% of light speed, 
at twice that distance it is 120%. Honestly  
I think this confuses a lot of folks because 
they expect it to be more weird to calculate.  
At the 100% marker no photon of light or graviton 
of gravity can leave an object and ever reach us,  
or us them, to be seen or affected, no event 
can be witnessed, and most of the Universe  
we can see now is actually past that point, 
what we call the Cosmological Event Horizon. 
 
This is one edge to our Universe but 
more in a practical and metaphorical way.  
We can’t ever see beyond that or travel beyond it, 
making it a practical edge. If this were the Edge  
of Our Universe, not only would it be constantly 
expanding in distance as the Universe expands and  
ages, but it would also violate conservation of 
Energy in the sense of all that matter, all those  
galaxies near the edge, constantly flying over 
it to reduce the amount of mass and energy in it.  
Of course it might be getting replaced by 
Dark Energy, but the key bit there is that  
we keep the notion of Conservation of Energy by 
simply tacking on that it is locally conserved,  
in any given chunk of it the various interactions 
will all add up to zero except where matter is  
entering or exiting that chunk, or temporarily 
popping in and out from quantum events. 
 
The tricky part is that since space keeps 
expanding, something does not have to be at  
that 100% light speed distance to be invisible to 
us in the future or its local or current present.  
That space is stretching, getting added to, 
or subtracted from, the speed of light coming  
from that distant object and heading our way. 
Determining that distance where an object right  
now can no longer send a signal we would hear, 
even though we can see it currently, albeit in  
its state billions of years ago, is harder 
to calculate but this is that event horizon,  
we just can’t see events going on there 
anymore. And this includes the super majority  
of the Observable Universe, most of which 
we see as it was before Earth even existed.
 
Now inside this bubble entropy is increasing, 
though Dark Energy is a bit hard to factor in too,  
since we know very little about it except that 
it is apparently spread out evenly everywhere,  
and so is probably not doing anything to 
decrease entropy. It’s a big question mark  
there since we know so little, and indeed one 
theory for Dark Energy I have heard is that it  
contributes to why time runs forward. Inside 
the finite observable Universe we can measure,  
and for those elements we can measure 
inside it, the amount of entropy rises,  
and I should note that only in a finite object can 
we really say entropy rises. Start talking about  
something infinite in size or time and things 
get a little more tricky in metaphysical terms.
 
Incidentally the pre-big bang model most 
scientists subscribed to in the 19th century and  
early 20th century when the Laws of Thermodynamics 
were getting locked down was an Infinite Newtonian  
one, space always had been and always would be 
and was infinite in all directions, hence why it  
didn’t collapse on itself from gravity. This does 
not work but it should be noted that in any finite  
system, given long enough, entropy as a concept 
resets. Shuffle a deck of cards enough times and  
the order it was in will repeat since there’s a 
finite number of orders it can be in. Expand this  
notion out to any closed system and you would get 
the same result, and also the same for non-closed  
systems like a region of space bound by neighbors 
that were essentially the same sort of thing,  
like if folks sitting at a table with each 
other, each with their own deck of cards,  
occasionally flicked one to their neighbor 
or grabbed one from their neighbor.  
A reset still occurs eventually for each 
player, but also for that whole table too.
 
I wanted to emphasize that because while the 
edge of our Universe in terms of where we can see  
is a decent enough place to just dub the 
Edge of the Universe, it's not really  
valid across the board. Especially if we’re 
talking about the sum total of all things,  
ironically it does have a certain correctness 
in practical and metaphorical terms since again,  
under current known science it is the sum of 
all things we can ever detect or interact with.
 
Now this raises the notion of other 
types of edges, like up and down,  
in the sense of higher dimensions and such. For 
a given value of higher dimensions. Now we can  
hypothesize a place where there’s a 4th physical 
dimension, at a right angle to up and down,  
left and right, forward and back, but String 
Theory and some other cosmologies suggest we  
need not look to other Universes to find these. 
Without digging into String Theory or any of its  
many derivatives, versions, and cousins, let 
us imagine that back at the Big Bang it was  
not actually point-like but more binary. There 
was a single left position, a single right,  
a single up and down and forward and 
back. Not a dot but a cube 2x2x2,  
where everything in reality could be in 1 of 
8 possible states, and which for some reason  
then expanded to be a gajillion by a gajillion 
by a gajillion. Let us assume it actually had  
more than 3 dimensions though, not all of which 
behave quite the same, which we know to be true  
in the sense that it had a time dimension, or 
maybe gained one from the expansion moment. 
 
Let us assume there were some dimensions that had 
an up or down state that didn’t expand at the Big  
Bang. Conceptually think of a sheet of paper, 
it's not really point-like in terms of depth,  
it has an upside and a downside, and making 
it thicker or thinner doesn’t change that,  
and sheets stacked above or below 
it don’t change that either,  
in this case those sheets 
would be parallel universes.
 
In this example you would have 2 
physical dimensions that were expanded,  
and one that was not, and a direct application 
of 3D physics to such a 2+1 Universe  
would require what we call “Compactification” 
as that one thin dimension is compactified.  
So light particles for instance, which expand 
in our Universe in all three dimensions and  
thus falls off with the inverse square of 
distance would in a compactified paper-thin  
Universe fall off only inversely with distance, 
a tenth the strength at ten times the distance,  
rather than a tenth squared or a hundredth 
the strength as it does in our Universe.
 
Key to String Theory, M-Theory, and some variants 
is that we have 6 of these compactified physical  
dimensions, so would be 3+6 physical universe, 
in the same way our paper was a 2+1. This does  
not necessarily mean a compactified dimension has 
only two states, it can have just one or several  
but less than the others, but often that up and 
down or positive and negative is assumed. 10,  
11, and 26 dimensions are popular suggestions for 
totals rather than our normally assumed 3 physical  
and 1 temporal dimension. It is also often 
assumed these smaller dimensions are ring like,  
a tiny little circle. These compacted dimensions, 
regardless of their specific characteristics,  
are assumed to be much smaller than 
even an atomic nucleus, indeed probably  
smaller to them than they are to our planet.
We may do a video on String Theory someday,  
but not today and we are interested in those extra 
dimensions because much like a sheet of paper,  
and a stack of them, if we can imagine there’s 
some right angle to reality that our Universe  
is just a single layer or sheet in, then it 
implies the possibility if you could pop up  
or down in this hyperspace on to another sheet. 
Hyperspace is a pretty vague term in science  
fiction but in math a hyperspace is one with more 
dimension than our own, same as we would be to  
that sheet of paper. In this context you wouldn’t 
be jumping a spaceship into hyperspace, you would  
be moving from your Universe, or sheet of paper, 
up or down in hyperspace to a neighboring sheet,  
you and that sheet already exist in the same 
hyperspace, same as two pages in a book do. You  
are traveling in Hyperspace but it isn’t meant 
to imply some separate place you jump into,  
as we often see in science fiction
How you would do this I have no clue,  
how does a letter move from one page to the next? 
I suppose if we were stretching the paper analogy  
we might argue that everything in our Universe 
occupies either the up or down side of that sheet,  
and might share its upside with the higher 
levels down side, so if you could flip all your  
states to be only the up or only the down side you 
might be able to get a toe hold on the sheet above  
or below. That’s a conceptual way you might move 
between layers of reality, but keep in mind it is  
assuming these compactified dimensions have up and 
down sibling levels. That’s an assumption not too  
dissimilar to the one about what our Universe 
is expanding into with the normal Big Bang.
 
Nonetheless in terms of hypothetical 
Faster Than Light travel methods  
that is the basis for hyperspace in the 
context of places congruent to each other.  
That sheet of paper is really three dimensional 
and has a time component too so the sheet above  
or below, or at various other right angles since 
we’re not assuming just 4 physical ones either,  
could be Universes where time 
had passed less, younger ones,  
which were smaller but which you could return 
from having covered more distance in our Universe.  
Sort of like jumping backward in time to 
travel in our younger and smaller universe,  
then jump back to now having covered a vast 
distance, but without the Temporal Paradoxes.
 
To play with that notion, a ship jumping 
from our Universe into a congruent younger  
one probably would not want to move to any more 
compact than our own period of Last Scattering,  
the epoch of the Universe about 
370,000 years after the Big Bang  
where it finally widened and cooled enough that 
the Universe was no longer as hot and dense as  
our Sun’s photosphere, which would not seem 
a very safe place to be moving a spaceship.  
But the portion of the Universe we observe 
wasn’t nearly a hundred billion lightyears  
across back then, as it is now, it was more 
like a hundred million light years across,  
so a ship able to leap into such a congruent 
Universe and move around there would be moving  
about 1000 times faster in terms of distance 
covered when it leapt back to our Universe. 
 
That younger Universe at that time would look 
like a Sun’s surface, which in addition to being  
quite hot, would also be providing an awful lot 
of drag forces when you try to move through it,  
but one might imagine it would be a net 
benefit, especially if you had something  
like a working Bussard Ramjet pushing your ship, 
fueling itself off that hot gas all around it.  
Needless to say you could jump back even 
further, to a congruent Universe even younger,  
but you can’t plausibly jump into the Inflationary 
Epoch for instance since not only was the whole  
Universe about a millimeter across then but it 
only lasted for a tiny fraction of a second,  
and would be hotter than inside a star’s 
core, so moving a spaceship there that  
was more than a millimeter across 
would be a dubious concept anyway.
 
For anyone feeling like writing that up as 
their scifi setting’s method of FTL, your speed  
amplification there is basically going with the 
red shift, or z, of that Universe, and presumably  
folks based there shift on how much their ship 
and engines are going to let them glide through  
in terms of denser and hotter younger universes. 
It would raise the question though of not just how  
you were jumping between Universes but also why 
you bothered coming back, since colonizing younger  
Universes has a lot going for it, albeit not ones 
so young and hot that entering them kills you.  
Maybe as a handwave you can only jump 
to expanding but dead Universes. 
 
For those curious, you can calculate 
the CMB temperature of the Universe,  
in terms of red shift or vise-versa, as the 
temperature in Kelvin being 2.73 Kelvin times 1+z.  
So the bathwater epoch about 10-15 million years 
after the big bang where its temperature was  
comparable to a bathtub would be when 
z, red shift, would end at around 100,  
equaling the freezing temperature of water 
in Kelvin of 273, so that the Universe was  
about a hundredth its current width, and decently 
smaller at the warmer early start of that epoch. 
 
I cannot think of any obvious 
reason you would travel through  
older congruent universes or migrate there, 
maybe to hide in a place few would visit. 
 
Anyway that’s one type of Hyperspace and also 
one way to think of the Edge of our Universe,  
or arguably to think of that Hyperspace as 
the true Universe containing many leaves,  
sheets, branes, or whichever 
that were like our Universe.
 
The thing is, this is still talking about 
Universes with the same characteristics  
as our own. Though we should note that this 
is also not a Many Worlds style Multiverse,  
any more than our observable Universe is a Many 
Worlds style of Galaxies. Many Worlds is all of  
the What If timelines version, this is just a 
bunch of different Universes which share the  
same physical laws and have some congruency. 
Time travel incidentally would be an example  
of traveling a hyperspace and the fact that we 
already move through it but at a set rate and  
direction gives some hope that if other dimensions 
exist motion through them might be possible.
 
I should also probably note though that we do not 
travel through time at a set rate universally,  
time really does run slower where 
mass and energy are compacted,  
like on planets or near galactic cores or of 
course near a black hole. That is another Event  
Horizon type of Universe Edge incidentally. 
We use the term event horizon so much these  
days that I think the meaning gets lost. The 
horizon is how far you can see, though if you  
move toward it or away from it you will never have 
the horizon itself actually get closer or further,  
though it would if you went up or down. An event 
horizon is where two objects can have actions  
occur to either one of them which can be witnessed 
or impact the other. As a simple example,  
once you fall through a black hole’s event 
horizon, you can send a message home to your  
planet to ask folks to do things, it’s just 
that they will never get that message. They  
will never observe the event of you sending 
it or in any way be altered by your effort.
 
This is another of those metaphorical edges 
of the Universe which is also arguably literal  
too. We do wonder if once inside a black hole you 
are effectively in a new and different Universe,  
passing through a gateway into one, or maybe even 
creating one. If that’s the case, it’s something  
we can presumably add more to from above, but 
not leave from below, a one way gate you can  
enter but never return through. Variations on this 
concept are a popular one for explaining where the  
Big Bang came from and maybe even where Dark 
Energy comes from but beyond being speculative  
it is also a good chance to explain that 
no, we are not living inside a black hole.
 
That sometimes gets suggested, since the 
radius of a black hole is linear to its mass,  
and when the Universe was younger it certainly 
would have qualified as a black hole by a  
simple application of mass and radius in the 
Schwarzschild Radius of Black Hole Event Horizons,  
but this is a bit meaningless since the usual 
assumption is there isn’t anything outside  
trying to look in at us, and who would not 
be able to see us as a result. If there were,  
presumably stuff on the fringe would be falling 
in, and rather we expand and have stuff fly over  
our cosmological horizon. Also while the interior 
solution for a black hole resembles a closed  
finite Universe, the bulk of current evidence 
says that’s not what we live in. Still it’s a  
decent option that black holes might germinate 
new Universes and we might be in one such. 
 
As I’d mentioned earlier we don’t even know 
that our Big Bang wasn’t infinite to begin with,  
just that the bit we can see is finite 
and was smaller sometime before.  
Nothing says an infinite thing can’t expand. 
So too, as we discussed with multi-dimensions  
where some expanded and others did not, things 
could be infinite in our usual three dimensions,  
but not in other physical dimensions or in 
time, and thus these might have edges. To  
use our planet as an example, its surface has 
no edge, and you can walk around it infinitely,  
but you can arguably go upward to infinity despite 
there being an apparent limit of the sky. 
 
Nor should we assume we only have one temporal 
dimension, or that there aren’t other dimensions  
besides space or time. Same as those living on 
a sheet of paper wouldn’t know what depth is,  
if some other non-spatial or temporal 
dimensions exist but we only get that  
infinitely thin slice of them, either because 
they are super-thin or we only experience a  
thin slice of them in our chunk of reality, 
these can be other edges of the Universe. 
 
So the edge of the Universe might be 
thought of as billions of light years away,  
but in many ways or in many models, it might 
be so near at hand that our best instruments  
are incapable of measuring the tiny distances 
involved, or so far away that we might never  
step beyond it, at least until we discover 
how to walk at right angles to reality.
 
I mentioned earlier that we might do an episode on 
String Theory one day but if you want to find out  
more about it without waiting on me, Curious Minds 
has an excellent 2-episode look at String Theory  
over on Curiositystream. Also, while producing 
the episode, which is essentially our FTL series  
episode on Hyperspace, I felt we didn’t look 
at its implications to the Fermi Paradox,  
the big question of where all the aliens are, and 
it’s also a topic I forgot to cover in our Fermi  
Paradox Multiverse episode a few months back. 
So we’ll take a few minutes to discuss that as  
an extended edition of today’s episode over on 
Nebula. Interesting feedback loop there too,  
I write the episode scripts months in 
advance but make the video a week or two out,  
and there’s almost always some topic I think 
of I wished I’d discussed more in the episode,  
so we do the extended edition, and half the 
time I write those I want to expand them into  
full episode of their own later on. 
If you didn't know, Nebula is our  
streaming service full of awesome content 
from STEM creators like Real Engineering,  
Mustard, Answers with Joe, MKBHD, 
Rene Ritchie, and a bunch of others.  
It’s designed to give creators 
more freedom than other platforms,  
and our episodes of this show appear early and 
ad free on Nebula, and we some have extended  
editions too, as well as some Nebula Exclusives 
like our Coexistence with Aliens Series.
 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself but 
we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational videos, 
to offer Nebula for free as a bonus if you sign  
up for CuriosityStream using the link in our 
episode description. That lets you see content  
like “Curious Minds: String Theory”, and watch 
all the other amazing content on Curiositystream,  
and also all the great content over 
on Nebula from myself and many others.  
And you can get all that for less than $15 by 
using the link in the episode’s description.
 
Incidentally, I mentioned earlier that some 
theories about gravity and time and entropy and  
dark energy try to link them all up to explain 
why time, unlike the 3 physical dimensions,  
seems to have one direction, and there’s 
a great discussion of that by Matt O’Dowd,  
“The Arrow of Time and How to Reverse It” over 
on PBS Spacetime, and he is one of the very few  
folks I know who can explain deeper aspects 
of cosmology in simple and intuitive terms.
 
All right, this was our last episode for the 
month but we’re still not done with August,  
as we have our Monthly Livestream Q&A this Sunday, 
August 29th at 4 pm Eastern Time. Then we’ll leap  
right into September with a look at the Future of 
Thorium on September 2nd and Human-Machine Teaming  
on September 9th, and our mid-month scifi Sunday 
episode on Stealth Spaceships on September 12.  
Then we’ll celebrate the 7th anniversary of 
our original episode on Megastructures with  
a look at Megastructure Death on September 16th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes  
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel, 
and if you’d like to help support future episodes,  
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website, 
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode  
description below, along with all of our various 
social media forums where you can get updates and  
chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
