This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
They say the 3 most important things about
real estate are location, location, location
- and one of the best locations in the future
will be the sky.
So today we return to the Earth 2.0 series
to continue our look at various ways we might
reshape our world if we wished to.
We’ve spent a fair amount of time in this
series discussing places humanity might occupy
like the oceans, deserts, tundra, or underground,
but for the most part we’ve been looking
at what they had to offer in terms of resources
or how we could make them more livable because
we were low on space.
Often we’ve noted that while you’d probably
get a fair number of folks living there, fundamentally
such places don’t have a strong motivation
to live there in and of themselves.
To be sure, some folks would love to visit
the ocean depths or go live on the north pole
or underground, but by and large you wouldn’t
have big queues of people fighting for the
privilege.
When we start looking at living up high though,
our topic for today, it’s a different story.
People like living on the upper floors of
tall buildings or on hills for the view, and
looking at human history, we tend to glorify
our deities by putting them up above, on Olympian
heights, more often than underground.
Looking at that same history, we have to acknowledge
a pragmatism to it as well, building up high
protects you from floods and invasions, and
gives you a longer range of fire and sight.
And to be seen as well, palaces or temples
built on a hill in or near a town are always
in sight and looming, and there’s a reason
water towers tend to be popular targets for
graffiti.
People seem to like building tall, but there’s
pragmatic reasons to do so too.
Of course the big problem is how you get something
up there without it coming back down again,
and it behooves us to remember that every
structure we make has this issue.
Many times when we discuss new tech, especially
things like orbital rings that just hang overhead,
people worry about them crashing down, as
well they should, but folks can sometimes
get stuck in an avalanche of potential disasters
and safeguards and forget that we already
have those issues with modern buildings, which
are very vulnerable to accident or sabotage
themselves.
We want enough safeguards to make the cloud
cities we discuss today as safe or safer than
modern homes, and we’ll discuss those, but
avoid the urge to ask ‘what if someone shot
one down with a missile?’ without first
asking what would happen to your own town
if someone lobbed a missile at it too.
It’s important from the outset though to
note that as we discuss the various ways for
holding these places up in the air, one of
the best contingencies is to use multiple
methods, and as an example, you might just
make a big airship or plane, relying on buoyancy
or lift, or you might make something that
did both, and which had its sewers and water
reserves ready to be dumped at a moment’s
notice to lighten the load.
This would make you very unpopular with whoever
you were above at the time, but is presumably
a better alternative than dropping a city
on them.
We also could incorporate pure safety features
like parachutes, which as we mentioned in
Orbital Rings, can potentially be made very
light using the same ultra-strong materials
so many of these structures would need to
be viable anyway.
Of course living among the clouds doesn’t
necessarily mean you are floating, you might
live on top of mountains, or a very tall skyscraper,
you might be up on stilts, you might be hanging
down from a tether in orbit and you might
simply be in orbit.
Many of these can be mixed and matched to
create hybrids that are even safer, but let’s
review each of these by themselves first,
and we may as well begin with our current
methods.
Prior to modern times if you wanted to be
high up you needed to start by finding someplace
high to build on.
The tallest structure for most of human history
was the Great Pyramid of Giza, and it’s
not very tall or high above sea level.
Needless to say if you just want raw height
above sea level, you go find a place that’s
high and build there.
We’ll mostly bypass the approach of just
building a normal but tall building today,
a superscraper, as we discussed those more
in the Space Tower and Arcology episodes,
and I’d rather save discussion of them for
another day where we can give them their own
whole episode.
But building on a mountain top is a different
approach, and also gives us a good chance
to look at some logistical problems that most
of our other approaches will also face.
Conceptually building a city on a mountain
top is easy enough, you either cut the top
off or hollow the peak out.
Doing the former approach you’d probably
build a good retaining wall around the top
and flatten it out, or do several layers like
this to create a tiered city, possibly all
the way down to the ground.
You’d presumably use a lot of rail lines
to carry freight and people up there, but
you’d probably want to have some fairly
impressive cisterns for water and waste processing
too, because pumping water to the top of a
mountain is very energy expensive.
Of course this all assumes you are getting
your supplies from lower down, but you might
actually be getting them from higher up.
One of the most obvious reasons to build high
is for easier space access, and as the centuries
roll by, it’s quite likely that most people
won’t live down on Earth, and not even necessarily
on other planets.
You could easily have a lot more real estate
in orbit around Earth than down on Earth and
ultimately mountaintops will always hold a
slight edge on places lower down for getting
into space.
We don’t do that now because building facilities
up there is an expensive pain and logistical
nightmare.
One of the things that makes them appealing
as launch sites is because the air is thinner
up there, which is one reason you might opt
to hollow out a mountain peak and live in
there, possibly with large windows to let
the light in and maintain the view.
You can of course also dome the place, but
you don’t necessarily have to, even on top
of Mount Everest the air is breathable, if
barely, and most mountains aren’t nearly
so high.
We also have options that would let you bypass
domes by using cybernetics or genetic engineering,
or even outright supplementation by building
huge air pumps that just ran constantly.
A dome seems preferable, but I could imagine
a spaceport, where everyone is already used
to low pressure and breathing equipment, having
buildings that were kept at overpressure and
higher oxygen rates, and people strapped their
breathing mask on when going out and the parks
and gardens had genetically tweaked plants
that handled the lower pressure better, and
the whole place had a constant outward breeze
as you pumped up warmer, higher-oxygen air
and just let it spill out.
This is a fairly energy-heavy approach even
on more modest mountaintops where the pressure
differential isn’t as high, and would give
you a constant outward wind, but you don’t
actually have to match Earth normal pressure
as we don’t require that, and might use
it as a minor supplement dialed up just enough
to provide a comfortable outward breeze and
some warmth.
More to the point, some of our designs for
keeping places afloat would involve using
huge amounts of energy and air to keep the
thing aloft, in which case this might be a
natural byproduct.
If you have a city simply being held aloft
by lift, like a helicopter, you’d have a
higher pressure underneath.
We think of living on top of whatever is floating,
but you don’t have to, especially if the
thing above is mostly transparent, like a
dome presumably would be.
So as mentioned earlier, for most of our history
if we want to be up high we either had to
find a high place or build a big tower.
As we hit modern times, long before the Wright
Brothers, we found we could float up there
by heating air up, so it was a lower density
and thus would float.
We also later learned that some gases, like
hydrogen and helium, would have this same
effect, what we call a lifting gas.
Now we discussed the physics of this more
in the episode Colonizing Venus, so we’ll
skim that today, but as we’ve mentioned
throughout the series, many of our tricks
for altering our planet might come from those
developed for use on other worlds, and vice-versa,
sometimes an idea we discuss here isn’t
something we’d actually want to do on Earth,
our childhood home with nostalgia value, but
might on other worlds.
Loosely speaking, lifting gases only get you
about a kilogram of weight per cubic meter,
which means you need something the size of
a house to lift even a couple people, and
indeed you have to give over a lot of your
mass to whatever is holding that lifting gas
in, or insulating it so it doesn’t cool.
Fortunately, leakage of gas or heat both relate
to surface area, while buoyancy is all about
volume, so we can benefit from the square-cube
law to make thicker frames that are sturdier,
better insulated, leak less, and take up a
smaller percentage of our mass budget.
And you will need to build big because you
really need a lot of volume to make something
heavy float.
Again your typical cubic meter of a lifting
gas is only giving you about a kilogram of
weight to work with.
If you wanted something like a ton or a thousand
kilograms per square meter of living area,
the big balloon you are living on top or underneath
of needs to have a depth of kilometers.
We shouldn’t discard it just for that though,
because there’s nothing necessarily stopping
us from having this balloon or lifting frame
be transparent, or having it spread out more.
The main objection to a floating city passing
overhead would be it blocking light or falling
on them, if most of it is transparent that
first concern is removed, and a buoyant balloon
doesn’t really crash, especially if it’s
got membranes inside partitioning it so one
compartment blowing doesn’t instantly vent
them all, and such internal membranes don’t
need to be very thick and heavy since they
can leak between each other, you just don’t
want them leaking very fast.
You also don’t actually need soil for plants
to grow, we have both hydroponics and aeroponics,
but even if we did need soil, a lot of plants
only need a few centimeters of it, especially
if they had some web-mesh beneath to attach
roots too.
Picture if you would a very large disc or
hexagonal plate with a large lawn of thin
soil or fake soil for roots to attach to and
get nutrient baths.
The houses and frame don’t actually have
to be very heavy if their bulk is made of
things like graphene packed with aerogel or
some other lightweight, ultra-strong substance.
You could also make that frame out of something
like a layered fabric, which in an emergency
could blow out to create a parachute.
A floating city is cool but a floating house
complete with a yard is pretty neat too, and
we suggest the hexagon shape because as we
mentioned in our Seasteading Episode at the
start of the series, when we were floating
on water not air, you might have cities that
were made of lots of interlocking plates,
each one its own home that can connect or
disconnect to migrate elsewhere or to rearrange
the city’s layout.
Easier here too, since someone near the middle
of such a big sheet of connected floating
habitats can disconnect by floating up or
down rather than needing everyone outside
them to move.
There’s another thing though too, as we
said, all of these would need a lot of depth
to them, and cities don’t have to be flat
and indeed have been moving away from that,
we already employ a lot of skyways to connect
upper floors of buildings to each other so
you don’t have to descend all the way to
the ground level to move around.
Whether we’re talking floating cities or
ones on mountains, you’d expect to see a
lot more emphasis on three-dimensions in layout.
You might build many concentric tiered rings
around a mountain, you might build homes more
like balconies around the edge of a spherical
balloon or lifting frame.
And if you’re assembling a bunch of individual
floating structures into a potentially ever-shifting
cloud city, there’s no particular reason
why they all need to be at the same height
nor do they have to be interlocked requiring
either square or hexagonal layouts.
They might just be tethered together.
Tether travel might be fairly normal too,
since you need a way to reach the ground,
you might want to tether it the ground to
avoid being blown around, and you obviously
aren’t keeping a car up there.
Of course personal vehicles might be planes
or helicopters, not cars, and we do have planes
and very large ones at that.
We run these on fuel and fuel is heavy, but
we can keep a plane aloft indefinitely by
mid-air refueling and multiple engines, so
that one or two can be shut down for maintenance
if need be.
Key thing there, fuel is heavy, but only chemical
fuel is heavy, and these are not rockets,
the propellant pushing the thing can be air
you just grabbed from in front of you.
It’s not really a huge amount of power either,
especially if you don’t have to carry heavy
fuel.
Needless to say if you’ve got compact fusion,
not only do you need very little fuel by weight
but since that fuel is invariably light stuff
like hydrogen, deuterium, tritium, or helium-3,
it also would be a lifting gas.
Indeed hydrogen is quite a good chemical fuel
too, so a civilization that’s energy rich
from fusion but can only make big and heavy
plants on the ground, could mass produce hydrogen
by electrolyzing water to use as a mixture
of fuel and lifting gas for such structures.
You can mix powered flight and buoyant flight,
we just don’t very often, unless you count
the engines on blimps.
How much energy it take to keep something
aloft through lift is rather variable to its
speed and height, but a Boeing 747 burns about
a gallon a second while cruising for instance
while smaller helicopters might use less than
a gallon a minute and only about an order
of magnitude more fuel than a car.
However this is perfect for something like
radioisotope thermal generators whose biggest
issue is that it can’t really throttle its
power production, it produces the same amount
of power constantly and if you just float
around at low speeds all the time, that’s
pretty much what you want.
Many things that wouldn’t work well nowadays
because of the sheer cost aren’t necessarily
bottlenecks in the future, same as aluminum
used to be more expensive than gold but is
now treated as nearly disposable.
An energy rich society can get away with things
we can do now on paper but can’t afford
to do.
A floating house with a big lawn, its own
power plant and water recycling facility,
might just be viewed as only somewhat luxurious
a century or two from now, rather than something
only an eccentric billionaire could contemplate.
Of course on board power or power beamed in
from orbital satellites aren’t the only
way to get power there, and there are other
ways to lift stuff up if you have access to
a lot of energy.
A tether running down to the surface to let
you move back and forth could also be used
to carry electricity, and something running
on solar power and buoyancy might ‘anchor’
at night times or cloudy days by dropping
a big, sturdy power line down to the ground.
Indeed it might tend to have multiple powerlines
constantly shooting down to grapple onto power
junctions and just pull itself around this
way, like a big spider.
Such a line might be thinner than your arm
too, even for very large floating cities,
so from any distance they’d appear invisible
except for navigation hazard lights like tall
towers have, and in the future such things
might tend to be in wavelengths outside the
normal visual range to avoid the visual clutter
and light pollution.
We talked about that in Colonizing Venus too,
big spider cities that march around the sky
by shooting tethers or using thin stilts.
You could potentially make very big thin stilts
too.
Materials like graphene rely on tensile strength,
great for hanging things from or pulling with,
but most buildings rely on compressive strength
and we can turn to active support systems
like those we discussed in Space Towers.
They’re energy hogs, unless you’ve got
warm-temperature superconductors that you
can magnetically shield, but if you have that,
or a huge cheap energy supply, you really
could sit cities massing in the Gigatons on
top of some very thin support pylons.
A single pylon, even if it could hold the
weight, is kinda dangerous, so you must construct
additional pylons for safety, and these could
be used as stilts for walking your city too.
Plenty of other options as well.
We can beam power up to one, or beam it down
from orbit and bounce it back up, and possibly
build the city at the top of a big transparent
dish where any energy lost to atmospheric
absorption or conversion is heating the air
under that dish up and providing lift or even
thrust – you can make a spaceship or airplane
that gets its energy beamed in, and this approach,
relying on size and heat, is less vulnerable
to a break in that beam and would just drift
down if power was cut, like a hot air balloon
and parachute mixture.
Handy too since if that dish is very strong
anything it lands on is basically getting
a lid put over it, not crushed.
We’ve also got the Ionic Wind approach,
like MIT’s new plane that has no moving
parts that can break and is virtually silent,
and could work very well when scaled up in
size for this sort of slow, drifting craft
or building.
Another way to create lift is by induced airflow,
like the Coanda Effect, using jets of air
on a surface to pull more air around a surface
or wing.
Some helicopters use this to counteract rotor
torque instead of a tail rotor, to avoid the
danger of a spinning blade at ground crew
level.
A floating body could create its own lift
this way, moving air around itself, instead
of moving through the air.
We can hang things too, either by a very long
tether up near geosynchronous orbits, an abridged
space elevator basically, or the less cumbersome
and safer approach of the Chandelier City
we discussed in Colonizing Neptune, where
you hang off an orbital ring.
Such things can be built stationary or to
move over a track.
There is a question of why you’d want to
move, regularly but at slow speed, and as
we noted in Seasteading there are a lot of
cases where you might.
A floating stadium or carnival or museum running
up and down a coastline was an example there,
and would work just fine here too.
We also mentioned solar powered ones needing
to tether to the ground at night, and another
approach on motion might be ones that bobbed
up and down over the course of a day, but
it is worth remembering that physical location
is likely to be much less relevant for things
like work and school in the future, even assuming
we don’t eventually get our hovercars that
scifi has been promising us for around a century
now or personal helicopters or quadcopters
in an energy rich civilization.
Speaking of bobbing, I could imagine buoyant
reefs, for growing plants on, that floated
around growing and slowly descended to the
ground when they got too heavy with plants
and crops, which you then harvested and let
drift back up, sort of like a big cloud sheep
you sheared.
I doubt that would be practical but it stills
sounds cool, and when dealing with civilizations
numbering in the billions and very prosperous,
you can support a lot of impractical things
that are neat simply for tourism and prestige.
Floating garden parks drifting around, or
floating restaurants, might be regular features
of bigger cities or something most nations
had several of.
A city is not synonymous with some giant megalopolis
like New York or Tokyo either, definitions
vary, but here in Ohio and most of the Midwestern
US, a city is defined as any incorporated
municipality with more than 5000 people, a
village one of less than 5000 people, and
a town simply anything not incorporated.
My specific township of Geneva actually includes
the village of Geneva on the Lake, where I
live, the City of Geneva, and the unincorporated
spaces between.
Keeping that in mind, a place like New York
City, with millions of people, could easily
have several cloud cities and villages that
were popular for tourism, commerce, or luxurious
private residences.
Same as they might have many coastal artificial
islands or subterranean cities, and might
have large structures drifting in and out,
floating on sea or air.
While we’re going to save a more extensive
discussion of just how far you can go with
hanging things from space or suspending them
by active support for another day, there is
one last structure I want to mention today
that is kind of neat that relates to space
launches.
We discussed the notion of a skyhook or rotovator
back in the Upward bound series, and its uses
can be fairly similar to what we’d use for
hanging towers from orbit.
One version is a long tether whose low end
hangs down into the atmosphere and which can
orbit far slower than normal because of this,
the top is in a far higher and slower orbit
and the net speed gets averaged out.
Those are handy because they allow hypersonic
planes to fly up and attach to them and crawl
up into space, and they can regenerate the
momentum they lost to that plane and the thin
air by electrodynamic tethering.
You can make a floating city this way, though
the tether needs to be very long if you want
it moving slow, and this is one of the ways
we might use magnetics for floating things,
but the more popular version is the rotovator
skyhook, that spins around, so that its tip
descends and is moving even slower while its
other tip is moving faster than normal at
the top, like a big slingshot for spacecraft.
This, along with the notion of floating cities
bobbing up and down, got us thinking about
another approach to moving up and down which
we’ve decided to call a Skywheel.
For conceptual purposes imagine a very big
carousel wheel, possibly with the bottom floating
just over the ground, possibly with the whole
thing floating far up in the sky.
Very stripped down, hardened, and large versions
might be handy for reaching space but a more
modest form might simply connect the ground
to a floating city and be a fun way to reach
them, and the various carousel carts might
be parks or business or homes or on larger
ones, entire neighborhoods.
They needn’t be circular, they could be
elliptical for instance, and they needn’t
be exposed to open air either, and one could
imagine big forms of these which whirled around
from a metropolis’s cloud city neighborhoods
all the way down to its subterranean ones.
Not very practical compared to an elevator
or tram line, but as with a lot of things
we discuss in this series, practicality is
not always what matters most, very prosperous
and high tech societies might tend to make
such things for the same reason they have
parks and gardens.
There are practical uses though, even if we
don’t need them in this case anymore than
a beach resort needs industrial uses.
We mentioned spaceports but airports can be
an option too, a lot of fuel is expended climbing
up to speed and altitude and a floating airport
can help with that, and while a floating aircraft
carrier like the S.H.I.E.L.D.
Helicarrier has a lot of downsides, the greater
speed of an airborne one compared to a naval
ship seriously helps with power projection,
which is one of the major purposes of a carrier
group.
We also have often talked about using orbiting
mirrors and shades to help cool or warm a
planet, and for the most part one floating
high in the sky can achieve the same effect,
somewhat diminished but also easier to build
and maintain.
But you might also use such things, especially
those using ionic propulsion, to help with
something like ozone farming.
Ozone layers are important and can be artificially
generated.
You might also use them for sucking up lighter-than-air
pollutant or greenhouse gases, or distributing
fertilizer or even moisture.
One could imagine genuine cloud cities that
helped with weather control.
It’s hard to say how many of these things
we’ll have in the future or what specific
methods will be employed to keep them aloft,
there’s just too many variables and we might
get better with magnetic levitation for instance
or even invent something like the classic
artificial or anti-gravity fields science
fiction loves so much, but I am confident
one day, and maybe not too far off, we will
at least have some civilization in the skies,
and what a great view they’d have...
So we were discussing how to keep enormous
objects aloft today, by buoyancy, or by lift,
or even by active support and orbital mechanics.
These are all examples of Classical Mechanics,
and when it comes to practical knowledge,
there’s isn’t much more practical than
Classical Mechanics, and few topics that truly
change your way of looking at the world more
than mastering this topic.
To master it though, it takes more than just
hearing the ideas, you have to get in and
practice it, and if you’re looking for a
great way to do that with clear explanations,
visualizations, and interactive quizzes, try
out the Classical Mechanics courses on Brilliant.
We often discuss the Future of Education,
of how important that interactive aspect is,
especially for the Maths and sciences, and
Brilliant incorporates that into every course
they make.
They also include daily problems, which are
an excellent way to get introduced to fun
new topics, which you can take expanded courses
on if one seizes your interest.
If you’d like to learn more about that topic
and others, and do so at your own pace, go
to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur and sign up for
free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription.
Next week we’ll be returning to the Alien
Civilizations series to look at the popular
concept of aliens visiting us regularly and
covertly in Secret Aliens, and we’ll take
a look at a lot of the conspiracy angles and
see what sort of motives aliens might have
for such things.
The week after that, we’ll start March off
by taking a look at how a person might make
their way around a colonized galaxy, in Hitchhiking
the Galaxy.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
