We estimate the sun might have risen over
Earth 1,659,330,750,000 times, and will likely
rise as many times again, or more, before
the Sun consumes our world.
And yet many more worlds will live on after
ours, most not coalescing for trillions of
years after Earth is but a memory.
What will that last planet be like, that last
sunset, and will anyone be left to see it?
To all good things there comes an end, and
as much as we all like sequels to a good story,
there’s no denying that even the most compelling
tales tend to get boring after a time.
Perhaps that’s so for our planet, or the
Universe itself, but after trillions of sunsets,
it does not seem that the tale of Earth has
grown tiresome yet.
Truth be told we don’t know how many times
the Sun will rise and set on this world.
The days used to be faster back in the primordial
era of Earth.
Our orbital dance with our Moon has slowed
in tempo over the eons and will keep doing
so as time goes on.
Stars form and then die, and from their ashes
are new worlds born, around new suns.
To the best of our knowledge this process
began about thirteen and half billions years
ago, roughly thrice Earth’s age, and our
current models suggest that our galaxy will
still have nebulae, pockets of gas dense enough
for stars to form from, for some time between
10-100 trillions years from now.
We also know that the less massive a star
is, the slower it burns its fuel, and the
longer it lives.
We believe the last stars will be examples
of blue dwarfs, stars which aren’t known
to exist anywhere in the Universe yet, but
will emerge from the smaller and longest-lived
red dwarfs as the exhaust their fuel but do
not swell into red giants, instead simply
burning hotter, shifting from a peak in red
and infrared light to the blues and ultraviolets.
Any planet orbiting such a world close enough
to feel its warmth, even if covered in ice,
will have long since stopped having sunrises.
The slow effect of tidal friction would have
brought it to a standstill, always dark on
one side and lit by that blue sun on the other,
all day, for untold eons uniterrupted.
Its oceans slowly evaporate away as those
harsher blues and ultraviolet light strip
the sea and sky into the eternal night above.
On the dark side there are no stars, as all
the other stars have died and even the remaining
handful of blue dwarfs that lived till recently,
scattered across the whole galaxy, were too
dim to have been seen with the naked eye even
if they were as close to this world as Alpha
Centauri is to us.
It’s a world still sheathed in ice on the
dark side, but a little less every year, as
some melts and thaws to the light side.
There may even be some ice left when the star
finally ceases all fusion and begins to cool
and contract into a white dwarf, and ever
dimmer from there.
It’s the story that arose in my mind’s
eye when I first saw the image I ended up
using as the cover art for this episode, a
dim blue star above a desolate world.
And since the end of all things is told in
so many stories, I thought we might discuss
that more today as well as what sort of civilization
might still be around by then and what it
might be like.
There are many ways things might end, and
we’ve discussed the higher tech routes a
lot in our Civilizations at the End of Time
series.
Of refueling stars or disassembling them all
to power artificial engines and black holes.
It is entirely likely the last star will be
in a virtual environment, one of a handful
of remaining virtual realities running on
computers that carry digital copies of a trillion-trillion
ancient minds who have each lived a trillion-trillion
years when at last; the battle with entropy
is deemed unwinnable and they settle out to
drain their energy reserves before seeing
if there is something elsewhere.
Maybe they instead scramble to enter black
holes, hoping they lead to another universe.
Who knows?
Maybe our own Sun is the last, refueled over
and over from immense stockpiles acquired
from around the galaxy by trade or tribute.
We’ll talk about those options in passing
today but they all tend to rely on the notion
of the Universe being a place we truly can
colonize and mega-engineer.
That is a critical concept on this show in
so many of our discussions, and the main reason
we tend to assume there are no extant alien
civilizations inside our galaxy or its neighbors.
We don’t see those civilizations; the galaxy
is devoid of their billion world empire and
absent of those megastructures we would expect
to be everywhere.
So we assume we are the first, if we could
build such things, but if we’re not, maybe
the galactic empire will send a representative
soon to tell us how we need not fear anyone
else, but we can forget about colonizing the
galaxy.
We get our planet, and are entitled to nothing
else and any ship leaving our solar system
will be politely told to turn back, and if
not, it will be politely vaporized.
No great star empires for humanity, nor Dyson
Swarms, just Earth.
And the same for everyone else until the gathering
darkness consumes all but a handful of last
planets, too scattered from each other to
speak, left alone in a galaxy too sparse to
offer any oasis to those who did dare journey
out from their dying world.
Or perhaps space colonization is far harder
than we imagine and yet possible.
It can be done in only those extreme cases
as we sometimes imagined in science fiction
of the mid-20th century.
Earth can muster the energy or resources to
colonize just one or two worlds for us to
travel to when this one is too old.
So, we escape from Earth to another world
in a billion years time and then another and
another.
Perhaps occasionally we spread to two planets,
on a single leap or later muster the effort
for another, or even a few but not all succeed,
and one time none at all succeed.
The effort involved and the long term success
rates are just so low and costly that even
if there were a thousand worlds to bring forth
intelligent life, spread out over the eons
and transplanting themselves into their respective
neighboring systems, sometimes dividing and
sometimes failing all together, so that little
or no contact between those nomadic species
was made.
For my part I don’t think this will be so,
and we had reason for optimism even during
our look at ultra-slow colonization of this
galaxy, what we call Crawlonizing.
Even when we consider colony ships with speeds
anywhere from a hundredth to a mere thousandth
of light speed, it was daunting but seemed
entirely viable.
And yet, with it being over fifty years since
a human set foot on another world, him being
but one of twelve to do so, and that world
merely our own moon, it is not hard to believe
there may be more difficulties than we assume.
There is no official plan and date yet for
a second or more permanent presence on the
Moon, and much of this is because we want
to do it right, without it being unacceptably
expensive or dangerous, and we keep finding
new costs and dangers as we contemplate it.
Until we have a permanent and mostly self-sufficient
outpost on another world, even just our own
Moon, many might think it hubris to just assume
we will conquer all the problems of moving
vast amounts of cargo and people on multi-century
voyages to desolate planets and making them
new paradises for humanity.
And phrased that way, it is certainly daunting
to contemplate.
For my part, I believe it is doable, and that
will surprise no one who has watched much
of this show, but I’m hardly without my
doubts.
What if we are just the latest in a long line
of civilizations to emerge on some planet,
be impressed by our own cleverness, then realize
that journeying to other stars is not something
that can ever be economically viable.
That at best, it’s economically ruinous
to launch any expedition with a decent chance
of success and that most civilizations put
it off for many millennia.
They figure it will get easier with time,
and with more technology and experience.
Some blow themselves up in the process of
getting that technology and experience, some
just keep putting it off and off until there
are whole libraries of well-edited arguments
against doing it that people just re-use whenever
someone suggests it.
Sometimes they start but it fizzles, problems
arise, or funding dries up, and the next time;
people are even more cynical about it.
Sometimes they do launch and the mission is
a failure.
Sometimes a colony arrives, and it’s a big
deal, messages are sent back congratulating
them, messages that arrive many years after
the first landing was made, and no one replies
back.
People keep their fingers crossed that the
comm gear is damaged.
Or maybe the colony just needs some time to
establish itself, and even centuries later
some keep up hope that one day a message will
come back or even that distant descendants
of those colonists who have forgotten all
will reinvent technology and send a message.
Some even wonder if, even if the colony failed,
we might see signs of terraforming bacteria
emitting biosignatures.
Maybe in ten or twenty thousand years there
may be a very basic but established ecology
on that planet for a second, easier attempt.
On many of Earth’s twins, throughout the
billions of stars in this galaxy and the billions
of other galaxies, some blow themselves up
before they make that second attempt, and
some don’t.
Some never make that attempt, even if they
saw that biosignature of basic terrestrial
bacteria and microbes taking root on those
dead soils under alien suns.
But what really is ten or twenty thousand
years against a million?
Or a billion?
Surely eventually someone will succeed and
even if it’s a thousand centuries between
serious attempts, five thousand generations
passing before they psych themselves up to
try again, or delude themselves enough to
think they can succeed, then over a billion
years, that’s ten thousand attempts.
Even if they learn nothing from each try,
and even if each attempt only had a 1% chance
of success, then that’s a hundred times
they should have succeeded.
But maybe the first success turned them off
trying again.
Their cousins on that world always want free
discoveries and technology, never offer any
but basic and mostly useless data on the barren
rock they live on.
They’re hostile eventually too, and make
it very clear that any future colonists sent
to this world, now that they have made it
viable, can expect a cold welcome, or a very,
very hot one, in the form of a surface-to-orbit
nuclear missile.
There will be no shuttling billions of citizens
there, your psychologists suspect they might
alter their own data to eliminate their historical
connection to your homeworld.
So you figure even trying again isn’t going
to save many of your people anyway, a few
thousand on an ark ship, leaving billions
to die when your sun does, and they’ll just
mutate into spiteful children anyway.
Or maybe it gets to be reasonably easy to
send automated probes with samples of microbes
and seeds to other worlds, and you can send
whole swarms of terraforming bacteria and
follow up trees and plants and even insects
but you just can’t make the freezing process
work for bigger lifeforms.
And you don’t trust an AI smart enough to
be able to grow people in an artificial womb
and raise them to adulthood.
Maybe just one civilization manages to engineer
an artificial panspermia scenario, a critter
robust enough to survive on airless death
traps and frozen ice balls that propagate
spores and can survive ten thousand years
of floating in the void between stars to bring
basic microbial life to every system in the
galaxy after a billion years of slowly drifting
around.
Heck, maybe that happened 4 billion years
ago and we’re just the first to rear our
heads.
Or many do and have, or will, and all just
keep poking their heads up into the heavens
and finding that it’s desolate nothingness
devoid of everything but lethal radiation.
Except on those rare occasions you do make
a genuinely successful and independent, self-sufficient
colony, then 10 generations later it grows
up and becomes a belligerent alien empire
next door.
And neither of you ever goes for another round
of colonies, because you figure that at best
they’re an expensive prestige effort and
at worst you’re surrounding yourselves with
possible enemies who aren’t likely to send
you an armada of space freighters with resources
when you get low on them and ask, and are
just as likely to send an armada of warships
to take whatever you have left.
That’s assuming the reckless new colony
of ungrateful mutants doesn’t unleash some
doomsday plague of self-replicating AI on
the Galaxy.
So why on Earth, or anywhere else in the galaxy,
would you fund some colony effort?
There are so many ways that the answer could
turn out to be that space travel is possible,
it just has a very strong tendency not to
result in galaxy-sprawling mega-civilizations.
That we can never replace planets with megastructures
as the mainstay of where people live because
it just takes too much construction and maintenance,
and are harder to defend than we imagined,
and we don’t trust any machine smart enough
to do it in an automated fashion.
And those, even when they do go nuts, just
turn into golems endlessly building some habitat
segment or paperclip warehouse until their
badly-programmed, patchwork, mutated coding
drives them into non-functional states of
psychosis.
It’s so focused on building components for
a Dyson Swarm that it can’t even conceptualize
that it needs to stop as there’s so many
of them that they’re smashing into each
other and setting off debris cascades, with
effects that make Kessler Syndrome seem like
a minor cold.
So, all we, or any alien world, ever see out
in the sky is a whole lot of emptiness and
failure, and at best a slow populating of
planets as they form from monumental colony-building
efforts.
Often planets spend thousands of centuries
populated before dying off, maybe resurging
later.
Maybe the world un-terraforms itself in that
time.
Maybe someone else comes by and seeds it,
or nukes it.
Maybe the emerging colonists end up at war
with their very distant and now primitive
cousins when they arrive on the barely livable
rock their ancestors set off for a thousand
years ago, and find a few tribes of techno-barbarians
are still resident and don’t want to share
what little is left.
Maybe they survive anyway for a few more centuries
till another opportunistic colony ship from
another neighboring system shows up to fight
both them and the original inhabitants.
So, the galaxy does fill up over a billion
years, but it doesn’t sound like the place
we normally envision it as on this show.
Nobody seems like they’re sharing science
and art very freely, or trying for grand feats
of mega-engineering.
Whenever some new system forms, people notice.
It takes tens of millions of years to show
evidence of an emerging worthwhile planet
though, while that new system probably drifts
past thousands of populated systems.
Some of them are going to feel they have good
intercept vectors to send a colony ship and
claim that new world.
Maybe they even do, scrambling to get there
and fight off anyone who arrives a few decades
or centuries later.
Maybe those folks never got something like
an Orion Drive working, but they sure do have
nuclear energy, and they did bring some nukes,
and blowing up a couple isolated colony domes
on something as big as a planet isn’t very
noticeable or dangerous to that world, and
taking over after might be easier.
They might even do that on purpose, figuring
they can salvage and steal from the first
folks, and intentionally time to be second
or third on the scene.
Without stargates, nobody can enforce anything
across all those light years, even if they
do get a message off before you strike.
After all, comm gear is pretty much by definition
pretty easy to spot and target if it’s in
regular use.
This isn’t a Lovecraftian galaxy we’re
painting, yet, anyway, but it sure isn’t
a hospitable place.
Everybody’s got technology, except during
interregnums of collapse, some so intense
they might see that planet’s equivalent
of monkeys or racoons rising a million years
later to open the next chapter.
They’ve got spaceships that can travel to
neighboring worlds, but not for real trade.
There might even be a few inhabited planets
in any given system, and dozens of asteroid
colonies.
After a million years they just don’t feel
like neighboring countries anymore either,
but aliens, for all that you still keep in
touch and maybe occasionally trade technology,
or art, or volleys of missiles.
In this reality, you still can terraform planets
like Venus with giant thin solar shades, but
maybe wars or terrorism make maintaining that
trickier than we would hope.
It takes a powerful economy to make that happen
and a lot of the future developed planet’s
economy to maintain it for eons.
You can still have solar mirrors warming Mars,
big solar powered electromagnets diverting
ionizing particles away from the fragile atmosphere
you created there.
Shielding the Galilean Moons of Jupiter.
Your home world may have some fairly robust
and ancient space habitats orbiting it.
Those may have been built ever more sturdy
and even repopulated when someone dumped a
mega-plague in one or flat out nuked the interior,
leaving a smoldering shell to be repaired
a thousand years later when the orbital debris
from newest epoch of Kessler Syndrome clears
out and makes orbital travel sane again.
When your sun started warming, you did deploy
solar shades over your planet to help protect
it.
Maybe you even managed to avoid ever having
those wrecked so badly every million or so
years that you couldn’t repair them before
they critically damaged the ecosystem.
In the end your world does die though.
Maybe for a billion more years there are remnants
of civilization hanging out in asteroids or
deeper space colonies, and they can bring
those back in to somewhere near the remnant
white dwarf and keep something going for a
while till they can just barely keep up with
routine repairs and some calamity tips them
over.
Maybe an effort is meant to send some ship
with archives or even frozen people or transhumans
or post-biologicals to survive in some neighboring
system where you believe they would be welcomed
as refugees simply because they are few in
number.
A few dozen people is no drain or threat to
a populated solar system after all.
And this cycle continues.
Down the eons, down through the disruption
in a few billion years when Andromeda and
our Galaxy merge and a handful of other noteworthy
neighboring galaxies bound by gravity pile
in to form one final stable super-galaxy.
That should be wrapping up around the time
the last holdouts in the outer solar system
when the Sun reaches its maximum size 7.6
billion years from now and either swallows
or cinders Earth.
At that time, the galactic civilization, such
as it is, might miss Earth, but the production
of stars will not have diminished yet.
We won’t even be 1% of the way through the
period of time at which new stars form at
high-intensity.
The Universe will need to be a thousand times
its current age before it gets hard to find
a new star in your area, though free ones
empty for the taking would still be something
very uncommon.
On average, less than ten new stars appear
in this galaxy every year, most of them near
other new ones, but that generally means for
the sector of ten thousand or so colonized
solar systems nearest some new one, each potentially
interested in trying to claim it, that is
still an event only happening in that sector
a few times every million years.
And often not at all for far longer stretches.
I can easily imagine that being a big enough
deal in a galaxy once fully inhabited that
colonization was guaranteed.
All the more so as time runs on and star formation
dips from maybe a thousand a century, galaxy-wide,
to just a hundred, then as even more eons
go by, a few dozen.
And each one is smaller on average.
That’s okay, the smaller the star, the longer
it lives.
It’s been several trillion years now since
life formed in this galaxy on Earth, that
world is so far gone that even the worlds
which remember it have long since died.
No one cares they’re distantly related,
far further back than even our own kinship
with a mushroom.
Nobody has invented anything new in a hundred
billion years, because if they had been constantly
improving their science and technology they
should have long since figured out vastly
superior energy and travel options.
There are no other galaxies out there anymore
except the ultra-red-shifted ghostly remnants
of the Council of Giants and some of the rest
of the bits of the Virgo Supercluster.
Stars are now winking out faster than they’re
being born, and everyone knows why but maybe
many intentionally forget.
After all, most of what’s left are red dwarfs
destined to live a trillion years or more
themselves, and who really cares about a crisis
even a million years away.
So for the 99.9999% of remaining inhabited
planets not yet in that million year window,
why discuss it?
All the options are already known, nobody
is coming up with any new ones at this point.
Better to accept it, or even erase it, there’s
nothing to be done besides causing existential
upset.
There are no new stars to migrate to either.
Those bare handfuls emerging are thousands
of light years apart and there’s always
someone else closer and willing to duke it
out to claim it.
We expect the last natural star to form around
the year 100 trillion, in a galaxy where stars
are already getting few and dim, so much so
that the night sky will be black to their
eyes.
And again on the worlds, there is an eternal
day side and a night sky on one side, devoid
of any stars, or maybe just one or two, certainly
no constellations.
These are all old worlds too, ones a trillion
years old, if not more.
If your civilization ever forgets what happened,
as it may intentionally do sometimes, trying
to figure out that there is a mostly dead
galaxy outside won’t be easy, and an expanded
and disappeared universe beyond even harder.
Perhaps every million years there’s a resurgence
of discovery, or some refugee spaceship arrives
with its Prophets of Doom.
Odds aren’t bad that space travel has long
since been perfected and the designs and specs
never really lost at the galactic scale.
You couldn’t ever really profitably trade
or colonize or invade but a ship of explorers,
that’s more plausible.
How many worlds out there could still allow
a robust and well-equipped group to land on
a once-inhabited ice ball where the last civilization
there collapsed a hundred thousand years before
and yet had salvageable enough material for
a brief stay and scavenge, maybe one part
archeological dig and one part grave robbing?
I’m not sure what’s powering these ships
now, maybe nobody ever got fusion working
well enough to be better than using solar
power but good enough to run a ship, if not,
there isn’t any uranium left at this point,
or Thorium, not from any supernova, but there
may be places able to still create it.
Just because they never figured out how to
make micro-black holes doesn’t mean they
never learned how to extract power from the
existing ones.
But it’s a dangerous and precise game trying
to keep a long term civilization around a
true black hole without the sorts of mega-engineering
we usually contemplate.
One wrong move can end that place, and leave
it lifeless for a long time before anyone
can resettle and restart the accretion disc
farming needed to keep it running and habitable.
A hundred trillion years is a really long
time for a critical mistake to happen during.
This isn’t yet the end though, realistically,
people will have known if they were near those
two rogue brown giants that with just a bit
of a nudge might run into each other and become
a new dim red dwarf.
There will be that place that did successfully
juggle the delicate process of feeding matter
from one of their remaining gas giants onto
their cooling white dwarf sun at a rate that
produced a steady power supply but not a nova.
Till that ran out, several billion years later,
or they made a mistake and for a million light
years all around the other handful of survivors
wondered what that bright little dot in the
sky was.
It wouldn’t seem a place that hope would
thrive in but let us remember scale.
These projects are almost inconceivable in
some ways because they often leave little
room for mistakes and no room for calamities,
and would require an almost inconceivable
amount of dedication and for billions upon
billions of years.
It seems inconceivable, and yet we must also
be mindful that the growing despair of an
encroaching eternity is really not that quick
to rise.
If science proved tomorrow that Earth would
be wrecked unequivocally in 10,000 years,
longer than our civilization’s entire recorded
history, the reality is that it would actually
be longer than a lot of the population expected.
It’s also just some arbitrary number at
that point, 10,000 or 10 million or 10 billion
really doesn’t mean much to us at a basic
level.
That Last Planet though will arrive, and even
if it started its life when there were still
a few million others left in the galaxy, odds
are if anyone is still running a decently
powerful telescope, the next to last would
have winked out and its absence of light reached
them before they ran out their own clock.
Maybe some refugees arrived and were welcomed,
maybe they just lacked the ability to stop
them landing.
This is not a robust world at this point.
It takes a long time to mine out an entire
planet, but that last star is probably living
several trillion years, so they have had it.
This planet is tidally locked, it's ice on
one side and a borderline desert on the other,
probably covered in greenhouses wherever they
can.
On those glaciers at the twilight edge of
the world are the last lakes, fed by a slow
glacial melt, and those retreat toward the
center of the dayside as time goes on and
the world cools to the point that even the
eternal twilight band is too cold for water
not to freeze.
There will be no retreat underground the way
that we could if our Sun disappeared tomorrow,
because there’s no great reservoir of internal
heat left over in a planet 10 trillion years
old, and there is no vast supply of fissile
materials to run nuclear power plants on.
There’s a good chance this planet was not
the first world colonized in this solar system
either, just the last one barely habitable
as things cool down.
You live on the sun-side, probably now under
domes, to help keep the air and water in.
There’s a desert outside but it’s fake.
It’s the dust blown around the last million
or so years since the surface got more and
more abandoned.
There’s a trillion years of empire buried
under it like geological strata and people
mine it all the time, and the standard for
hitting paydirt keeps going down.
But nobody really knows because it takes so
long for things to wind down.
Even the last time a ship arrived claiming
to be the harbinger of the end of a neighboring
world was a millions years back, and those
who record such things have had to succeed
in doing that through the rise and fall of
thousands of empires, each weaker and frailer
than the last, but seeming epic and mighty
to those of its time.
Where does this end?
That’s hard to say.
Nobody’s expecting a technological miracle
at this point, though they may be keeping
their hopes up for the other kind.
I’m not expecting this to end as a Mad Max
situation, there’s just going to get to
be a day where the increasing effort to keep
those domes intact and minimize their leaking,
while salvaging and making replacements gets
harder and harder, and the dimming sun weaker
and weaker and weaker.
Each dome produces less, takes more effort
to maintain, and a breakdown is going to happen,
parts get harder to scavenge.
At some point this is going to get critical
and whether they dwindle from tens of thousands
to none over one night or ten centuries doesn’t
matter much.
You could have a few folks that kept a personal
dome running even after it was just them by
themselves.
They may be ageless too, one would expect
life extension technology to have long since
been mastered, and the odds favor the last
people would be the old ones who were very
skilled at survival and very practiced at
it.
Someone might survive for thousands of years
as the last person on that world or any other.
They might be determined to keep going on
even alone, till an accident got them, or
one day just give up.
I think life itself would probably go on a
little while longer.
Maybe even millions of years, as there are
critters a lot tougher than humans when it
comes to the arctic tundra but these people
aren’t human anywhere outside our imaginings.
Definitely a depressing end scenario, though
it leaves a lot of room for courage and nobility,
and remember, it was a tale of a trillion
worlds and hundred trillions years.
If humanity ended today, our one planet and
its thousands of years of recorded history
and far more unrecorded, I would still not
say it had existed for no good end, simply
because it came to a true end, that doesn’t
erase what our civilization has done just
because no one is left to remember it.
Over any time line, no matter how long, which
is not infinity, you still have an end come
for you.
We discuss other even greater and longer-lived
civilization scenarios in our civilizations
at the end of time series but those are still
finite for all their immensity, and while
they might add a few more zeroes to the number
counting down on clock, that last zero still
comes.
I don’t believe it made the event that it
was timing worthless just because it is over,
but your mileage may vary.
Do I think this scenario is likely?
On a brighter note, no, again I think the
weight of evidence favors a universe in which
interstellar travel is practical and mega-engineering
is doable.
Also, realistically, I don’t know what civilization
a billion years from now will look like but
I am betting that if it looks human, it’s
mostly a conceit of the oldest surviving post-humans
who might still be kicking around at that
point.
Biological life may be possible for another
100 trillion years, indeed even longer with
various mega-engineering projects for refueling
stars or powering artificial black holes,
but I can’t say I expect it to be the norm
for eons to come or to much resemble us if
it is.
Perhaps in spirits and kinship if not much
in appearance.
Whether it’s a hundred trillions years from
now or 100 quintillion, or we find some get
out of jail free card for beating entropy
or traveling to new universes, it’s a lot
more time than this world of ours has classically.
So if your take away from this episode was
that space colonization serves no point, I
would argue that even in the more pessimistic
scenario we examined today, it absolutely
does, as it’s still the gateway to a trillion
worlds and trillions of years to dwell on
them.
A trillion-trillion lives to lead and stories
to tell, all waiting for us out there in the
galaxy.
That hardly sounds like a dark or pessimistic
future to me.
Some of my favorite episodes to make are ones
like today where we get to use a story to
help us paint a clearer explanation of possible
futures and how science helps us see the universe
around us, and I hope you enjoyed today’s
story, and don’t forget to hit the like
and subscribe buttons if you did.
For my part, I’ve always loved science fiction
as much as science and it’s probably why
I like to use stories to explain concepts.
My favorite way to consume a good book though
is on audio, where a great narrator can make
a great book even better, but even the best
performance of a story or song can be wrecked
by bad audio equipment.
That’s why I love my Raycon Everyday Earbuds.
They offer premium sound quality for half
the price of other premium audio brands, with
noise isolation, seamless bluetooth pairing,
and comfortable fits with gel tips that won’t
fall out of your ear.
Their noise isolation mode lets me use them
even while mowing the lawn, and their awareness
mode lets me keep alert to my surroundings
instead when I need to, and they’re great
earbuds not just for music and stories, but
for phone calls too.
They have an 8 hour battery life along with
a portable charging case, for 32 hours of
total battery life.
And they are durable, I’ve accidentally
left mine in the washing machine before, twice,
and they’re still going, and Raycon has
been a show sponsor for 4 years now, so that’s
durability you can rely on.
Raycon’s are stylish, comfortable, and come
in many colors and patterns, and you can adjust
volume, toggle modes and answer phone calls
with quick taps, and there’s no dangling
cords or stems.
Premium audio, premium comfort, and an affordable
price, and if you don’t like them, Raycon
has a 30-day free return policy.
Treat yourself to crystal clear audio quality
for work and relaxation and feel the difference.
Are you ready to buy something small with
a BIG impact?
Click the link in the description box or go
to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur to get 15% off
your Raycon purchase!
So today we looked at the End of the Universe,
but we’re still just getting going for August,
and this weekend it’s time for our monthly
Scifi Sunday, on Cyborg Armies, what it might
be like to be in one and what the future of
war might look like if they exist.
And next week we’ll be exploring where we
might get water and other volatiles in space,
with Comet Mining.
After that we’ll look at the concept of
Devolution, and ask if fictional mutant degenerates
like Morlocks and C.H.U.D.s might be possible
in our future.
Then we’ll close out the month with our
Livestream Q&A, Sunday August 27th at 4pm
Eastern Time, and then Thursday, August 31st,
with a look at near term space colonization.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
