In the future we may be able to claim new worlds 
and forge them into paradises, but should we?
The survey ship Hydra and its pilot and captain, 
Brant and Jacobs, landed on HD 18445 A’s third  
planet almost a month ahead of schedule, and 
their first month there proved very exciting  
indeed. It was a mineral rich world with 
geology suggesting very stable solar output  
and geological cycles. The planet gave every sign 
of being one of those planets surveyors dream of,  
the kind with everything colonists could want 
in terms of an easy target for terraforming.  
The day was even 24 hours and 12 minutes long. 
Their commission for surveying this planet was  
going to be huge, because even a tiny percentage 
of a planet is still incomprehensible wealth. 
There was just one minor anomaly in an area where 
there were some lakes heavy on geysers and rich  
in phosphorus, way up in the frozen tundra. When 
they got there they realized why the rest of the  
planet was so dead, life if it had originated here 
couldn’t have spread out to icy planes beyond. But  
as they went toward the shore of the nearest 
lake to take some samples, a small many-legged  
centipede-like creature came out on the shore. 
Brant and Jacobs stared at each other in chagrin  
through their helmets, then slowly, deliberately, 
Jacobs crushed the alien critter under his boot. 
“It will have to go,” Captain Jacobs said.
Looking at the steaming primordial lakes  
on the icy tundra and thinking about the 
two centuries on ice it had taken them to  
reach this planet, their big score, Brant 
nodded. It was a pity, but life is rough,  
and there were so many handy metal rich asteroids 
in this system, another plus for colonists, and it  
wouldn’t be so strange for one to happen to fall 
on this spot. On the off chance anything survived,  
the scientist would have fun trying to figure 
out how the impact caused life to form there.  
Brant would run the calculations for an asteroid 
trajectory bump when they got back into orbit. 
Welcome to another episode of Science & Futurism 
with Isaac Arthur, and I am your aforementioned  
host, Isaac Arthur, for a little under ten years 
now and just starting my second year as President  
of the National Space Society, so I’m guessing 
there’s not a lot of suspense on this episode as  
to whether or not I tend to think terraforming 
planets is a reasonably ethical thing to do. 
That said, it is not cut and dry across the board, 
and so today we will examine not just why many  
feel terraforming is generally a good idea but 
also the concerns a lot of us have about it too,  
and some of the less well-know problems 
we could have confronting us while we go  
around colonizing the galaxy.
And we may as well start with  
the word ‘colonizing’, which often has some bad 
connotations historically and is the main root of  
the concern with terraforming. It gives us our two 
main cases as well as our first in-between cases  
for contemplation. I have encountered some folks 
who genuinely think it is wrong for us to seek  
to take an entirely lifeless rock of a planet or 
moon and try to turn it into a new settlement for  
humanity or alter its non-existent ecosystem. So 
too, I have met folks who didn’t think there’d be  
anything wrong with showing up on some planet 
that already had intelligent aliens on it and  
absorbing them into our civilization, or even 
sometimes killing them off for fear there’d  
be no room for both of us in the galaxy.
Neither viewpoint seems to be anything  
approaching common, let alone a majority view, 
and in general I assume anyone taking either  
perspective online usually tends to have a 
hint of someone not being serious or acting  
the troll. Nonetheless I’m pretty content 
to bypass any serious contemplation that  
it’s ethically wrong for us to tamper with the 
pristine surface of the Moon, or alternatively,  
that it is okay to just obliterate any native 
civilization we encounter out among the stars. 
There’s more gray area once we get into 
pre-existing ecologies and this mostly because  
if you’ve found ten thousand planets covered 
in various primitive algae and nothing else,  
you’ve probably got doubts about the scientific & 
economic value of further study. As we discussed  
in our recent episode on Quarantining 
Planets, the ability to keep quarantine  
on such a world for a couple billion years till 
intelligence evolves is pretty improbable too. 
But practical doesn’t mean ethical and it is 
our good first step, to ask when it is okay  
to terraform a planet with pre-existing life 
on it and if it matters how advanced it is,  
or if it should matter if we thought it likely 
to have advanced life in the future or not. 
Twinned with that is the question of 
how sure we need to be that a planet  
is lifeless before it is okay to terraform it.
But these are the beginning questions we need  
to ponder because while we might be willing 
to wave away whether it can be unethical to  
terraform a planet with no life on it, 
we also have to ask ourselves if it's  
okay to do it once we’ve started settling it.
Short form, if my great-grandfather founded a  
now robust settlement in some crater on Mars, 
and folks start talking about dumping an  
ocean worth of water on the Red Planet, that 
settlement is going to get flooded. So too,  
if I’ve built a beautifully floating homestead 
among the clouds of Venus and folks decide  
to start deploying a L1 solar shade to cool 
the planet and remove that thick atmosphere,  
like we discussed in Winter on Venus, do I have 
any say or is this just a matter of majority rule?  
And the current majority or the folks a thousand 
years ago who founded the first settlements on  
the planet dreaming it would be another Earth, 
and which fifty generations have worked toward. 
Maybe the planet got to half normal Earth 
air pressure and composition and a lot of  
folks accepted genetic engineering or bionics to 
let them breathe that and now no longer want the  
world to get any more Earth-like than it is.
I am guessing if you’re watching this episode,  
you already know what Terraforming is but the 
key word there is Earth-like. It is the process,  
or processes, used to make some planet more like 
Earth and has two noteworthy variants. The first  
is para-terraforming, which has a hazy border 
with normal terraforming but tends to imply  
more artificial constructs that need maintenance, 
like Domes covering the Martian surface to keep  
air and heat in, or some collection of space 
stations at the L1 Lagrange Point to alter the  
amount and type of light coming in or deflect 
solar wind in place of a magnetosphere. The  
other option is bioforming, which is where 
we alter people and organisms to fit a new  
planet rather than the other way around. 
The extreme version would be you growing  
gills and becoming a merman on an ocean planet.
We have tons of episodes getting into the many  
different methods and processes for all three, 
terraforming, para-terraforming, and bioforming.  
But the recurring point I tend to make on the 
matter isn’t which is better but rather that  
in most cases you will always end up using a bit 
of all three, and moreover, the particular ratio  
of them and which varieties of them that you use 
will likely change with time as your colony grows. 
What’s more, it isn’t likely that people will 
have uniform opinions on that matter in different  
regions and periods. Planets are huge and we have 
no reason to assume anything like homogeneity of  
people and purpose on them, anymore than Earth 
has. Everybody is going to have different goals  
and priorities that also shift over time. So too, 
a given culture might be way more okay with one  
type of change than another. We could imagine 
a civilization whose mythology leaned heavy  
on some villainous and ugly sea monster, 
and those people having a very different  
attitude on becoming mermen and mermaids than some 
culture where the Little Mermaid was a classic,  
and that same group of folks might get very 
different attitudes about having a modification  
to a thicker skin that could handle radiation 
and low pressure better, or might be more okay  
with something soft and glossy but reject 
something more akin in texture to tree bark. 
Terraforming is likely to be the same in 
many cases because there’s always going  
to be some disagreement about what’s okay and 
what isn’t, and also what adds unique character  
to their world. As an example, I think most 
of us would consider two moons in the sky a  
very neat feature for a new planet to have and 
would not expect anyone to suggest they need to  
take one of those moons apart and adjust the 
other to a lunar month of 29 and half days. 
For all we know it might be very hard for the 
terrestrial ecosystem to adapt to a 22-hour day  
or 26-day lunar month or a second set of tides. 
Both the month and the tides are very baked into  
our biology and you might see an argument 
over whether or not they should adjust that  
moon and remove the other or genetically tweak 
a million species to function on a new month,  
or new day length of 31 hours or 19. And if 
one of your settlements already made that  
modification they are likely to be very resistant 
to paying taxes to fund that massive terraforming  
effort to change day length or year length.
Like the folks living in the deep crater  
being told you’d like to put an ocean there, 
they are likely to feel a bit unenthusiastic  
about the matter. And maybe they are only 10% 
of the population but maybe that’s not a “51%  
voted for it, and so it’s okay” type of issue.
I should also note that terraforming is very  
destructive. I think folks imagine some rocky 
desert terrain suddenly sprouting grass and trees.  
However, there’s no roots preventing erosion and 
mudslides and a planet you are terraforming is  
likely to look at least as overhauled as 
if some glaciers passed through and more  
like if someone decided to redecorate the area 
with jackhammers and h-bombs. Indeed, as we’ve  
discussed before, nuking a planet is one of the 
realistic strategies for expedited terraforming. 
If you settled the planet and decided 
to initiate a big terraforming project,  
you might seriously consider evacuating it while 
you did the bigger lifting, like making it rain  
non-stop for several centuries to put an ocean on 
there while you dropped comets on it. What do we  
do about the folks who refuse to move when we tell 
them their hab-dome is on a stretch of landscape  
likely to slide down in a muddy avalanche once 
we get to terraforming? What if that crater-hab  
we mentioned simply refuses? Can we make them 
move? Can we make them reinforce the dome to  
handle being under a kilometer of water?
And of course we can’t say, this may be  
an episode on the ethics of terraforming but 
I have no special moral authority or insight  
as to when its okay to make someone move or 
modify their hab dome for the nominal greater  
good of turning that planet blue and green, 
anymore than I can say it is or isn’t right  
to find a planet with some primordial goo on 
it that hasn’t even gone multicellular yet and  
terraform the planet anyway. Neither really 
strikes me as an easy black and white issue  
the way choosing to settle an entirely lifeless 
rock would be or, alternatively, murdering off  
some indigenous alien civilization whose only 
crime was to be on some rock we wanted for our  
own. We could discuss either for strictly academic 
purposes, and feel free to in the comments,  
there’s lots of good sci-fi discussing unexpected 
angles on that, but that’s more of an alien  
civilizations topic than a terraforming topic.
For the very simple algae life case, many would  
say that once we’ve gotten comprehensive samples 
from all over that planet, we could keep a digital  
archive of the genetics – we can print DNA and 
probably any alien equivalent – and then just  
keep some preserves. As I’ve noted in some other 
episodes though, you’re often safer building your  
nature preserves off planet in nicely isolated 
space habitats, as they tend to be easier to keep  
invasive species, poachers, and other unexpected 
problems out of. But the flipside of that, and to  
terraforming, is not to bother turning planets 
into Earth-like ones but instead to build vast  
artificial megastructures we can build ecologies 
and civilizations inside, by default rotating  
cylinder habitats like the O’Neill Cylinder.
These allow way more living space than planets do,  
kilogram for kilogram, and on an order of around 
a million to one. You can deconstruct Earth to  
make rotating habitats and you’d have many 
quadrillions of them with a combined living  
area of millions of continents, and thousands 
of those could be devoted to various indigenous  
or terrestrial nature preserves without making a 
dent in that economy and vastly larger in scope  
than that planet you came to. More importantly, 
you do not need to disassemble that planet or  
life-bearing Moon. You can use local asteroids 
or truly dead worlds, or even suck heavy matter  
right out of stars, which, depending on its 
metallicity, probably has hundreds to thousands  
of planets worth of materials inside it.
Incidentally we would not usually refer to  
space habitats as examples of para-terraforming 
but mostly because the entire topic focuses on  
making existing rocks livable, conceptually they 
overlap with para-terraforming or could be their  
own distinct category. The original use of the 
word terraforming from Jack Williamson’s short  
story “Collision Orbit” features a modest asteroid 
with a gravity generator on it to hold air in  
and let people walk around its small surface, and 
that’s the first example of terraforming as again,  
the term was coined in that story and about that 
rock. Thus that example presumably must count as  
terraforming rather than para-terraforming.
Hence, I personally would consider cramming a  
rotating habitat into an asteroid as an example 
of para-terraforming, but we’d loosely draw the  
line between it and terraforming in that it 
takes regular intelligent maintenance to keep  
the environment Earth-like. Our environment 
takes maintenance too, but it is principally  
provided by non-intelligent actors evolved on the 
planet. Everything from geological cycles to food  
chains is involved in this planet’s state – which 
changes too – but requires no active human effort,  
or at least didn’t used to. I would argue 
Earth is no longer a natural ecosystem in  
its current state and that if we disappeared 
tomorrow, its eventual reversion to a natural  
state would be very unlike where it was when 
humanity was less impactful. We discussed that  
more in our episode “Earth After Humanity”.
And we need to understand that a planet left  
to itself might un-terraform itself. In the 
case of para-terraforming, probably faster,  
but I could imagine us constructing diamond hard 
domes that were still around and letting sunlight  
in for a million years and which covered all 
the land and even sea, which might only be  
smaller lakes and ponds anyway. At some point the 
natural effects of asteroids crashing or volcanoes  
erupting ought to start breaking some domes and 
letting others be covered by the dust outside  
them blown around by the air leaking out of the 
domes and covering them over. Of course, you might  
engineer some organisms, or self-replicating 
machines, whose job was to clean them off. 
This contributes to what probably is the biggest 
contention on preserving native ecologies. Nature  
isn’t static and preserving it over millions of 
years is not natural. If that’s what you’re doing,  
that might be fine, but you are effectively 
intervening heavily to keep a planetary ecology  
static like that. So too, if you’re just trying to 
leave it alone, as an experiment, you probably run  
out of useful new knowledge to gather at some 
point, especially as it’s a continuous effort  
that’s expensive in time and resources, 
and lost opportunity cost. Alternatively,  
if you’re leaving it alone because you don’t want 
to interfere in nature, many folks would argue  
you are taking the random processes of Darwinian 
Evolution and putting them on a pedestal. Which  
many folks do nowadays and which they may do 
in the future, but it is easy to see conflict  
arising between factions in a system over that.
On the one hand we would figure that with so  
much construction material available in a solar 
system, then that native world could be spared,  
and certainly early on while it also needs 
careful study to unlock its secrets. Study  
could also be done in additional space habitats 
you built to simulate that native world too,  
and doubtless you would conduct exactly those 
experiments to see what the interactions were  
between that life and terrestrial organisms. 
There’s no shortage of raw materials early on. 
However, I think after many thousands of years 
of harvesting other raw materials and even your  
sun itself, people are likely to feel that the 
planet could be used more effectively. I think  
a lot of us could see saying “Look, we’ve learned 
all we can about these alien microorganisms this  
last ten thousand years and we have more and more 
infractions of people getting in there, we even  
had to nuke one spot to eliminate contamination, 
this is a losing game, costing more every day,  
lets terraform that planet already”, and they 
might start cutting down on quarantine funding  
and enforcement to make it easier for an accident 
to occur and slip in some terrestrial biology. 
I think you’ll have these sorts of disagreements 
at every level of terraforming too,  
transforming it into the main political football 
of most new worlds, and systems in general, for  
at least many centuries if not millennia. Let’s 
consider another scenario as food for thought. 
On the planet of Dusk the sun never rises 
or sets except in a thin band of twilight.  
It orbits a red dwarf once a month, which it is 
tidally locked to, and on which the desert side  
is forever baked by that enormous but dim star 
overhead, while on the back it is eternal night. 
As usual for settlement, scientific teams landed 
first to explore and survey while the orbital  
infrastructure was prepared. It’s a big planet 
with 20% more surface area than Earth, though  
only a fractionally higher surface gravity, and 
possesses a weak atmosphere about 50% of Earth’s  
own, with nitrogen abundant, carbon dioxide 
common, and traces amounts of methane and ammonia. 
It was a few years into study before they found 
any lifeforms and this was after the survey crews  
had begun getting lazy about containment, 
and it was just bacteria anyway. Thus,  
they never had to consider whether to establish 
themselves there. Indeed, many people think one  
or more of the survey crews intentionally snuck 
in photosynthetic bacteria to ensure there's no  
way the planet wouldn’t get contaminated. It is, 
after all, easy to sterilize the outside of suits  
and they have all sorts of leak monitors.
But Dusk surprised them twice more. First  
it turned out there was a lot of life on the 
dark side, far under the ice in many thermally  
heated and volcanically fueled sub-surface 
lakes, and multicellular life at that,  
including something akin to a small proto-fish and 
proto-crab. And second, that the local organisms  
seemed to have a knack for genetic theft as 
photosynthetic native organisms began popping up  
on the twilight belt. Some also suspect that other 
scientists might have engineered these to ensure  
it would be more likely that terraforming would 
proceed with more respect to the native life. 
The terraforming plan was to crunch some 
asteroids up to make some mirrors and lenses,  
and to have many statites at the L1 that would 
rotate over a 24-hour period to provide a night  
cycle, while mirrors around the solar L2 behind 
the planet would bounce light back down on the  
world’s dark side to give it a day cycle.
We now have 4 major factions in play. The  
Nightbringers, who feel the planet should still 
have the solar shades deployed to L1 to give  
the uninhabited dayside a night and some cooler 
temperatures. Then we have Daybringers, who still  
want that L2 shade as well, even though it will 
melt the ice above all those subsurface dark side  
lakes. We also have the Retreat, who feel Dusk 
should be abandoned entirely and that war archives  
should be opened to let them prepare nanotech and 
bioweapons targeted to kill off any terrestrial  
life on the planet before self-destructing. Life 
will be lived in space, by humans, and the planet  
left to the native ecology. Finally, we have the 
Banders, who want to limit human habitation to  
the Twilight band for now and aim for an eventual 
synthetically mixed Terran and Dusk-ian ecology. 
None of them fall into a category of 
wiping out the native Dusk life entirely,  
all 4 factions agree that samples of native 
life must be vigorously sought out and have  
their genetics digitally stored and nature 
preserves created on-planet and in orbit as  
more rotating habitats get built. Even at the 
most optimistic estimates, organisms on Dusk  
are not terribly varied or complex by Earth 
standards so it won’t take much to store it. 
So which camp do you think is most 
right? Or maybe least wrong? And  
who if anyone are the villains of the piece, 
the Daybringers, Nightbringers, the Retreat,  
or the Banders? Are they missing something?
So, what are our major conundrums for  
contemplation? Well, probably more than we 
could list off but here are the major ones  
I hear come up, and of course your mileage may 
vary, and some were addressed during the episode,  
though you be the judge of if it 
was addressed satisfactorily or not.
Environmental Impact and Responsibility: The 
process of terraforming could have irreversible  
impacts on the existing environment of 
a planet, again even mild terraforming  
is likely to rearrange the landscape, not 
simply spray paint it blue and green. It  
will also have phases of growing complexity 
that will move it more Earth-like and might  
entail intentional mass extinctions as 
we advance that complexity. This raises  
questions about our responsibility 
towards extraterrestrial ecosystems,  
even if they are initially barren 
or uninhabitable by Earth standards. 
Interference with Potential Life Forms: 
There's a possibility, however remote,  
of existing or dormant life forms on other 
planets. Planets are huge and we have no  
idea what nooks and crevices they might be able to 
hide life in, certainly Earth has offered us many  
surprising examples already. Terraforming could 
disrupt or destroy these life forms. The ethical  
implications of potentially harming alien life 
through accident or negligence are significant. 
Resource Exploitation and Sustainability: 
Terraforming would likely require massive  
amounts of resources, especially for cases 
such as comet bombardment to create oceans.  
This raises concerns about sustainability and the 
ethics of depleting a star system’s resources for  
such a project, particularly in contrast 
to artificial space habitats like O’Neill  
Cylinders or even post-biological 
civilizations running on starlight. 
Human Safety and Health: The health and safety of 
humans involved in terraforming projects are also  
ethical concerns. This includes both the pioneers 
who initiated the process and potential future  
inhabitants. Terraforming might be physically 
dangerous, but it could also be ruinously  
stressful as it’s a project of centuries at a 
minimum. We may be in awe of the efforts needed  
to build mighty structures like the pyramids or 
the cathedrals which often took many lifetimes,  
but we should not ignore the human cost those 
construction projects likely had on many folks  
who paid for them and had them looming over their 
lives, sometimes literally. Terraforming might be  
orders of magnitude more intense and protracted.
Cultural and Philosophical Perspectives:  
Different cultures and philosophical perspectives 
may view the idea of terraforming in varying ways,  
like our example with mermen and mermaids 
from earlier. No matter what happens,  
you are building a new culture on a planet, 
indeed likely several, who will be shaped  
by that terraforming effort and who will likely 
have their main political and diplomatic tension  
points be about it too. Ruinous wars might be 
fought over how to bring life to a world, and  
a side opposed to further terraforming might be 
willing to unleash terrifying weapons that would  
re-sterilize a planet. In the grander realm, back 
here on Earth where the vast colonial ark ships  
will be built and launched from, some may see it 
as a human overreach or interference with nature  
on a cosmic scale, while others may view it as a 
necessary step for human survival and expansion. 
And in the long term, these are projects 
that require people to stick to the plan  
for many generations and it is very hard to 
see how you would maintain a clear consensus.  
Even in a society that’s cracked radical life 
extension, and thus might have its founding  
members still alive to see terraforming complete 
a hundred centuries later, will still have tons  
of new people being born and other people 
changing their minds. Who has authority on  
that planet to make these decisions and make them 
continue if public opinion shifts occasionally? 
In the end, terraforming involves complex ethical 
considerations across every aspect of human life,  
not to mention altering human life through 
bioforming, but spreads beyond that to every other  
organism we’ve encountered, terrestrial or alien.
For my part, I’m strongly in favor of terraforming  
but not recklessly. I don’t expect to find 
much intelligent life out there in the galaxy  
and I don’t expect simple single-celled 
life to be particularly common either,  
so I suspect finding a planet with it will be such 
a wonderful novelty and scientific gold mine that  
people won’t be anxious to change that planet. Nor 
are colonists arriving in a new system out of luck  
if a planet turns out to have some simple life on 
it that probes missed. I favor space habitats for  
human expansion and regard the terraforming of an 
entire planet as a quest of thousands of years and  
a commitment to maintenance of it for millions of 
years to come. There’s no need to rush into it. 
But ultimately, I feel humanity should 
embrace grand and noble purposes,  
and it’s hard to think of many grander and nobler 
purposes than bringing life to a once dead world.
Our conversation today was on ethics involving 
the advancement and usage of technology,  
and if you ever need any proof of how important 
that is to discuss in advance, the internet and  
artificial intelligence both stand as recent and 
glaring examples of how important that can be.  
We are bombarded constantly by people trying 
to steal and sell our data and now Artificial  
Intelligence is involved in the game, harvesting 
your information and putting it out there for  
others to exploit. Just between 2021 and 2022 the 
number of victims of identity theft rose 41.5%. 
The good news is that you have the right to 
protect your privacy and request that data  
brokers delete the information they hold 
about you. The bad news is that it would  
take you years to do it manually, just once. 
And you’d need to repeat the process every  
few months as data brokers continue collecting 
your data and creating new records, using AI. 
But two can play that game, and that’s where 
our sponsor, Incogni, comes in. They deploy  
AI to focus on finding your information online 
and send automated takedown requests for you. 
All you have to do is sign up, give them 
permission to act on your behalf to delete data,  
then they go to work, and your data goes away. 
You can check up on the progress and see who had  
your data and how detailed and risky it 
was considered. Incogni makes these data  
harvesters take your info down, and they keep 
doing it too, making sure that it stays down. 
Incogni is available risk free for 
30 days, so you can try it out,  
and get a full refund if you aren’t happy 
with the service. Use code IsaacArthur at  
the link in the episode description to get an 
exclusive 60% off an annual Incogni plan. Go to  
https://incogni.com/isaacarthur 
and take your data back.
So we were talking about terraforming today and 
many feel that the first planet we’ll try that on  
is Mars, and next week we’ll travel to Mars, not 
to look at the Red Planet, but instead at its two  
tiny moons, Phobos and Deimos, and ask why and 
how we could settle them. Then it will be time  
for our sci-fi sunday episode, Automated Justice, 
for a 50-minute deep dive on the role of AI in our  
courts and justice system. Then we’ll return to 
the Fermi paradox on March 21st to discuss that  
evolutionary jump from the simple to complex, and 
if that might be the solution to the big question  
of where all the alien life is. Then we’ll 
finish our discussion of last month on black  
holes by deep diving kugelblitz black holes 
and using them for power generation, before  
finishing out the month, with a bonus scifi sunday 
episode on the 31st, Multi-Planetary empires. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you’d like to donate or help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s 
episodes early and ad free on our streaming  
service, Nebula, along with hours of bonus content 
like Crystal Aliens, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
