For as long as we have had 
history and likely before,  
people have contemplated a life after 
this one, but might we one day create  
artificial afterlives? And if so, 
will we create heavens or hells?
So in our recent episodes Omega Point 
Cosmology, Hacking the Simulation,  
and Higher Dimensional Aliens we dallied with 
some concepts like reanimating the ancient dead,  
us being in a simulation and possibly 
as preparation or reward, and how  
simulation rules might be different in a higher 
dimension, plane of existence, or reality layer. 
So I wondered if we might try an 
episode on Artificial Afterlives,  
and it did well on an episode poll of our 
audience, so I figured we would give it a try.  
Before we begin, let me say not what this 
episode is, but rather what it is not. 
First it isn’t about trying to prove, disprove, or 
replace an actual afterlife or praise or ridicule  
any specific version of those. We are discussing 
ones we might make, in the future, though we will  
also contemplate scenarios like someone having 
already made one in the past that applies to us. 
Second, a lot of our focus today is not 
as much on how to make these things,  
but more it is about how we would employ them 
and what the effect on civilization would be. 
Third, the episode is not strictly about digital 
worlds and virtual realities, and while that  
will be a major focus and tool for explaining 
concepts, we are interested in a lot more options  
than that one, including flat out sculpting 
sub-universes or demi-planes with different rules. 
I wanted those disclaimers up front to clarify 
this isn’t just an episode on the ways you  
could make very nice virtual realities. And 
such a virtual reality under known physics  
would not seem a viable replacement for 
a true eternal afterlife anyway, as your  
computer is presumably going to eventually 
run out of power, not to mention memory. 
Or maybe not, again we will be contemplating a lot 
of scenarios today and us getting our hands on an  
infinite power supply or a practical cheat for 
that should be discussed. So too should be the  
question of if an eternal, as in truly infinite, 
afterlife would be meaningful for a human anyway,  
requiring effectively infinite memory or data 
storage. After all, over an infinite timeline,  
similar events happen a lot, and eventually 
even perfectly identical events will repeat.  
One can make an argument that only access 
to infinite power, resources, and intellect,  
along with the ability to do the impossible or 
paradoxical – in other words, God with a capital  
G – can make a perfect and eternal afterlife.
And this brings us to a good starting point  
because we need to start by asking what qualifies 
as an afterlife and what qualifies as a successful  
one. That latter is arguably impossible to 
answer since it’s rather subjective. If someone  
is building afterlives to throw vicious murderers 
into, then a success might be crafting something  
that’s a decent simulacrum of Dante’s Inferno, 
and we probably don’t care if it’s a bit buggy and  
can only run for trillions of years, not eternity.
So too, when it comes to more pleasant afterlives,  
the key word there is ‘after’ and so someone’s 
private paradise they dwelt in on weekends or  
to spend the odd decade long sabbatical before 
returning to civilization presumably does not  
count. However the general concept 
of afterlives would seem to need to  
include options like reincarnation and possible 
limbo-like holding pens between recurring lives. 
Let’s imagine we froze someone for whatever 
reason, awaiting medical advances or  
journeying to a distant solar system or just 
wanting to leapfrog into future centuries,  
and while they were frozen we ran their mind in 
a slow dream state. Maybe their brain gets backed  
up and if they’re in an accident it’s activated 
while a new body is grown or constructed. This  
wouldn’t seem like an afterlife in the classic 
western perspective since we plan to restore  
them but it would be in some other traditions, 
which anticipate people being reincarnated or  
otherwise spinning around on the wheel of time. 
We might call something like this a waiting room,  
but it obviously has a lot in common with an 
afterlife, and there are also non-cyclic versions  
in which one is basically climbing a ladder, 
one rung each life, with an eventual end-state. 
We’ve contemplated that for simulated realities 
and ancestor simulations before too. That these  
simulations might be where advanced civilizations 
raise their kids. They use some remembered earlier  
form of their civilization where there’s 
basically still hardships and where virtual  
reality is discussed, but isn’t really there yet, 
like nowadays. In this way folks don’t spend their  
whole time wondering if they’re in a simulation, 
but also can still plausibly experience hardship,  
where a more advanced civilization might 
lack even papercuts. So you raise them  
in the ancestor simulation and hatch 
them into the advanced civilization,  
once their ethics and worldview are established.
Nursery Universes, so to speak, are plausible  
enough I think, but not an afterlife obviously, 
quite the reverse, but many of the concepts might  
apply, especially the notion of many stacked 
layers of reality, where you ascend or descend  
based on the trials of time and experience.
An awful lot of these scenarios we’re going  
to be contemplating today also sound good 
at first glance, but have some holes in them  
as we dip deeper. At the same time, apparent 
holes or flaws in a system don’t necessarily  
invalidate the idea as it might get used anyway 
because people like it enough to tolerate  
its problems or have found patches to them.
Let’s consider a hypothetical example. Let’s  
say we have a deep space habitat, one built 
into some rock or iceball that represents a  
significant but finite fuel supply. We’ll call 
it Habitat Sandman-1967. The colonists here  
know that every other rock nearby is claimed and 
every star within a thousand light years is too.  
They have a habitat cylinder decently larger 
than the typical O’Neill Cylinder and able to  
comfortably support a million humans with plenty 
of space for gardens and forests and critters. 
They have an impressive amount of life extension 
technology, as well as mind augmentation. They  
decide the best thing for their civilization 
is take a page out of Logan’s Run, where they  
gas or vaporize everyone before they get old, in 
the novel and book age 21 and 30 respectively,  
but the twist on Sandman is that you have 
brain chips in you recording your every  
thought for mind upload and backup, and when 
your time comes, at age 100, you have a big  
birthday party and at midnight you shut down.
They do one more really in-depth and destructive  
scan of your brain, and flip you on as a digital 
person in a virtual and somewhat dreamlike Utopia.  
It’s meant to be dreamlike so you can run at a 
slow speed, years passing outside for a day in  
the after-dream, and not be disoriented by it 
or fret about wondering whether it’s all fake.  
Experts can be spun up from the dream into a 
more normal virtual space or into an android  
to help with something, though normally this 
is for short term trauma counseling if some  
loved one can’t handle them being gone yet or 
for a quick set of answers on something that  
represents legacy or institutional knowledge, like 
they were a writer and turned their book series  
over to a pupil, and they wanted to check 
if some major change or addition was okay. 
They plan to eventually spin everyone back 
up for an entirely virtual existence one day,  
or re-incorporated into biological bodies, or 
whatever, once better technology gives them  
better options. In the meantime everyone’s in a 
slow dream state because they feel that helps with  
continuity of identity, and they also don’t feel 
someone born today should get to enjoy a vastly  
bigger share of that finite energy supply than 
someone born in year 999,990 of their million  
year plan. So everybody runs on low till then, 
after which things get dialed up. Everybody gets  
a full century of very healthy living in a body 
that can still run marathons and pass for 30,  
then they digitize and cross their virtual 
fingers that superior technology will be invented. 
They believe they have the ability to maintain 
the living population at a million normal people  
for a million years on current supplies and 
current tech, plus a ton of virtual people  
running at low speed, as low as is needed to 
stretch that energy budget out. They calculate  
they need the hardrive capacity for 10 billion 
stored minds and believe they can keep that in  
good shape with redundancy, and powered on low, 
for that full million years with extra to spare. 
That’s their margin, and they expect to benefit 
from the development of more technology elsewhere,  
but they decided as a colony that they 
would gamble on a vastly superior option  
being available and that if it existed it would 
be discovered inside a million years. If not,  
they plan to pack it up, run the computers on 
high speed so everyone of the 10 billion folks  
can enjoy some more time, a subjective couple 
thousand years, and when their fuel runs out,  
find out if there is a real afterlife.
I picked this case mostly for the purpose  
of a thought experiment, so let’s walk through 
the issues. First, it’s a big gamble to assume  
your station is going to stay static for a 
million years without anyone trying to smash up  
the old folks on ice to steal their energy, but a 
reasonably plausible one. The million year option  
is obviously pretty arbitrary but anything would 
be, and I think it’s perfectly plausible for some  
community living in a period after everything 
has been colonized and where technology just  
isn’t advancing much anymore to decide to play 
a long game like that. They’re presumably able  
to abort and even call a giant group assembly of 
everyone living and dead for a vote if something  
pops up that alters the equation. Otherwise, if 
something big doesn’t emerge in a million years,  
it wouldn’t seem like they’d feel a few 
million more would matter, or even a billion. 
We might see something similar with black hole 
based civilizations in a post-stellar era, like  
we looked at in our civilizations at the end of 
time series. In those, we suggested that if nobody  
had figured out how to build a perpetual motion 
machine or reverse entropy in a quintillion years,  
folks might settle for waiting till the black 
hole powering their civilization was nearly  
drained of energy and jumping into it to see 
if there was a Universe beyond down there. 
From a religious or spiritual perspective 
this case on Sandman is the same as normal  
life extension or mind uploading 
scenarios. If there is a normal  
eternal afterlife of the sort where you expect 
to meet St. Peter at the front gate, these really  
aren’t a problem. If you extend your life for 
a thousand years by medicine and cybernetics,  
it’s not really any different than any other 
medicine, as we say in our discussions of life  
extension tech, fundamentally all medicine is 
life extension technology. And fundamentally, one  
century or two or ten trillion, they are all still 
next to nothing compared to an actual eternity. 
Uploading your mind can be a bit tricky 
where souls are concerned, if you’ve got one,  
but presumably if I freeze you and you die, or 
I upload you and you die, either your soul goes  
along for the trip into your new state in this 
Universe – repaired corpsicle, clone, android, or  
digital existence – or it doesn’t and you take the 
stairway to heaven or the bullet train to hell.  
Since someone can presumably have 
this done to them against their will,  
we can not simply assume anyone revived this way 
is automatically getting tossed in the inferno. 
Also, I tend to assume if your soul exists and 
does not make the trip to your new form, then  
it’s probably going to be readily apparent in some 
fashion like you acting a total lunatic or psycho  
ala Linda Blair from the Exorcist. If not, then 
we’d have to assume your soul wasn’t specifically  
pertinent to your behavior and was more like your 
higher-dimensional recording or backup. Were that  
the case, it presumably operates no differently 
than if we have a person back-up their mind, have  
that activated because folks thought they were 
dead, and then it turns out they were alive and  
there’s basically two of them now. We discussed 
more of those sorts of identity confusions  
and hijinks in our episode Me, Myself, and I.
So there’s no obvious philosophical, theological,  
or ethical issue with Sandman-1967’s plan that 
I can think of. Obviously your mileage may vary,  
and there probably are things I’m overlooking 
since I just wanted a decent example for the  
episode. You get a century of very healthy 
life, get to skip a lot of the normal problems  
of longevity in societies of upward mobility and 
dodging Malthusian catastrophes. Assuming physical  
death doesn’t jettison your soul right to another 
plane of existence, you then get a lot of pleasant  
dreams. This is occasionally interrupted with 
an update and request for a vote, or to speak to  
some relative or student who needs a quick moment. 
When that’s all over, if nothing better has been  
found to allow everyone to return to a fleshly 
life or extend their existence longer in some  
other fashion, then everybody dials up to explore 
and enjoy a variety of personal paradises till  
the power runs out. After which you can find out 
the traditional way if there’s a life hereafter. 
To me that sounds like a pretty good deal, 
obviously the specifics could be made better  
or worse. A lot depends on how they operate 
on occasions where someone reaches 100 and  
says “Heck no, I don’t want my brain 
uploaded, nor do I want to be killed”. 
This raises some fair questions. Is Sandman-1967 
morally obliged to give that person a shuttle and  
let them leave? If they leave, can they still 
flip on the copies they’ve been making of that  
person the whole time? Can they just shrug, 
hit the button, and ‘ascend’ that person to the  
digital life and see if they’re still complaining 
afterward. There also might not be any place for  
them to go, again this situation is set in a 
pre-Malthusian circumstance where folks have  
basically gathered all the resources up and are 
now slowly draining a finite local stockpile,  
with no reason to expect distant interstellar 
colonies will decide to send them anymore. 
We can also imagine this scenario playing out on 
actual planets. As we’ve noted in other episodes,  
your real limitation on population on planets 
is getting rid of heat, and it's such that if  
you are doing your planet all in skyscrapers 
over every inch of it, people are going to  
have huge regions of empty space where it’s warm 
and fairly dark. We only need a tiny fraction of  
the kind of lighting it takes to provide sunlight 
levels or grow food in order to comfortably see. 
Your LED lightbulb lighting your bedroom 
in the evening is probably a few watts,  
the sun at noon is a thousand watts a square 
meter. So a Ecumenopolis, or planet wide city,  
like Earth might one day become, might be building 
layer after layer of vast structures made out of  
absurdly strong and self-repairing materials. 
Folks in a given apartment or layer might slowly  
migrate upward to newer ones or remain behind 
in sealed quarters, completely taken care of by  
robots and awake or living in VR or in stasis, 
and just have themselves built over top of,  
endless layers of cryo-crypts and virtual tombs.
So too, current law holds that you’re dead when  
you’re frozen in cryo, and I could easily 
see the precedent for getting that removed  
being to stimulate brain activity in a frozen 
brain or emulate it just enough to say hi,  
to prove that person was still around, then 
keeping them running on low power so nobody  
could claim they weren’t currently alive 
and take their property or bank accounts.  
One can imagine that being a legal nightmare 
waiting to happen in many different ways. If  
you thought ancient Egypt was obsessed with taking 
everything with them to the hereafter, imagine a  
civilization a million years after cryo has been 
perfected but actual biological immortality has  
not been, and 99% of the population is in and 
out of stasis or waiting for better technology,  
and also owning 99.99% of everything, and 
hoping the folks still awake will keep them  
running while providing an eventual solution.
Given that the most obvious solution that would  
come to mind for those still awake 
might be to start unplugging folks,  
one could imagine a lot of those cryo-crypts or 
stasis vaults having some serious firepower on  
robot guardians to make sure nobody was trying 
to pull the plug or expedite their inheritance. 
And many of these issues would be the same 
for scenarios where we aren’t talking about  
virtual reality, uploaded existence, or 
digital options. It’s just the easiest  
and most familiar to discuss the philosophy and 
problems of these situations. We’ll get to some  
non-digital options shortly but let’s look at 
one more real quick, and that’s the idea that  
we’re actually in some simulation currently.
Now that actually might be of our own choosing.  
As I’ve mentioned before, whoever makes lifelike 
and convincing virtual realities will be a very  
rich person, but the real game changing tech is 
inventing a technique so that people maintain  
their core identity in such a world but with 
their prior memories temporarily shut off,  
or on but they still don’t notice they’re in a 
fake place or just don’t care, like in a dream. 
Either way, if we’re running in such a simulation 
we cannot assume the same rules and limits apply  
in that higher universe simulating us as physics 
tells us we operate under. They might not have  
entropy and a perpetual motion machine might be 
something kids build in daycare. If not though,  
they eventually run out of power. Yes, they can 
easily provide an afterlife to those in this  
simulation dying. Probably a paradise and one in 
which any trauma of this life could be mitigated,  
shut off, or fixed, so that your suffering 
here really didn’t impact your happiness and  
quality of existence there. And other people’s 
suffering you see might not be a real person,  
just an NPC or ChatGPT character.
But they still have to deal with  
finite limits. Even the Big Crunch trick we 
discussed in Omega Point or Dyson’s Eternal  
Intelligence option we discuss in Black Hole 
Farming don’t really handle infinity well,  
though at least allow a decent flirtation with 
it. They run out of juice while at the same time  
they have an ever-rising number of immigrants 
needing it. This raises real issues, though we’ll  
contemplate them a bit satirically. Essentially, 
how many people need to walk into the pearly  
gates and join the City of God before the walls 
need widening and the main boulevard expanded  
to include another lane? How many mead halls and 
tables are in Valhalla or the fields of Elysium? 
Now again if we’re talking about the classic 
God with a capital G and infinite capacities,  
this doesn’t actually matter, but a lot of 
mythological gods of the past weren’t infinite  
in scope, and the episode is ‘artificial 
afterlives’, kind of implying we’re talking  
about the creations of folks who, however 
impressive, aren’t Capital-G impressive. 
Which raises the question of whether 
or not an infinite afterlife is needed.  
Back to the Sandman-1967 habitat example, 
they were going for a finite duration. But  
after how much experience is a person no longer 
experiencing anything new? Even ignoring that  
your brain has finite space in it, and even the 
card catalog for an infinite library is too big  
to fit in your head, there’s truly a finite 
number of actual experiences you can have.  
There are a finite number of books that can be 
written that are thousand pages or less long. But  
simply rearranging two of those words or having 
an identical book but with one character’s name  
changed from John to Joe isn’t a new experience.
It doesn’t matter how unique each snowflake is,  
my experience jamming a handful of 
them into a snowball to throw is  
not new or better for having one of those 
snowflakes changed into a different one.  
What’s more, if I am an ever-changing brain, or 
mind, with little changes at any given moment,  
I will eventually have my brain pass through 
every possible state it could be with every  
possible set of memories it could have, even 
if those included false memories and delusions. 
An infinite and changing existence for 
a finite being is one that eventually  
shifts you through every person who ever 
existed and every set of lives they could  
have enjoyed. Or suffered. You will also be the 
most virtuous and most vile of people over time.  
Such an entity is indistinguishable from any 
other, as well, as they all ultimately were  
every person an infinite number of times. 
So presumably only one identity is needed,  
and it will encompass every one that ever was or 
could be. This also checks your resurrection box,  
which is how that works in Omega Point 
Cosmology, again see that episode for details. 
With all that in mind, though, for many 
people an actual eternity is of no greater  
value than a very long but finite time. At 
a certain point we must expand you beyond  
the strictly human for your mind to be 
able to retain these new experiences,  
not to mention keep enjoying them, since 
this is supposed to be a pleasant afterlife. 
Otherwise, we’re really just talking about 
dumping old memories for new ones and there  
gets to be a point where that really strains 
credibility on the argument that there’s  
continuity of identity. At least to me, identity 
and consciousness and continuity are very murky  
and debated topics and have been for centuries 
now. Cloning and Computers didn’t really add  
anything to the debate beyond a modern flavor 
and convenient framing device for the discussion. 
So let’s shift the discussion off of computers, 
virtual reality, and mind-uploading options. 
First, we can actually do all the digital stuff 
just fine in old analogue, it’s probably no  
harder to copy your existing neurons onto a new 
biological neuron as compared to a harddrive.  
So you might have some big organic megabrain 
everybody existed as part of and which had the  
added ability to notice a neuron was failing 
and copy and reroute. We’ll call this world  
NeoBrahma and assume it’s a massive hydroshell 
planet of giant floating seas of brain matter.  
You don’t have to go all silicon or steel 
to have the timer removed. It also doesn’t  
apply to a higher simulating universe which 
might not be using computers for it, a layer  
of simulation might be somebody’s dream, just a 
very impressive one, and their brain might run on  
materials that can’t exist in this universe.
If the notion of a computer-like scenario is  
bothersome, rest assured there’s nothing requiring 
it be done that way, and folks might be using  
binary switches made out of black holes or entire 
universes that function like a big synapse.  
As often gets noted, maps of our Universe often 
disturbing resemble neurons and brain connections  
at the galactic supercluster scale, and 
while I doubt that means anything here,  
it is perfectly plausible to imagine that’s 
the basic path for how brains or dreamworlds  
are created in alternate realities. There’s 
also nothing really in the way of more arcane  
options for thought creation like using twisted 
up bits of spacetime, it’s just easier to frame  
all this structurally in the context of either 
computer chips or neurons as familiar formats. 
We do not know if it is possible to create 
sub-universes from this one – not including  
computer simulations – or travel to or otherwise 
tap other parallel universes, or higher ones. We  
don’t even know if they exist. Though if they can 
be shown to exist, that tends to imply interaction  
with them is also possible. If a photon can come 
through from an alternate reality for you to see  
that copy of Earth, then presumably you can send 
another photon back, or several, or a person.  
If not, if it’s one way, then you can run a 
solar panel on that photon and its siblings,  
and now you have a power plant from another 
reality. You can achieve an eternal existence,  
of some sort, possibly, by simply moving 
yourself or your civilization to some brand  
new and empty universe, then another and another.
In any event, if we can access such places then  
their rules may differ, and allow options ours do 
not. For instance a lot of your storage and access  
problems in a brain or library are from being 3D, 
you only have so many places to store data nearby  
and the more you store, the bigger your library 
needs to be, and the bigger the corridors for  
travel by those going ever further out to retrieve 
that data, and the longer those journeys, as the  
library – or brain – expands. In 2D this is even 
worse, but in 4D, much easier, and 5D, and so on. 
No entropy, different limits on infinity, maybe 
even different math or core physics. All might  
be options that improve what you can do or how 
much of it. And so you are likely to be moving  
yourselves to those spots and that also tends 
to imply a limit on what you can move back,  
since if you’ve shifted your architecture to 4D 
or 5D, then coming back into 3D is not likely to  
be easy or desirable. Which is a convenient 
handwave for why those ascending to higher  
planes of existence don’t stay in contact with 
us, though I mostly think of that happening in  
science fiction as a result of lazy writing.
For that matter, an absence from other  
people’s existence in this mortal realm is not a 
requirement of an afterlife. Clearly the existence  
of Ouija boards and ghosts haunting places implies 
the idea is compatible with a classic afterlife,  
and so a virtual world that was serving as 
an afterlife might have their equivalents.  
Probably a lot less clunky, you just pickup 
the Ouija-phone and dial Grand Uncle Ted,  
who by answering syncs back up with whatever time 
flow rate you have compared to his subjective  
crawl or race. Your big issue there is if it is 
an afterlife at all, as otherwise you could become  
quite the necropolis, where the undead still run 
everything. This is somewhat backward from the  
more common notion that most of the population in 
the future will retreat into virtual paradises and  
the handful of folks left will have to take care 
of them, or take care of the robots doing so. 
As to what qualifies as heaven or 
hell, that’s obviously very subjective,  
and part of why we phrase these as an afterlife 
is the notion that if your paradise is that nice,  
you’re not coming back to this existence much, 
or at all. Of course, in the case of some private  
hell you’ve been sentenced to or dumped in by some 
sadist who kidnapped you or a copy of your brain,  
that probably isn’t intended to allow an escape 
back to the real world either. So afterlife isn’t  
automatically the same as a true paradise or 
torment-filled underworld, but they’re pretty  
linked. And also, that we’re not currently in 
either, or if we are it’s like the discount  
knock off resort equivalent or minimum security 
wing, not the utter utopia or nightmare scape that  
comes to mind when we think of angels strumming 
harps or demons scurrying around with pitchforks. 
Which is one last reason I’d feel the afterlife 
term isn’t wrong to apply to paradises we might  
build. It’s something you wouldn’t expect folks to 
want to return from, except to make it easier for  
other folks to join them. Like your civilization 
leaves behind a beacon transmitting to let other  
civilizations know how to do it once they arise 
in a distant future. Of course the other grim  
alternative is that such civilizations lose 
all sense of purpose – or delusion of purpose  
perhaps - and just grind down eventually, and 
don’t feel it’s worth the effort to leave a beacon  
behind just to rain on some new civilizations 
last few sunny days before the eternal gloom and  
doom arrives. We contemplated that more in our 
episode Reality & Purpose, as well as the more  
dark side of that in our episode Gods & Monsters.
Such a civilization might still go on though,  
with some of its members opting to enter 
those artificial afterlives but with their  
brains drained of remembering that end 
sequence for their civilization. Which  
of course could mean that you or I are such 
a person ourselves, already in an afterlife. 
But I think not, as much as I enjoy my life, I’m 
pretty sure I would have come up with something  
even better, or at least that I thought was 
better. As to what true heaven would be like,  
or its artificial facsimile, leaving beside 
classic examples, juvenile ones, or humorous ones,  
I honestly don’t know. I’d be curious what folks 
thought the typical artificial afterlife would  
be. A shared one with other people? A personal 
one with fake people? Mundane or over the top? 
All I know at the moment, and given 
that this is a family-friendly show,  
is that I hope it has lots of coffee, 
and that every snack is zero calories,  
so that there’s always time enough 
and room enough for a drink and snack.
So today’s topic was one of our more philosophical 
episodes, and it seemed a good time for a further  
discussion of concepts like Free Will and 
consciousness and what science is telling  
us about the mind, so I thought we would do a 
bonus episode over on Nebula looking at Orch OR,  
Roger Penrose’s theory of our minds being 
Quantum and unpredictable. He argues that Quantum  
Mechanics and Orchestrated objective reduction, 
Orch OR, imply our minds are not deterministic  
and that we have free will under known science.
This isn’t the first time we’ve looked at one of  
Dr. Penrose’s grander theories on Nebula 
either, such as our episode on detecting  
prior universes and Conformal Cyclic Cosmology.
Those are definitely the sorts of episodes Nebula  
is great for, where I would not expect youtube’s 
algorithm to be kind to them, and are just some  
of bonus content over on our streaming service, 
including extended editions of many episodes,  
as well as bonus and exclusive content, 
like Orch Or, Conformal Cyclic Cosmology,  
Planets Vs Megastructures, Space Freighters, 
Colonizing Binary Stars, and many more. Plus every  
episode comes out on Nebula Early and ad free.
Nebula is a streaming service started by creators  
for creators and their audiences, and has grown 
to be the largest creator owned streaming service,  
with tons of great content from an ever-growing 
community of creators. Using my link and discount  
it’s available now for just over $2.50 a month, 
less than the price of the drink or snack you  
might have been enjoying during the episode, 
and it goes to supporting new content from  
myself and other creators, like our new feature, 
Nebula Classes, so its 2 for the price of 1. 
When you sign up at my link, 
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use my code,  
isaacarthur, you not only get access to all of 
the great stuff Nebula offers plus now Classes,  
you’ll also be directly supporting this 
show. Again, to see SFIA early, ad free,  
and with all the exclusive content, 
go https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
So next week we will have our 400th regular 
episode of SFIA, as we contemplate what life  
might be like in the year 2323 AD, then we 
have our Monthly Livestream Q&A on Sunday,  
June 25th. Then we’ll finish up June on Thursday 
the 29th by asking what Earth might be like if  
humanity disappeared. July 6th we’ll discuss 
how and why we should mine or refine materials  
on the Moon, then on the 13th we’ll move on to 
the idea of moving cities, from those floating  
through the clouds to those trundling along 
the ground on massive tracks or even legs. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
