This Episode is sponsored by Audible
 
It is quite likely that before this century 
is out we will be mining our moon and  
asteroids for resources. It is almost beyond 
conception how much resources they contain,  
and yet, they are but tiny motes of dust 
compared to what the galaxy offers. 
 
So today we’ll be continuing our look at Galactic 
Domination. We started a few weeks back in Eternal  
Empire, and I mentioned there that we wanted 
to look at possible motivations for trying to  
take over a galaxy. The big ones that tend 
to come up in discussion for any empire,  
be it Earthly or Galactic, are a desire for Empire 
for its own sake, to be King of the World, a  
desire for resources, or a desire for defense from 
hostiles, which might include preemptive attacks.
 
Today we’ll be discussing that desire 
for resources, why someone might want  
or need a whole galaxy’s worth of them, 
and how they might go about doing that.
 
We’ll be drawing from discussions in science 
fiction, along with what is right or wrong  
about the pictures they paint, but this is likely 
to be an issue we’ll encounter in real life as  
we head out to the stars, and maybe sooner 
than we might expect. And when I say ‘we’,  
I do mean you and me, because some of the 
associated technology is potentially near-future,  
and while it's always hard to forecast how 
technology will develop, some of the more  
optimistic scenarios might allow us to be sending 
out interstellar probes within our lifetimes.
 
This is also part of the reason 
for the choice of episode title.  
Strip Mining is a term that has some pretty 
negative overtones these days, compared to say,  
Resource Utilization, but a big aspect of the 
topic for today is going to be whether life,  
intelligent or not, might be on some planet we 
decide to mine. Many of the options available  
to us early on for harvesting the galaxy would 
involve not knowing if the place was inhabited  
before sending harvesters out, and a pretty 
good case can be made that if you send an order  
out to harvest a planet without knowing if it's 
inhabited, you bear the guilt of ordering a planet  
with inhabitants to be exploited even if it turns 
out the planet in question was a lifeless rock. 
 
This is a concept that comes up a lot in science 
fiction, where the aliens in the story have in  
some way harmed us and the politicians and 
generals are all going for military action  
while a brave kind scientist says we misunderstood 
and no violence was intended. For example,  
in the Ender’s Game series, the buggers treat some 
captured humans rather badly because they didn’t  
realize that humans were individual beings who 
were suffering immensely. That could indeed be the  
case but I’ve seen this applied in storylines even 
when they are actively targeting ships and cities,  
and it brings up concepts like due diligence and 
a reasonable expectation to know. Larry Niven and  
Jerry Pournelle in the Classic novel, “The Mote 
in God's Eye” point out that any given alien race  
sending out a probe has a duty to ensure that 
said probe has safeguards in place, in this  
case not to fire anti-meteor defenses at a ship.
This duty is often best highlighted by looking at  
it from our perspective, not theirs, because 
the excuses seem a lot thinner that way. While  
we often warn folks of seeing things from a human 
perspective when thinking about alien psychology,  
it doesn’t change whether or not firing on or 
mining an inhabited planet is right or wrong. 
 
“Strip Mining” is the process in which one has 
a large and valuable deposit of something – most  
often coal – buried under a field of soil and 
rock, so you remove a long strip of that rock and  
soil to get at the buried minerals or materials. 
It's debatable if this is any worse or better,  
ecologically, than many other mining methods but 
from a visual and public relations standpoint  
it tends to look awful and has become 
synonymous with exploitative processes. 
 
It’s also a pretty ghastly concept on 
a stellar or galactic scale; the notion  
that an alien harvester might land, peel off 
our biosphere, and grab the resources below.
 
Now there are a couple of problems 
with this specific endeavor.  
First, it is true that Earth has an enormous 
mass and vast resources, roughly equalling every  
other rocky planet, moon, and asteroid in our 
solar system combined in terms of raw material,  
with Venus as a close second and making up the 
bulk of that remaining material. However, it is  
at the bottom of a gravity well. It’s the nature 
of gravity that the more mineral wealth you have,  
in raw terms, the more expensive your shipping 
and transport bill is going to be for getting it.  
So planets like Earth are your last stop for 
easy minerals, except for gas giants – which have  
vastly more – and stars themselves – which have 
even more and also supply the power needed for  
that harvesting, see our episode on Star Lifting.
The 2013 film Oblivion, starring Tom Cruise,  
Morgan Freeman, and Jaime Lannister, spoilers 
following, features an alien agency trying  
to strip Earth of its precious seawater for 
fusion fuel. This would be a pretty illogical  
plan given that water is one of the most abundant 
molecules in the Universe, and on the fairly short  
list of things more abundant than it are molecular 
hydrogen and deuterium, the two things water might  
contain that you would be interested in using for 
fusion, with helium-3 as one other alternative.  
Water, hydrogen, deuterium, and helium-3 are 
all vastly more abundantly available in our  
gas giants, like Saturn, which is where incoming 
aliens first arrived in that movie, and there’s  
no good reason they’d bypass it in favor of 
Earth. If you mastered fusion power, mining fuel  
from gas giants is vastly easier and therefore 
more economical, see our Outward Bound Series  
episodes on colonizing the various gas giants 
for discussion of that, like Colonizing Neptune.
 
We also see this in the 1996 film Independence 
Day, which is celebrating its 25th anniversary  
and which I remember being one of the first 
films that got me really thinking about  
scale of alien empires and threats. In there we 
meet a race of Harvesters who take apart planets  
to fuel their massive mothership, nearly the size 
of a moon, but it’s not clear why a ship even that  
big would need anything like a whole planet’s 
raw materials to run on, nor that they had any  
interest in our biosphere, as is apparently the 
case with famous comic book planet-eater Galactus,  
who apparently needs them for their life force. 
Taking apart an entire inhabited planet because  
you want some raw materials seems not just 
villainous but lazy, wasteful, and stupid.  
We’ll examine both notions more this weekend 
in our Scifi Sunday episode Annoying Aliens.
 
Anyway, Earth-like planets certainly have 
resources, but it’s much easier to access  
those resources from comets, asteroids, moons, 
and lesser planets without atmospheres or such  
deep gravity wells. They also have far less of 
those resources than the gas giants or stars,  
which again can supply the energy for their own 
disassembly, see our episode Disassembling the  
Solar System for discussion of how we do 
that, as well as why we might want to.
 
Earth is not worthless, not by any means, but 
it ought to be on the bottom end of the list for  
extraction from an economic perspective, and Earth 
makes up less than 1% of 1% of the metal resources  
of this solar system, and an even smaller 
fraction of things like hydrogen and helium.  
Even if every Earth-mass planet in the galaxy 
had life, and you felt obliged to skip them all  
for that reason, you wouldn’t be missing 
out on much - economically speaking.  
 
So a civilization has to be pretty ruthless to 
run mineral extraction on an inhabited world  
once they have interstellar travel, given that 
it is only a tiny sliver of available resources  
and comparatively inconvenient when you 
have technology like fusion or starlifting.
 
Of course greed is a plausible enough motive 
for being ruthless, getting that planet after  
you’ve gotten all the low hanging fruit, but that 
brings up the second problem with this endeavor.  
Namely, a biosphere is a lot more valuable than 
all that stuff beneath it. A given biosphere is  
fairly unique we can assume, and contains untold 
billions of species, and you could probably make a  
ton of money just selling exotic pets, aquariums, 
or botanical samples from one. That’s before we  
consider exotic molecules created in ecosystems, 
some of which can be used to make medicine or for  
other chemistry. So you’re really not scraping 
off the dirty life forms to get at the cash  
buried below, you’re scraping off the cash to get 
to the fairly mundane and plentiful stuff below. 
 
We mine Earth because it’s the 
only place we can mine right now,  
and virtually everything we build is for use 
here, so there’s no added transport cost due  
to the gravity well. The reason we talk about 
mining asteroids all the time is because it’s  
so much easier, once you’ve got a spaceship or 
are trying to build stuff for use off Earth.
 
We can’t assume aliens are ethical 
obviously, especially if we’re using  
our standards for ethics, but if they are, 
if they do value life, even alien life,  
that would only leave the concern that they 
might unintentionally mine an inhabited planet.
 
That’s a real possibility, one looked at in 
sci-fi occasionally and maybe most memorably  
in the Original Star Trek episode “The Devil in 
the Dark” where they are mining a dead rock only  
to find out that it’s inhabited by Silicon 
Based Life. This seems to raise the issue of  
not recognizing something as a lifeform, 
but let us put some caveats on that. 
 
First, while that is a great episode, it's 
got some plot holes. Second, it wasn’t being  
silicon-based that made them unrecognizable as 
life, though that gets said a lot in discussing  
the episode, it’s that they had an extremely 
bizarre lifecycle which caused them to all die  
off every fifty thousand years except one member 
who guarded their eggs. It’s nice in fiction to  
have strange lifeforms, but if the premise is 
not recognizing them as alive, and it involves  
missing it because the critical trait is something 
that is absurd from an evolutionary standpoint, it  
probably isn’t a good example of how we should be 
looking for potential life in the real universe.
 
So this is the key notion; it’s probably 
pretty hard to miss life on a planet.  
No species capable of designing and using 
spaceships should be able to look at Earth and  
think “Oh, this probably is all random geological 
formations” when looking at trees, buildings,  
and people. The silicon life form, the Horta, in 
that Star Trek episode are conveniently the only  
lifeform on a planet with no other ecology, they 
build nothing, and then they mysteriously die off,  
leaving only eggs every so often. Every plausible 
model of evolutions tells us that intelligence and  
complexity arise from ecological and evolutionary 
pressures, predator-prey cycles and so on,  
so it's just not very plausible you’d have highly 
intelligent life as the only life, and which left  
no trace except its eggs and the tunnels it 
made while meandering through the planet.  
No other life, no buildings, no monuments or art.
In a case like that, yes you have an excuse for  
your explorers not knowing it's an inhabited 
planet. But again, it’s an extreme stretch  
of plausibility. Of course the alternatives 
are that you might be smart but your probes  
aren’t – you use stupid robots – or that you 
do see there’s life there and just don’t care.
 
We will get to the robots in a bit, but 
let’s consider the indifference angle.  
Again you might find value in life 
for strictly non-altruistic reasons,  
selling alien pets or building the place as a 
tourist trap, but you might not value that life or  
once you have samples and studies, you might torch 
off the biosphere and get to those minerals. 
 
Your civilization, or hive mind or 
monolithic planet brain with Darwinian  
tendencies and xenocidal hobbies, might 
just not care that there is life there.  
Indeed it might care a lot 
and in a very hostile way,  
but if your goal is exterminating all other life 
forms, you don’t do it through strip mining the  
galaxy. Even if your reason for exterminating 
all life is to have a free and clear claim  
on all those resources, you do your exterminating 
well in advance of your harvesting. 
 
Might someone do this? Sure, killing folks and 
taking their stuff is a pretty time-honored  
approach to existence. For my part I don’t 
view morality and right or wrong as being  
subjective and relative, just that we are 
often flawed in determining what they are,  
but a lot of folks do think its relative 
and make a good case, and even if I’m right,  
that there are things that could be considered 
universally good or bad or evil, doesn’t  
mean a given alien races holds that view. 
I can’t see anything explicitly preventing a  
civilization evolving and getting out into space 
that revolved around them hating all aliens.  
It would seem pretty likely that in most cases, 
the development of specialized economies and  
technology would tilt toward having some concepts 
for tolerance of differing views and natures,  
but it would be hard to build a case for it being 
impossible or even pretty improbable for an alien  
civilization to hit the galactic stage with 
the intent of clearing it of the other actors.
 
Of course we are not just necessarily talking 
about actors in the context of intelligence.  
Same as you might have a civilization that was 
fine with alien life but not rival intelligent  
life, you could have ones that wouldn’t lay a 
finger on a planet with intelligent life but  
would cheerfully colonize or even disassemble a 
planet that had only very basic lifeforms on it.
 
There are some pretty good reasons to think 
our galaxy is devoid of any complex life,  
see our Fermi Paradox Great Filters series for 
discussion of that, and we may find that the  
most common life we find out in the galaxy is the 
most common type we find here – bacteria and other  
non-sentient organisms. It just might be the best 
most worlds have. It would be highly problematic  
and honestly probably unrealistic to quarantine 
a planet for billions of years hoping the pond  
scum on its surface would develop complexity and 
art and science. I suspect where such worlds are  
concerned, any interstellar civilization would 
undertake an effort to study them, take samples,  
set up preserves – probably off planet in 
artificial habitats – and then to proceed to  
use the planet, if that was what they valued.
Indeed that might be the case even if it had  
intelligence, and as we have discussed before, 
given the very real chance that intelligent life  
might be prone to going digital, artificial 
intelligence or posthumans mentally uploaded  
to computers, they might do their preserving of 
intelligent planets by killing everything on it,  
just quietly and via mind upload. They aren’t 
likely to view it as murder, and may view it as  
the gift of near-immortality and near eternal 
safety. I could definitely see a civilization  
with ethics not too unlike our own encountering a 
species they thought were worrisome as a threat or  
competition and uploading their whole planet 
to a simulated reality kept safe somewhere,  
indeed I’d rate it as an outside chance 
that someone already did that to us.
 
Key notion though, as we move into how you 
would harvest the galaxy for resources,  
which would generally be accomplished with 
robots, is that you probably can send out  
probes to identify worlds with life or not that 
can do the job very effectively. You also have no  
reason to go for the big planets first if you’re 
just harvesting raw materials, and can do this  
sort of thing in waves to ensure life-bearing or 
life-probable planets are being left alone until  
you can eyeball them in detail and pick a course 
of action. Indeed it would not be that tricky to  
even engage in full-blown starlifting or solar 
englobement for power collection while leaving  
an inhabited planet untouched, shielded from the 
solar wind blowoff, and with the proper amount of  
sunlight routed to still hit that planet.
The usual fear, and a decently valid one,  
is that someone would send out robots designed 
to explore, resupply, and explore some more,  
send resources home, or build things 
locally with them, like more of themselves  
perhaps. That is both a legitimate worry and one 
not treated very realistically in fiction too. We  
often call this a Hegemonizing Swarm, where 
some machine intelligence, be it bacteria  
dumb or super-intelligent, just sweeps through the 
galaxy converting everything into more of itself.  
It’s fairly similar to the Paperclip Maximizer 
or Grey Goo scenarios and probably deserves an  
episode in this series all to itself, but for 
now let’s look at why that might happen in the  
first place and how it might treat life.
Let’s say someone manages to put together a  
self-replicating machine in the next decade or 
two. That does not imply microscopic machines  
or nanobots incidentally, as those are usually 
assumed to be self-replicating because otherwise  
you need to make trillions of them by conventional 
manufacturing to do even the smallest job,  
so micro-machines as medical aids in the body 
or for grey gooing a planet are assumed to be  
self-replicating if you have them. However, while 
human life might have started microscopic and  
evolved to modern larger forms, for machines 
it is likely to be the other way around.  
You start big, with what we call a Clanking 
Self-Replicator, which might be something  
like an automated factory on some asteroid or 
moon that has complete blueprints for itself,  
all the machines it uses for building and 
maintaining its components, and for the robots  
it sends out to gather resources and also makes 
some product, say metal plates for building space  
habitats, and maybe packed up egg-equivalents 
of itself to send to other asteroids. 
 
Indeed a clanking self-replicator is probably more 
analogous to a biological cell or normal-sized  
animal than some tiny little virus or machine 
even smaller, such as the classic Universal  
Assembler. Full of blueprints and sub-factories or 
organs and organelles that do specialized tasks.
 
This isn’t easy but I suspect we could 
actually do it right now if we wanted.  
We have no real motivation to do so in our 
own terrestrial economy, which is already  
self-replicating and which has established 
transport and distribution infrastructure. A  
self-replicator isn’t necessarily an economically 
advantageous approach to manufacturing or getting  
jobs done, it just has the option of being 
packed up small and sent some place new,  
akin to sending a covered wagon out 
to Oregon on the Trail back in the day  
rather than running in trains and trucks between 
ten thousand facilities handling various bits  
of a given supply chain, most of which are also 
involved in hundreds of other supply chains too.
 
So don’t think of it as really high-tech 
or free once you build the original.  
The latter is true but only in a first 
order look, as it ignores opportunity cost,  
because it’s great for getting the foot in 
the door at some new place with no existing  
infrastructure but once you do you probably want 
to be able to upgrade to a more complex system.
 
This means you have to be able to shut the things 
down. Which raises the whole mutation and robot  
rebellion and safeguards issues. I mean it’s 
nice to have a quadrillion robots run out into  
the galaxy and do all your mining for you, but you 
have to worry about them deciding they want to use  
the resources to build an armada and come home for 
some pointed discussions about labor relations. 
 
One way to minimize the risk of your robots going 
off the deep end is to keep them very simple and  
stupid, to the point that they’re no smarter than 
an amoeba, and indeed there’s no particular task  
involved in building machines or mining the galaxy 
that would require those performing it be smarter  
than an amoeba either. Simple lifeforms do very 
complicated tasks, they’re just hardwired to do  
them, they don’t learn them or think about 
them. You can do the same for machines. 
 
Of course that raises the grey goo issue 
since that’s basically what an amoeba is,  
green goo, a very simple machine that harvests 
resources locally to make more of itself.  
In galactic colonization and exploitation terms 
it really doesn’t matter if the life doing it  
is naturally evolved or artificially created, 
carbon or silicon, just if it’s smart or not,  
and given our own existence apparently began a 
billion generations back as amoeba-like things,  
a galaxy colonized by hoards of mutating and dumb 
machines might just result in Silicon-forming it  
long down the road rather than Terraforming 
it, which is arguably six of one half dozen  
of the other in the grand scheme of things. 
We’re a carbon-based life form, some type running  
on silicon or one of the other chemsitries we 
looked at in our Non-Carbon Based Life episode,  
if its simply starting off as some 
equivalent to simple organisms,  
be they microscopic or big dumb asteroid miners 
acting as clanking self-replicators, really should  
amount to the same thing in galactic scales and 
timelines if those machines begin mutating into  
thousands of varieties forming an ecosystem 
in each of a billion different solar systems.
 
In our more personal concerns though, 
a critical thing to keep in mind is  
that natural evolution has no overriding 
reason to evolve a resistance to mutation,  
mutating mutation resistance would seem a bizarre 
evolutionary path. However it is a lot easier to  
program in. We often talk about how amazing 
DNA and RNA are about copying themselves with  
minimal errors but that’s pretty relative and 
mostly in the context of folks playing telephone  
or transcribing things or photocopying 
them over and over from successive copies.  
We do actually have a ton of data integrity 
techniques and there’s plenty of ways to set up  
a self-replicating machine to be less likely than 
not to mutate even one time over the course of the  
entire history of the Universe and even if every 
gram of matter was turned into copies of itself.
 
So if it is something we want to do, I think 
we would have the technology to launch that  
this century, even if it might take millions 
of years to percolate out to the galactic rim.  
And probably with something smart enough to notice 
obvious signs of life to not mine those systems,  
or at least those planets, yet still be no real 
risk of mutating into something we might regret.
 
The issue though might be a rush. 
See whoever stakes a claim first on  
a place might enjoy an advantage 
in court decisions of ownership,  
and more importantly might enjoy the advantage of 
having already built up a lot of infrastructure  
in that system when someone comes by to 
object, which might include a lot of guns.  
That is potentially the sort of environment where 
rush jobs at design and programming can happen,  
potentially with folks trying to cobble together 
their own personal spaceship and self-replicator  
to send off to any of a billion random stellar 
systems to stake a claim for themselves.
 
And now we get to why we might want to do this 
in a bit of an organized and deliberate fashion.  
Last time we suggested you might want to establish 
an empire simply to ensure none of your colonies  
were a threat to you and each other. They might 
through malice or negligence end up breeding or  
brewing up some galaxy-rending fleets and 
technologies on some isolated system they  
inhabit far from watchful eyes. So you might want 
to harvest all those resources, or get the process  
under way, just to make sure they aren’t 
lying around for others to grab and misuse.
 
One upside though is that spaceships have 
to slow down to mine or colonize something,  
whereas a missile does not. And thus anytime 
someone builds and sends an unauthorized  
colony ship or probe or miner, you can see its 
massive rocket flame or drive source, and you  
can send something much smaller, and quicker, that 
doesn’t need to slow down and rendezvous with it,  
but can instead use its slow down fuel 
to speed up even more and slam into it.
 
So we also don’t want to assume folks could 
be sending things out without anyone being  
able to stop them. However the capability 
in physical terms doesn’t mean they will,  
and I would have a hard time seeing any nations 
or international treaties agreeing to shoot down  
any ship that tried to leave the solar system 
without permission. Nobody’s going to be up for  
a suicide pact, where some agency just gets 
to take whole asteroids apart in our system  
to manufacture a trillion robotic seed ships to 
claim every star in the galaxy for themselves.  
However, that’s a lot different than trying to 
make laws that involve chasing down and shooting  
a ship. One is naked provocation, the other is 
a public relations disaster, but a ship sent by  
some seemingly benevolent and minor group to one 
star system could always get there, spawn copies,  
and proceed to launch those trillion seeds ships 
from Alpha Centauri or Delta Pavonis instead. 
 
Now we’re phrasing this throughout the episode 
as a fairly unfriendly or unethical process,  
the title itself is pretty prejudicial, talking 
of Galactic domination and Strip Mining,  
but what is likely to be the process in our 
own galaxy and is this likely to happen?
 
Yes, we are probably going to strip 
mine our galaxy, at least in terms  
of stripping it down for resources. Indeed 
I’d argue it is nearly inevitable that any  
species capable of practical interstellar 
travel will do this, given long enough,  
and likely very quickly on galactic timelines.
We’ve got the obvious scenario, eventual classic  
galactic colonization, where folks settle where 
they can and grow new families and communities and  
empires. This usually assumes they eventually 
start doing mineral extraction for large  
artificial habitats, like O’Neill Cylinders, until 
the whole solar system is transformed into what we  
call a Dyson Swarm. Some collection of artificial 
worlds and industries and power collectors  
englobing an entire star to make use of all of 
its energy. Known as a Kardashev-2 civilization,  
this comes in a lot forms and varieties which 
we’ve discussed in other episodes. The next step,  
Kardashev-3, is when this happens on a galaxy-wide 
scale, to every star. There are alternative  
scenarios and some interesting varieties, with one 
being that we won’t grow up and spread wide across  
the galaxy, but instead stay home and miniaturize. 
You don’t need a galaxy’s worth of resources if  
you stick to one planet or dive into virtual 
worlds of your own creation on computers. 
 
Or so goes the usual reasoning anyway. 
Unfortunately this has some holes in it.  
First if we’re talking about a civilization 
going digital, with uploaded or artificial minds,  
that doesn’t imply slow growth or maximum 
expansion. Indeed it arguably encourages more.  
If you view the rest of the Universe as only a 
source of energy and raw materials for building  
computer chips and sources of power, then you’re 
even more omnivorous, so to speak, since you can  
grow and exist at incredibly fast rates and with 
enormous density, and the Universe and its laws  
are going to be on your side when it comes 
to colonization or harvesting resources,  
with things being tipped significantly 
more in your favor than it would be for  
a classic human population. Your appetite is 
probably huge, eager to swallow up whole suns.
 
Now some folks would suggest digital civilizations 
can miniaturize and indeed they likely would,  
but this is not a Fermi Paradox solution 
because miniaturization should not be assumed  
to be something you can constantly improve on, 
or necessarily improve on faster than you are  
growing. If you can cut the resources you need for 
an individual down by a half, but the time that  
improvement took to research and implement was 
the same as it took your population to quadruple,  
you are still needing more resources than before.
Trying to use a single atom as a computer switch  
or like a neuron is pretty tricky and I don’t have 
a clue how you could even go lower, but that would  
just mean that if you only needed one atom to 
simulate the equivalent of one human neuron,  
and needed a hundred billion of those like we 
have, that a given human only needs a hundred  
billion atoms to exist digitally. Which is 
really tiny, enough that you could get the  
whole current human population on some chunk 
of matter less massive than a grain of sand.
 
Problem is, it is still a finite thing, so if 
your population is doubling every generation,  
be that a couple decades or a couple millennia 
– and indeed it might be a couple nanoseconds  
for a digital civilization – you still use 
up an entire planet, every atom, in just 100  
generations. That’s exponential growth for you.
Now populations don’t grow exponentially in real  
terms, they grow quickly like that but 
in hiccups as the environment permits,  
they fill it up and hold there until a new 
improvement allows more growth. It is very easy  
to imagine a civilization curtailing its growth 
because it needed to, we’ve done this for most of  
our history, but there has to be some reason 
why you are. Otherwise anyone who feels like  
it and has the resources to grow exponentially, 
will do so. And the whole point of harvesting a  
galaxy is that as best as we can tell the stuff 
is all sitting there unused and waiting for us.
 
Except it is not really sitting there unused 
waiting for us. Patience is not a virtue in  
resource utilization. Some metal rich asteroid 
we detect today has a decent chance of being  
shattered into hard to collect dust or falling 
into a planet or gravity well. You can extract  
metals from a star, but it is harder. Indeed even 
black holes can be very useful to a civilization,  
but every minute that passes more entropy builds 
up and the Universe decays. Trying to tell folks  
that they have to let chunks of lifeless dead 
rock or burning globes of precious fuel sit  
around being wasted when they would like to use it 
for some productive end is hard. Especially when  
it isn’t likely to be a strictly philosophical 
issue for abstract discussion. It will be real  
uses like raising a family or crafting artificial 
wonders or supporting libraries and archives of  
knowledge and art, or powering research facilities 
trying to figure out how to beat entropy. 
 
The galaxy is full of valuable resources, 
wasting away, to an advanced civilization an  
untapped star isn’t a pretty object, but rather 
a monstrosity akin to watching a campfire made  
of books and food. Since it can supply life, 
every moment it's wasting its fuel not doing so  
is life being burned away. Only in scenarios 
where they are not of value – either because  
you can not practically make use of them or have 
some better source – can really be long lasting  
arguments against taking over the galaxy 
and utilizing all its resources. Otherwise  
it only represents a temporary or local delay. 
If you decide not to grow or harvest, it does  
not matter unless each nation on each planet you 
have also decides to, and then every generation  
the issue comes back up again and they must each 
decide to continue not growing or harvesting.
 
Of course I said planets there and the 
assumption of plurality might be premature.  
One common objection to this is that 
folks, whether they live on a computer  
or in some nutra-tank or mansion with a headset 
on, would skip on space colonization in favor  
of staying at home in virtual utopias.
This doesn’t work either though, because any  
virtual reality that could feel real enough to be 
universally appealing to potential space colonists  
so they stay home is also sophisticated enough 
that it's got smart machines that can pass for  
human in the VR settings. Which takes way, way 
more complexity than programming a simple clanking  
self-replicator to disassemble rocks and turn them 
into computer hardware, VR support equipment, and  
more copies of itself to be sent on spaceships to 
other systems. Honestly very little sophistication  
is involved in interstellar travel or harvesting 
asteroids to smelt into raw materials.  
So everybody might dive into VR and also refuse 
to leave the solar system where light lag would  
interfere in syncing and updates, but that 
doesn’t imply they left the galaxy alone.
 
Quite to the contrary, with no one interested 
in colonizing worlds, and all of them sublimely  
convinced VR or simulation is better, it still 
only takes one small group to adapt their  
technology to make harvester probes and they ought 
to have the tech for that long before they can  
make virtual worlds so good they match reality in 
terms of environment or simulated characters for  
interaction. If you can program a virtual human 
to carry on a conversation or life in a sim,  
you can program one to follow a star chart, hunt 
for giant rocks, and run mineral extraction,  
the former is orders of magnitude harder 
than the latter so you should be able to  
do the latter long before virtual utopias become 
universally addictive if that is what happens.
 
Which raises the question, how much 
processing power do you need? And  
how much can you jam into a solar system?
Well the answer is that you can really start  
squeezing stuff down if you want to. You could 
cram the entire galaxy into a volume smaller than  
would fit between us and the nearest star without 
it collapsing into being a black hole. We have a  
concept called a Matrioshka Brain, which can be 
summarized as a simple but enormous computer with  
a star in its basement able to virtually simulate 
entire galaxies with lots of processing power to  
spare, and you can upsize that to galactic terms. 
Ditto a Dyson Swarm of conventional Habitats,  
or even the grand daddy of artificial shellworld 
mega-planets, what we call the Birch Planet,  
which is a single huge planet containing 
more living space on its surface than  
every single plausible habitable planet 
in the Observable Universe would have.  
See the Mega-Earths episode for more 
discussion of that, or Colonizing Black Holes.
 
Now, getting to Galactic Domination, as we 
discussed last time, is very hard to run an empire  
galaxy-wide when signals take thousands of years 
to move around, but we do have empires on Earth  
that have lasted a long while with lag times of 
months between messages traveling from the capital  
to provinces. A civilization doesn’t need to send 
colonies to harvest the galaxy, they can just send  
out automated extractors to drag everything home, 
including colonies that got set up without their  
approval or current approval. They can drag it all 
into a tight core a handful of light years across,  
for their resource storage, and probably keep 
the actual civilization those resources fuel  
packed in even tighter if they like. Suddenly 
a galactic empire seems a lot more plausible.
 
Probably the best way to set that up is to move 
early, send out the automated harvesters as  
soon as the technology seems reliable. 
That way even if some escape the net,  
there isn’t all that much material for them to 
work with to threaten you, it all came home.
 
And this is only if you’re harvesting 
everything, not just asteroids or whole planets,  
but eating the stars too, which can conveniently 
power the operation. If you are only going for  
asteroids and rocky planets to bring home, you 
probably could squeeze all that material into  
something not much bigger than our solar system 
out to the Kuiper Belt without running risk of a  
Black Hole Collapse, for communication lag times 
of less than a day. It's only when you start  
eating whole stars by the billions that month or 
year communication lag times become an issue.
 
So there you have it, and if this was going on 
somewhere we would expect to see a massive black  
sphere of space from that direction where stars 
were being systematically consumed or englobed.  
We don’t see that, which means either it's 
something aliens don’t do for some reason  
or they can’t do it because 
they don’t exist. If the former,  
some other approach to galactic domination 
might be picked instead, if the latter, well,  
we might turn out to be the epicenter of such 
an expanding dark sphere in centuries to come.  
One vast dark galactic empire, packed into a 
tiny pocket of a remote part of the galaxy,  
at least until the harvester ships arrive 
to move the rest of the galaxy here.
 
One aspect of resource exploitation around the 
galaxy, or other galactic construction programs,  
is that presumably occasionally you have to be 
engaging projects that the local population might  
find less than welcome, like a hyperspace 
bypass, but someone has to let them know,  
and we see an example of that in the opening 
of Greg Bear’s Nebula Award winning novel,  
“The Forge of God”, which opens with humanity 
receiving an alien signal saying “I’m sorry,  
but there is bad news”. The Forge of God, 
and its sequel the Anvil of the Stars,  
give us a unique look at conquering the galaxy 
with self-replicating machines, one of the first  
detailed looks at in sci fi, and about justice 
and morality in colonization, extermination,  
and retribution, and I’m glad to name it our 
July 2021 SFIA Audible Audiobook of the Month.
 
Greg Bear is one of science fiction's 
best and most active authors,  
with dozen of wonderful titles to his credit, 
and you can find them all over on Audible.
 
Audible has the largest collection of Audiobooks 
out there, indeed it is so large you could hit the  
play button and still be listening to new titles a 
few centuries from now, and as an Audible member,  
you will get (1) credit every month good for 
any title in their entire premium selection—that  
means the latest best-seller, the buzziest 
new release, the hottest celebrity memoir  
or that bucket list title you’ve been meaning to 
pick-up. Those titles are yours to keep forever  
in your Audible library. You will also get 
full access to their popular Plus Catalog.  
It’s filled with thousands and thousands of 
audiobooks, original entertainment, guided  
fitness and meditation, sleep tracks for better 
rest and podcasts—including ad-free versions of  
your favorite shows and exclusive series. All are 
included with your membership so you can download  
and stream all you want—no credits needed.
And you can seamlessly listen to all of those on  
any device, picking up where you left off, and as 
always, new members can try Audible for 30 days,  
for free, just visit Audible dot com slash 
isaac or text isaac to 500-500. 
 
So we will be continuing our Galactic Domination 
series with the Galactic Laboratory at the end of  
this month, Thursday, July 29th but before that 
we also have our mid-month Scifi Sunday episode,  
Annoying Aliens, this weekend on July 11th, 
then next week we will be discussing whether  
we should go to Mars now or return to the 
Moon and establish a base their first.  
Then in two weeks we will jump into the distant 
future - or maybe not too distant future - to  
look at the End of Earth. We also have our End of 
the Month Livestream Q&A, on Sunday July 25th, and  
we will be teaming up this month with Rudyard of 
WhatIfAltHist for a collaboration episode looking  
at the Geopolitics of Space Colonization. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes  
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel, 
and if you’d like to help support future episodes,  
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website, 
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode  
description below, along with all of our various 
social media forums where you can get updates  
and chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas. You can  
also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud, or Spotify 
to get our audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
