The episode is sponsored by Skillshare.
For a human mind, the exploration of alien  
ruins could be almost as much a psychological 
labyrinth as a literal one, driving many mad. 
 
One of the most common tropes in science 
fiction, back to the dawn of science fiction,  
is that of the intrepid adventurer uncovering a 
mysterious artifact or exploring an alien ruin.  
It’s another Scifi Sunday here on the channel, 
where we let our hair down and explore more  
common scifi concepts to ask how realistic they 
might be. On today’s episode, we’ll be looking at  
how you might explore an alien relic or ruin 
and if and where you might encounter one.
 
Now, from a story-telling perspective, these 
objects are often irrelevant beyond being the  
inciting cause of the plot or initial character 
interactions, what’s commonly called a MacGuffin,  
but that’s hardly limited to science fiction 
as a trope. Whether it’s the titular Maltese  
Falcon or the suitcase from Pulp Fiction, its 
purpose in the story is to drive events simply  
by mysteriously existing. Somewhat parallel 
is the One Ring in the Lord of the Rings.  
It is not actually a MacGuffin, but we mostly 
see its fairly mundane power of invisibility  
while hearing about its Earth-shattering past 
and vast powers in the right or wrong hands,  
which as it turns out, is nearly everyone’s. 
We never see it do much else besides provide  
the temptation of power and control, and of 
course that’s its point in the story. Similarly,  
a science fiction story involving advanced alien 
technology treats it in much the same way, as some  
associated temptation, greed, or madness drives 
tension and problems to help further the plot.  
Even the alien ruins in the classic H.P. Lovecraft 
story, “At the Mountains of Madness”, is an iconic  
example of a story centred on alien elements, 
but even that example is really less about the  
alien elements and terrifying secrets than it 
is about the human responses to those things.
 
A more common example, but one that’s often 
overlooked, is the case of a continuing series,  
be it episodes or books, where the 
world-shattering insights or technology promised  
by an alien relic or ruin often never actually 
materialize. This gives rise to another trope,  
“Reed Richards is Useless” named for the 
super-scientist of Marvel’s Fantastic Four  
series, who seems to have an inventory 
of technologies which would end hunger  
and disease or environmental challenges, but none 
of these ever seem to make it out of his lab.
 
Something we want to consider today then is 
what really would happen if alien relics were  
uncovered and deciphered, suddenly giving us 
access to advanced technology? Of course a lot  
of folks think that’s how we got some of ours, 
by deciphering pyramid relics or crashed UFOS,  
so we’ll look at that today as well.
A common way of handling that in fiction  
is that the alien relics get boxed up and put 
in a secret bunker or warehouse - as we see  
with the Ark of the Covenant in Indiana Jones 
once its done melting the bad guys – or even  
destroyed to keep its secret from harming 
us or our society or the powers that be,  
and we’ll contemplate that today too.
Of course from a reader perspective it  
can often be frustrating when authors ignore all 
the potential benefits and effects of some new bit  
of super-tech, or all the plot holes around how 
the relic or ruins got made. From the author's  
perspective these often exist because they 
didn’t care, it didn’t matter to them what  
the big artifact actually did or if the reason 
given for the alien ruins coming into existence  
made sense because they are simply the backdrop 
for a fictional story or the motivator for it.  
We might ask why the heroes didn’t take more 
precautions before entering or why they didn’t  
nuke the dangerous place from orbit and fans 
sometimes argue over why not doing these things  
made sense, but the reality is the main cause 
was because there would have been no story  
if they had. The difference between a good writer 
and a bad writer is the latter typically gives  
plausibly good reasons for why the exploration 
occurred or writes such an otherwise good story  
their audience is willing to suspend disbelief.
To us, in the real world - probably - it certainly  
does matter why some alien outpost hidden 
in a remote part of Earth or on the Dark  
Side of the Moon or around a distant star 
got abandoned and nobody ever came back.  
That’s especially true when authors start talking 
about things which have been sitting around for  
millions or even billions of years, or sometimes 
are even artifacts from earlier Universes. 
 
As an example, if we’re in some classic 
space opera setting where the galaxy is  
full of alien races that wax and wane 
all the time, then there’s something  
especially worrisome if you’ve got a dead world 
that’s been left untouched for a million years  
full of ancient and powerful technology. 
Because if you’re out exploring and found it,  
presumably other folks from other 
civilizations did too, and either  
they wised up and didn’t land on it, or they did 
and the world swallowed up every trace of them.
 
But that’s not really plausible, either. 
Even in the case of rogue grave robbers  
from a civilization that frowns on disturbing 
dead worlds, someone should follow up to see  
why they disappeared. While they may not have 
left a record that they were out to plunder  
some alien ruins, their ship might still in 
orbit. Even assuming they didn’t leave a ship  
or crew elsewhere in that system, it would 
only be a matter of time and disappearances  
before someone builds a beacon saying “Hey, be 
cautious, this planet seems to eat explorers.”
 
Of course we often have humans as new kids on the 
block, but curious ones, who get warned by older  
aliens not to venture to Planet X or Z'ha'dum or 
the Necron Tombworld where peril lies and no one  
returns from. Which gets promptly ignored, 
partially because little is actually known,  
and given that beacons warning people to 
stay away presumably only last so long,  
it is plausible that everybody stays away 
while the beacon is up, then stories and  
rumors of the dangers persist increasingly 
vaguely for some centuries or millennia,  
until finally getting vague enough that someone 
decides to ignore them and venture forth. Possibly  
this would result in many cycles of re-discovery 
and explorer loss and ruin quarantine.
 
That’s also a bit more plausible in some respects, 
since two of the big technologies any civilization  
planning to persist a while should want are 
ultra-durable or self-repairing materials that  
withstand millions of years of wear and erosion. 
And as we’ll be discussing in our upcoming episode  
Human-Machine Teaming, one of the probable 
directions AI might take inside civilizations  
is the helper who is invisible not by being 
secret but simply by being the non-squeaky wheel.  
It just does its job in the background so well 
that nobody pays it heed or gives it orders,  
and so it just keeps on repairing the building 
until hell freezes over and keeps guarding the  
building and resetting its traps until it reaches 
it preset maximum kill count or runs out of  
cake or the Universe experiences Heat Death.
Ironically, I could imagine that for something  
like an actual museum, one purpose built for that 
role and not just the last unintentional relic of  
a civilization. A museum has valuable stuff in 
it that’s not meant to be taken, in some cases  
for the express purpose of its preservation, and 
automation is likely going to cut down on the  
expenses associated with that care. It’s a bit 
of a joke with some city managers I know that,  
given long enough, every building in the city 
gets registered as a historical building. Since  
it’s often a big drain on budgets to keep them 
running, AI might be able to help with that a lot.  
To be fair, I can’t imagine the Smithsonian in DC 
or the Natural History Museum in London employing  
lethal or arcane traps to protect its contents, 
but I could also imagine an AI left alone at a  
task of guarding a place for millennia, long after 
its creators died, going more than a bit bonkers.  
And of course some civilization might be much 
less tolerant and non-lethal toward thieves.  
Or alternatively have traps that dumped people 
into simulated realities to rehabilitate them,  
possibly mazes meant to challenge and correct.
A museum though is a decent explanation for why  
archives intentionally left for others to 
find might be tricky. If a civilization or  
its handful of survivors knows its on the way 
out from some calamity, they might well build  
some archive for those who follow after to find – 
either a warning or a history. We see an example  
of the latter in the award-winning Star Trek: 
The Next Generation episode “The Inner Light”,  
a personal favorite. However, as we discussed 
in our Episode Dead Aliens, there is a chance  
the archive they leave might be instructions 
for how to resurrect them in some fashion.  
Or alternatively, a trap designed to let them 
body snatch the explorers and live on inside  
them like some possessing demons. If it’s a 
warning though, you have to wonder why they  
didn’t or couldn’t heed it, and if the warning 
would actually benefit whoever received it.
 
I also posed a mystery of what killed those 
aliens off in that Dead Aliens episode,  
and while its been a while, last time I checked 
I had only one person offer the correct answer.  
I won’t give it here, since it's become 
a bit of a mystery unintentionally,  
though I’ll add that unlike some writers I 
could name, I don’t throw my audience great  
mysteries for whole books or seasons I’m too 
lazy to come up with an actual answer for.
 
Insane AI acting as the Archivist 
or Librarian can’t be ruled out,  
nor can alien behavior or psychology that drives 
a human mad when attempting to decipher it,  
especially if it was a warning of an existential 
crisis that wiped them out. However, beyond that  
such a ruin should not be hard to find as it’s 
presumably intended to be that way. You want  
things to be found and understood, and thus are 
more likely to put your effort into minimizing  
the effort required by future explorers.
One exception that comes to mind can be found in  
one of our most-referenced books on the show, “The 
Mote in God's Eye”, where an alien race prone to  
perpetual cycles of self-collapse into barbarism, 
have created a museum to help facilitate their  
recovery after each subsequent collapse. In cases 
like that you’d obviously want the place found,  
but might only want it to happen at a certain 
point, or for it to be unlocked in stages,  
restricting access to certain knowledge. Such 
being the case, you might have many archives,  
each located elsewhere that get found at certain 
stages of advancement, or one archive with puzzles  
of increasing complexity or scientific 
understanding required to unlock new bits.  
The Asgard of the Stargate Franchise seem to 
follow this particular route, and something  
similar seems implied with the unknown 
aliens in the 2001: A Space Odyssey series. 
 
Sticking something in hard to reach places such 
as the peak of the highest mountain, the exact  
North or South Pole, or on the dark side of the 
moon, might be one good approach to this sort  
of staggered archive design. Incidentally most 
moons will be tidally locked and have that side  
you can’t see from the planet, the occasionally 
misnamed Dark Side, except in the context of being  
unseen and unknown to those on the world. You aim 
to pick a place that people can’t reach until they  
get to a certain level, but also somewhere they 
are almost bound to take a look at eventually.  
You’d also probably want to pick out several 
spots just for the sake of redundancy, since  
having your all-inspiring archive at the bottom 
of the deepest undersea trench or the center of  
the biggest asteroid crater might not only get 
missed but also might not stay #1, no longer  
the deepest part of the sea or highest mountain 
peak. Planetary poles can change for instance.
 
But this is assuming that the alien ruin or 
relic you’ve uncovered was meant to be found,  
and so it was either placed in a 
significant location or near to one.  
We’ll get to asking what might get left behind 
unintentionally by a dead or departed civilization  
in a moment, but another option is that the relic 
is your world. It’s a popular notion that aliens  
might have seeded life on Earth long ago or seeded 
civilization more recently, both have been common  
storylines in science fiction and are also popular 
candidates for real history in both older human  
mythology and many a modern belief too, see our 
Ancient Aliens episode for a discussion of that. 
 
Douglas Adams put an interesting twist on it 
in his famous Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy  
series, where Earth was built to be a computer 
for figuring out the Ultimate Answer to Life,  
the Universe, and Everything… or rather, the 
Ultimate Question, since a previous smaller  
computer had already determined the Ultimate 
Answer to be 42. That series also features  
a civilization that builds planets, Earth having 
been one of their bigger commissions, and building  
artificial worlds is certainly something we 
would expect of an advanced civilizations,  
be they artificial planets or merely classic 
rotating space habitats like the O’Neill Cylinder,  
or even goliath stellar-class habitats in 
the Dyson Sphere or Birch Planet range.
 
Perhaps it’s also worth noting that even in that 
case, with a purpose-built planet-sized computer,  
it still ended up being accidentally paved 
over for a cosmic highway, which is probably  
a good example of the designers not putting Earth 
somewhere that kind of thing wouldn’t eventually  
become an issue. If you’ve got some planetary 
experiment or world packed full of treasure then  
sticking it out in the middle of nowhere has a lot 
going for it, and we see this with another Scifi  
classic, Isaac Asimov’s Foundation series, where 
the Foundation world of the new empire, Terminus,  
is placed way off at the edge of the galaxy rather 
than near its center where the old capital was. 
 
Of course the colonists on Terminus were 
unaware of their role as future capital,  
merely that they were a protected archive of 
knowledge far from troubles and distractions.  
Alternatively, the secret power 
behind them, the second foundation,  
was quietly built right on top of the ruins of 
that old capital now inhabited by farmers who  
grew their crops among the ruins of millions 
of grand palaces and plazas. It is not hard to  
imagine that a post-technological remnant of 
a civilization might live among the collapsed  
ash heap of their empire and view it as 
a reminder of past wonders and hubris,  
fallen Babylon. In such a case they might not 
explore their ruins but adventurers from far away  
might do so, with or without their blessing.
Which raises another interesting point, in  
that one way a civilization might discover alien 
ruins is by realizing their world itself was one.  
That they are dwelling on the remnant of an 
artificial world made by their precursors,  
and possibly progenitors. Maybe they are direct 
genetic descendants, maybe some subordinate race  
kept as slaves - or pets, since given enough time 
and the right conditions, something like cats or  
dogs might evolve to be an intelligent species. It 
might also be an experiment, which would also help  
to explain the disappearance of those progenitors. 
They might not have really disappeared,  
in favor of hiding and monitoring the situation, 
or may have been victims of their own experiment,  
some lab creation run amok that wiped them out 
and which left you behind, or turned into you. 
 
One of our more popular disaster 
scenarios for civilizations is grey goo,  
runaway self-replicating machines that disassemble 
everything to make copies of themselves, and as we  
often note, grey goo is not that dissimilar 
to the green goo believed to have arisen on  
this world and evolved into our own diverse 
ecosystem. It is plausible enough to believe  
that something which wiped out a civilization 
might not remember that it did. Possibly because  
it was dumb and became smart, possibly because 
time is the great eraser, possibly because a  
civilization that wiped someone out might choose 
to forget a couple generations later or be wiped  
out itself by its own offspring, ashamed at 
the act or simply looking to emulate it.
 
By and large though, civilizations don’t schedule 
doomsdays, and while a lot of them probably would  
have an “In Case of Apocalypse” plan or bunker 
in place, by and large if some calamity is on the  
way, many folks are going to be want to divert 
resources being spent on preserving the memory  
of the civilization to projects which prevent 
it from needing such an archive to begin with.  
Which is often a good idea. You don’t build 
a bunker to handle an incoming asteroid,  
you build a detection grid and swarm of long range 
nuclear missiles with multi megaton packages. You  
might be better off doing both but you can’t 
prepare for everything and money spent building  
the End of the World Bunker could probably see 
better use invested into many other projects. 
 
So assuming the ruins are just what got left 
unintentionally, what might those look like?  
I often joke that based on known archeology, if 
you find a big building full of books it's a lot  
less likely you found their library or museum 
than their tax records or courthouse dockets.  
The basic notion there is that you are far 
more likely to encounter the mundane when  
digging around a ruin, simply because there is 
so much more mundane stuff than there is exotic.  
Indeed this is the fundamental concept behind 
the Mediocrity Principle or Copernican Principle  
which science uses as its bedrock. So when 
exploring ruins in some alien world’s bedrock,  
we should tend to assume they are not exotic 
until proven otherwise. Take for instance the  
real-world example of pottery shards, or 
broken clay pipes, which can actually be  
used with great accuracy to date a site and 
make guesses about the folks who lived there.  
A lot of what we learn about older civilizations, 
even the ones who wanted to be remembered,  
is done by digging through their trash. 
You can obviously learn a lot from the mundane,  
but the random stuff left behind in that way 
is more likely to be mediocre examples of that  
civilization’s achievements, rather than their 
ultimate works. Now it's true that things they  
prized might have been built to be more durable, 
but often what’s built durable is something that  
needs to be durable, like a bridge or a dam or 
some bunker around a dangerous lab or experiment  
or reactor. We don’t typically build sculptures to 
those standards, and even if we did, it’s likely  
that most of the exterior details and complexities 
would still be weathered away over the years.  
What might once have been a beautiful statue could 
eventually end up looking like an amorphous blob.
 
The classic film The Planet of the 
Apes ends with the scene of Charlton  
Heston chewing the scenery while lamenting 
his discovery that the planet he was on  
had actually been Earth all along. This is because 
he found the remnants of the Statue of Liberty.  
In practice, even if New York City had been 
repeatedly nuked, there should still be  
considerably more obvious relics of humanity there 
than that statue, because there really is not much  
intrinsic durability in a big human shaped 
statue sitting on an island on the coast. Of  
course in the sequel, we find that other things 
have survived as well, like the Subway system,  
and a hoard of mutant telepaths who worship 
an unexploded atomic bomb or doomsday device.
 
But that really is the sort of thing 
that might unintentionally survive.  
Not an atomic bomb specifically, since those 
involve materials that are short-lived and  
decay in a fashion that damages the rest of the 
device, but a classic doomsday device is the sort  
of thing you probably store in a very safe place, 
including safe from time and natural disaster,  
and which you might have built with a 
lot of sturdiness and redundancy in mind.  
It is also exactly the sort of place you might 
put an AI in charge of guarding, because the thing  
about a super-weapon is that it’s a better option 
to lose the keys to it or forget your password,  
so to speak, so no one can have it, then 
to lose it to someone who wasn’t supposed  
to have it, or have it accidentally go off. 
So it is the sort of thing you might guard with a  
robot who was absolutely implacable, merciless and 
unreasoning when it came to unauthorized visitors  
and who did not care when you tried to prove 
to it that its creators were long extinct.  
It’s got a job, to protect the weapon from 
anyone who isn’t authorized to play with it,  
that everyone who is authorized to 
use it is now dead changes nothing. 
 
The same applies to dangerous experiments. Those 
you might build inside very sturdy and durable  
facilities with a ton of automation. Now a common 
concept for how a civilization might get wiped out  
is by one of those experiments, hence why secure 
and durable facilities for them full of traps  
for explorers might make sense. But we tend to 
assume those experiments got out of their box  
and that’s what ended civilization. On the other 
hand, it's entirely possible your civilization has  
been keeping a lot of entirely different dangerous 
and terrifying experiments, prisoners, relics of  
even older civilizations, and doomsday weapons in 
various secure facilities. Maybe one of those got  
out of its containment, ending the world leaving 
the others behind. Genie’s in their bottles, boxes  
tempting Pandora, gateways needing unlocking.
I mentioned a while ago that some stories with  
MacGuffin’s have characters driven to insanity by 
them, and this of course is one potentially good  
reason you might box the relic up and hide it. As 
a result you might get a rather cyclical doomsday,  
like some insanity-inspiring twisted AI or alien 
mind-upload that carried in its head something  
like an existential crisis of why existence 
was pointless that wrecked its civilization  
and just gets passed around to new 
civilizations, bringing around ruin.  
For that matter one way to keep powerful AI around 
for emergencies that often gets overlooked is to  
simply keep them shut off when not in use, so 
some explorers unboxing the thing is plausible.
 
That’s another worry with an alien artifact. 
They might be intended to be discovered by  
curious minds not out of friendship but hostility, 
something like a poison pill meant to be carried  
back to a species nest – or homeworld – to wipe 
them out, possibly by some virus-like concept  
or existential crisis. Possibly by playing on 
their curiosity or greed for new technology.  
Possibly just as a cheap beacon to let 
the alien overlords know something new  
and smart has arisen and needs wiping out. 
That’s a popular notion in scifi too, and a  
key plot point in the book series I recommend most 
on this show, Alastair Reynolds’ Revelation Space.  
However, as we’ve noted in some of our alien 
civilization series episodes, this is not really  
an effective or efficient means of killing species 
off. You don’t need some eye-catching trap aliens  
find and switch on, proving they’re around and 
need killing, there’s a ton of ways to sterilize a  
galaxy of all life or monitor for life emerging or 
even just monitor for intelligent life emerging.  
You’ve probably heard about how you can see our 
cities from space these days, at night time,  
but all those ancient walls and canals 
and roads we built in pre-modern times  
were clearly visible from space too, just 
not necessarily to the naked human eyeball. 
 
Since we can assume that spacefaring aliens have 
something more advanced than the mark 1 eyeball,  
potentially even satellites with infrared monitors 
that can pick up obviously artificial campfires  
like we already have, then they don’t need to be 
waiting around for civilizations to emit radio  
waves or poke at some alien beacon on the moon 
or another world. Indeed given that any galactic  
empire or galactic predator presumably is one 
that’s pretty powerful over very long periods  
of time, to even contemplate building such beacons 
let alone keeping them running, we should assume  
their tech is durable enough to allow them to 
construct a few trillion satellites and send a few  
dozen to orbit around each life-plausible world.
Such being the case, the alien trap meant to lure  
folks in seems implausible, because it's too 
much work when easier options are available.  
Though we could also imagine a relic being a lost 
ship or a crashed satellite meant for observing.  
Spaceships are generally likely to be more 
durable than their crew and passengers,  
possibly even if their crew and passengers are 
post-biological, so finding one crashed a million  
years ago on an airless moon or floating 
through deep space is decently plausible,  
but we wouldn’t expect anything remarkable to be 
on board. Of course an advanced civilization’s  
mundane tech and even their garbage is a 
less advanced civilization’s treasure.
 
So that covers most options for why you 
might have some alien artifact or relic,  
but before closing we should always 
remember one key thing about exploring them.  
Whatever made them get abandoned might still be 
around, you wouldn’t want to assume a civilization  
wiped out by a biological virus left nothing nasty 
behind, like that virus. If you find an artifact,  
there is a reason it was made, and a reason no 
one who built it is still hanging around. If you  
find ruins, there’s a reason they are ruins.
In reality I’d not expect to find vast troves  
of alien archeology to do, because I’d not expect 
to find alien civilizations. However, the sheer  
scale of any galactic civilization is one that is 
likely to see untold trillions of ruins around,  
simply because of all the untold quadrillions or 
quintillions of them that might be made. If you  
build a trillion O’Neill Habitats in a given solar 
system, then even if only 1% of them ever spend  
any time abandoned, and even if that’s only about 
a decade out of millennia lifespan, than that  
would still mean at any given moment there 
would be 100 million derelict space habitats  
in that system, and nearly a trillion systems in 
a galaxy each with their own trillions of habitats  
and hundreds of millions of derelicts. 
If of that 100 million derelicts though,  
we assumed only 1% spent got lost in the shuffle 
and spent many decades or centuries rusting away  
abandoned, that’s still a million ancient relics 
to explore, in each of a trillion systems.  
So plenty to keep a Xenoarchaeologist busy, 
even if it’s examining relics of extinguished  
human and post-human civilizations 
rather than aliens who predated us. 
 
I was commenting early on the absurdity 
of the Statue of Liberty being the only  
blatant sign of Old Earth left behind on The 
Planet of Apes, but it’s a thing to remember,  
that the longer civilizations are around, the more 
junk they leave behind. This being the reason for  
the old joke that whatever a city was originally 
built on, be it a coastline or riverbank or hill,  
forest or sand or swamp, after a long enough 
time what it’s really built on is itself. 
 
There’s a classic Dying Earth fantasy 
series “Book of the New Sun” by Gene  
Wolfe, where our protagonist wanders around the 
world and after a long enough time if you’re  
paying attention you realize the landscape 
is all layer upon layer of old civilizations,  
the mountains ancient super-buildings 
and monuments, folks with the job title  
of ‘miner’ really being grave robber 
or garbage sorter or archeologist.  
And by the same reasoning of scale as from a 
moment ago, but in the sense of time not just  
size and population, we really would expect to 
see ancient civilizations leaving ruins behind,  
layer after layer, all over the galaxy. Many 
might be hidden too, but odds are in most cases  
not intentionally but simply covered by the 
sands of time, only to be uncovered long ahead. 
 
And who knows, maybe our civilization will be 
uncovered one day, maybe even this video.
 
There’s a fairly large number of authors and 
writers in our show’s audience and many aspiring  
to write a novel or improve their skill with 
fiction, and if you’re interested in upping your  
game, there’s a great video course by Professor 
Lincoln Michel on “Science Fiction & Fantasy:  
Creating Unique and Powerful Worlds” 
available over on Skillshare. He has  
some excellent discussion on worldbuilding and 
also how to find new angles on classic tropes,  
to turn the cliche back into the fascinating. So 
if today’s episode inspired you to write a story,  
and you want some pointers on plots and 
design, check out his video lesson on it.
 
Skillshare is an online learning community 
for creatives and Skillshare has classes  
to fit your schedule and skill level. 
It’s curated specifically for learning,  
meaning there are no ads, and they’re always 
launching new premium classes, so you can stay  
focused and follow wherever your creativity takes 
you. Skillshare is where millions come together to  
take the next step in their creative journey, 
and Members get unlimited access to thousands  
of inspiring classes, with hands-on projects 
and feedback from a community of millions. If  
you’d like to give it a try, the first 1,000 of my 
subscribers to click the link in the description  
will get a 1 month free trial of Skillshare so 
you can start exploring your creativity today!
 
So this wraps us up for today but 
we’ll be back this Thursday for a  
look at Fusion Propulsion designs and concepts 
for Spaceships before closing the Month out  
by heading all the way out to the Edge of the 
Universe, on Thursday, August 26th, then we’ll  
have our Monthly Livestream Q&A on Sunday, August 
29th at 4 pm Eastern Time. Then we’ll leap into  
September with a look at the Future of Thorium.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes  
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel, 
and if you’d like to help support future episodes,  
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website, 
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode  
description below, along with all of our various 
social media forums where you can get updates  
and chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas. You can  
also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud, or Spotify 
to get our audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
