This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
In the future, the brightest empires will
be born around dying stars.
Colonizing other star systems in this galaxy
is probably one of the most foundational topics
we cover on this show, and a few weeks back
we looked at colonizing red dwarfs, those
smallest of stars which outnumber all the
other types of stars combined.
I mentioned at the time that even though they
were the most numerous, they were far less
bright, amounting to less than a percent of
the current starlight in the Universe, and
that they probably wouldn’t have the most
planets either.
Both those honors belong to giant stars, and
I thought we should follow up looking at colonizing
dwarf stars by looking at colonizing giant
ones too.
As we will see today, such systems around
giant stars may be crowded with dozens of
planets, all potentially habitable, and each
taking decades or even centuries to orbit
their star.
However, as I was writing that sequel, I began
feeling likely it was a topic that needed
to be broken into a few episodes instead,
so this week is not just a sequel episode
but also the first of three episodes, or the
second of four perhaps.
In a couple weeks we will follow up with Killing
Stars, where we will look at those giants
so big they go supernova and if and how we
can manage them or even colonizing them.
Then after that we will go the opposite direction
and ask about living without stars, colonizing
the deep voids between them or even between
galaxies, in Exo-Stellar Civilizations.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and this will be a longer episode, so if you
haven’t already grabbed a drink and a snack,
now’s a great time to do so.
Giant stars can cover a pretty big range of
systems, since the term itself has a bit of
vagueness.
We will be looking at all the types of giants
today which are larger than our sun, but too
small to go supernova, saving those for the
next installment of the series.
The term dwarf and giant, when applied to
stars, is essentially a relic term of when
we could basically only see their color and
make a loose guess as to their distance.
All stars are white, but will have a peak
spectrum associated with the surface temperature.
If you know roughly how far a star is away,
then by taking its apparent brightness to
our eyes and instruments, you can calculate
its actual brightness or luminosity, and from
that, if you know its temperature or peak
wavelength, you can determine its surface
area and from that its radius.
A star twice as hot as another for instance
gives off 2^4 more energy per unit of surface
area, or 16 times as much, while an object
10 times further away would give off 10-squared
or 100 times less light.
When plotting this data on a chart with peak
wavelength on one axis and luminosity on the
other, we started noticing that they’re
mostly grouped into two fairly distinct categories,
or sequences and we named the physically big
and very bright stars “giants”, and named
the more numerous dimmer and smaller stars
on the main sequence “dwarfs”, a word
which now is synonymous with a star burning
hydrogen during the first phase of its life.
At the time we could disproportionately see
the brighter stars, and we could not even
see M-type Red Dwarf Stars, which make up
the majority of stars, and thus the dwarf
and giant monikers made sense.
Also at the time we often called them old
and young stars, as we did not know about
nuclear fusion yet and assumed that stars
glowed brightly when they were young and cooled
as they aged, this terminology has been dropped
but stuck around as a relic for quite a while
after we figured out fusion drove stars.
Giants and dwarfs fit better but are still
relics and don’t work well, as it means
that 99% of stars are labeled dwarfs, including
our own sun.
Of course it depends a lot on what we mean
by ‘bigger’ and in this context I mean
mass but volume and brightness also work.
The more massive a star is, the bigger and
brighter it is, but the biggest stars are
always those that have left the main sequence,
stopped burning hydrogen, and expanded to
become red giants or even red supergiants.
Stars get hotter, rather than colder, as they
age, and eventually reach a phase called subgiant,
then their red giant phase after that.
The period a star spends in those latter two
phases varies a lot but will generally be
more than a percent but less than 10% of their
main sequence period.
So shorter but not so short we want to ignore
these objects for colonization.
Indeed stars the mass of our sun might see
these late periods last a full billion years,
whereas a star just twice as massive as our
sun will barely live a billion years on the
main sequence.
Stars smaller than our own stun, which is
the vast majority of them, will have even
longer red giant phases.
Though interestingly since stars the mass
of our sun live 10 billion years before going
red giant, and the Universe has only been
forming stars for a few billion years longer
than that, there are no red giants formed
from stars 10% less massive than our sun,
and few even of our size.
The universe just isn’t old enough for these
to have come to exist yet.
Yet red giants, and subgiants, are quite common,
indeed they will generally be more common
than stars twice as massive as our Sun simply
because those are so short lived.
So our primary interest today will be to look
at these three categories of stars: First,
those stars 2 to 8 times more massive than
our own sun but not big enough to go supernova
and which are also still on the main sequence,
which are not proper giants under the nomenclature
we explained earlier.
Second, the sub-giants, which are that range
leaving the main sequence but not true giants
yet, and a fairly distinct category.
Third, the red giants, those stars now burning
helium.
We will ignore the main sequence Stellar Classes
of F, G, and K, G being our Sun and F being
those a bit bigger while K a bit smaller.
Incidentally each stellar classification,
like F, G, and K, also divides into 10 sub-types,
0-9, with 0 hottest and 9 coldest.
Our Sun is a G-2 Type V sun, the 5 being in
roman numerals and thus folks often will incorrectly
say “V” and that indicates a star on the
main sequence, or a star burning hydrogen
in its core.
I’m guilty of doing that myself incidentally,
I made note that B2V stars are the ones on
the cusp of being able to go supernova, and
thus for discussion in that future episode,
and everytime I look at it I mentally pronounce
it as “B2-V”, bad habit but also a common
one even with astronomers in my experience.
A III in roman numerals indicates a giant,
a IV a subgiant, in the Yerkes Luminosity
Class, 0, I, and II are hypergiants and supergiants,
and we will save those for another day.
Today we will look at 3 example stars, Vega,
Procyon, and Arcturus, the 5th, 8th, and 4th
brightest stars in the night sky respectively,
and an example of a larger main sequence star,
a subgiant, and a red giant, again respectively.
Incidentally the brightest star, Sirius, is
fairly similar to Vega but wasn’t selected
today as an example, even though it’s closer,
because it is a binary with a white dwarf
companion.
We will talk about binary systems today but
I wanted to start with single-system examples.
You can also see our Stellar Compendium episode
for a deeper dive into star classification
and history.
Vega is a type A-0 star, the hottest of A
type stars, and is 2.1 times more massive
than our sun, 2.4 times wider, and fully 40
times brighter.
Vega is only 25 light years from Earth, making
it pretty close as things go and the reason
why it is the fifth brightest star in our
sky without being a giant of any type.
It is our closest example for today, but there
are still over a hundred star systems closer
to us, and we will want to start by asking
what Vega has going for it to appeal to would-be
colonists, these future Vegans?
Of course proximity is the top of that list,
and fame too, there are good odds all the
named stars that are regularly and easily
visible to the naked eye will be easier to
find colonists for, and Vega again is the
fifth brightest star and also used to be our
north star several thousand years ago and
will be again in several thousand more.
Incidentally, Polaris, the current northernmost
star, is a yellow supergiant 5 times more
massive than our own sun, or includes a yellow
supergiant, it is a triple-star system and
we’ll return to it later today too.
Vega is surprisingly low in metallicity – elements
heavier than hydrogen or helium – for a
star as young as it is.
Usually the older a star is, the less metallicity
it has, as the Universe had less of such elements
earlier on, but that’s only a general rule
of thumb, a star’s metallicity is mostly
determined by the nearest supernova in whatever
Nebula it formed from, but as the Universe
ages the overall metallicity rises.
Vega is about half a billion years old, about
a tenth our Sun’s age, but is also about
halfway through its life, same as our Sun.
It started to shine about the time life was
crawling out of our oceans.
While it’s metallicity is fairly low for
a star so young, it does have a thick circumstellar
disk of dust, which results in an excess emission
of infrared light emitted from that dust after
it absorbs sunlight, and indeed stars with
this behavior are termed “Vega-like stars”.
Other interesting notes, Vega was the first
star besides our sun ever photographed, and
it also varies in brightness quite a lot,
and rotates very rapidly, about twice a day
compared to the monthly rotational rate of
our Sun, though exact rotation velocity is
hard to see because Vega not only is up near
our celestial north pole, but also has its
own polar axis pointing toward us.
We’re not sure what the cause of the dust
ring is, but the most popular solution is
that it’s from a planetary collision.
The inner boundary of that debris ring is
fully 100 AU out, a hundred times further
from Vega than Earth is from our Sun, so this
is more like a Kuiper Belt than an Asteroid
Belt, even accounting for Vega being brighter.
We suspect Vega of having planets but it is
basically at the worst possible angle to use
for detection, showing us its poles not its
equator, and while that is handy for detecting
a big ring of dust around it, that is awful
for planetary detection.
This is where Habitable Zones come into play.
Now the Habitable Zone of a star system, or
Goldilocks Zone, or CHZ, Circumstellar Habitable
Zone, is hypothetically where a planet could
be in terms of distance from its star and
support life, but specifically is where we
think a planet could be and have liquid water
on its surface, and that’s vague too, estimates
vary from as little as just a few percent
closer or further from the Sun than Earth
is to as much as ten times further out.
Since today we are not contemplating stars
with naturally evolved civilizations around
them – Vega for instance is not even a giant
star yet and still will only live around a
billion years, we might as well be on the
more generous side of habitable zones.
Planets we could as easily terraform to be
Earthlike as Mars or Venus, without using
solar mirrors or shades, in favor of manipulating
the atmosphere’s insulative traits and just
adapting to a warmer or colder climate.
We will keep it fairly round at half the distance
to twice the distance from the Sun as Earth
is, in terms of relative brightness anyway.
A star twice the distance from our Sun only
gets a quarter of the light, and one half
the distance, four times the light.
Vega though gives off 40 times the light our
Sun does, and thus to get the light Earth
does, a planet would need to be 6.33 AU away,
further from Vega than Jupiter is from our
Sun.
If we are assuming our Sun’s habitable Zone
was half an AU to 2 AU, then Vega’s analog
would be about 3 AU to 13 AU.
That is an enormous range, and would still
be big enough for multiple planets to be in
it if we picked a more constrained CHZ width
of something like a tenth closer or further
from its sun, not double or half as we did.
Incidentally the year length will vary a lot.
In our system, a planet twice as far from
the Sun has a year of almost 3 Earth years,
while a planet half as far from the Sun would
have a year of only about 4 months.
That would be the upper and lower lengths
of years on the Goldilocks Zone of our Sun
for our picked lighting of a fourth to four
times what Earth gets.
Alternatively around Vega, the Earth-like
year length is 11 Earth years long, and would
vary from 4 years to 32 years on the inner
and outer edge of Vega’s Goldilocks Zone.
The more massive an object is, the more quickly
things orbit at a given distance.
But that period goes with the square root
of mass, a star needs to be 4 times more massive
than our Sun to make a planet orbit in half
the time at the same distance, and a hundred
times more massive to make it orbit in a tenth
the time, again at the same distance.
However, luminosity of a star rises far faster,
at somewhere between the cube and fourth power
of mass, and brightness only falls off with
the inverse square of distance, thus the brighter
stars are, the longer the year length they
will have for habitable planets.
In many of our bigger examples, especially
of red giants whose brightness rises even
though their mass stays the same, habitable
zone year lengths will rise to centuries or
even millennia.
Now that is important for a couple reasons.
First, such long years help emphasize why
we can pack so many planets into these system’s
habitable zones, they have an enormous volume
of space and slow orbits so that planetary
perturbation and merger or collisions should
be relatively reduced, add into that the shorter
lifetimes for such perturbations and collisions
to have occurred in and you might get systems
swimming with planets.
Second, such long years make seasonal variation
pretty extreme and argues against habitable
zones being quite that wide as we offered
earlier, half to double.
We can contemplate lifeforms able to survive
cold hibernation of months, but centuries
is another story, and we formally begin our
summer and winter seasons with the longest
and shortest day of the year because it takes
time for the planet’s temperature to catch
up to whatever the temperature should be for
that increase or decrease in lighting, but
it takes a month or two, and would on a planet
around a brighter star too, even if that planet
had a century between its solstices.
Again it does not matter as much as it did
when looking at red dwarfs or other yellow
suns like ours because we are not talking
about naturally occurring life.
Vega is on the small side for main sequence
“giants” for today’s use of giant to
include just stars 2-8 times as massive as
our own and still main sequence, but a star
8 times more massive won’t live about a
billion years, it will live more like 50 million
years, less time than it has been since the
dinosaurs exited the stage, not even enough
time for a planet to have finished coalescing
and cooling to form a planet water could be
on.
So we’re just not talking about natural
life, only what we add, barring maybe the
simplest microbes for the smaller stellar
examples like Vega.
On the far end, up around 8 solar masses where
stars begin ending their lives as supernova,
and only live tens of millions of years, we
have plenty of examples because they are so
easy to see far away, but they are rare, there’s
only Vega at the top of the A-type stars and
beyond then it goes into the B-type blue stars,
and out of the over ten thousand stars within
a hundred light years of us, only a handful
are B-type: Regulus, Algorab, Algol, and Alpheratz,
and none of those 4 are even 4 solar masses.
Such stars, and those more massive yet, also
tend to be multi-star systems more often than
not, which can often have a big impact on
habitable zones.
Again Polaris, the North Star, would be one
such example, and with its three stars all
nominally inside each other's habitable zones
it's difficult to imagine any stable planets
around them.
Two binaries in close orbit, which is common,
just have a wider habitable zone for planets
that orbit both, while those in distant orbits,
also common enough, would have two separate
habitable zones nowhere near each other, but
those in the medium distance can have habitable
zones overlapping or nearly touching and you
could get some weird examples where a planet
orbiting one star would have been a bit too
cold on its own just from that star but was
warmed enough by the other to be habitable
and have a double seasonal cycle based on
its normal year and axial tilt, and how often
that other Sun was nearer or further from
it too.
The rough border zone for stars to go Supernova,
and thus for discussion in our next episode
on Killing Stars, is those that are main sequence
B2 stars.
Just a bit smaller, the nearest B3’s are
Alpha Pavonis, also called Peacock, at 180
light years away, at 5.9 Solar Masses and
Alkaid, the leftmost star in the Big Dipper,
at 6.1 solar masses and just over 100 light
years away, neither could go supernova at
that mass.
If you found an Earth-like planet, in terms
of lighting, around Alpha Pavonis or Peacock,
that planet would need to be orbiting 47 AU
out – well beyond Pluto’s distance – and
would orbit Peacock every 130 years.
Such a planet would need a strong ozone layer
from the sheer amount of Ultraviolet light
it would get from this star being 3 times
hotter than our own with a correspondingly
blue-shifted spectrum.
Using our half and double distance habitable
zone range, planets in it would orbit between
45 to 370 years.
Values are a bit iffy here too, as we suspect
it of being a close binary.
Should we colonize such systems?
And if so, how?
Well it's common to say no given how short
a time they live, and yet I think that’s
an example of how often we let our non-intuitive
sense of astronomic scales of space and time
interfere in our thinking.
Some star might only live 50 million years,
but that’s still nearly a million times
longer than you or I would live and represents
a couple million generations for humanity.
We have only had a couple hundred generations
of recorded history, and that’s being generous
given that you could barely fill a single
book with all the recorded history of the
first half of that.
Humanity has been around a lot longer than
that, but even a generous definition of human
probably only could be stretched to a hundred
thousand generations or so, and thus still
only represent a few percent of the lifespans
of these shorter lived stars.
Indeed even the shortest lived stars, the
genuine supergiants that go boom, live around
as long as humanity has been around.
Given that, it's hard to argue it doesn’t
make sense to colonize these stars.
Their planets might not be ideal for terraforming,
numerous though they are likely to be, simply
as they might not be done cooling and there
are likely to be a lot of protoplanets and
dwarfs still hanging around that haven’t
merged or been collected as moons yet too.
However such stars give off dozens or even
thousands of times more light than our Sun
does, and likely will have far more available
mass orbiting them to build stuff like megastructures,
space habitats, and solar collectors out off.
We build houses and call them old if they’ve
been around a century, spending decades building
an O’Neill Cylinder and knowing it will
only be in service 50 million years wouldn’t
seem like something that would stop folks
building one, especially given that it would
seem unlikely they would last that long without
far more maintenance invested into them then
went into building them originally.
Even outright artificial planet construction
taking millenia, like shell worlds, would
still seem a very good investment.
Such things are mobile too, if it comes down
to it, though we will discuss evacuating planets
in the follow up episode Killing Stars.
Now it is fairly common to start referring
to stars in this mass range or higher as blue
giants, even if they are main sequence, but
the classification system that has roman numeral
V or 5 as a main sequence, the Yerkes Luminosity
Classes, has III as normal giants and meaning
something fairly specific for that, typically
red giants like Arcturus, which we will get
to in a moment, but between those we have
the sub-giants, like Procyon, and here we
have stars already on their way out of the
main sequence where it would seem less wise
to invest in a colony.
Procyon is just 11.5 light years away, one
of the 53 star systems and 78 known stars
– some being binary – within 5 parsecs
or 16.3 light years that we designate as our
neighboring stars and first colonial targets.
50 of those are red dwarfs, 11 are known brown
dwarfs – and there are probably many more,
and these are also interesting colonial targets
we’ll look at more in Exo-Stellar Civilizations
– 4 are white dwarfs, and only a dozen other
are larger stars.
Procyon is a star just leaving the main sequence
and entering the sub-giant phase, and it also
has one of those white dwarfs stars too, Procyon
B, as a companion.
However the white dwarf is a distant companion
with an orbital period of 41 years, and our
Sun is 2000 times brighter than Procyon B
so it would have no effect on planets close
to Procyon A in terms of temperature.
However it is very eccentric and gets as close
as 9 AU to its partner, so on a habitable
planet around the primary it could be as close
a 5 or 6 AU at times and thus while it would
seem 50,000 times dimmer than our Sun, it
would still be several times brighter than
our Moon.
It also still has a lot of mass and would
be very disruptive to planets in the habitable
zone of Procyon A.
It's also a dead remnant, and would have been
the bigger of the pair beforehand, as it died
first, we estimate it would have been 2.6
Solar Masses, compared to Procyon A’s 1.5,
and we believe it left the main sequence about
a billion years ago, with both stars being
just under 2 billion years old.
Procyon B is now doing the same, and is about
7 times brighter than our Sun, whereas a main
sequence star of its mass would generally
be more like 4 times as bright.
Though stars get brighter as they age and
their cores begin to deplete of hydrogen,
they still have a lot of hydrogen left as
they get to subgiant phase but less of it
so the core gets hotter as it begins to crunch
down and increase the fusion rate.
For such stars, this is not necessarily terminal
for life living around them, but a planet
that evolved life when that star was young
will receive double or more light and solar
wind hitting it to strip off atmospheres and
so on.
They are certainly colonizable but you know
the end is coming.
However, this is a phase every star that can
go red giant will go through and it lasts
a fraction of that star’s lifetime, meaning
for most of the stars that will go subgiant,
this phase lasts longer than those B-type
giants we were just discussing that only live
tens of million of years.
So I would say yes you would certainly colonize
such a system, but I do not know that you
would bother with terraforming its planets.
You could, of course, keep terraformed planets
around a subgiant or even a red giant, but
as we often discuss on the show, planets are
not the ideal method of making living space
so I would tend to assume folks really determined
to go the effort of terraforming a planet
would be more worried about the long term
aspect, and even if such a terraformed planet
might have tens of millions of years left
before the red giant phase began, I suspect
they might opt for another system, given that
there’s no shortage of them.
Not even 1 in 10 stars is massive enough to
be subgiant yet, even if they formed at the
dawn of the galaxy, and most stars did not,
stellar formation rates are fairly constant.
For those less focused on planets these systems
make very nice targets for colonization, lots
of light, plenty of room and raw material,
and since most artificial habitats are essentially
spaceships, if you built one sturdy enough
it could last for a hundred million years,
you can just pick it up and move it when the
subgiant and giant phases end, as well as
moving it outward gradually as those stars
brighten.
Now let’s get into the first true giants
in classic astronomy, our red giants.
Arcturus is a red giant 37 light years from
us, of spectral type K0, which would actually
make it an orange giant bordering on yellow
giant, being right on the edge of the K and
G stellar classes, but it gets called a red
giant and I’m not sure if I’ve ever heard
the term ‘orange giant’ used.
I mention that though because it means that
Arcturus’ light spectrum is pretty close
to our own.
Arcturus is old, around 7 billion years, and
8% more massive than our own sun, thus why
it is already going red giant at only 7 billion
years of age.
It is currently 25 times wider and 170 times
brighter than our Sun.
At only 10% more massive we can mostly ignore
orbital period changes, and simply note that
Earth would need to be 13 AU from this Star
to get the same lighting and that’s it habitable
zone would basically be your Saturn through
Uranus distances, with planets orbiting it
having years of multiple decades to perhaps
a century.
Red Giants are the end of life phase for stars
over a quarter of a solar mass, though as
I just mentioned, Arcturus is not actually
‘red’, hovering in the orange to yellow
stellar classification and the biggest and
brightest stars, those so massive as to go
Supernova, do expand too but are still so
hot we start calling them yellow supergiant
or blue supergiants, but we’ll discuss supergiants
next time.
Can we colonize these red giant stars?
Yes, certainly.
Should we?
Again, yes certainly, and in many cases they
will have habitable planets around them as
they slowly warm up.
Some longer lived red giants might have once
frozen planets that slowly thawed and did
so over a long enough timeline that native
life could evolve there.
They give off tons of light, making them nice
candidates for Dyson Swarms, and likely will
have plenty of raw materials around them too.
Our Sun might expand enough to get Mercury
and Venus and even maybe Earth but that’s
not the majority of raw material in the solar
system.
Now red giants are often thought of as the
death throes of a star, but it should be noted
this phase can last as long as a billion years,
indeed longer on smaller stars though again
none have yet gone red giant, the Universe
is too young.
A star’s red giant phase is shorter than
its main sequence phase but it is still a
very long period, and for most stars, their
red giant phase will be longer than the lifetimes
of stars like Regulus, or even Vega.
This is the period where they are burning
helium rather than hydrogen, though that’s
way down in their core, and at this point
that star is a big thin blob you could literally
fly through.
What we normally think of as the surface of
our Sun, or any star, is just where the light
comes from, it’s very thin even compared
to air, not some solid you’d fall into and
burn up in like we tend to picture with someone
falling into a vat of molten metal.
If it weren’t for all the radiation burning
you on the way down you could fall very deep
into a star and this is even more true in
a red giant.
They are so spread out you could literally
run a spaceship through one without burning
up and doing this as a way to slow down their
ship or turn it.
Indeed planets ‘swallowed’ by expanding
red giants would endure for centuries, continue
to orbit that star, albeit as cinders, while
orbiting inside that star.
What’s truly interesting about these stars
though is that they might be what we choose
to colonize first, rushing to get out to them
not because their time is almost up, but rather
because they permit us to reach them first.
These are common types of stars to find, and
decently evenly distributed, and if we’re
thinking of sectors of space a couple hundred
light years across containing several thousand
stars, odds are good you will have a couple
red giants in here and one of them will be
ground zero for colony ships, and as such,
likely the local capital or spawning point
for other colonies.
Why is that?
We have often talked about being able to boost
ships up to very high-speed using known technology
by using laser propulsion systems.
This means if you are willing to build up
your space infrastructure enough to shine
lasers on your ships as they leave their home
system they can be pushed up to as fast a
speed as your ships ability to detect and
handle space debris would permit.
There’s no real limit on how fast you can
go, and it lets you go much faster than a
classic rocket would permit, be it chemical
or fusion powered, but there is a problem,
you need some way to slow down and if you’re
approaching a new system, there is no laser
braking system to do that yet.
We contemplated some methods for doing that
back in our episode Exodus Fleet, but crashing
into a star might work well too.
In last week’s episode on Orbital Bombardment
I mentioned that one alternative to aerobraking
is what we call lithobraking, which is where
you slow a ship down by slamming it into rocks.
Ramming a spaceship into a star, especially
at very high speeds, would seem even more
crazy but in truth it’s not a bad way to
do it.
At those speeds the temperature of the star
is essentially irrelevant, especially if your
ship is shiny to reflect light away.
Indeed there are large tracts of essentially
empty interstellar space at a higher temperature
than a red giant’s surface.
What matters is that it’s a thick bit of
gas, compared to interstellar space, but not
too thick, so a ship might be able to pass
through one’s outer skin and get rid of
a lot of speed, essentially as much as their
current speed allowed them to drop while running
the diameter of that star at whatever acceleration
rate they could bear.
I wouldn’t want to try to come down from
near-light speed this way but even things
moving at about 10% of light speed should
be able to brake down to a complete halt for
just the cost of a heat shield using this
method, though this is a very rapid deceleration
and is probably better suited for something
automated and unmanned.
Other methods for braking ships that we have
looked at, see our Episode Exodus Fleet, would
also work better on a red giant system than
a normal star, such as those that focus on
solar wind.
Being very bright and emitting lots of solar
wind, a vessel could begin slowing sooner
out and faster with conventional light sails
and braking using the solar wind than in other
star systems, then plunge through the star
to take off more speed.
This also works well in tandem with sending
some automated probe out just ahead of you
into the solar system which can break this
way, undergoing higher g-forces, then deploy
as a stellaser to slow the mothership down.
Even if the ship can’t achieve total deceleration
using ones of these methods and has to use
on board fuel, it will be able to slow down
from a higher speed than any twin ship relying
only on that fuel.
As a result, since it is very likely that
systems will be colonized by ships approaching
them as fast as their braking technique will
safely allow, rather than as fast as we could
make them move, then red giants would be the
fastest stars to reach and the first things
colonized in any volume of space far from
Earth.
Red Giants produce anywhere from hundreds
to thousands of times the light and energy
that our Sun does, and will likely be the
first reached and with all that available
energy are ideal for setting up huge laser
pushing systems to slow more incoming ships
or help turn them or send them on their way
to other neighboring stars.
They might be natural hubs for the vast Interstellar
Cycler castles we discussed in interstellar
trade, and many of these red giants, subgiants,
and bigger stars like Vega may have vast planetary
systems and potentially orders of magnitude
more raw material than most systems do.
They will frequently have companion stars
too, many of which might be full solar systems
in their own right.
Such systems make up the minority of stars
by far, but may be the glowing capitals of
stellar empires, even around these dying stars,
which may serve as the birth spot for new
stellar civilizations arriving from distant
Earth.
Of course they are dying stars, and we will
continue this series by looking at how to
avoid that problem, how to mine stars, evacuate
systems threatened by ones that exploded,
how to prevent those explosions, how to move
or kill such stars, and how civilizations
might live without stars, in our future episodes.
So after I finished the script up for today’s
episode I came up with another reason why
you might aim to colonize giant stars and
that’s for their military applications in
terms of dominating that region of space or
sterilizing the galaxy.
This episode’s already overly long though
and I suspect our episodes have been getting
a bit too close to what Youtube’s AI starts
demonetizing or lowering in the algorithms
as violent, what with last week’s episode
being on blowing up the planet and next week’s
being on the future of warfare, and the one
after that being about Killing Stars.
So I am going to include that discussion of
the military advantages of Giant Stars in
our Nebula version as an extended edition.
Worries over what Youtube permits or being
able to add bonus material or try out new
things is why a bunch of us creators got together
to found Nebula, our Streaming service, and
thanks to our audiences it’s been growing
strongly and letting a lot of Youtubers enjoy
greater creative freedom, and you can see
a lot of extended and original material from
folks like Joe Scott, Jade from Up and Atom,
Minute Physics, Real Engineering, Braincraft,
Mustard and more . We have also partnered
up with Curiositystream, the leader in educational
streaming content, to bring you both Curiositystream
and Nebula for free while you’re a curiositystream
user.
There’s a lot of original and extended content
on Nebula by creators, like our own Coexistence
with Alien series, and our regular episodes
play there ad-free.
If you like this episode, the Nebula version
removes this ad entirely and replaces it with
the extended version where we’ll discuss
the military advantages of these systems.
As I mentioned we’ve been revisiting the
topic of space warfare recently and there’s
some great video on that topic over on Curiositystream,
like “World War A: Aliens Invade Earth”
where leading scientists weigh in on the scenarios
that might unfold if aliens found us and visited.
Curiosity Stream has thousands of fun and
educational videos, and they have partnered
up with us at Nebula, our Streamy-Award Nominated
streaming service, to offer Nebula’s content
along with their own, if you sign up at the
link in the episode description.
That means you will not only get Curiosity
Stream, and at a 26% discount, but also lets
you catch SFIA episodes a couple days early
and without ads, and helps support our show
while you’re doing it, not to mention getting
to see our extended version of today’s episode.
Again you can get a year of both Curiositystream
and Nebula for less than $15, get to support
the show and see our episodes early, and get
all that for less than $15 by using the link
in the episode’s description.
As a quick sidenote before we get to our schedule,
and on the topic of enclosing giant stars,
I’ve often mentioned that the Dyson Dilemma
of the Fermi Paradox is essentially asking
why we can see any stars in the Night Sky,
since older civilizations should have surrounded
them all in Dyson Spheres by now, and we saw
the advantages to doing that to even very
big and short lived stars today.
I often joke that I wish I hadn’t named
it the Dyson Dilemma but that “The Dark
Night Sky Paradox” was already taken, also
known as Olber’s Paradox, which asks why
we have as dark a sky as we do and haven’t
been incinerated by the Universe’s combined
sunlight yet.
I’ve been meaning to do an episode on it
forever but it kept getting put off for other
projects, and I’m very glad to say my friend
Jade from Up and Atom recently did an episode
on it, which I’ll link in this episode.
Jade’s one of those folks like Joe Scott,
Cody don Reeder, Fraser Cain, and John Michael
Godier I’ve known since the early days of
the show and collaborated with before, on
our episode on Boltzmann Brains and the Anthropic
Principle, and if you haven’t already seen
her work, I’m sure you’ll love it.
So that will wrap up our episodes for the
month, but we still have our Livestream Q&A
this Sunday, February 28th, at 4 pm Eastern
time, for you to get your questions answered
live.
Then we’ll leap into March to continue our
look at the future of combat with “The Next
Century of War” followed by the sequels
to today’s episode “Killing Stars” on
March 11th and Exo-stellar Civilizations on
Sunday, March 14th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
