This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
There are so many crazy alien conspiracy theories
kicking around on the internet, it’s tempting
to just dismiss them all--but that’s exactly
what the aliens are hoping we’ll do.
So today we’ll be contemplating the idea
of Alien Conspiracies, mostly by asking ourselves
how we’d do it if we were in their shoes
and why we’d be doing it, or often, why
we would not.
This isn’t an especially long episode, but
if you’re heading to the kitchen anyway
for some hat-making foil, you might as well
grab a drink and a snack…
Conspiracy theories abound in all areas of
discussion but of course are pretty popular
with aliens, governments, and the paranormal,
and often you get all three for the price
of one.
That said, humans are sneaky devils and while
we might snicker at many a conspiracy theory,
we certainly have had plenty of real ones
throughout history and probably many more
that we never heard about, as that’s generally
the point.
And after all, if you don’t believe in conspiracies,
then you believe that everybody does everything
they do in a completely above-board way and
never take any discrete action aimed at increasing
their power or obtaining their goals - which
one could argue is the craziest theory of
them all.
So while we’ll be taking a tongue-in-cheek
approach to the topic today, as we usually
do in the Alien Civilization series, we’re
not going to waste any time mocking the ideas
either.
Of course that comment of a moment ago, that
the point of conspiracies is usually to keep
them quiet, is something worth mentioning
up front.
Any given conspiracy that’s said to be ongoing
and active has to meet the smell test of why
it would still be in operation after being
exposed.
If aliens had the mission of abducting and
probing humans and not getting caught, that
mission is a total failure.
Now they might not care if they got caught,
but if they didn’t, there’s no reason
to bother with secrecy to begin with, as an
interstellar species could clearly overtly
force us to give them people or have quietly
abducted them and just not returned them at
all.
That’s kind of how you have to approach
conspiracies, figure out what the action is
and what the motive is and ask if it really
makes sense or if there’s another more obvious
and effective way of doing it.
Cui Bono - Who benefits?
That is not to say that all conspiracies are
ultra-logical.
Quite to the contrary, even the ones that
work and only got exposed long after the fact
often had enough flaws in them that they’d
be rejected by audiences as unrealistic with
too many plot holes.
One of theories for the abductions I’d heard
recently was that it was to create alien-human
hybrids, in one version to prepare us for
global warming.
This one doesn’t stick as humans require
no adaptation to that personally unless the
temperature rose so much we had to modify
people, and everything else, to some new and
massively different biology.
Since such aliens pretty much by definition
have easy remedies for CO2, like fusion or
some better power source, and since such biological
changes would be beyond overt, this wouldn’t
seem like a good plan.
Which would seem to eliminate this scenario,
BUT, we can be a bit more creative maybe,
because there is another reason to adapt humans
specifically to higher Carbon Dioxide levels.
An interesting and handy fact to remember
during the winter times, when CO2 levels rise
to about three times the current atmospheric
levels, which they often do inside poorly
ventilated buildings in the winter, humans
begin getting a bit dumber and more lethargic.
And if you ever start feeling tired and dumb
after a long lecture in a crowded classroom
or conference room, it’s quite likely that
was a factor.
Now if you’re an alien who wants to remain
fairly covert and are fairly benevolent but
don’t like overt involvement, tinkering
with humans just a little to be better at
handling CO2 without getting dumb and lethargic
could probably be snuck in as a minor genetic
tweak.
Humans have been living inside enclosed and
fire-heated buildings long enough that it’s
plausible a mutation that handled carbon dioxide
better might pop up.
Quite a stretch but it would also explain
doing it a lot.
You don’t abduct people as often as gets
claimed for biological research, but trying
to sneak the DNA into a ton of people so the
gene spreads fast and quietly works.
Not very well though, and you could presumably
do this with a retrovirus or tiny little nanomachines
too.
Some nasty infectious cold that improved our
lungs just a smidge, and amusingly that would
spread fastest in the places where CO2 indoor
buildup was highest – poorly ventilated,
crowded, heated buildings.
There’s also the question of who they are
trying to stay secret from, and it isn’t
necessarily us.
If you’re a group from a civilization whose
official policy is akin to the Star Trek Prime
Directive, no interference with pre-interstellar
civilizations, and you don’t like that policy,
you act in secret.
You also might not care if we find out, if
that civilization you’re from doesn’t
monitor us too much and thus wouldn’t notice
we had noticed.
Or you might just not care so long as you
don’t get caught red-handed.
So you might be openly but not officially
acting, just maintaining plausible deniability
and reasonable doubt so you and your fellow
conspirators don’t get thrown into space
prison.
That one fits the level of evidence we often
get too, assuming for the moment that evidence
is real or some of it is.
You might not even come from a species of
little green or grey dudes.
They might dress up as some other neighboring
alien civilization or unknown aliens just
to distract or point the finger elsewhere.
Your own governing body might be a little
reluctant, if they think it was a neighbor
civilization, to make an issue out of it.
Heck I wouldn’t be surprised, assuming we
ever enacted such a policy for dealing with
primitive species we encountered, if people
who disagreed with that policy decided to
dress up as little green men when breaking
the rules just to thumb their nose at the
authorities.
Anonymous Aliens.
But critically the thing missing from alien-hybrids
as replacements scenarios is any actual hybrids.
Our carbon dioxide case of a couple minutes
ago, at least our version of it, was suggesting
a minor change in DNA to help us handle breathing
CO2, and probably not even of alien origin
other than them being the ones designing the
tweak.
If you’re trying to replace humans with
yourself, or a mix of us with you as some
form of conquest or colonization, your conspiracy
needs to explain why you’re making that
effort as opposed to outright attack.
It also needs to explain why we’re not coming
up with tons of people sporting really weird
DNA.
Still, the absence of blatant hybrids would
be implying they were content to go very,
very slow to make it look rather natural,
and it also assumes aliens have DNA, rather
than using some other combination of amino
acids, of which there are tons that might
have evolved and worked just as well on alien
worlds or put forth the effort to understand
ours in great detail.
However, we’re not trying to debunk individual
conspiracies today but rather ask how they
might work.
Why would you need to go subtle, instead of
just blowing into our solar system with an
Armada and planting your flag on top of a
mountain of human skulls?
Well, as we often mention here, if you’ve
got one set of aliens near enough to interact
with Earth you’ve got a ton more not that
much farther away, who probably keep tabs
on you and might object for any number of
reasons, benevolent or selfish, to you just
conquering planets.
Nor does it have to be another race either,
it could be members of your own species who
were just nicer than you, or very much not
nicer for that matter.
You might have a species that tolerated other
intelligent civilizations so long as they
stayed at home, but didn’t let them travel
out to the stars.
Due to the massive genetic drift you’d expect
in an ancient and interstellar empire, they
might have some official rule about how much
DNA of theirs was enough to be ‘one of them’,
so some kinder-hearted rebels might sneak
onto primitive planets and slowly splice a
little of their qualifying but irrelevant
genetic code into us so we couldn’t be banned
from the galactic travel list.
While alien conspirators are often portrayed
as pretty evil, it’s usually the kinder
and more benevolent motives for a hypothetical
conspiracy that make a bit more sense.
Though mostly because the more sinister options
tend to be ruled out by not needing to be
slow or subtle about it.
If you’ve got interstellar travel and want
humanity dead, and nobody but current humanity
can stop you, then you can crush us like a
bug.
Such being the case, malevolent motives and
conspiracies don’t tend to work too well
together.
You can contrive various explanations for
not overtly attacking us, and there’s obviously
no shortage of conspiracy theories that have,
but they require a lot more contortions to
make sense.
Or they just have a pretty vague purpose in
mind.
The Black Knight Satellite is one such example,
a hypothetical alien spy satellite that’s
been in a polar orbit of Earth for 13,000
years.
Various folks have proposed why it does this
spying, and some have said it was shot down
by an elite Illuminati Task Force as well,
or that there are many of them.
However, we might want to ask why it was there
in the first place, and I don’t mean to
spy on us, its purpose, but rather its place.
Why it was in orbit?
Now, on first glance, that makes sense, and
indeed in past episodes we’ve suggested
an alien civilization would generally leave
probes in orbit of Earth to monitor for signals,
rather than just waiting for weak signals
to reach them at radio telescopes many light
years away.
However, you really wouldn’t want to put
them in low orbit.
Oh to be sure, if you want to see the ground
you want them real close.
Folks often forget that satellite imagery
we see, often zoomed in enough to make out
buildings and vehicles, is only taken from
a few hundred kilometers up, not the tens
of thousands it is to geostationary orbit
for instance.
And distance matters, the Hubble telescope,
for all that it sees very distant galaxies,
isn’t high enough resolution to even make
out the equipment we left on the Moon, our
nearest neighbor.
Galaxies are generally many trillions of times
farther away than that or more, they just
happen to be ridiculously big and bright compared
to a Moon Rover.
Still, things in low orbit don’t last long,
as the atmosphere is still there, just very
thin, and it’s quite hard to hide something
there, especially if it has fuel or gear for
stationkeeping, as is implied by it being
up there for thousands of years.
Instead you’d build something farther up
and just make it bigger.
That’s not really a problem, Hubble isn’t
our biggest telescope by any means, it’s
just the biggest we could economically get
into space intact and functional at the time.
And you can make a telescope pretty darn stealthy
if you want.
You could also be building your spy base on
the Dark side of the Moon, which of course
is not dark in terms of daylight, just ‘dark’
to us because the Moon is tidally locked and
always shows us the same face, so we can’t
see that side, at least not till we could
send satellites around it and they’ve hardly
built up a super-detailed high resolution
map even today, so you wouldn’t need to
conceal that base too much and excavating
on the Moon isn’t terribly hard.
Just park your base in some underground lava
tube with a concealed entrance.
Can’t do much spying there directly of course,
but you could easily launch probes from there
or send a mobile scope along the ground to
hang around the edge and peek at us.
You just make sure those short-term and low
altitude satellites, if you’re using them
and replacing them, are setup to burn up on
entry to the atmosphere and fairly natural
looking when they do, and just de-orbit them
when a meteor shower is going on.
That hardly disproves the Black Knight Satellite
theory though, it still does make perfect
sense to stick satellites around Earth and
the closer the better, if your technology
is up to the task of keeping it there for
thousands of years, and honestly that’s
not something requiring advanced scifi super-technology.
Evidence against this one is mostly just that
it would be a pain in the butt compared to
some other spy satellite options, and the
question of what they need high resolution
imagery for, which we’ll get to in a moment.
Of course an alien base on the Dark Side of
the Moon is a popular theory too.
It is actually a good spot for one.
Everything else in the solar system is much
farther away and rotates so we can see it
occasionally.
The only other totally concealed spot is Earth’s
Lagrange 3 Point with the Sun, on the exact
opposite side of the Sun as us.
If you’re going for long term concealment,
you’d expect us to look at the back side
of our moon before we looked around our own
Sun.
However, you’re not buying yourself much
extra time as you’d expect the first probe
beyond the Moon to take a peek at the Earth-Sun
L3 and it wasn’t even the decade after we
took photos of the dark side of our Moon that
we did that.
And the Moon is closer and you can dig into
it and get raw materials from it.
So as hidden bases in our solar system go,
it’s the best one for spying unless you
want to dig into some distant comet or Kuiper
Object and build a very big telescope.
This raises the question of what the base
is for though.
The galaxy is beyond ancient, by any human
standards, and humans are pretty old too.
It’s highly unlikely anyone who didn’t
know of us only recently discovered us and
they could have harvested any data they wanted,
and entirely secretly, during any period until
very recently.
We wouldn’t even know if they flat out landed
a big ship in a remote village even in the
1800s and took everyone, or zapped them all
unconscious and probed them then dumped some
whiskey or rum on them to make it seem like
a festival gotten out of hand.
And everything about us is the same now as
back then or earlier, except our technology
and culture which they could easily get all
pertinent info about from our own radio and
TV.
I can’t imagine they actually care much
about our technology either, beyond monitoring
the general details, it’s not like they’d
be confused about how our smartphones worked
our want to rip off our patents.
And if for some reason they did, I’d be
pretty confident they could just sneak an
android into our patent office or sneak into
the bedroom of someone who worked there, pop
their eyeball out and replace it with a facsimile
with a camera and transmitter, and call it
a day.
Of course they might be content just to hack
our internet, they’re presumably not going
to find that challenging, and beyond all our
scientific data being out there, it’s also
where we keep most of our art and literature
which is another thing they might be interested
in.
In Secret Aliens I suggested there might be
a rather large black market in primitive world
memorabilia and art.
If they’re spying on us now, you need a
reason why they could only start doing it
recently or need some data that only became
available recently.
Our biology is unchanged since technology
arose, so it’s not that, ditto our basic
psychology.
And even if the reason is that they are newcomers
on the galactic stage, that just raises the
question of who used to be doing it before
them, because someone probably was, and why
you can’t just ask them for the data they
gathered.
I mean we would absolutely spy on any civilization
we encountered while out in the galaxy, and
the only reason we might not is that we might
just opt to land and say hello instead.
I doubt we’d be keeping that data secret
from anyone, including other alien folks we
met out there and became friends or allies
with.
Of course they might have died off recently
and the new galactic community is whatever
arose from the ash heap of the previous galactic
empire.
The odds that such a thing existed for billions
of years and just happened to collapse recently
don’t actually matter, as that would fall
under the Anthropic Principle if they were
suppressing or obliterating species that got
advanced during their empire.
If someone was going around killing smart
critters off, and just recently stopped, whoever
arises afterward is going to think they were
lucky but only someone lucky could even notice
that.
It does beg the question of why they let anything
intelligent exist, or any life exist, that
wasn’t of their creation, but I suppose
you might be fine with wiping out competing
intelligent lifeforms while still valuing
life overall and just wait to act till the
threat began emerging.
Which is easy enough to do if you’re spying
on those planets.
And if your empire was starting to crumble
for some reason, you might be fine with letting
the primitives survive and replace you, even
if you weren’t happy about going down yourself.
You didn’t hate them, you just didn’t
want the competition.
Though even there, it would seem to make more
sense to just be keeping probes around with
orders to send some drones in if they saw
signs of basic technology like fire and just
zap that tribe or be a little less heavy-handed
and infect them with a virus to be a bit stupider.
The Ancient Aliens issue is always a big problem
for conspiracy theories, and we looked at
that before in the episode Ancient Aliens,
because you always need to account for what
happened to the ancient empires, why alien
visitors hung out here in the past but don’t
now, or what they are still doing here now
for that matter too.
Again, we broadcast everything they’d really
need to know if they just wanted to keep up
with how we’ve changed since then, and they
could probably be keeping legions of androids,
or animal-appearing robots, on our planet
to keep tabs on us.
Your cat or dog might be spying on you right
now for their alien masters.
Heck they’re better spies than people are,
most of us are pretty casual about walking
around undressed and unrestrained around our
pets, and cats stare at us all the time and
dogs follow us everywhere we go.
Even without really advanced technology, you
could slap an awful lot of spy gear into our
pets, some android cat can probably get away
with sleeping next to folks’ heads at night
and scanning their brains.
That would generally qualify as an “Enemy
Within” type of conspiracy theory, and unsurprisingly
there are some classification system for there.
One by Jessie Walker include five kinds, the
Enemy Within, conspirators lurking inside
a group indistinguishable from regular folks,
or pets.
The Enemy Outside, your default alien conspiracy
of course or one by a rival nation, since
it’s not limited to aliens, the Enemy Above,
which is not referring to altitude but one
by folks at the top of the social order working
to their own gain, like CEOs or government
officials.
We also have the enemy below, which is also
not morlocks or chuds but rather folks at
the bottom working to overturn the social
order, and lastly benevolent conspiracies,
those meant to help folks out, which obviously
could be done by any of the other four types
in terms of origins, but generally implies
a different motive and operational behavior.
Aliens working to give us an improved capacity
for handling CO2, as we suggested earlier
who were using android pets to spy on us and
infect us with changes, would presumably be
The Enemy Outside, Within, and Benevolent,
all three.
Obviously this categorization is general.
We also have the Michael Barkun’s categorization
method, Event, Systemic, and Superconspiracy.
Event Conspiracies are pretty specific, like
a coverup of a murder or assassination, or
a coup.
Systemic Conspiracy theories would usually
be the big sweeping and enduring organized
ones like the Illuminati and whatever world
changing machinations they are accused of.
While Superconspiracy theories are where you
start linking up lots of theories into some
interconnected web, essentially how Bigfoot
is teamed up with the Loch Ness monster to
help get out the truth that Moon Landings
were faked, but only because the real landing
did occur but encountered aliens who are building
new pyramids on the Moon and told NASA and
the CIA to cover it up or else, and bribed
our leaders to start introducing mind-control
drugs with contrails.
That sort of thing.
Of course, while I did just make that one
up completely and generally roll my eyes at
examples of Superconspiracies, I again want
to emphasize that we do actually have conspiracies
occur and the goal of the episode isn’t
to mock anyone who happens to believe in one
I happen not to believe in.
Superconspiracies I make an exception for
since they generally fit together lots of
unrelated things whose apparent goals and
motives would be seemingly contradictory.
It’s plausible you might have a fairly convoluted
conspiracy even by rather clever and advanced
civilizations, as I mentioned near the start,
most known conspiracies generally were held
together by improvisation, duct tape, and
superglue so pointing out some holes or better
ways to achieve a goal doesn’t necessarily
kill the idea.
In the end though, you still have to ask not
just “What are they doing?” but why they
are doing it, and why they are doing it the
way they seem to be doing, and if the theory
is leaking all over the place, it’s probably
because it’s full of hot air, not solid
concepts and reasoning.
And I’ve yet to hear a good reason for why
aliens would cross the vast interstellar void
just break out the probes and advance their
knowledge of human proctology.
Of course, if there really is a galactic community
out there, and if most alien conspiracy theories
are true, there’s probably whole planets
full of space lawyers handling class action
suits against this or that alien civilization
or group by various no-longer-primitive species
for all the sinister stuff done to them.
This would presumably include sabotaging efforts
to research life extension to make sure nobody
was still around from their probing days to
take them to court for that.
Galactic communities and alliances are common
enough in science fiction and one of the ways
that might take shape would be some loose
set of treaties for defense, trade, and courts
for handling lawsuits.
But there may be some other stranger reasons
to work together, and we’ll be examining
that in the fourth installment of our Nebula-Exlcusive
series Coexistence with Aliens “Alliances”
which is out today as well.
You can check that out, or the three previous
episodes, Xenopsychology, Trade, and War,
or get to see early releases of our bonus
episodes by joining Nebula today.
Nebula, our new subscription streaming service,
was made as a way for education-focused independent
creators to try out new content that might
not work too well on Youtube, where algorithms
might not be too kind to some topics or demonetize
certain ones entirely, or just doesn’t fit
our usual content.
And if you’d like to get free access to
it, it does come as a free bonus with a subscription
to Curiositystream, which also has thousands
of amazing documentaries you can watch, on
top of the Nebula-exclusive content from myself
and many other creators like CGP Grey, Minute
Physics, and Wendover.
A year of Curiosity Stream is just $19.99,
and it gets you access thousands of documentaries,
as well as complimentary access to Nebula
for as long as you're a subscriber, and use
the link in this episode’s description,
curiositystream.com/isaacarthur.
We’ve been spending a lot of time looking
at Aliens and Interstellar Civilizations and
far future topics of late, so next we’ll
come back to the here and now, or at least
to the Moon and the 21st century, to ask how
we can go about using the Moon as our springboard
into interplanetary civilization, beginning
with Moon: Industrial Complex.
The week after that we’ll ask the big question,
of Why Life Exists?
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
