This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
Everyone always talks about colonizing Mars
and turning it green, but Venus might turn
out to be a far better candidate for terraforming…
if we can just cool it down first.
Last month we talked about terraforming Mars
and how to warm it up and thicken its atmosphere
to bring Springtime to Mars.
Venus, our other close neighbor, is something
of the reverse case.
Mars and Venus, our two big first targets
for colonization, have almost the exact opposite
strengths and weaknesses.
Often Mars is seen as the most logical first
target, which can seem strange on reflection.
It’s farther from us than Venus, our launch
windows to it just once every 26 months, whereas
Venus’s is every 20 months, and it’s a
closer and more direct shot.
Venus is also much bigger than Mars, with
a surface gravity nearly that of Earth.
Venus has plenty of light and atmosphere to
work with, indeed we thought it was probably
a paradise world well into the 20th century.
Problem is, it’s a scorchingly hot hell
hole.
Cool it down and it would be practically ideal
for terraforming, with just one other big
problem, it spins very slowly.
By weird coincidence Earth and Mars have near
identical day length, just 37 minutes longer
on Mars, a little extra sleep, and nothing
in the solar system comes close to that.
The next closest is Uranus at 17 hours, and
the various moons and asteroids almost all
have either very long days from being tidally
locked to their planet or very quick days
of just several hours.
Venus though takes this to extremes, unlike
some objects whose day and year are the same
length from being tidally locked, Venus’s
rotational period is actually longer than
its orbital period because it spins backwards,
and while we’re not sure why it’s such
a blisteringly hot world, beyond its proximity
to the Sun of course, we tend to assume Venus
spinning slowly and backward is related to
it’s monstrously high temperature.
A couple years back we looked at Colonizing
Venus and we mentioned there that up above
Venus’s hideously hot surface, far in its
upper atmosphere which is much thicker than
Earth’s, it’s quite possible to make rather
nice floating cities, and we focused mostly
on that in the episode.
I also mentioned though there have been plans
for cooling down Venus, most notably Paul
Birch’s solar shade approach, and I wanted
to focus on that and other cooling techniques
today.
Now because Venus is closer to the Sun any
terraforming plan has to include not just
cooling it down in the first place, but keeping
it cool.
Also, we’ve mentioned that many planets
or moons could hold an atmosphere if only
they had robust magnetospheres, and it’s
a little ironic that Venus has a very thick
atmosphere and almost no magnetosphere itself,
and gets savaged by atmosphere-stripping solar
radiation and wind far more than any world
but Mercury.
Ironic but not actually weird.
See Venus may have a very thick atmosphere
but has virtually no hydrogen in it, hydrogen
and helium being the most common elements
in the Universe but rare in the inner planets
precisely because they are so easily stripped
off those planets by the Sun, being lighter.
We only have any on Earth because it bonds
to other atoms like oxygen and that slows
the loss, once the initial unbounded hydrogen
blows away.
Stick water on Venus and it will evaporate
away, even if we magically cooled it to Earth
temperatures.
As a result, Venus’ atmosphere is mostly
nitrogen and carbon dioxide, heavier stuff.
So the problem with Venus is essentially the
Sun, it gets a bit too much of it and doesn’t
turn fast enough to even contemplate a normal
day/night cycle.
Needless to say, this being SFIA, the concept
of spinning it up faster and moving it away
from the Sun is hardly a shocking idea, but
I am going to be making the case today that
Venus is the most logical target for Terraforming
first, not Mars, and truth be told the only
one where it really makes sense to even try,
as opposed to follow different pathways of
colonization or resource extraction.
With that in mind we’ll mostly bypass the
notion of moving it or spinning it up in favor
of more near-term easier pathways.
Now there’s quite a few ways to cool Venus
down and not all of them require decreasing
how much sunlight Venus gets and retains,
and these are of interest to us more locally
in regard to Earth.
As noted, Venus’s atmosphere is mostly carbon
dioxide, 96.5%, with 3.5% being nitrogen and
everything else being in the parts per million
with sulfur dioxide coming in a very distant
third 150 parts per million, barely over a
percent of a percent, 6000 times less than
its carbon dioxide content.
Earth on the other hand only has about 400
parts per million carbon dioxide.
It’s not just a percentage though, because
Venus’s atmosphere is around a hundred times
thicker than Earth’s, so that it’s got
hundreds of thousands of times more carbon
dioxide helping retain heat than Earth does.
If we could get rid of almost all of that,
Venus would get to be rather livable, though
civilization might cling to the poles rather
than the equator, opposite of what we’d
expect on cooler Mars.
Now there’s a lot of ways to remove that,
atmospheres are relatively light to move compared
to trying to shove the planet further from
the Sun or increase its spin rate.
You could go faster and dirty by using atomics,
the Mass of Venus Atmosphere is 4.8 x 10^20
kilograms.
For context, while that’s only a small fraction
of Venus’s total mass, just 1% of 1%, a
ten-thousandth, that’s about half the mass
of the dwarf Planet Ceres or a sixth of the
entire Asteroid Belt.
So it’s hardly trivial, but it’s also
already quite hot, and to remove it ultra-fast
we need only get it hot enough to move at
the escape velocity of Venus, 10.4 kilometers
per second.
This involves adding around 20 billion, billion,
billion joules of energy, or the equivalent
of 5 trillion megaton warheads, which incidentally
is nearly a hundred times what it would take
to blow Earth’s atmosphere off.
Sounds absurd, but as with all things it’s
rather relative, you’d pay about the same
energy to truck it off to other planets or
habitats for use and a lot more to move Venus,
you also need to spend about ten times that
much to get Venus spinning up to a 24 hour
day.
No need to memorize those numbers but we’ve
trotted them out because as is so often the
case on this show, when we discuss things
that can seem ridiculously immense, it’s
all relative.
If you’re willing to remove that atmosphere,
quick or slow, you are getting into the range
where giving the planet a serious shove is
on the table, and if we’re talking about
superheating gases, well that’s what we
make rockets out of.
Strategic application of energy to Venus Atmosphere
could be used to simultaneously remove it
and nudge it a little bit further from the
Sun or give it a decent spin.
Nor do you need use nukes, you could use a
big mirror or lens to focus sunlight on Venus,
or the Stellaser concept we’ve often discussed
on the show and which we’ll come back to.
As huge as that energy requirement is for
atmosphere stripping, it is only about a minute
of the Sun’s power production, so even if
you’re only building enough mirrors and
lenses to concentrate a tiny fraction of that
solar output, it can get the job done rather
quickly.
Just a couple of problems, though.
First, this is obviously heating Venus up,
which is not our goal, even if it’s only
temporary, and second it’s taken that nitrogen
away along with the carbon dioxide, and we’d
rather keep that.
It’s also a lighter element than carbon
dioxide, so it will fly off even faster on
us.
There’s also the matter of ‘where to’,
and if we blow trillions and trillions of
tons of carbon dioxide off Venus it’s going
to meander away from Venus until it leaves
the solar system or gets captured by something
else.
The next nearest ‘something else’ is Earth,
and I don’t know that we want to be getting
extra CO2.
We wouldn’t capture that much of it, proportionally,
but as mentioned Venus has hundreds of thousands
of times more of it than we do, and we already
have plenty.
You can avoid Earth wandering into a cloud
of liberated CO2, via timing and directing
outgassing from Venus, and if you can do this
then CO2 at home isn’t much of a concern
anymore anyway, but at the same time don’t
think of this as super high-tech.
As we mentioned in Colonizing the Sun, where
we first discussed the Stellaser idea and
in more detail, a Stellaser really is just
a pair of big thin mirrors orbiting high above
the Sun using the Sun’s atmosphere as a
lasing medium, and this is handy because it
means you’re not mega-engineering any super
huge mirrors and lenses or shades.
Obviously our alternative approach is to simply
shade Venus, and none of these options are
high tech, just require a lot of building.
What’s nice about a stellaser approach is
that it’s more compact than just big lenses
at Venus’s Lagrange Point or in orbit, so
less building, and the laser is at a discrete
frequency, not just raw sunlight, so it opens
options like zapping Venus with light that
Carbon Dioxide absorbs better than nitrogen
does.
Indeed you can break that carbon dioxide up
into carbon and oxygen by hitting it with
ultraviolet but that’s less useful than
it might sound like because carbon dioxide
is a low energy state so random carbon and
oxygen floating near each other after being
disassociated by UV light, would generally
just recombine.
Ideally we’d like to keep all that carbon
dioxide on Venus, just as carbon and oxygen,
so while using it as a rocket propellant is
an option, it’s maybe not the best one.
However, as we’ll see in a moment, our timetable
for cooling Venus down by just blocking the
light off is a couple of centuries, so options
on the more energetic side might be preferred
simply because they save time.
Building several million square kilometers
of millimeter thick shade or lens might sound
like quite the endeavor but honestly it’s
well inside our modern industrial capacity
groundside here on Earth, so a space based
one that was also more automated than modern
manufacturing might crank that out fairly
easily.
Those shades might run a few tons per square
kilometer and you might need a few billion
tons of them, but that is around our current
annual metal production.
You just need to have the capacity up in space,
but power and raw materials for it are superabundant
there, so it’s basically how good your robots
and automation are.
Be it shades, mirrors, whichever, that’s
why we tend to be pretty casual on the show
about suggesting you can shade planets or
warm them with mirrors, there’s nothing
high-tech about them and they aren’t colossal
endeavors.
If I had to guess, I’d say the level of
automation we need to setup some moon or asteroid
factory that just sucked in rock and spat
out millions of tons foil a year with minimal
human on-site oversight already exists, we’re
just not setup and practiced with that kind
of remote manufacturing yet, and you’d have
a lot of kinks to work out.
I generally tend to figure this will end up
as the preferred final solution for our own
carbon dioxide concerns so we may get a lot
of practice and core infrastructure developed
before we decide on tackling Venus’s carbon
dioxide.
Also keeping to context, throwing up a foil
that’s not even millimeter thick around
a planet is a lot easier than doming over
a whole planet like we often contemplate for
terraforming Mars, or rather para-terraforming
it.
This method of shading Venus and letting it
cool down was discussed in Paul Birch’s
1991 paper Terraforming Venus Quickly, and
the ‘quickly’ part is rather relative.
Shade Venus so no sunlight gets through and
he estimates a cooling time of 90-200 years.
He discusses some ways to speed that up but
I’ll add the notion that blowing its atmosphere
off by laser-ing sections might be the most
expeditious approach and sometimes time is
worth a lot more than effort, and even more
so if most of that effort is being done by
stupid little robots that are being spat out
by giant and mostly automated factories.
The other issue that makes blowing the atmosphere
off sound sane is what happens as you cool
carbon dioxide down.
Now as you know, normally here on Earth CO2
is a gas or a solid, dry ice, there’s no
liquid phase, but that’s only true at low
pressures, like on Earth, and indeed at low
enough pressure substances generally do not
have liquid phases at all, in a vacuum you
basically only have solid or gas.
CO2 is a substance that needs pretty high
pressures to have a liquid phase but Venus
happens to have that.
As the planet begins cooling, cut off from
light, it will begin to rain carbon dioxide,
as opposed to just sulfuric acid which is
what the rain on Venus is these days.
This won’t be instant, indeed it won’t
happen until you cool to 304 Kelvin, 31 degrees
Celsius or 88 Fahrenheit, versus its current
temperature of 463 Celsius or 86 Fahrenheit.
So this happens about halfway through or so
in, when you’re almost cooled down to comfortable
temperatures.
At this point you will now have an ocean of
CO2 accumulate on a place that’s rather
warm but livable already, temperature-wise.
But the pressure is still quite high, and
that’s problematic.
As it rains that atmospheric pressure will
begin to drop and we need to keep cooling
the planet more, because carbon dioxide’s
liquid phase is based on pressure and temperature,
the lower the pressure, the lower the temperature
needs to be to keep it a liquid not a gas,
and that craters out at 194 Kelvin, or -78
Celsius or -109 Fahrenheit, and 5.2 atmospheres
of pressure.
Even ignoring that pressure being too high
for us to be comfortable in, you can only
get to that pressure by dropping to that temperature,
and if you don’t, if you just cooled to
normal room temperature, you’d have most
of that CO2 still in the atmosphere and some
in the new oceans of CO2 and a constant rain,
at a pressure you could probably survive in
with reasonably advanced Spacesuits, or Venus
suits.
To clear the CO2 out, we have to keep going
even colder.
We need it down to that 194 Kelvin, very nearly
the record low temperature recorded in Antarctica,
so that it will stop raining CO2 and begin
to snow dry ice instead.
It’s now officially Winter on Venus.
At that temperature Dry Ice can exist at for
normal Earth pressure so the CO2 will just
keep falling.
If you’re wondering, all that nitrogen will
still be there as it doesn’t liquefy till
even cooler, 77 Kelvin at normal Earth Pressure,
and while you can Liquify Nitrogen at higher
temperatures under higher pressures, they’re
lower than carbon dioxide’s, so you’ll
have lost all that pressure the CO2 provided
before you got down to the needed temperature.
Such an approach could be done on a planet
that had far more nitrogen than CO2, but Venus
isn’t such a case.
Anyway, all that CO2 falls down and your oceans
crusting over into dry ice glaciers, but you
still have that nitrogen, and it’s enough
that down on the frigid surface the pressure
is still too high for comfort anyway, we’ve
got around twice the gas and pressure than
we want, and still none of it oxygen.
Now, oxygen itself is easy to get, most rocks
have plenty of it so it’s never a terraforming
issue anywhere but all that CO2 is mostly
oxygen by mass, so we’ll save energy converting
it, that produces heat though and a lot of
it when trying to make an atmosphere’s worth.
We can also start fixing that nitrogen into
plants but at the moment there is no sun and
they don’t care for those temperatures,
so for now we just have to decide if want
to keep chilling till even the nitrogen rains
down or just deal with a thick nitrogen atmosphere
for a while, and that is probably the better
option, particularly as it will take longer
and longer to cool Venus each extra degree.
Hot things radiate energy faster.
Of course the moment we start warming the
place back up to start terraforming, all that
Dry Ice is going to blow off right back into
the atmosphere, so we need to deal with that.
We’ve got carbon sequestration, turning
the carbon into other stuff like calcium carbonate
– or limestone – or we can just pave over
the stuff and rely on the sheer weight of
rock to keep it at pressure.
This is an iffy proposition though since you’d
need to pile dozen of meters of rock over
it to keep it as a liquid at room temperature
and more like a kilometer to keep it as a
solid at that temperature.
It’s entirely probable we’ll have gotten
quite good at carbon sequestration by then,
and although we don’t know the chemical
composition of Venus’s surface very well
at this time, it’s likely to have plenty
of things like Calcium or Magnesium to bond
that carbon to, as well.
Of course carbon need not bond with anything,
but by default carbon dioxide dissociated
into carbon and oxygen will form coal and
oxygen, needless to say that’s not a combination
you want together at high temperatures or
it will just burn up.
At low temperatures we can start separating
it into those two but we’d need to sequester
most of the oxygen into rock as well, we’ve
more than a hundred times more oxygen in all
that atmospheric CO2 than we’ll want in
our terraformed atmosphere.
All of this is doable but takes time, even
if you’ve got a big energy budget, because
you can only use so much power at once since
it will end as heat, the thing we don’t
want to add.
So you really have to take your time doing
this.
This is further complicated because all that
air, or new ocean or glacier, has a lot of
mass, and as it drains out of the sky and
pools up in lowlands you will begin getting
earthquakes, great big earthquakes, or venusquakes
I suppose, and probably volcanic eruptions,
neither of which is helping you store sequestered
CO2.
You can probably start seeing why the notion
of just ripping the atmosphere off has some
appeal, we don’t want virtually any of that
carbon dioxide and we’ve got a lot more
nitrogen than we need, and dealing with them
this way is rather time consuming.
I should also note that we’ve got very little
water right now, we are desperately short
of hydrogen.
However if we’ve got the industrial capacity
and technology for it, we can take some more
proactive steps to speed this all up and do
it better.
Before getting to that though we do have another
brute force approach for getting that water,
or hydrogen.
We could of course truck it in from places
like Jupiter or send massive bombardments
of comets in, but I mentioned just shooting
the place with a stellaser earlier and that’s
not the only kind of beam we can blast a place
with.
The Sun has tons of hydrogen, most of our
supply of it, and it’s not that hard to
get the ionized stuff magnetically shot at
Venus, which is a big target.
We’ve talked about starlifting before, mostly
for mining other elements off the Sun, but
it is mostly hydrogen you get when doing that
and you either dump it back down on the Sun
or take it off somewhere, and there’s a
lot to be said about just blasting Venus with
it.
I will just go ahead and name a giant hydrogen
particle beam from a star a ‘hydrocannon’,
because it’s seems appropriate.
That heats stuff up too, but three main elements
in Venus atmosphere are carbon, nitrogen,
and oxygen, and carbon is the lightest and
the one that we can blow away easiest.
So if you knew what you were doing you might
be able to get away with basically Death-Starring
Venus with a giant laser and hydrogen particle
beam until you got a nice mix of water, oxygen,
and nitrogen.
I don’t think that is a very wise approach
but it’s certainly an amusing one and might
turn out to be the fastest method.
Ultimately it all depends on your technology
and what your controlling factor is, time,
energy, manpower, money, etc.
To speed cooling we have the option of using
great big convective towers on the planet,
or hanging them down off orbital rings, and
you might hang a bunch of orbital rings and
radiators above the planet and do some chemistry
up there, extracting CO2 and nitrogen either
for export or to sequester it into something
that would be a solid at higher temperatures.
Early on you could actually float such factories
and convection towers, as that atmosphere
is very thick, rather than using active support
tech like orbital rings and space towers,
but it only takes around half a century to
cool Venus enough you could walk around and
just feel warm and would take even less time
if you’re using such a setup, so at most
you’d erect the basic structures as buoyant
objects initially and begin adding in your
active support as the atmosphere and buoyancy
went away.
Going this way you can cool the planet faster
but more importantly you don’t have to cool
it below room temperature.
You might be slowed a little because running
all that forced sequestration and cooling
towers does take energy and produce heat,
but it’s a lot like running a fan and dehumidifier
to cool a room, both add more heat but in
the process of removing that heat.
So you’ve got giant cooling towers and active
support and big sequestration facilities processing
out that atmosphere, which begin running as
soon as the planet is cool enough that you
can drop the sequestered materials back down
without worry they’ll just unsequester themselves
right back into CO2 and nitrogen.
You might have big centrifuges being powered
by beamed in energy and hydrogen from the
sun that took dissociated carbon dioxide and
turned into coal or graphite and water.
Or you might truck your hydrogen in from Jupiter.
Ultimately, and probably in around a century,
you’ve got a planet cooled down to Earth
temperatures with the right amount of Nitrogen,
CO2, and water, and you can start letting
some light back through your shade.
You don’t need a magnetosphere to protect
that atmosphere though because that shade
is still keeping you shielded from the Sun.
Put you’re probably not just opening the
shade but rather altering into a dish that’s
going to bounce light at another orbiting
mirror that rotates around Venus every 24
hours, just a bit lower than geocentric orbits
on Earth would be as Venus has slightly weaker
gravity.
That second mirror, our geocentric Sun essentially,
would want to be about a tenth as wide as
our Moon, or about 200 miles wide or 300 kilometers,
not too big, though in this case not very
thin at all, you want it to be fairly massive
so all that light concentrated doesn’t shove
it away like a solar sail.
Presto, you now have a perfect candidate world
for terraforming and in this case all you’ve
got to do is drop in the bacteria and slowly
introduce more complex life and colonists
as the world finishes settling into its new
setup, it’s likely to be fairly tectonically
active for a while now that it has oceans
over some spots and thin atmosphere only over
others, shifting around weight.
The gravity is a little lower, and the weather
will be a bit different because the sunlight
isn’t coming in totally uniform but from
a more point like source near at hand, whereas
the Sun is so far away we can treat it’s
light as coming in parallel.
If you stick a light bulb near a wall, you
get a bright spot on it, unless the bulb is
very bright and far away compared to the size
of that wall, or planet, so that every part
of the wall is nearly the same distance from
the light bulb, which is the case for the
Sun as light bulb, see the Mega Earths or
Making Suns episode for further discussion
of how to do geocentric lighting correctly.
Back to tilt, Venus has very little axial
tilt anyway so you’re likely to cyclically
adjust that mirror-sun a fair amount to fake
seasons anyway.
I should note that while I just said Venus
has very little axial tilt it’s actually
got the most, being effectively flipped over
180 degrees, 177.3, but from most practical
standpoints the upside down world has a very
small axial tilt of 2.7 degrees compared to
Earth’s 23.5.
You do want those seasons, as while you could
doubtless genetically engineer Earth-life
to different or no seasons, way too many plants
and animals have the seasons wired into their
life cycles so it’s probably a good idea
to aim for a close approximation of Earth’s
own, and though Venus’s year is shorter
than ours, if you’re faking your lighting
this way anyway, you can put a 365 day year
into play instead if you want.
As always with terraforming, you have to decide
what’s good enough and which approach for
getting good enough makes the most sense or
least effort.
Dragging Venus further from the Sun, spinning
it up and flipping it over seems like overkill
compared to a thin sunward shade and thick
mirror-sun.
Regardless, more technology in terms of biology
or sequestration or automation can all let
us do this much faster, but while it takes
a little more time to start terraforming Venus
compared to Mars, since you’ve got to let
it cool down a bit before you can mess with
the surface, I suspect you’d be able to
get the job done faster and certainly more
complete than Mars.
Ultimately all you need is that solar shade
and mirror system and a source of hydrogen,
which if necessary can be slowly collected
from the Sun’s own Solar Wind, though that
would be quite slow.
This gives you a nice terraformed planet,
fairly quickly and also fairly low tech, we
could keep going of course, slowly spin the
planet up and just remove the Sun Mirror and
much of the shade later on.
We could drag in Mercury and make it a moon,
though it would be more like a double planet
at this point, something we’ll look at more
down the road, and of course we could just
dissect Mercury, reform part of it into a
moon, dump the rest on Venus to add some mass
to bring it a bit closer to Earth Normal size
and gravity, and shove the whole thing into
a counter-Earth orbit on the opposite side
of the Sun, but I’d consider that overkill.
As we mentioned in Springtime on Mars, you
can never really replicate a planet perfectly
nor would you really want to, and so it’s
just a matter of deciding what’s good enough,
and the options discussed today in terms of
shading are potentially within our capacity
in this century, especially considering the
necessary first step is that simple shading
and everything else can be added later as
it cools.
We’d just need a robust space industry,
preferably heavy on automation, and I really
don’t think it’s a big stretch that we
might have that in the 21st Century.
So it’s entirely possibly you could see
dry ice snow on Venus in the 22nd century.
Our hot twin might see its first winter in
a mere century or two from today, even without
any particularly huge advances in technology.
Winter on Venus, though, until you truck the
hydrogen in for normal water and purge or
sequester all that CO2, is not one you’d
want to introduce reindeer to.
As is often the case on this show, we brought
up a lot of concepts that seem so immense
and challenging that they can seem almost
equally difficult, a planet size solar shade
can seem harder to build than blowing off
an entire atmosphere, rather than vastly easier,
just by the sheer scale of everything involved.
To understand how these things can be accomplished
under known science and encapsulate the scales
involved, or to think up new ideas yourself,
it helps to have a solid grasp of math and
science, and that’s where our friends at
Brilliant can help.
Brilliant is a problem solving website and
app with a hands-on approach, with over 50
interactive courses for the ambitious and
curious, who want to better understand the
Universe around us and how it works, and have
fun while they’re doing it.
With courses focused on puzzles and entertaining
examples, and with their daily challenges,
you can improve your knowledge from the comfort
of your own home or while on the go, and at
your own pace.
Effective learning is about problem solving,
and Brilliant will help you learn and get
practice -- you’ll come away better at problem
solving.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
Venus is a pretty hostile place, and the folks
working to terraform it one day might be exposed
to great risk, and much of humanity’s hopefully
bright future includes some risks and some
dangerous new challenges.
Next week we’ll take a look at some of those
future dangers and some of the new technologies
and methods we might have available to help
avoid them or get people out off danger, in
High-Tech Search and Rescue.
Of course one of the ways we might avoid such
dangers, for those people or for those rescuing
them, would be through remote piloting, and
in two weeks we’ll look at that and some
other options that may become available to
us if we develop a way to interface the mind
with the machine.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And if you’d like to support future episodes,
visit our website, IsaacArthur.net, to donate
to the channel or check out some of the awesome
SFIA merchandise there.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
