This episode is brought to you by Raycon.
So much of our discussions of the future  
here on this show and elsewhere assume 
a grand destiny out among the stars.  
But what if we’re wrong and that glorious 
future on the horizon is merely a mirage?
A few months back I asked our audience over 
on our reddit group, r/IsaacArthur, for some  
episode ideas, and there were so many good ones 
that I decided to take 5 of the most upvoted and  
put them on our Youtube Community page for a 
poll, and the clear winner was today’s topic,  
what happens if we can’t leave Earth? One 
of the things I tend to be best known for is  
talking about how to get us off Earth and to new 
planets so I was a bit surprised by that being  
a topic folks wanted me to discuss. Of course 
another thing I tend to be well-known for is  
being pretty upbeat about humanity’s future and as 
we’ll see today, even if we can’t get off Earth,  
that doesn’t make for a bleak future at all.
We don’t really see a distant future on Earth  
discussed very much, scifi in a galactic setting 
rarely does much here in favor of strange new  
worlds, and Earth tends to either be the distant 
capital of some stellar empire or a distant memory  
of a world long since destroyed. When we do 
see Earth as the centerpiece of such stories,  
it is usually the Dying Earth saga, inevitably 
dystopian stories set in an exhausted planet  
which is either spurned by its distant colonies 
or unaided because they have the same exhaustion.  
Dead mined planets around dying stars, and Earth 
a fading ember waiting to die by fire or ice. 
Indeed so much of classic science fiction 
drums that point in, to encourage us to  
want to reach out to claim those stars. One 
of my favorites quotes on the topic is from  
Commander Sinclair of the 90s scifi show 
Babylon 5, in the episode “Infection” when  
asked by a reporter from Earth about the great 
expense of keeping his space station running  
and the cost and risk of other space endeavors.
She asks,” I have to ask you the same question  
people back home are asking about space these 
days. Is it worth it? Should we just pull  
back? Forget the whole thing as a bad idea, 
and take care of our own problems at home?” 
And Sinclair replies, “No. We have to 
stay here. And there's a simple reason  
why. Ask ten different scientists about the 
environment, population control, genetics,  
and you'll get ten different answers. But there's 
one thing every scientist on the planet agrees on.  
Whether it happens in a hundred years 
or a thousand years or a million years,  
eventually our Sun will grow cold and go out. 
When that happens, it won't just take us.  
It'll take Marilyn Monroe, and Lao-Tzu, and 
Einstein, and Morobuto, and Buddy Holly,  
and Aristophanes, and all of this…all of 
this…was for nothing. Unless we go to the stars.” 
I love that line, it’s very poetic. I think it 
summarizes how a lot of us feel about space.  
But in a couple of months we will ‘celebrate’ 
the 50th anniversary of the last time humanity  
walked on the Moon, and I don’t think even 
space pessimists of that time thought we  
would be over half a century going back and 
not have done a manned mission to Mars by now. 
I firmly believe we need no new science and only 
a handful of technological improvements to make  
space a reality, that vast improvements 
to both can only help but aren’t needed,  
and we discussed the very low-tech 
approaches in our episodes Crawlonizing  
the Galaxy and Low-Tech Kardashev Civilizations.
Nonetheless there’s no guarantee those things will  
happen. That we will just find a way to make 
space colonization viable, and we can show the  
practical engineering and raw numbers for travel 
but there’s a big difference between inventing  
a ship sail and actually creating large-scale 
intercontinental oceanic trade. There are so many  
tiny little problems with sailing a boat across an 
ocean that took centuries to figure out and many  
of those major problems weren’t visible until 
we began early journeys. Space travel is hard,  
and it's likely there are critical problems 
with doing it we don’t even know of yet. 
So I remain confident it will happen but we can’t 
casually ignore that we might just be wrong about  
this. Indeed until those Apollo Missions were 
done, we didn’t even have the term Fermi Paradox,  
and Fermi himself was just of the opinion 
that alien races were common enough but  
that interstellar space travel wasn’t and 
that species don’t long survive technology,  
a bit of pessimism that is understandable from 
one of the inventors of nuclear weapons who got  
to see the arsenals and tensions grow in the 
Cold War, but not live to see the Space Race. 
And it wasn’t really a perspective that was 
new, scifi was playing around with interstellar  
colonization throughout the 20th century and 
before then nobody really contemplated space  
travel and settlement in a serious way, even 
though we had an increasingly strong knowledge  
that the Universe was huge and ancient and that 
our sun was just another star. Indeed pre-20th  
century with Radio Waves and Relativity, ever 
since Newton’s laws of gravity, we assumed the  
universe was infinite in age and size. So when 
it was discussed everybody assumed that life  
was either the unique creation of the divine or 
that life probably was all over the place but  
that travel was impossible and of course travel 
was the only way to communicate. There was no  
phone or radio after all, communication by default 
was done by walking or riding or sailing to either  
talk to someone in person or hand them a letter.
So the idea that our future was ‘space or bust’  
is definitely a new one, and while just about 
every religion and culture had some built in  
doomsday event they expected, it was usually 
nebulous and set to arrive whenever and while it  
often involved the heavens it was in a different 
mental context. The end was a thing to be welcomed  
or dreaded or maybe both, but folks didn’t really 
think in billion year timelines back then anymore  
than we do now. With a few notable exceptions, 
the same as we had a few for non-travel based  
communication, like beacon fires or semaphore.
None of this past-history speaks to our future  
survival buts it’s a reminder that a belief 
our world will end and we have nowhere to flee  
to doesn’t mean civilization falls into ruinous 
despair awaiting the inevitable end, whether that  
is from divine wrath or a fiery consumption by our 
Sun or a frigid dissolution a trillion-trillion  
years from now in a dark and entropic Universe.
One day our sun will end, and with it all the  
days and nights of Earth, and indeed even most 
of the tricks we have discussed on this show  
for extending that like starlifting and refueling 
rely on technologies that make interstellar travel  
a piece of cake. We estimate in a billion or so 
years, maybe half that, maybe double, the Sun will  
have brightened enough to burn off our atmosphere 
and seas. And we have tricks for preventing that,  
like shading the planet with orbital shades & 
mirrors or even moving the planet, but both imply  
a skill at space travel beyond what we have now.
We tend to assume we wouldn’t even make it that  
long though and that’s a fair point, if the 
Sun might boil our oceans away in as little  
as half a billion years from now, well half a 
billion years ago is when we crawled out of the  
ocean and we don’t look or act much like we 
did then. We often assume that this period,  
humanity’s rise to master Earth and then this 
region of space, would be so significant that  
all life descended from us afterward would view 
humanity as very important, their most noteworthy  
ancestors or creators, the form of life which 
dominated our world then our galaxy and perhaps  
beyond, or at least made the first big steps out 
there, as Neil Armstrong so eloquently put it. 
For a civilization looking back from the edge 
of the end, one where we always dwelt on Earth,  
life would have arisen in the seas billions of 
years ago and those seas slowly disappeared with  
various species and civilizations arising and 
falling and humanity probably just one of them.  
In another billion years, if humanity wiped 
itself out and it took 10 million years for  
the world to heal enough and some other critter 
evolve enough to replace us and do it again, then  
we’d just be one of a hundred great civilization 
making species. And realistically it would be  
much shorter intervals. Probably more like tens 
of thousands of years and tens of thousands of  
iterations. As we saw in the Silurian Hypothesis, 
it isn’t likely we would be forgotten, we would  
still have our wikipedia page, possibly literally, 
but we would probably not be noted as the grandest  
or greatest or even necessarily the first.
Let’s consider some scenarios though. First,  
I can’t really accept that science and 
technology don’t allow space travel,  
so while we will discuss that scenario too, let’s 
start by hypothesizing that we can not get off  
Earth because we are told not to. This might 
be that the programmers of the Matrix give up  
on trying to convince us there’s a real universe 
out there to colonize and just stop bothering to  
simulate it or maybe very powerful and eternal 
aliens or divine agencies show up and say “No,  
this is your one and only world, keep it or wreck 
but no replacements and no returns.” and we might  
contemplate if Earth’s orbital space, which we are 
clearly very active in, should count, perhaps out  
to the Moon, or even the whole solar system.
We might also imagine that it is our own  
decision. Let's imagine we do start finding 
signs of life all over the place, exoplanets  
seemingly teeming with them and even Mars and 
Europa and Venus and more. Perhaps also that,  
as many suggest, ethics and right and wrong are 
things that can be logical deduced and universal,  
that humanity will reach that ethical code and 
other aliens all converge to that and everyone  
really does say “It is wrong to take other 
worlds, even from an Amoeba, even from where  
an amoeba might be likely to one day appear.”
Or perhaps we come to fear what colonies will  
turn into once away from us, and us powerless 
to stop it. Space travel is possible but we  
forbid it and shoot down any ship seeking to 
leave, so that their distant descendants don’t  
in turn surround us with possible enemies.
After all, we talk of how space will benefit  
humanity but the reality is that’s only true if 
we pick a broad definition for it. Realistically a  
future of space colonization in a no-FTL universe 
is one where humans spread to the stars and mutate  
and genetically engineer and cyborg themselves 
up till in even a few thousands years they act,  
look, and think little like we do now.
On our lone world we probably still have  
all the science we need to discover how to become 
post-scarcity, living vastly extended lifetimes  
in prosperity with robots doing the grunt work and 
us free to pursue higher aspirations. We can still  
make a world of many layers and arcologies, still 
have a trillion virtual realms for us to explore,  
weirder than nature will produce and not 
requiring centuries of expensive travel to  
reach. We can still live extended and augmented 
lives. Here on Earth Alone we can still rise  
to Olympian Heights. Claiming more worlds 
on which new research and development and  
experiments with civilization can occur may help 
speed that up, but there is danger there too. 
Some may say it is better to have this one world, 
surrounded only by silence, then to have a future  
where we still have only this one world, but are 
surrounded on every side by our mutant offspring  
and vulnerable to whatever abominations of 
technology some reckless or ambitious colony  
might unleash upon us and their neighbors.
There is a good deal of sense to that,  
mathematically. An AI which takes over a 
planet as a single megamind has to think  
twice about expanding that domain since their 
own mind can stretch only so far from light  
lag restraints and their progeny may be as 
deadly to it as it was to us, and surely  
more so statistically than empty space would be.
Is it any different of an equation for us, truly? 
We might imagine a future where any ship on a 
trajectory past the Moon is destroyed by great  
sky fortresses looming over our world, and this 
is a future where we can hold back the Sun with  
solar shades all the way to the final sunrise 
they are burned away and our world with them,  
4 or 5 billion years hence. Or we might 
imagine that even satellites are forbidden,  
and that instead huge towers permit communication 
between themselves as nodes like in the pre-space  
days. For communication, this would be no great 
limitation, as we might cocoon our planet with  
fiber optic cables to allow far denser and faster 
communication than our satellite grid allows. 
We talk of solar shades in orbit but perhaps 
instead we might make high-stratospheric balloons,  
reflective on one side to sunlight or those 
frequencies of it we value less. Indeed we  
might decide the best approach would be to dome 
our whole world over, a worldhouse as we call it,  
and permit no air to leak and to reflect away 
any light we didn’t want before it was absorbed  
by land or sea or air as heat. Indeed we might 
build radiating trunklines and masts on these to  
let us move heat from hot to cold areas or remove 
it from the world by radiating it into the vacuum.  
Done correctly, and without ever needing 
spaceships, we could slowly push Earth from  
the Sun by means of reflected light or superheated 
helium or other gases vented toward the Sun at ion  
drive speeds. Earth would lose mass, like 
any rocket, but it has so much and the sun  
provides so much power to drive that process.
Indeed it is worth remembering that once you  
remove all the material in the Sun and the Gas 
Giants, hard to reach and use, Earth makes up  
much of the remainder. Indeed Earth outmasses all 
the rocky planets combined, and very nearly ever  
rocky planet, moon, and asteroid combined, with 
the majority of the remainder being in Venus. So  
it isn’t that our solar system’s mineral resources 
are really necessary to keep Earth going.  
Nor do we need hydrogen or deuterium 
or helium-3 from other worlds to run  
our hypothetical fusion plants, though I 
can’t imagine how we could have those and  
not be able to do space travel with them.
We mostly only want all those rocks in  
space for new places for humanity and to help 
fuel that expansion. Gold and platinum from  
asteroids sure would be nice for encouraging 
and assisting early space expansion but every  
asteroid combined doesn’t have as much gold 
and other precious metals as Earth’s own crust,  
which is roughly ten times the mass of 
the entire asteroid belt, while still  
being less than a percent of Earth’s total mass.
We’ve discovered around a quarter of a million  
tons of gold to date, but that is only around 
a millionth of what’s in the crust alone and  
the same is true of basically everything we mine, 
albeit not in dense and easily reached ore veins.  
As long as you have energy, you have the ability 
to keep refining and recycling and centrifuging  
those minerals, and on geological timelines they 
do shift around with the mantle. In truth as long  
as the sun keeps shining we should be able 
to support our current population and more,  
but even if we did need to go back to a lower 
population density, say a billion people,  
to be a stable ecology while still having 
plenty of room for crops, livestock,  
biofuels, solar, wind, geo, and hydropower, 
that remains a very impressive civilization. 
We believe perhaps 100 billion people have 
lived thus far, with around half in the last  
two thousand years but the other half spread 
over far longer. Most since we learned farming  
and agriculture, but more humans lived before we 
had agriculture than live now. Maybe not by much  
though, even over hundreds of thousands of years. 
It varies a lot on vague estimates of prehistoric  
populations and where you draw the line on what’s 
human, but the most recent calculation I saw  
was 117 Billion, currently growing by about 82 
million a year, with 34 million dying each year,  
and us set to hit 8 billion humans alive 
shortly after this episode comes out. 
For simplicity of numbers though we might 
assume a steady population of around a billion,  
each person living a century, for a billion 
births and deaths each century and in a billion  
years that would mean 10 million centuries or ten 
million-billion people, or 10 quadrillion, or a  
million times our present population or a hundred 
thousand times as many people as have ever lived.  
Rough numbers and for my part I think we 
could support a lot more folks than that. 
So consider this, ours is not a great civilization 
but rather the most recent and mighty collection  
of many civilizations who are heirs to thousands 
of great cultures who are spread over thousands  
of years, and mostly unknown to us. Few empires 
numbered a billion souls over their entirety,  
and most folks lived in realms and times far less 
grandiose. Millions of those could rise and fall  
and overlap each other in time and space before 
ever the Sun finally set on Earth. That is not a  
future to be depressed about or sad for, anymore 
than a person should lament having a million  
dollars because someone suggested they might make 
billions and a million is all that materialized. 
Nor is our longevity or sheer numbers 
the measure of our worth. Many a person  
has striven for immortality in the form of 
being remembered by statues and histories,  
and if that is a good way to persist, then to have 
our history recorded for a few billions of years  
before being burned up is also nothing to be 
sad about, simply because it falls short of the  
trillions of years or even longer that we often 
contemplate on the show. And as I’ve mentioned  
before, digital data and cheap data storage 
plus the internet mean that unlike virtually  
everyone who lived before, you have good odds 
of being remembered until this world is no more. 
But I don’t think the measure of man is only in 
how tall his statue is or how long his tale is  
kept, and the same for all mankind. Our forgotten 
and unrecorded civilizations are our loss,  
not theirs, we are made less by not knowing them, 
and while it would be a great shame if a fire  
burned every copy of Shakespeare or Tennyson or 
Mozart or Bach, it doesn’t make their works any  
less grand, it just makes the world that follows 
poorer. And if the sun burns up our whole world,  
and everything we were with it, then it 
is no loss to us today, merely to those  
on that day and on all the tomorrows that follow 
somewhere on some other world we never got to see. 
If we stay here, it doesn’t mean we are vulnerable 
to having all our eggs in one basket. There’s  
really only a few improbable scenarios that 
would sterilize our world, even on billion  
year timelines, and being planetbound doesn’t mean 
you are defenseless against those scenarios. Great  
big orbital space guns or missile platforms 
work wonders. As we looked at in our episodes  
Asteroid Defense and our Collab with Joe Scott 
on 5 Doomsday Scenarios and how to prevent them,  
with a bit of forewarning and detection there’s 
very few ways a natural calamity can endanger  
us that can’t be managed and survived. Man-based 
cataclysms alternatively, ones able to threaten  
whole worlds, can also threaten whole interstellar 
empires, and have more place to originate from in  
one. The hyper-intelligent self-replicating 
swarm that devoured your whole world and  
which you cannot resist probably is still 
irresistible when it gets to your other colonies,  
or if it came from one of them.
Indeed if it is a choice,  
like we considered in our episode years back 
on Stay-At-Home civilizations who could expand  
into the galaxy but choose not to, then their 
technology renders them safe from natural disaster  
even if bound to one world. And when it comes to 
technological threats, the nightmares we might  
spawn, a billion worlds might spawn them a billion 
times faster, and far harder to detect and kill in  
weaker embryonic states then some homogenizing 
swarm or von Neumann berserker probes might be  
once they got rolling on some lightly settled 
colony planet far from oversight and control. 
Alternatively many would say the nightmare 
we might spawn is us, and that any world we  
go to will suffer the same fate as ours. But 
if that is so then colonizing worlds really  
offers no escape from that and what’s more, 
colonizing a planet is always going to be  
harder than repairing one you already had but 
damaged. The technologies and wisdom humanity  
needs to spread to the stars is the same that 
permits us to keep our world the wonder that  
it is. If we don’t get that then it doesn’t 
matter if we’re stuck on this planet or not,  
we would carry our doom with us whether we stayed 
or went, and not for far or long either way. 
This to me though is the greatest 
loss. If you see humanity as a plague,  
replicating itself over a galaxy that will descend 
into eternal war among its greedy divergent spawn,  
then all the better if we are stuck on this world 
until our Sun burns it up and us with it. But if  
you see us instead as gardeners and sculptors, 
and the galaxy beyond as our garden and quarry,  
then even if we were swept away by 
some descendant or creation of ours,  
then we still are victorious in seeding that 
garden, even if in the end we are only the seed. 
That’s what truly happens if we can’t ever leave 
Earth. It isn’t the end of humanity or a doorway  
to despair, merely a door to heavenly heights 
we must pass on, while still having so many  
more great paths available to us even here, 
on our one lonely world, our pale blue dot.
So yesterday I was at the store in the check 
out line with my wife when my phone lights up  
with a call from my bank. They never call me 
and it was after hours so I was immediately  
worried they were about to tell me my identity 
was stolen or were calling to tell me they just  
successfully wired all my funds to my new bank 
on non-extradition island. I’m half deaf from  
my time in the military and pretty much always use 
my speakerphone but I didn’t want to put that call  
on speakerphone so I had to ask them to wait while 
I got outside. Thankfully it turned out they were  
just calling to wish me a happy birthday and I 
could catch my breath again. Then kick myself,  
because I’ve got a very nice pair of Raycon 
Everyday Earbuds with noise isolation,  
which have this very pocket-friendly 
carrying case and charger that makes  
it easy to carry them around everywhere 
and everyday, but I’d left them at home. 
Earbuds are just plain handy for leaving you both 
hands free and for letting you hear things around  
loud or changing noise levels, and Raycon’s noise 
isolation is superb, I’ve used it for listening to  
audiobooks while mowing or running drills and 
saws, or taking a conference call while going  
for a bike ride, and Rayon Earbuds let you 
reject calls or navigate audio tracks just  
with their earbuds, leaving your hands-free.
Raycon’s Everyday Earbuds have optimized gel  
tips for the perfect in-ear fit, so they 
are comfortable and they will not budge or  
fall out. They’re water resistant, 
I’ve washed my on accident before,  
and they give you high quality audio at half 
the price of other premium audio brands. That’s  
probably while Raycon Everyday Earbuds have tens 
of thousands of 5-star reviews, including mine.  
They’re just all around great earbuds in terms 
of quality, versatility, comfort, and cost. 
The individual earbuds have a 8 hour playtime 
battery life and they recharge in their compact  
carrying case, for 32 hours of listening 
time without needing to plug into a wall,  
plus a wireless charging feature for the case 
you can try out. Raycon Everyday Earbuds are  
Siri and Alexa compatible, and have both noise 
isolation immersion mode and awareness mode  
for when you need to hear the noise around 
you, plus three sound profiles, pure sound,  
for podcasts and audiobooks, a bass-boosted mode 
for music with a lot of beat, and balanced mode. 
So if you’re looking for a great and 
affordable listening experience and  
want to help support our show while you’re 
at it, just click the link in the description  
box or go to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur 
to get 15% off your Raycon purchase!
So today we asked what happens if we have 
to remain on Earth and this weekend for  
our Scifi Sunday episode we’ll go the other 
direction and ask what Alien Environments  
might be like. Then next week we’ll go even 
farther and ask if space travel might become  
so mundane you could have Your Own Personal 
Spaceship, which we’ll look at on October  
20th. Then we’ll ask what would happen if 
you damaged that spaceship on October 27th,  
and then close out the month on Halloween 
weekend with our Livestream Q&A, on Sunday,  
October 30th, at 4 pm Eastern Time. Join us 
live to get your questions into the chat so  
they can be answered. After that we’ll head 
into November to discuss refueling the Sun,  
an option that could make it possible for us to 
keep Earth going for trillions of years to come. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like to  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social media  
forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
