This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
They say space is the final frontier.
If it's anything like prior frontiers,
it’s gonna need a sheriff to ride into orbit
to keep the peace.
As long as people are people, some of them
will commit crimes.
So, wherever people go, crime will follow.
As we head into Earth orbit then out to the
solar system and the galaxy beyond, it stands
to reason we’ll need police in space.
So today we’ll be looking at that, and in
the broader sense the future of police, some
of the stranger crimes they might see, and
even some scenarios like Galactic Police and
Time Police.
Of course we often figure a future humanity
will be a more enlightened one, maybe one
with few to no crimes, and we’ll discuss
that too, as well some other scenarios where
crime might cease to be, even if humanity
didn’t get particularly enlightened.
We’ll also be exploring some more science
fiction notions of crime and policing that
might not be science fiction for too much
longer.
Speaking of science fiction though, a lot
of sci-fi is essentially the Wild West in
space, frontiers, pioneering spirit, strange
new friends and enemies with alien ways, and
not much in the way of law and order.
Till the sheriff comes to town of course,
and of course, often a new sheriff because
they tended to have a fairly short tenure,
far from the rule of law and backup.
It’s not hard to imagine that on distant
and sparsely colonized worlds, rough lands
needing rough folks.
Just as often in pioneer towns there was law
and there was order, but it wasn’t always
too synonymous with justice.
This or that company or exploitative nobleman
or major landholder pretty much ran the show,
and the law enforcement were thugs in their
open employ or on the take or just didn’t
have much choice but to enforce the law as
best they could on most things while bending
to the powers that be, which were privileged.
Literally too, privilege derives from the
Latin words Privus and Legis, or Private and
Law respectively, laws applying in favor or
against an individual, rather than one law
for all and none above or below it.
It’s pretty easy to imagine an Asteroid
Mine having law enforcement that worked for
whoever controlled that mine, and dispensed
justice in accordance with that.
Private security forces might be the norm
for early space colonization.
Now, this is a bit of separate issue from
when the first law enforcement officer off
Earth will be appointed.
We can mostly ignore the current treaties
we have for space, they’re interesting but
are really only placeholders for dealing with
space until we’ve actually got a major presence
there and some experience knowing what we
should be negotiating for.
They’re hardly irrelevant but getting stuck
in the weeds of those treaties doesn’t serve
much point as they’re likely to all be renegotiated
if not just tossed aside or ignored long before
we have a big footprint of many thousands
of folks off Earth.
During those early days of minor presence,
we basically have two scenarios.
Remote scientific or industrial outposts that
are far from Earth and probably made up of
the cream of the crop, and folks up in low
orbit in routine construction or on space
tourism.
Those are two very, very different scenarios.
Astronauts and scientists can certainly commit
crimes, but generally are not going on murder
sprees or stealing from each other on base.
Indeed the one alleged crime to have taken
place in space thus far, a bit of news item
for late 2019, which we won’t comment on
besides saying that if true, involved the
misuse of a spouses bank password during divorce,
which hardly excuses if true but also is hardly
the stuff crime dramas and westerns are made
of.
Something worse is bound to happen over a
long enough time but when you’re dealing
with folks you’ve carefully screened for
their backgrounds and reliability not only
is crime less likely but the other folks there
with similar backgrounds are likely to be
able to serve in a law enforcement role in
a pinch too.
Some Mars base is likely to be composed of
a lots of folks with a military background
and likely to have cameras and sensors all
over the place, so nobody is expecting to
commit a crime without getting caught, and
everybody is going to be ready to dogpile
anyone who does since it’s likely to be
because of some stress-based psychological
snap and now you’re not talking justice,
you’re talking wrestling someone down to
the ground before they accidentally, or purposefully
due to insanity, kill everyone by rupturing
the hull or dome or tent you’re all in or
doing some other critical damage that leaves
everyone to die, quick or slow.
That’s a big part of why we screen astronauts
so thoroughly, stress can cause accidents
and nervous breakdowns or fits of anger or
despair.
It’s not until you either have very large
bases raising your sample size so that rare
incidents can become normal or you have to
lower your recruitment standards to fill all
the job vacancies that you need to start considering
a full time and trained police officer.
Until then, it would just be a hat worn by
the commander or some other crew member, same
as cook or medic or a bunch of other roles
that you have to distribute to a limited crew.
It’s also only till you’re outside of
easy communication range that you need any
real prisoner handling procedures and protocols
and facilities, you just tie someone up while
you call home to the experts for advice and
you don’t really care about things like
Miranda rights or evidence handling because
you don’t actually care that much if the
case gets tossed in court on a technicality
or civil lawsuit, in comparison with the safe
and successful continuation of the mission,
and given the small pool of suspects and constant
monitoring, they’re going to have plenty
of evidence in most cases even if some confession
got tossed out for improper procedures.
That’s a very different case than what we’d
get in Space Tourism, which is going to be
a growing industry in decades to come.
Early tourists will generally be fine with
putting up with the general lack of privacy
involved, plus going through all sorts of
security checks by groundside private security
or law enforcement officers before going up,
and probably with medical and psychological
screenings, but that won’t last.
Once the initial novelty wears off and the
numbers involved grow to hundreds a day, with
folks staying there for weeks at a time and
wanting to do things besides float around
in zero-gravity, you start having the real,
ordinary issue of crime in play.
Someone is going to get their name in the
annals of history for being the first person
to smuggle contraband on board, someone is
going to get in a drunk fight, someone is
going to kill someone.
At some point that is going to be big enough
that you’re going to need security forces
onboard and they are going to have to have
jurisdiction and authority and everything
else that comes with a badge.
Now when we get the first detective is a whole
different story.
In those early days and those places close
to Earth, where light lag is minimal, you
can bring your investigators in by remote
and essentially conscript those onboard security
forces or any other crew to help as needed
under supervision, even deputizing random
passengers or guests if need be.
On the flip side, any interstellar colony
needs to have a functioning and complete police
force from Day 1, because home and help are
years of communication time away, and Day
1 needs to be from the day they launch, not
the arrival date when they land, because those
journeys would take decades or far longer.
But even once you get out to the asteroid
belt those communication times are long, too
long for fair trials to be conducted by remote,
when a response to a lawyer or judge might
take an hour and reach the jury an hour later.
Any detective from home is dealing with many
hours of delays on every instruction, during
which evidence might decay beyond usability
or the criminal might be able to destroy it
or interfere with the investigation with the
detective far away and tenuously able to act.
Now you might be able to develop a reasonably
fair protocol for handling long-delayed court
cases, with everyone offering written or recorded
testimony conducted by correspondence, but
that’s likely to be a mess and likely to
spark a lot of appeals and civil rights concerns.
Hard to claim you got a fair trial if your
lawyer never was closer than a billion kilometers
to you and it took an hour to exchange every
answer, and that might be fine for civil cases,
misdemeanors, and maybe lesser felonies but
if we’re talking murder, where the severity
of the possible punishment usually grants
the defendant the most vigorous defense, I
doubt that would fly.
Alternatively we could fly the person home,
but such journeys might involve prisoner transports
of months or years, and even if we start getting
very powerful engines capable of sustained
1-g thrust for days at a time, you’re still
talking weeks.
At a minimum you’d need to be able to deal
with misdemeanors and lesser felonies locally,
or have some way of shipping prisoners, and
beyond the security problems and costs, I
wouldn’t want to be the person who shipped
someone home on a charge that didn’t get
convicted and required the accused to spend
months in a brig.
Or alternatively maybe put into stasis or
getting frozen.
What’s more, those are likely to be sparsely
populated bases… or ships.
Nowadays if some outpost or ship has a crime,
they can rely on rapid communication to home
and if necessary, military or police assets
arriving to handle the matter in hours, not
months.
If you’re some ice miners out in the Kuiper
Belt spending years out at a time attaching
drive and steerage components to comets to
send them in-system, you could be looking
at hours or even days of communication delay
time, and that’s presumably a for-profit
venture with a minimal crew.
Now we do have a precedent for this, ship
captains traditionally had to handle crimes
as even when they were near some port, it
often wasn’t their home country anyway,
and they might be away from any port, friendly
or otherwise, for many months.
Maritime law, or Admirality Law, has long
been a popular reference in science fiction
for captain’s handling crimes on ships and
it might see a resurgence in the future.
Now, contrary to popular belief it is not
legal anymore for ship captains to conduct
trials and hang folks, but it was a power
held in ancient days and not so ancient days,
indeed historically maritime law was fairly
uniform until more recent times, when the
rise of our more modern notion of nations
saw lots of individual laws by country and
flag, which only became uniform again near
the beginning of the twentieth century.
We might see a divergence happen again as
we venture out to space, especially interstellar
space, but while it makes for good drama I
doubt we’d see lots of ships having murder
trials conducted on board by the captain and
ending with someone getting shoved out an
airlock.
Great big colony ships with great big crews
can have great big judicial systems too.
In other cases, often the technology will
permit alternatives, like throwing someone
on ice or in stasis till they can be dealt
with, or even getting into some of the more
peculiar options like reprogramming someone’s
mind or virtual prisons.
The future is about more than just fast spaceships
after all, there’s a pretty big electronic
component to our future and more than just
in how we move data around.
Though speaking of that, as I mentioned earlier
the only alleged crime to have occurred in
space thus far involved a cybercrime but doubtless
we’ve already had a ton of crimes take place
that bounced around one satellite or another.
Now fortunately modern communication satellites
are effectively mirrors or relays for data,
not hosts or actors, so thus far we haven’t
really had to worry about the space aspect
of any given crime, whatever data was transmitted
left some place and arrived some other place
and can be accessed from those for investigation
and jurisdiction concerns.
We won’t be focusing on cybercrime today
because that’s its own topic and one we
looked at more in Cybersecurity last fall,
but we do need to consider ideas like virtual
crime, not to mention all the avenues for
new crimes and new evasion of justice that
things like mind augmentation introduce into
the equation.
We also need to consider the role Artificial
Intelligence is going to play in helping us
solve crimes, and the often overlooked issue,
in science fiction, of how you would prosecute
and punish an AI.
Folks tend to just end stories involving crimes
perpetrated by an AI with it being switched
off, killed if you would, though that’s
a bit problematic since you can’t commit
a crime unless you’re a person and if you
can commit a crime you presumably are entitled
to be tried by a jury of your peers and due
process.
Of course we might do away with that in favor
of having AI being your judge and jury, and
computers as objective judges is another popular
sci-fi trope.
Whether or not an AI could serve as an objective
judge, or at least more objective than another
human, is rather debatable – being a computer
does magically grant it objectivity and rationality,
that’s one of those weird notions of early
sci-fi that popped up and stuck along with
the notions that machines couldn’t lie for
some reason - but it does raise the whole
notion of what we’re actually judging.
We investigate crimes because we don’t know
who done it, and we have trials because we
are trying to confirm who done it to a certain
degree of certainty, but that gets rather
redundant if the vast majority of crimes are
caught on camera and we scan people’s brains
to see if they’re lying.
Now we can’t do so at this time, contrary
to popular belief polygraph lie detectors
are not admissible as evidence for some random
arbitrary reason, they aren’t admissible
because they aren’t ultra-reliable.
Whether they’re mostly reliable or about
as accurate as phrenology - measuring someone’s
brain pan – is quite a topic of heated debate
and not of interest to us today, the point
is that they aren’t reliable enough to be
deciding guilt and innocence.
That should not be assumed to remain the case
with future versions using different approaches.
We might get brain scans so good they couldn’t
be fooled or be wrong, but the standards they
would need to meet to be used as evidence
would rightfully be quite high.
Of course, we might get ways to alter memories
or brains to fool such things.
If you can read memory then you can write
memory and erase memory.
And memory isn’t like a digital recording
or nicely indexed file, it is a big massive
dumpster heap and part of why we don’t trust
witnesses, it’s not just concerns of dishonesty,
it's outright certain that a witness’s memory
is not particularly reliable.
Let’s say I commit a crime, then have my
brain altered to remember sitting at home
that afternoon, no lie detector brain scan
is going to find me a liar because I’m not,
my memory is changed.
Now we might be able to prove the crime by
other means, same as now since we obviously
don’t just take the defendant’s word for
it that they didn’t do it, but it does raise
the issue of whether or not that person with
a changed memory is still guilty of that crime.
There’s some interesting legal precedents
on the matter dealing with amnesiacs, and
we discussed those more way back in our episode
Consciousness & Identity, where we also discussed
the idea someone might implant a memory of
committing a crime into someone else while
erasing their own.
That might be more than an afternoon’s worth
of events too.
We could say that if someone killed someone
then moved their mind to someone else’s
body that they are still guilty in that new
body, but that gets a bit trickier if they’re
merging their mind with someone else in a
very major way, exchanging whole years of
memory and effectively creating a new person.
Similar notion but if we ever see Hive Minds
emerge via networked human consciousness,
would a criminal who joined a hive mind now
be innocent of previous crimes or alternatively
would that entire hive mind be guilty?
The answer might depend a lot on how interconnected
they all were.
Similarly, if someone is forced to join hive
mind and when yanked free of it wants nothing
more than to return to it, can we charge that
Hive Mind with a crime when they refuse to
press charges and do we let that person go
back?
What about if a Hive Mind had a member who
committed a crime, would they all be equally
guilty?
How interconnected would they have to be for
that to be the case?
Also, we give lawyers and clergy and medical
professionals certain privileges on communication
and confidentiality with their clients, and
we extend something similar to spouses, and
it wouldn’t be hard to imagine various hive
or networked minds being able to claim a similar
privilege to its members, as an interesting
bit of food for thought.
Similar things might tend to apply to AI too,
not so much in terms of them having distributed
or node intelligence akin to a hive mind,
but in terms of AI who serve a person being
able to refuse to participate in offering
records or testimony.
The notion of AI acting as judges, or police,
or criminals themselves in virtual landscapes,
raises some other landscapes we might have
to deal with, the galaxy at large or even
spacetime itself.
Now galactic police might have to face some
very hard times dealing with the lag time
of light speed communication.
They might have crimes that took place over
worlds separated by light years or need to
spend decades tracking down a criminal who
is fleeing to interstellar space.
The job of bounty hunter, always a popular
one in science fiction, might fit that sci-fi
mold very well as they tend to be rugged loners
and if you need to spend decades traveling
in stasis to catch up to your target, that
tendency to being a loner is likely to help
and likely to happen as you get totally unglued
from your home civilization that you might
not see for centuries at a time.
Similar things might happen with Space Pirates,
a topic we looked at some months back, as
they might tend to form their own very distinct
subculture simply from their separation in
time and space from needing to hide out and
hijack slow-moving interstellar ships.
There’s also the notion of policing entire
species.
Should the galaxy end up as one of those places
full of alien civilizations, be they naturally
evolved from many homeworlds or just divergent
products of a galactic humanity, you might
end up with some overall authority that enforced
certain universal laws or trade agreements
or similar.
That might end up as something like the implied
role of the mysterious ancient aliens in Arthur
C. Clarke’s 2001: A Space Odyssey series,
where the aliens tend to help out emerging
sapient races and protect them from each other
and in a harsher interpretation, wipe out
the troublemakers.
Considering the light lag issues, and sheer
time involved, it wouldn’t be hard to imagine
some advanced AI serving this role, or effective
race of AI galactic police.
That’s out the window if we ever find a
method of faster than light travel, as it
would then be possible to communicate law
changes and negotiate and investigate over
light years in less than years, but as we
often point out on this show, faster than
light travel is typically synonymous with
time travel, most hypothetical methods that
do one do the other too.
Of course that raises another popular plot
in sci-fi, which is time cops.
If folks can flee to different times, we need
to be able to follow them and find some way
to prevent them changing the past if that’s
possible.
It’s hard for such an agency not be vulnerable
to being wiped out by anyone who can travel
back in time to prevent them ever forming,
but it depends a lot on what sort of time
travel option is in play, and we discussed
those more in our Time Travel episode.
You get some real issues with crime there
too, like folks robbing someone by stealing
their idea or winning lottery number or patent
and jumping back in time to claim it as their
own.
Or getting revenge on someone who hurt them
by killing them as a kid or keeping their
grandparents from marrying.
If you ever had time crimes, you’d end up
needing something like an Acausal Investigation
Department just for all the crimes that had
their sequence of events and motives happen
out of order.
You might also see folks arrested before they
committed a crime, something contemplated
in Philip K. Dick’s famous short story Minority
Report.
In such cases, whether by time travel or advanced
prediction and precognition, crime might cease
to exist.
So too, a deeper understanding of the human
mind might see crime massively curtailed or
eliminated.
That raises the issue of how you figure out
if someone can be charged with a crime if
they haven't committed it yet.
We do have a basic principle for that, attempted
murder and so on, but how early can you stop
something like that and still reasonably say
the person was going to commit the crime?
Under current legal thought you need to have
evidence they are going to do it, but that’s
pretty tricky if you are interrupting a crime
of passion before the event that inspired
it.
And that also depends a lot on the nature
of time, if you’ve got branching future
realities there’s presumably one Universe
where they did it and one where they did not.
We won’t even get into law enforcement in
a Multiverse case, though it offers some amusing
options like snatching your multiverse clone
to frame for a crime or use to fake your own
death, or just finding that Universe where
you were a famous billionaire and doing away
with that person and taking their place.
One thing is for sure though, the future in
space and beyond will have no shortage of
options for crime, so there’s not likely
to be a shortage of police either.
We were talking a lot today about artificial
intelligence and it’s a fairly regular topic
on the show because it will be such a key
part of the future, in almost every aspect
of human endeavor.
If you’re curious about AI, Neural Networks,
and other computer concepts, there’s a number
of amazing courses on this topic at Brilliant.
Neural Nets are one of the expanding fields
of computer science and Brilliant has an excellent
course on the topic.
Brilliant’s focus on fun and interactive
methods makes them a great choice, whether
you’re a student, a parent trying to enhance
your kid’s education, a professional brushing
up on cutting-edge topics, or someone who
just wants to use this time to understand
the world better, you should check out Brilliant.
Try adding some learning structure to your
day by setting a goal to improve yourself,
and then work at that goal just a little bit
every day.
Brilliant makes that possible with interactive
explorations and a mobile app that you can
take with you wherever you are.
If you are naturally curious, want to build
your problem-solving skills, or need to develop
confidence in your analytical abilities, then
get Brilliant Premium to learn something new.
Brilliant’s thought-provoking math, science,
and computer science content helps guide you
to mastery by taking complex concepts and
breaking them up into bite-sized understandable
chunks.
You'll start by having fun with their interactive
explorations, over time you'll be amazed at
what you can accomplish.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, and want to do it at
your own pace and from the comfort of your
own home, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and try it out for free.
So next week we’ll explore Graphene, the
super-strong material that might have an enormous
impact on our civilization and permit the
creation of some truly enormous space habitats.
Then in two weeks we’ll look at those enormous
megastructures you can make with graphene,
and by some other methods, in Continent Sized
Rotating Space Habitats, as we head into July.
Before that we’ll close out the month of
June with our Monthly Livestream Q&A at 4pm
Eastern Time, Sunday, June 28th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
