This peisode is brought to you by Raycon.
To paraphrase Ellen Ripley of Aliens “Sometimes
you need to nuke the entire site from orbit.
It’s the only way to be sure…”
So today we are returning to our Space Warfare
and Future Warfare series, looking at Orbital
Bombardment, something that might come into
play as a regular weapon of war in the next
century.
And we’ll be looking at that in a few weeks
too, with an episode on the Next Century of
War.
At the time I’m writing this, near the end
of 2020, I just had occasion to give a guest
lecture and talk at the US Air Force Academy,
and unsurprisingly it got me thinking on the
future of warfare again, particularly its
progression into orbital space.
On the personal side, it reminded me that
it's been a decade since I left the Army and
two decades since my first time working for
the military, as a research intern for the
Air Force at AFIT back when I was 19 in my
senior year as a physics major at KSU.
A few years later I left grad school where
I had been working toward a Ph.D. in theoretical
physics to enlist in the US Army, where I
finished out that decade.
At the time there had been a lot of talk of
going to the Moon again, and the urgency of
replacing our shuttle program, neither of
which has since happened, and it reminds of
popular expression in the military, “Hurry
Up and Wait”, as it so often seems like
everything involving the space program seems
like both a constant rush of improvement and
a constant test of patience.
Another thing I noticed in my time in the
Army, besides its fondness for acronyms, was
that everything was always the most important
thing.
Almost every bit of advice I got from my mentors
was phrased as “The Most Important Thing
to know about being a soldier is…” or
“The First Rule of Warfare is…”.
Many were contradictory, and nothing was ever
the second most important thing or second
rule, and there seemed to be hundreds of these
little gems of wisdom, and that is the origin
of our long-running gag on the show of the
First Rule of Warfare, which includes a few
dozen first rules at last count.
One of my personal favorites, the unofficial
motto of my old field artillery unit and of
our show nowadays, is that if Brute Force
isn’t working, you’re not using enough
of it.
That is both very descriptive of what is involved
in orbital bombardment and its exact opposite,
since it allows precise and surgical strikes.
The First Rule of Warfare is always to seize
the high ground, you cannot get much higher
than orbit, and it is a great place to launch
attacks from.
Though as we will see today, it has its own
weaknesses and vulnerabilities too, an orbital
weapons platform is very vulnerable to attack
from groundside facilities and anti-satellite
or ASAT weapons.
We see the use of orbital bombardment a lot
in science fiction, and today we’ll consider
some popular examples and ask how realistic
they are from a science perspective too, as
well as a practical military perspective.
It takes immense amounts of energy to get
things into orbit, and anything up there has
access to that energy.
What comes up must come down, unless it is
in a stable orbit, which still tends to degenerate
with time, and when it comes down it's picking
up as much kinetic energy as you used putting
it up there.
Keep that in mind because we can’t get more
energy back from a mechanical impactor than
we put into it in the first place.
Exceptions can be made, though, if we’re
talking about propelling that object towards
Earth, which adds extra energy into the impactor.
We will discuss a few different approaches
to orbital bombardment today and how it might
get used, as well as means of defending or
countering it.
Now first it is important to understand that
things don’t just hang over planets, barring
some clark-tech anti-gravity drive, or from
some structure like an orbital ring.
So what we’re almost always discussing is
some spaceship or weapons platform orbiting
the target planet, or moon, or asteroid, and
firing down on it.
Except you’re not actually firing ‘down’.
You, yourself, are whirling around the planet,
possibly in a nice simple circular orbit,
possibly in something rather elliptical, and
what you’re actually doing is kicking your
projectile into a different orbital path,
one that intersects with the planet below
and preferably with a specific part of it.
Now this might be something moving far faster
than orbital speeds, like a laser beam or
simply a slug fired out of a space catapult
or mass driver or rail gun at speeds far in
excess of orbital craft.
In this case so long as you have line of sight
you are effectively firing in a straight line,
or as close to it as a bullet is.
This is the best approach if you have the
technology and energy budget for it, because
you retain all that orbital velocity (which
you have already paid for) and is essentially
what we see in science fiction most of the
time.
There are a couple of problems though.
First, you still have targeting windows since
you are orbiting.
Second, things moving fast into an atmosphere
suffer even more abuse from re-entry and might
burn up or get knocked off course easier.
It would be very hard to build something designed
to enter an atmosphere at thousands of kilometers
a second that could have exterior guidance
and sensor packages that wouldn’t be wrecked
by tearing through all that air at those kinds
of speeds, so precision strikes aren’t simply
a matter of dropping a rock on your target
and very clever cutting-edge engineering and
materials would be needed even to attempt
something like this.
Beam weapons might do better but have the
issue of scattering in air, not to mention
thermal blooming, which is a big issue with
high energy beams.
Air distorts beams, air being super-heated
by a beam distorts them more and more chaotically.
That’s a major issue with trying to shoot
down ICBMS with lasers, and it is just as
severe from orbit to ground as ground to orbit.
The other thing is if you have weapons able
to move that fast and through an atmosphere
with any precision, it tends to imply the
other side has them too, and a satellite or
spaceship in orbit is a heck of a lot more
vulnerable than some groundside facility buried
under a mountain or some submarine that only
surfaces long enough to shoot you.
Even more so since spaceships have to worry
about moving all their mass around, including
their protective armor, so generally can’t
afford as much of it as ocean-going vessels,
let alone a fixed facility.
They are shooting up, and you are shooting
down, so everything they send has less energy
from clawing its way out of a gravity well
and everything you have gains energy in the
descent.
And that’s a lot of energy, but when we’re
talking about energy beams, it is next to
nothing, the speed of light is tens of thousands
of times faster than most planet’s escape
velocities.
As for solid slugs or missiles, if we are
talking about ones moving many times orbital
speeds, then the energy loss or gain from
being groundside or in orbit gets to be fairly
minimal and the reality is that while a fleet
of kilometer long warships with guns as big
and wide as skyscrapers sounds nasty, and
certainly is, an entire industrialized planet
is going to just tear through that like it
was a swarm of gnats if both sides are on
the same approximate technological level.
The disadvantage of being at the bottom of
a gravity well is all your strikes are a bit
weaker and all theirs a bit stronger, but
the advantage of being at the bottom of a
gravity well is that you have a lot more mass
to be using as armor and weapons.
We looked at this more extreme case in our
episode Planetary Invasions, and the short
form is that while armadas and orbital bombardment
are awesome if your fleet has a big technological
edge or is invading and bombarding some lightly
populated or low-tech colony world, if you
try that on some industrialized planet you
are only going to succeed in causing a navigational
hazard from the wreckage of your fleet.
Getting into a shooting match with a planet
from orbit violates the first rule of warfare,
“Don’t Get Shot, that’s the other side’s
job”, which is best achieved by doing all
your shooting from too far away for them to
easily aim at you.
Alternatively a planet can’t move around
to avoid being hit.
In space warfare, especially the high-tech
kind involving folks able to move at a decent
fraction of light speed, the disadvantage
of being at the bottom of a gravity well is
that all that mass is hard to move and easy
to hit.
That does sadly spoil a lot of classic Science
Fiction, especially Space Opera, though if
you want to occupy a planet you eventually
need to get into orbit around it and presumably
do some bombardment and we’ll discuss that
scenario later, but let’s consider the more
near-term and modern-tech approach for now.
When dealing with weapons orbiting and deploying
at fairly similar speeds, the usual notion
is to have the orbiting weapon be in a stable
orbit, be it circular or highly elliptical,
low orbit or high orbit, and transfer to an
orbital path that now intersects the planet.
That is easy enough to do, the tricky part
is getting the timing right to hit the place
you want to hit and making sure it can arrive
at its destination on target and without burning
up.
Tungsten rods are a popular option for this,
Tungsten is fairly cheap as dense and heat-resistant
materials go and isn’t fissile so doesn’t
raise any nuclear concerns.
Such an object would slam into the ground
at about Mach 10 and be very good at penetrating
hardened targets.
You may have heard of this weapon discussed
as Project Thor or a “Rod from God”.
It’s not going to match the firepower of
a nuke, but is worth more than its weight
in chemical explosives.
It also doesn’t violate the Outer Space
Treaty’s ban on deploying chemical, biological,
or nuclear weapons from space.
Last I heard the engineers at SpaceX seemed
confident they were going to get launch cost
to orbit down to under a thousand dollars
a kilogram, possibly well under, so the prior
cost concerns on such tungsten rods costing
hundreds of millions of dollars a piece to
get into space are probably on their way out.
If it costs a few million dollars to get a
rod into orbit, well that’s competitive
with a bunker buster bomb, the various Massive
Ordnance Penetrator, or MOP, bunker buster
bombs generally cost a few million apiece
too.
What’s more, that’s the price to get them
up from Earth, it’s cheaper to fly one in
from the Moon or some tungsten rich asteroid,
nor do you have to use tungsten, uranium is
a popular suggestion and plenty of other metals,
alloys, and ceramics would work.
It’s probably a lot easier to set up an
off-Earth manufacturing chain for metal rods
than sophisticated bombs full of explosives,
so these are likely to see a future in warfare.
They do not match an atomic bomb, let alone
a hydrogen bomb, in destructive potential,
but they definitely make a good tool for getting
into armored targets.
Don’t assume incidentally that you can easily
hollow one out and fill it with explosives
or guidance packages either, such things don’t
handle the kind of stresses and heat a kinetic
weapon made of a solid slug of simple metal
can.
That said if you can get something in there
that can act as a decent fuse or detonator,
some ten ton rod of metal suddenly shattering
into bullet-sized hypersonic fragments, presumably
around a million of them, either once inside
an armored bunker or high up in the air would
be a vicious anti-personnel or even anti-vehicle
weapon.
If you had one that could reliably fragment
as air bursts then deploying larger ones or
several of them would probably let you chew
through a city.
In an industrialized orbital and cislunar
economy, something we will pass through on
our way to settle our solar system and the
galaxy beyond, there should be a point at
which producing and shipping these rods ran
to mere thousands of dollars a piece, allowing
you to keep arsenals of millions of them on
hand, and they do then become a great weapon
for both groundside attacks and orbital strikes
on things like space stations too.
Of course you can counter one by good detection
and interception, and nobody with a serious
presence in space wants a major conventional
war in orbit either as it sets off Kessler
Syndrome, a cloud of debris in orbit making
it hard to pass through without heavy armor
or sweeping it clear with something like a
laser broom.
Such rods are good for cracking into such
armored targets though.
Kessler Syndrome events are something parallel
to MAD or Mutually Assured Destruction concepts
of the Cold War, in that any major player
can set one off, but we also want to keep
in mind that thinly armored spaceships and
space stations or habitats is not something
we should expect to exist indefinitely.
Such rods become potent weapons exactly because
mining and shipping metals from the Moon or
asteroids gets so cheap, so shipping in armor
plating gets cheaper too, and while a chunk
of metal fragments zipping around a ten kilometers
a second sounds horribly dangerous, it isn’t
the same as a projectile forged with penetration
in mind and shot right at you, and it is quite
likely a lot of stuff built in orbit will
start to include levels of armor and point
defense able to handle that sort of debris,
or even those sort of kinetic strikes.
On the other hand, some components simply
aren’t easy to armor.
Solar panels, radiators, sensors, and antennae
would likely need to quickly retract inside
your armor when RADAR or LIDAR detects incoming
debris.
Perversely, once you retract your sensors
to protect them from debris, you can no longer
see incoming debris.
Also your rocket engine bell nozzles better
not take a hit while thrusting because they’ll
be running at their material limits.
Even small impacts would likely destroy a
nozzle.
Ships in motion, accelerating, decelerating,
or maneuvering, are very visible and very
vulnerable targets compared to objects simply
drifting.
Now I mentioned how they aren’t as powerful
as a nuke and barring the Outer Space Treaty
there is good reason to put your nukes up
there.
ICBMS have good reach but are limited, compared
to an orbiting device, and usually maintaining
those rockets fueled-up for short notice launch
is far more costly and difficult than building
and maintaining the actual nuclear warheads.
Incidentally this is not the same as FOBS,
or a Fractional Orbital Bombardment System,
which is just launching a nuke into orbit
briefly on its way back down, as a way of
extending its range to anywhere on the planet
and concealing the target location, at least
in terms of the launch path not revealing
it.
Folks sometimes get confused by this because
it sounds like something that would go higher
than an ICBM but rather it’s the exact opposite,
a depressed trajectory to no more than 150
kilometers of altitude, precisely because
it is at orbital speed, while alternatively
ICBMS go almost ten times higher and fall
back down.
ICBMS only reach about 6 or 7 kilometers per
second, decently slower than orbital speed,
so it can be confusing why they go higher,
but the key thing to remember is that while
things in orbit might only be a couple hundreds
kilometers up, all that rocket fuel isn’t
to get them that high, it’s to get them
going sideways fast enough to fall around
the planet perpetually.
We only put them high up to get them over
the air drag of the atmosphere.
Ignoring air drag on the way up, you only
need to shoot something at a couple kilometers
a second to get it up to those altitudes,
so it will fall down to the ground.
That’s just fine for shooting things up
there incidentally, since they are moving
sideways at several kilometers per second,
if you fire some over-powered flak cannon
up like a fountain in their way, or a pod
that’s more aerodynamic and will explode
as flak, all that flak needs in terms of lateral
velocity is enough to spread out in a cloud
the orbiting satellite, tungsten rod, defense
platform, or whatever will pass through and
be damaged by the cloud of flak before the
flak falls back down.
Incidentally this is essentially the same
way you counter more distant strikes too,
like interplanetary bombardment, asteroid
strikes, or relativistic kill missiles sent
in from deep space.
Those are all going so fast that it only takes
them running into something to explode, so
you defend by simply putting things in the
way that are much smaller and cheaper and
need little propulsion either.
Orbital bombardment has the advantage that
there’s very little time for detection,
more so since the planet’s horizon can obscure
the weapon as it approaches.
Bunker buster rods from god and atomic weapons
aren’t the only things orbital bombardment
is good for.
A popular trope of science fiction is sending
down drops pods with troops in them.
So, you might want to be using this for some
non-military purpose like sending in emergency
rescue personnel or supplies.
For that matter, the Rod from God might be
a good way of excavating – it's weird to
think of using orbital strikes to cut a road
through a mountain range or dig a hole for
a building’s foundation, but we use explosives
for these often enough anyway, and it might
be very handy as a tool for terraforming other
worlds.
Now back on the notion of drop pods for troops,
you obviously can’t be dropping someone
inside a hollowed out metal rod, even if it’s
a robot or cyborg able to handle way more
gee force.
This is called lithobraking, as opposed to
aerobraking, and it's when you slow something
down by ramming it into rock or earth instead
of by air drag.
Needless to say not much is going to survive
ramming into the ground at several kilometers
per second, though if it did, that’s nothing
you want to pick a fight with!
Anything that walks out of a crater it made
probably is something you should run away
from and hope it doesn’t follow you.
You can actually make stuff that would survive
that impact by applying the same concept as
an air bag, though in cases like that your
pod might be a very long rod that basically
acts like some cross between a rifle barrel
and a spring, as its whole job is to try to
extend the period the cargo of the pod experiences
the braking action as the pod itself rams
into something.
But, even if you made one that somehow minimised
the g-forces experienced by the troops inside
to something survivable, they’re still going
to have to dig themselves out of the crater
created by the impact, one with molten materials
trying to dissolve their boots while they’re
at it.
That violates the first rule of warfare: don’t
create a hellscape for your troops to deal
with before they even encounter the enemy.
Though I suppose they could use the crater
as a defensive dugout.
We also see concepts like that in boarding
torpedoes in some science fiction and I think
they’d be most realistically viable for
attacking spaceships, space stations, or asteroids
where those folks in the things are decelerating
only at a rate they could survive, from a
speed that could be slowed down from in a
few hundred meters.
Humans can’t handle more than 10-g of deceleration
without passing out, but we can handle more
without dying and we can build machines, and
yes probably cyborgs or genetic superman,
able to handle a lot more.
At 10-g of deceleration a human can decelerate
down from 10 kilometers per second in 100
seconds, so an orbital drop pod decelerating
at that rate from that speed has to pour on
the gas at an altitude or distance of 500
kilometers.
That still makes it a hard target to hit given
it’s probably jittering around as it does
this and would still be moving as fast as
a speeding bullet till that last kilometer
or so.
Also that 10 g’s is just to avoid passing
out while experiencing protracted acceleration
or deceleration.
While humans in car crashes often experience
over a hundred g’s and live or even walk
away, the first rule of warfare is: don’t
send your troops into battle feeling like
they’ve just walked away from a car crash.
So even 10g’s is probably a bit on the high
side for a practical troop drop.
Still, if the folks, or robots, on board could
handle a 1000-g acceleration, and we can build
some machines able to handle that, like fuses
on artillery rounds for instance, then they
only need 1 second to drop speed and can start
their braking at 5 kilometers out.
How you’re actually slowing down from these
speeds is tricky, but my best guess for an
ideal method that involved something like
a small pod would be a parachute made very
large and out of something of very high tensile
strength like graphene and carbon nanotubes.
That parachute is an easy but irrelevant target,
poking a million tiny holes in a kilometer
wide drop pod parachute wouldn’t matter
much, and note that this does not require
a gentle landing that offers the enemy plenty
of chances to shoot you as you descend slowly
through the air.
You’re potentially undergoing the same horrible
g-forces we just talked about, but on an automatic
timed basis to slow you to a crawl right before
hitting then maybe using mild lithobraking
or rockets to finish the drop.
This strikes me as much more useful for rapid
delivery of supplies to a combat zone or rapid
delivery of people to an emergency where no
one is shooting at them, or at least no army
is shooting at them with high-tech weapons
meant for killing paratroopers.
Otherwise I’d tend to think dropping bombs,
not combat troops, would make more sense in
most cases, but then again you always want
your troops in-theater quickly, just in case
folks start trying to shoot them even if it
previously seemed safe, so this might be the
method used, it’ll save fuel and a bunch
of giant parachutes certainly makes clean
radar returns and targeting a nightmare.
Of course you might also be fighting your
way down in waves.
As we often point out in other episodes on
space colonization, it is likely planets will
have massive orbital infrastructure, and indeed
might have far more people and far more industry
up in orbital space than down on the planet.
They also might have active support structures
like space towers and orbital rings, or even
live in a multi-layered matryoshka world,
in which case your orbital bombardments and
or actions might be happening at much slower
speeds and smaller distances.
The same would apply to attacking moons or
colonized asteroids and those are likely to
massively outnumber planets, so presumably
be more common targets in conflicts.
Dropping from an Orbital Ring a hundred kilometers
up is no different than dropping from a plane
except you need that initial protection from
vacuum and cold, you are falling through very
thin air so you can get quite fast, but this
isn’t re-entry speeds, and orbital rings
can frankly be at any altitude, as can space
towers, see those episode for details, but
trying to fight your way down a hundred kilometer
tall space tower with 30,000 floors strikes
me as a nightmare scenario for an infantry
regiment, on offense or defense.
Frankly, this strikes me more as a generational
war than a battle.
We tend to think, from the sheer scale of
the weapon powers involved, that planetary
invasions would be quick affairs, at least
to get groundside, but it really might be
the sort of thing that takes generations of
travel to get to the orbital space of the
planet, decades of fighting to claim the thousands
or millions of orbital stations and habitats,
and just as long fighting your way down to
the ground, relying on the defender not wanting
to trash their own ground-to-orbit transport
systems like orbital rings and towers as cover
for seizing them one slow and brutal footstep
at a time.
Remember again what we said earlier, as massively
powerful as orbital bombardment seems, that
planet probably can punch back much harder,
so it wouldn’t be that surprising to deploy
a strategy that focused on seizing and holding
little bits of valuable real estate one bit
at a time, discouraging them from deploying
their heaviest weapons, possibly to the point
that it was more like an invasion by migration.
That brings me to the first rule of warfare:
Keep your wars short.
Don’t plan a war with troops that start
off as teens and end up fighting until they’re
octogenarians looking for an old folks home.
It is hard to say of course, it might be fast
or slow, but our usual assumptions about future
warfare are also that it's more automated,
faster, and more precise, and that might not
turn out to be the case across the board,
nor necessarily stay the same over time.
Every century sees new innovations in warfare,
often turning the prior fundamental strategies,
truths, and rules on their heads, and we’ll
see what the Next Century of War might hold
in our next episode of the series.
Whatever happens, though, always remember
the first rule of warfare!
We’ll get to our schedule and announcements
in a moment, but first if you’re looking
for a good pair of earbuds with noise isolating
features, without dangling wires. and at half
the price of other premium earbuds, I’d
recommend trying out Raycon’s Everyday E25
Earbuds.
Personally I love them for the snug, discreet,
noise-isolating fit that means I’m able
to wear them during conference calls without
missing the conversation even while in loud
rooms, or just getting away from my screen
without getting unplugged, and of late I’ve
often used them to listen in on calls even
when my wife was doing a zoom conference call
five feet away.
Plus they’ve got a good battery life and
a very compact charging case with its own
battery that can recharge them four times
while you’re on the go, which means they’re
recharging every time I put them back in their
case for safe keeping.
Raycon earbuds give you 6 hours of playtime,
seamless Bluetooth pairing, more bass, and
a more compact design for a comfortable, noise-isolating
fit!
Raycon is disrupting the electronics industry
by designing premium wireless audio for half
the price, without compromise.
They’re doing things differently than other
brands out there—from the way they design
their products to the way they price them,
Raycon prioritizes their customer experience
from start to finish.
The company was co-founded by Ray J. and is popular with celebrities Snoop Dogg, Melissa Etheridge, 
 and many others for their comfort, style, and playtime. They also come in a range of colors and style, 
and Raycon has a 45-day free-return policy.
Whether you’re taking up a new hobby—or
just want to make your day-to-day a little
more comfortable—Raycons are the perfect
way to bring premium audio to everything you
do, and if you’d like to give them a try,
click the link in the description box or go
to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur to get 15% off
your Raycon purchase.
So today we were looking at Orbital Bombardment
and we will continue to exam the future of
warfare in the coming months, and we will
probably end up doing an episode devoted to
the Space Force at some point.
I mentioned that I had the privilege of guest
lecturing at the Air Force Academy some months
back and I’ve also had the chance brainstorm
with some folks about industry and defense
in space, and I wanted to give a quick shout
out to my friend Colonel Peter Garreston,
author of “Scramble for the Skies: The Great
Power Competition to Control the Resources
of Outer Space” and editor of “STATE OF
THE SPACE INDUSTRIAL BASE 2020”.
I’ll link to those in the video description
and the 2020 report is a great outlook at
the situation in space development right now,
I hope you’ll find Peter’s work as insightful
as I do.
Again we will be looking more at future warfare
in two weeks, in “the Next Century of Warfare”,
on March 4, but before then we will be asking
if it is possible to colonize solar systems
around Red Giants and other short lived massive
stars, then we will finish February out with
our Livestream Q&A, Sunday, February 28th,
at 4pm Eastern Time.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
