This episode is sponsored by Audible
One day, an alien ship may arrive here on
Earth, and whether they come in peace or to
enslave us, it would seem like civilization
as we know it would be over.
So what should we do if the situation is reversed
and we find a planet inhabited by primitive
aliens?
So welcome to another sci-fi Sunday here on
SFIA where we take some time to examine a
popular concepts in science fiction and ask
how realistic they are, and today’s topic,
Primitive Aliens, struck me as an appropriate
topic after our recent looks at surveying
exoplanets and sending probes and explorers
to them.
Probably one of the most common themes of
science fiction is an advanced civilization
showing up to conquer us or enlighten us or
whatever, and whether their intent is benevolent
or malevolent, and whether the net result
is positive or negative, humanity is changed
forever by that meeting.
Needless to say, we have a lot of history
to draw on, warning us of possible mistakes
that civilizations can make when meeting each
other.
Those are not limited to when one of those
civilizations has a large advantage in technology
or numbers, nor is it universally one sided,
but an awful lot of science fiction deals
with the pioneering of new worlds that’s
drawing inspiration from various colonial
scenarios in our own history, probably the
American Wild West being the biggest.
As a result, there is a lot of Cowboys and
Indians style interactions of humans and aliens,
so ethical discussions about how to interact
with indigenous alien civilizations, or if
we even should, are common in science fiction,
probably most famously, the Prime Directive
of Non-Interference from Star Trek.
We’re not here today to discuss the morality
of prior human conduct with each other, which
has been a mixture of noble and despicable
for all of human history.
Rather this episode wants to look at the topic
from a bit more of a practical standpoint
today.
Now, ‘Practical’ is often a euphemism
for blatantly ignoring all sorts of bad behavior,
both leading up to a situation, and for managing
the existing dumpster-fire that one has inherited
and been entrenched in.
With that in mind, I’m going to be very
intentional to not draw conclusions about
right and wrong action on the various sci-fi
examples and hypothetical scenarios which
we’ll discuss today.
One thing that doesn’t happen much in sci-fi,
when meeting aliens who are less advanced
than our intrepid explorers, is for them to
appear in next week’s episode or for us
to get an update a couple generations later.
So, we’re not seeing the various corpse
piles left behind by an accidental disease
transmission, or the many hospital rooms now
helping the primitive natives recover from
once lethal diseases, or them borrowing your
technology or simply being inspired to seek
those answers by your visit.
It also doesn’t show their ambassador showing
up centuries later to slap our ambassador
on behalf the millions who died from a disease
which we could have prevented with our technology,
or by starvation, that our farming techniques
could have saved, or that died from the brutal
war of conquest launched by whichever tribe
we first made contact with, whom now has a
technological edge.
In short, it is going to be a mess, and it
is still going to be a mess even if your explorers
have orders never to be seen by primitive
alien natives at any cost, nor tamper with
their civilization, because even ignoring
the fact that they might view us as indifferent
snobs who left them to die when they find
out centuries later about the galaxy, if you
are living in a civilization that values personal
freedom and knowledge, you’re not really
in a position to keep others from visiting
those primitive planets.
Where Star Trek is concerned, an important
point that often comes up is essentially to
acknowledge that not everyone is in Starfleet,
indeed, proportionally it would seem like
a smaller percentage than are in modern militaries
or police.
Do the discoveries of the USS Enterprise and
other ships get reported to the public?
Do they get primitive worlds redacted?
If so, on what legal ground?
So, what’s stopping folks from reading about
the big discovery by Starfleet and deciding
to go to that new planet and enlighten the
natives about Jesus, Darwin, Mohammed or Buddha?
You might be able to keep the outright con
artists away from a world by threat to prosecute
them and take their earnings, but true believers
are usually a lot more sanguine about risking
their own neck.
Whether that’s about giving the natives
hypothetical eternal salvation or medicine
and other technologies, you’ll have folks
willing to try.
As I said back in our episode Smug Aliens,
“Died savings millions” is a pretty good
epitaph to have on your tomb, and that’s
assuming your apparently enlightened society
is not only willing to do a big planetary
quarantine for untold centuries but also willing
to use lethal force to stop folks entering
or to execute those that snuck in.
Which is likely to be seen by those aliens
as executing a visitor from heaven who sought
to help them.
Not really a good public relations move.
Plus, it is based on an implicit assumption
there that you’re doing them a favor by
keeping others away from them and I think
that’s a bit of a blanket assumption, especially
when taken to extremes like saying it’s
not your place to divert an asteroid that
was going to whack some inhabited planet.
Personally I’d argue that relationships
are always a bit messy, be it family, friends,
or neighboring civilizations, and the right
path is openness, honesty, respect, and offers
to help when they ask, and not necessarily
when you think it best, and to encourage them
to reply in kind, with the goal of a long
term mutually beneficial friendship.
Though that’s just my opinion and could
be very wrong.
So, generally it isn’t about if we should
or shouldn’t interfere in more primitive
societies, because from a practical standpoint,
it would seem more likely that someone will,
and we either want to get in there first,
or to have plans for handling it.
Which is not going to be a simple solution
that you can come up with and implement in
Act 4 of this week’s episode, especially
given the time lags involved in space travel
in the absence of FTL - faster than light
options.
Imagine someone went and gave the aliens a
cure for a plague that was ravishing them,
and a few decades later you find out about
it, and a few more decades later, you’ve
got a ship there to investigate and you find
a whole bunch of statues to that person on
one continent and a whole civilization there
devoted to spreading their new nation to every
other part of their planet, just as they did
to this continent in the last generation or
so.
It’s a new empire, built on many high-minded
principles picked up from their Visitor’s
off-the-cuff comments, many of which were
quotes of other respected humans like Lincoln
and Churchill, and after that visitor’s
death, they decided to venerate that visitor
and spread the idea of democracy and that
exploiting and murdering weaker people is
wrong.
They are true believers and the areas they
govern are definitely enjoying higher standards
of living and basic human rights, or alien
rights, but at the same time, they flat-out
conquered their whole continent and can be
pretty heavy-handed in their administration.
Plus, there’s a fair amount of corruption,
bribery, and double-standards at a practical
level.
There’s a classic Star Trek episode “A
Piece of the Action” where Kirk and crew
find a world built by mobsters inspired by
a book on Chicago Mobs a previous starship
accidentally left behind a century before
with the primitive aliens, which is a fun
examination of this concept.
This seems like a plausible enough scenario
and we can’t really land there and tell
them the prior Visitor was a wicked person
– they probably don’t want to hear that,
even if it is true – and if we say we need
to fix the Visitor’s tampering, their leader
might point out that all of his authority
comes from the assumption that their Visitor
was right, so he can’t make any decisions
to reverse that, as its predicated on him
having that authority to act on his people’s
behalf.
He also might then hand us a gun and a shovel
and ask if we’d like to go kill the estimated
50 million of his citizens that the Visitor’s
guidance and technologies saved from illness
and starvation, or to go dig up and resurrect
the 5 million soldiers and civilians who died
on all sides of the various wars of unification.
Also, they’ve been sending explorers and
representatives to other parts of their world
to make contact and he’d like to know if
we’re planning to scuttle those ships, or
the other ones he plans to send even if those
first ones get sunk, or the fleets he plans
to send to conquer the world, or those bits
of it which don't cheerfully join them.
So, practically speaking, there’s not much
we can do to erase the past interference and
now we have to decide if we’re going to
help the natives of those other continents
to defend themselves from conquest or just
to bug out.
Or maybe we will sink that fleet.
Critically though, there’s really no reverse
option generations after the event, and in
a non-FTL universe, that’s what you’ve
got as your hurdle.
Now, one solution to this is to put observers
in local space, maintaining a quarantine once
we discover an inhabited planet, who can act
quickly and also actively prevent tampering
by other visitors.
This has some problems too, because we have
to ask, who is watching the watchers?
And we are talking about prolonged timelines
here.
We might trust John and Jane to watch over
the planet and not set themselves up as interventionists
or god-kings, but what about their great-great-great-grandchildren?
Or even John and Jane, if nigh-immortal via
technology, as they might mutate in perspective
over time, and we are talking about potentially
millions of years of watchdogging.
Even an AI designed for watching over worlds
is not necessarily a fix.
If it isn’t at least human-smart, it is
liable to be fooled by anything smarter that
comes to challenge it as the watchdog.
If it is human-smart or smarter, it’s open
to Perverse Instantiation, which is basically
where something finds a way to twist the rules
to let it do what it wants.
In simplest form, you tell a child they are
not to have any of the cookies in the cookie
jar, and that they aren’t to take any out,
and so they either break the jar or tip it
over so that gravity removes the cookies for
them.
They have technically followed the rules,
but perverted them to achieve the goal the
rules sought to prevent.
Again, this is called Perverse Instantiation.
And even if you get that AI right, one whose
core nature is being the watchdog, so that
it genuinely wants to protect that world and
will not sway in its behavior, how many guns
are you giving it?
Because there’s no guarantee your civilization
is still going to want to uphold quarantines
set hundreds or even thousands of years ago,
let alone hundreds of thousands of years ago
by some nation that represents them no better
than some minor tribal chieftain in the Fertile
Crescent before even the days of the Scorpion
King is going to represent all of us nowadays,
for all that he might be the common ancestor
to more than 90% of us.
Is your watchdog going to fire on a fleet
coming in that has signed orders from your
democratically elected leadership under the
banner of the same nation that built it?
What about its successor state if that empire
crumbled?
If tomorrow we found a Roman Legionnaire frozen
like Captain America who we could bring back,
who does he take orders from?
There’s a ton of places that claim to be
the proper successors of the old Empire after
all, all of which are going to seem pretty
alien to him.
But, speaking of aliens, it would seem pretty
likely that if you found one intelligent civilization
while exploring space, primitive or not, that
there’ll be some others, and some might
be spacefaring.
They might show up to talk to those natives.
Does our watchdog shoot them too?
If not, then why not?
Why is their interference okay?
Does this make a loophole for folks at home
to hire alien mercenaries to bypass the watchdog?
One problem with non-interventionist concepts
in science fiction is that they tend to assume
it’s fine to interfere inside your own species
or culture but not in others’ ones, especially
those less powerful than your own.
But we probably shouldn’t be assuming humanity
will really qualify as a species in a few
millennia or that we would be the only intelligent
agencies coming out of Earth and its daughter
colonies.
I’m not really sure how the prime directive
would handle finding a colony of humans who
had gone primitive themselves and genetically
engineered themselves to be half-dolphin or
centaurs, but, if instead of engineering themselves
into hybrids, some scientist had simply made
intelligent dolphins with hands, or a centaur,
and left them on some planet or megastructure,
should we act differently to them?
Does the prime directive apply to the scientists
but not the hybrids?
If so, why?
If not, why for them but not for aliens?
In Orson Scott Card’s classic novel, Speaker
for the Dead, we see a humanity limited by
light speed travel that’s colonized hundreds
of worlds a few thousand years in our future.
But before we colonized any, we encountered
aliens who sought to invade us.
We repelled the attack and eventually invaded
them and wiped them out.
Humanity felt terrible guilt about that and
so, when thousands of years later, they finally
encounter another alien species, a primitive
one, they limit themselves to a tiny colony
contained inside a fenced-in area on that
planet, whilst maintaining policies of minimal
contact with, and no intervention or technology
handouts given to this newly-discovered primitive
species, called the Piggies.
But, one of the folks studying them breaks
the rules and gives them various technologies.
When a follow up basically comes to try to
set things right, their argument is that they
want spaceships too.
That they don’t want to wait while humanity
settles every world around them, so that they
are stuck with just one world while we fill
up every system in that region of the galaxy.
No star empire for the Piggies, maybe just
a few token worlds given, assuming humanity
doesn’t change its mind and take their world
too.
They argue that we had no right to show them
this greater universe and then snatch it from
them, that, in many ways, the policy toward
primitive aliens is designed to keep them
weak and not a threat, and the protagonist
of the tale agrees and helps them get star
flight.
Wonderful book by the way, but it does raise
the point that, if a civilization opts for
non-intervention for that reason, is it in
the wrong?
If some ancient alien civilization had arrived
on the galactic scene a billion years ago,
millions of years before anyone else, and
colonized everything but inhabited star systems
with animal life on them, do we have any real
moral authority to chastise them for not leaving
us room to colonize?
If so, then, if they had left us a few hundred
systems, nearby to us, or left roughly half
the galaxy uncolonized, in pockets around
such worlds, is that enough?
If not, what is?
Are we in the wrong not to be leaving space
for future intelligent racoons or dolphins
or elephants to colonize?
Should we be building them megastructure habitats
for them to dominate and evolve intelligence
in?
And again, this episode isn’t really aiming
to determine what’s most moral here, in
theory we could also be contemplating indirectly
assisting other species by deciding that active
genocide on primitive aliens was ethical as
it saves lives down the road.
Seem despicable but contemplate it in the
context of the acid-drooling xenomorphs from
the Alien franchise, who will rapaciously
grow on the galactic stage by laying eggs
inside every sentient creature.
Or maybe they are a slow-growing race and
encounter one that’s much faster to expand
than others.
If so, do they have a moral duty to force
slower or limited growth to leave room for
slower growing or future species?
And on the other side of that, who put them
in charge except by ‘might makes right’?
Is that the basis for their morality?
And what’s wrong with that faster growing
group taking on dead worlds and making them
life-bearing?
But, just as important to the entire conversation
is, what we mean by ‘primitive’.
All of our working assumptions around non-interference
are built off humans interacting with other
humans, and whatever minor differences various
human civilizations had with each other genetically
when they first met, they don’t seem to
have represented a basic difference in intelligence
or basic emotions and judgment.
At least during known history, it is possible
that some prehistoric or even pre-homo sapien
interactions, like with Neanderthals, did
involve huge differences in IQ or some mutant
clade that was born inherently sociopathic
or something.
Otherwise though, we just know that practically
any human during recorded history, on any
continent or in any era could have been easily
raised from birth in the modern world and
would be practically indistinguishable from
anyone around nowadays.
That probably would not be true of proto-humans,
which presumably would include the folks who
presumably discovered fire around a million
years ago and maybe even 2.
Evidence is pretty limited, so, we can hardly
speak with certainty about if Homo Erectus
discovered fire and which of their descendant
sub-species and cousins also had it, nor about
how smart they were.
Brain size is basically the only information
we’ve got, and that doesn’t actually mean
that much, especially when talking about how
they would fare at learning language, or at
understanding modern social interactions,
and technology or math.
So it is entirely possible a proto-human,
even from way back when fire was new, could
be abducted as a baby by time machine, and
raised to function fine in modern society,
or not, insufficient information.
Same notion, you might actually find aliens
who were way smarter than us in many regards
but still hadn’t mastered fire, and not
just in the context of them being ocean-dwellers.
That might even be true of proto-humans, and
Neanderthals are thought to have had slightly
bigger brains than we do nowadays.
They might have been nearly identical to us,
or smarter than us, or seemed like idiot-savants
in some areas.
Again, brain size doesn’t mean that much
– whale brains can get about six times bigger
than humans and the tree shrew has a brain
that’s fully 10% of its body mass.
Alien brains are likely to be very different
in form and function and also let’s not
ignore that cybernetics and genetic engineering
could be brought into play.
And this is all in the context of humans and
our relations so close that we could probably
have interbred with them.
You could easily have some alien squid species
that engages in sibling cannibalism and isolated
its existence shortly after hatching, that
could barely comprehend the point of language
but could also solve a Rubik’s Cube in three
seconds.
It doesn’t really get communication – it's
not hostile, but it flees if anyone approaches
it that’s bigger than it, and generally
tries to eat anything smaller if it’s hungry.
Sitting in its tank watching us fiddle with
primitive tools and technology, it figures
them out ridiculously early and easily.
Now, we’ve often talked about if it is ethical
to help species that are as smart as us but
confined to water worlds, where discovering
fire and thus other technologies is very hard.
This particular type of Uplifting - Technological
Uplifting – is the one usually under discussion
in science fiction and a favorite topic of
mine with my friend and fellow science youtuber,
John Michael Godier.
However, here we are looking at possibly needing
one of the other two types of uplifting – biological
and mental, or neurological.
Normally, that’s giving a dolphin hands
so it can work with technology or giving a
chimpanzee or dog a bigger brain so it can
understand them.
Here though, the alien squid needs no bigger
brain, it’s a genius at math and science
and it’s quite capable of manipulating tools,
better than us, it just has no social skills,
lacks the inherent wiring for them, and its
brain doesn’t have the plasticity for that.
When we start talking about tinkering in this
fashion too, we also want to keep in mind
that fire with humans is thought to have gone
through some stages, at some point being opportunistic
and occasional, then becoming habitual, and
eventually obligate, which is to say, unable
to survive without it.
We used fire and slowly came to need it.
And that’s not limited just to fire or even
just to technology.
Humans are necessarily social, and of our
critters that are born unable to survive on
their own and need parental care, which is
presumably why you don’t see much sibling
cannibalism or super-big litters, broods,
or clutches in such critters.
But, we should not assume that the mammalian
architecture with its slow maturity and its
parental dependence, is necessary for a big
brain.
Let’s say that our alien squid is a real
case and some time in the twenty-something
century we discover this critter, maybe in
the subsurface seas of Europa, maybe around
some water world orbiting an alien sun.
An interesting conundrum gets raised here.
Our xeno psychologist points out that the
creature isn’t in any way evil but it has
no parental or familiar bond.
It lacks any real concept of empathy, so while
it finds us interesting, and would miss us
if we disappeared as a way to satisfy its
curiosity, it would also find it interesting
to see us tortured to death.
And would feel the same about its own kind.
So, anything we teach it is not going to get
shared, unless we rewire it to have such tendencies.
One person suggests that, since humanity now
has technology to achieve biological immortality,
this wouldn’t be too hard to adapt to the
squid, or maybe it is naturally is immortal,
so it could potentially get our knowledge
and keep it indefinitely and indeed, we could
teach more of them.
We don’t necessarily have to look at primitive
aliens as a species, personal relationships
and individual actions are as morally valid
for them as they are between humans presumably.
So, you could adopt the squid, or adopt a
primitive alien that was a Neanderthal analog
that was left abandoned to die, and raise
it as your own.
Admittedly, in many cases, that might raise
a hazy line between a child and a pet.
Another researcher points out that we could
tweak this squid, and maybe a few others,
to have that parental and fraternal bond and
social desires, but that if we did, since
they breed at a ferocious rate, laying thousands
of eggs that grow to maturity in a couple
years, they would be emotionally ruined by
trying to save all their thousands of spawn,
and if not, be overwhelmed trying to expand
fast enough to support them.
So too, we would potentially be dealing a
fatal blow to humanity as they might be far
better and more motivated at galactic expansion
than we and soon render us a relative micronation
reliant on their goodwill for continued existence.
Stephen Baxter plays with a similar concept
in his Manifold trilogy.
This obviously opens up a whole host of ethical
problems too, including if it is an act of
genocide to kill the genetically tinkered
with version who has been given those traits
by a rogue member of your team.
Maybe it is not genocide but simply an act
of murder, or maybe not even that?
But, when it comes to primitive, this is what
we need to be keeping in mind.
Odds are not really good that some pre-technological
or low technology alien we encounter is going
to be an analogy for cavemen or neolithic
tribes, as we have seen in science fiction
so often.
And I don’t mean that they don’t look
and dress like human hunter-gatherers except
for some makeup and forehead prosthetics for
an episode of a show, being entirely non-humanoid
in physiology.
Rather, that they’d be alien of mind, like
that squid, whose biology and neurology is
just not compatible with our worldview.
Unless maybe it is, if we work hard enough
to find a way.
Especially if we’re talking about a protracted
period of primitivism, which is likely to
be the case.
Now, humanity spent around a million years
with fire before it got around to using it
for pottery or metallurgy, so we want to be
careful with what we mean by ‘protracted’.
Our squid critter probably would never evolve
advanced technology because, as smart as it
is, it has no easy biological route to socializing
and without that, it wouldn’t seem likely
that any real retention and improvement of
technology is going to occur.
It might be that they slowly evolve enormous
intellects just because they’ve been stuck
as non-technological primitives for a billion
years.
You could also have another species where
the wiring was such that the traits for creativity
and invention tended to be badly connected
to social or survival traits.
The brain architecture for the one, uses circuit
paths that the other would, so to speak.
Aristotle said “There is no great genius
without a touch of madness”, and that might
not be true of alien minds, either because
their geniuses had very big touches of madness
or the reverse, they were smart but not eccentric
or out of the box.
Sharp as a razor but no knack for innovation.
Being born to a water world isn’t the only
way you could get brains but no technology,
or brains but with a hard limit physiologically
on getting smarter in one or more fashions.
Your brain just can’t expand further because
your heart can’t spare the blood, for instance,
or like humans, our heads are a bit too big
for safe births.
One last notion to close out on though.
When dealing with primitive aliens and trying
to figure out when, where and how to interact
with them, it is important to keep in mind
that their very existence implies other intelligent
aliens exist.
It’s probably a good idea to assume that,
if you found one species you beat into space,
that there’s likely another who beat you.
Maybe they believed in letting other civilizations
be and are watching to see what we do, maybe
they’ll be judging us.
Maybe they died off rather than colonizing
the whole galaxy – which might imply that
almost all technological civilizations ultimately
do too.
If that’s the case, you are doing the primitive
aliens no favors by handing them a technological
time bomb – a concept we’ll be examining
next month.
One other scenario though.
If we’re contemplating some stealthy ancient
alien observers hanging around a world to
observe and protect them or study them or
whichever, and if we’re also considering
the idea that technology itself might be a
trap, then maybe they are not primitive aliens
but post-technological techno-primitives.
What we see is not scattered tribes on their
way to technology but after they already had
it.
Maybe some faction of their civilization decided
to jump off the technology train or maybe
they’re just so genetically and cybernetically
tweaked that all outward signs of technology
are unnecessary, they can eat anything and
are immune to illness and aging and just very
smart, strong and fast, so they don’t need
the outward technology, but they might still
have it or have some members of their society
who do, but keep it hidden.
In all of these cases, it’s an even better
reason to be cautious and contemplative about
the practical and ethical concerns of interacting
with another civilization, and to exercise
good judgment, as otherwise, you or your whole
civilization might end up getting judged themselves.
As an upside, maybe that’s why we haven’t
conclusively heard from any alien civilizations
ourselves.
So it's time again for our Audible Audiobook
of the Month and we definitely have some good
ones to pick from for today’s topic.
We already mentioned Orson Scott Card’s
classic, Speaker for the Dead, and Stephen
Baxter’s Manifold series, and there are
so many other great novels on the topic of
Humanity interacting with less advanced civilizations
or vice-versa, but perhaps the greatest is
from David Brin, the astronomer and novelist
who wrote the Uplift Series, in which we see
an intergalactic civilization of many sapient
races who have all been around for billions
of years, each successively uplifting other
species to technology and acting as their
patron, for which their entire civilization
is indentured for 100,000 years as repayment.
A process that has gone since the near mythical
progenitors that started it 2 billions years
before humanity arrives on the scene having
uplifted itself, and chimpanzees and dolphins,
much to the irritation of the older civilizations.
It’s an amazing series spanning many novels
and showing not only scientific realism but
also deep philosophical and ethical discussions,
all of which are hallmarks of David Brin’s
writing and why I’m glad to give him our
SFIA Audible AudioBook of the Month for a
second time, and for his first novel, Sundiver,
which started the Uplift Series off in 1980!
Brin has been a prolific writer of science
and science fiction for decades and been an
inspiration not only for this show but countless
other artists, with his works appearing in
print and on the silver screen, and all of
his novels are available on Audible, as are
the other authors we mentioned today.
Audible has thousands of audiobooks available
and literally centuries worth of content for
you to pick from, and more being added every
day faster than you could listen to all of
it.
But they don’t just have audiobooks, they
also have many excellent podcasts, such as
Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur, where
we have every single episode on Youtube, plus
several audio-only exclusives I’ve made
over the years.
That’s just some of the great content in
the Audible Plus Catalog, which also has sleep
& meditation tracks available, as well as
guided fitness programs for getting into shape
this summer, and Audible Original’s like
Impact Winter, from the folks who brought
you Pacific Rim and the Walking Dead.
The whole Audible Plus Catalog full of free
books and other content, comes as a bonus
when you join Audible, in addition to your
usual 1 free audiobook each month and big
member discounts on additional ones, and as
always, new members can try Audible for free
for the first month, just go to Audible.com/isaac,
or text isaac to 500-500.
So next week we’ll continue our month-long
tale of galactic colonization with a look
at seeking to escape to Extragalactic Sanctuaries
on July 14th, and we’ll see just how enormous
a challenge that can be and what almost incomprehensible
resources those hunting for you might have
at their fingertips.
Then we’ll return to the Fermi Paradox to
ask where all these enormous habitats and
megastructures we discuss on the show might
be and what their apparent absence indicates
about the Universe.
After that we’ll look at two of the most
mysterious things in our Universe, Black Holes
and Dark Matter, and if dark matter might
be black holes.
Then we’ll close July out with our Monthly
Livestream Q&A on Sunday, July 31st, at 4
pm Eastern Time.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like help support future episodes, please
visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways
to donate, or become a show patron over at
Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
