This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
Humanity has many ambitions to reach upward
to the stars, but those ambitions are only
as strong as the materials those foundations
are built on.
So today, we’ll be looking at what advances
in materials we may see in the next generation
or century, though, we will also leap distantly
into the future near the end to discuss the
near-magic materials we hope future science
might give us a path to, materials so strong
they make steel seem like warm butter.
Now we often do deep dives on certain topics
here on Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur,
like we did with our focused look at Graphene
last year, or Metamaterials a few years back.
However, today’s topic is a bit broader,
and so we will be touching on many different
topics and many different applications.
We’ll be looking at objects that emit smells
or light when exposed to air, advances in
aerogels, smart materials, self-repairing
ones, programmable matter, zero-g materials,
new uses for liquid crystals, two-dimensional
materials like graphene, but less-known, plus
many more.
Some of them, like Graphene, probably do deserve
their own episodes, and so we’ll follow
this episode with a poll over on the Channel’s
Community page to pick one of these topics,
so it will get its own dedicated episode in
a few months.
In the meantime, though, we’ve got a lot
to cover in a single episode, so grab a drink
and a snack.
There is a tendency to think of super-materials
in terms of those which are super-strong,
that you can hang a building from a string
of, or which could survive a tank battalion
firing volleys of shells into it.
Things you could make Captain America’s
Shield or Wolverine’s Claws out of.
And yet there are a lot of other equally valuable
traits a material might have, and I thought
we’d start by cataloging a few of those,
and what the current reigning champion is,
very quickly.
For strongest or toughest materials, those
can vary whether we’re talking about how
much weight it can hold, versus how much can
press down on it, tensile strength versus
compressive strength, and indeed even that
can vary on the situation a lot, since one
metal might be much weaker at a change in
temperature or pressure.
Bulk Modulus, the ability of a material to
resist being compressed, as opposed to strained
or sheared, is generally thought to be all
about the electrons around that atom, and
results in a graph that oscillates up and
down and back up again as you move through
the periodic table.
Major peaks occur at Carbon – particularly
its allotrope diamond – and Ruthenium and
Osmium, with some lesser peaks including Silicon
and Uranium.
Osmium’s is the highest but this is a very
rare substance, also the densest known element
and it’s dual champion status as strongest
and densest is not coincidental.
We do not expect any alloy would be stronger
in terms of Bulk Modulus, so Osmium will probably
keep that champion status unless some transuranic
element can be found that is stronger and
has a half-life long enough to be worth building
out of.
This is one interest in the often discussed
Island of Stability, a hypothetical region
of the periodic table usually thought to be
around 140 where materials would have long
half-lives, or so some believe, we haven’t
made any yet.
Of course, even those transuranic elements
we have discovered are so small in quantity
– since we have to make them an atom at
a time – that their properties are poorly
known.
We can now begin to test things like compressive
strength of just a handful of atoms with lasers,
and that also raises an interesting use of
lasers for creating unique materials we’ll
discuss later.
Also while alloys might not be stronger in
this regard, allotropes of a given substance
would vary in strength, like Graphene and
Diamond both do as allotropes of carbon.
So we may find some unknown allotropes of
materials that do better than regular Osmium
does, but we would not expect a big jump,
if any.
For strongest tensile strength, this title
also remains with a long running champ, Graphene,
though it is but one of many quasi-two-dimensional
materials, many with interesting properties
and some better than graphene in one role
or another, and we’ll discuss those more
today too.
Incidentally while the densest material is
Osmium, the least dense solid is Aerographene,
a type of Aerogel made of graphene, it is
less dense than actual air.
Aerogels are surprisingly strong materials
that are feather light, and whose main use
is as a thermal insulator as they can hold
a lot of weight and pressure but barely transmit
heat.
This means they can potentially replace vacuum
flasks, though their main uses are insulation
for specialized markets, like pipeline insulation,
paint thickeners, battery heat insulators,
and so on.
Right now it costs around 50,000 dollars a
kilogram - though this is only a dollar a
cubic centimeter given how light it is, hence
why it's economically viable for keeping your
laptop battery from heating up your laptop.
As costs drop, as they probably will, expect
to see it in many more residential applications,
potentially including your coffee mug and
cookware.
Additionally Aerographene has shown itself
to work very well for 3D printing, which opens
all sorts of new doors.
Aerogel’s lightness makes it unsurpassed
as a sturdy light-weight heat insulating material,
but in terms of how hot it can go, we have
a new champion.
Tungsten was the long running leader for highest
melting temperature of any metal, at nearly
6200 Fahrenheit or 3400 Celsius, though it
usually gets mixed with Rhenium – whose
melting point isn’t much lower – to create
an alloy with a higher strength and corrosion
resistance when used as a refractory material,
and it's often alloyed with nickel, iron,
copper, or even thorium to produce high-temperature
sturdy materials with other necessary properties
like electric conductivity.
However the new champion for highest melting
point of a metal is an alloy of hafnium, with
Tantalum and carbon, at 7460 Fahrenheit or
4126 Celsius, vastly higher than Tungsten.
We’ve also had good results with Hafnium
alloyed with Nickel and Carbon.
I should probably note that carbon actually
has a slightly higher melting point than Tungsten
does as an element but not as a metal, and
still far short of this Hafnium-Tantalum-Carbon
alloy.
On the low end, the element with the lowest
melting point is still Helium, at just about
absolute zero, 4.2 Kelvin, or -458 Fahrenheit
or -272 Celsius.
You mostly won’t find helium in its solid
form outside a lab as even the Cosmic Microwave
background radiation that permeates all the
Universe is at 2.7 Kelvin and the coldest
known place in the Universe is the Boomerang
Nebula, about 5000 light years away, and it
is at 4 Kelvin.
The hottest place in the Universe is quite
debatable - but barring the Big Bang, the
invisible hearts of black holes, supernovae,
or laboratory supercolliders - it would go
to neutron stars, and with those aforementioned
exceptions they’d also be the densest things
in the Universe, far beyond Osmium, and is
where the term Neutronium comes from, a popular
superstrong material in science fiction.
It probably wouldn’t be strong in reality
as degenerate neutron matter is not so much
‘strong’ as gravity is, binding all that
matter together at crushing pressure, the
neutrons are all that’s strong enough to
resist being crushed by gravity at that strength.
Ironically gravity is the weakest force, and
one portion of one of those other forces,
the magnetic fields of the electromagnetic
force, is very hard to shield materials against.
Any ferromagnetic material can help shield
against magnetic fields but not very well,
and for a long time the leader in this regard
was mu-metal, which is a bit of blanket term
for various nickel-iron ferromagnetic alloys
with a high permeability, the symbol for which
is mu, the Greek Letter that looks like a
lower-case u and where the name mu metal derives
from.
However some year back experiments with metamaterials
started showing us options like dielectric
singularities and magnetic wormholes and while
mu metal remains the reigning champion, it
seems almost certain that title will next
be given to some sort of metamaterial, it’s
just a question of when.
I should note that any sort of material that
can block or dampen any of the forces is very
handy.
As an example, while current physics doesn’t
really allow for a gravity-blocking paint
of material such as we see in some early scifi
like Cavorite in H.G. Wells’s The First
Men in the Moon, something able to block,
reflect, or focus gravity waves or gravitons
would be of incredible value, and same for
anything able to interact strongly with neutrinos
or dark matter.
See our Dark Matter Technologies episode for
some more discussions of those sorts of far-future
options.
Things which can reflect, absorb, or transmit
other particles or forces are always of interest
to us in material science, whether we’re
talking about something photons can pass through
but is sturdy, as clear as glass but tougher
than steel, or something which moves smoothly
through other things, like a friction-less
material better than Teflon, or superior to
oils in viscosity.
For clear options, the Transparent Aluminum
famous from Star Trek has in many ways long
since been bested, but it's hard to call a
winner because some options are strong and
clear but not super clear, others handle shock
well, making them good for collision resistance
but not good for ultraviolet wear and tear,
and so on.
Diamond probably remains the all around favorite
if we can upscale production – making diamond
is quite easy in many ways but it's still
not something we can do in bulk to start making
windows.
Polycarbonate remains the cheap and tough
champ, while clay nanosheets mimicking the
brick-and-mortar molecular structure of seashells
continue to gain ground in that and many other
applications.
We do actually have literal Transparent Aluminum
– Aluminum Oxynitride or ALON is a transparent
ceramic made of Aluminum, Oxygen, and Nitrogen,
and it is quite sturdy compared to glass,
coming in around the hardness of sapphire
and spinel.
It’s also already commercially available
for windows and domes, well ahead of its use
in the 23rd century of Star Trek, much like
the flip phone communicator.
Communicators and Computers advanced far more
rapidly than Star Trek expected but Moore’s
Law of Transistors and ever better computers
halving in size or doubling in power every
couple years does seem to be done.
That said, progress continues if slower, and
we are seeing commercial production of chips
with transistors in the single digits of nanometers,
with experimental chips down to about 2 nanometer
transistors.
Silicon crystals generally are just over half
a nanometer across, with nearest neighbors
at about a quarter of nanometer, so it's hard
to imagine this getting much smaller.
Other crystals aren’t really much smaller
either – for instance the hexagonally-spaced
carbon atoms in graphene are .142 nanometers
apart.
Graphene also offers a pathway toward mechanical
computing, where we replace the electric switch
of a transistor with a super-tiny mechanical
switch.
None of these seem to offer paths to much
smaller computer chips but that isn’t necessarily
a big deal.
Our best supercomputers are building-sized
still and run on a megawatt of power, while
being parallel in processing power to a human
brain, which is vastly smaller and runs on
about 10 watts.
Our chips are 2-dimensional powerhogs, so
switching into more power and heat efficient
methods, and ones more 3D, is likely to be
the pathway to faster computers that seem
small.
Existing chips are already using transistors
vastly smaller than a human neuron after all.
In terms of smallest conventional transistor,
we are limited by the size of crystals, and
spacing between atoms.
A chemist would know better, but if I had
to guess, metallic hydrogen would probably
be the default densest crystal in terms of
atoms per volume.
Not in terms of mass per volume mind you,
that would go to Osmium or far denser degenerate
matter states, indeed metallic hydrogen’s
density is just a bit higher than water, more
than a dozen times less dense than Gold, Osmium,
Platinum, Uranium and other dense metals.
But hydrogen is the lightest atom, containing
a single proton and electron, so both Solid
hydrogen – which is just a bit less dense
than water – and Metallic hydrogen have
very tight spacing, around an angstrom, or
tenth of a nanometer.
I’m not sure how you’d make a semiconductor
out of these, maybe by doping with some other
small nuclei or even deuterium or tritium,
but you’d have to do it at ultra-cold temperatures,
which admittedly is awesome for computing
anyway, but not handy for pocket computers,
maybe ones wrapped in aerogel to keep them
cold.
Incidentally the current record for coldest
temperature was set earlier this year by physicists
in Germany, on a quantum gas, which they dropped
to 38 trillionths of a Kelvin.
For folks familiar with the Landauer Limit
of temperature and computing that we so often
discuss in our Civilizations at the End of
Time series, that insanely cold new record
would permit computer processing or digital
intelligence 8 trillion times more efficient
than room temperature.
Getting back to Metallic Hydrogen for a quick
moment, this material still seems to hold
the potential as the most power-dense chemical
fuel for rockets or engines in general, and
the ability to mass manufacture and store
it would be incredible for both rockets and
more mundane purposes.
We would have to make it though, mining it
from Jupiter’s Core wouldn’t seem viable.
See our episode Reusable Rockets and Metallic
Hydrogen for more on that.
Before we leave materials at ultra-cold temperatures,
I should mention that Superconductors have
left those temperatures themselves.
And we do finally have a room temperature
superconductor, or close enough, operating
at 15 celsius or 59 fahrenheit.
It is also made of the utterly mundane materials
of hydrogen, carbon, and sulfur, so not a
cost issue to produce.
Unfortunately it doesn’t superconduct until
it reaches pressures you’d expect to find
in Jupiter’s core, not on Earth’s surface,
with the temperature it could superconduct
at, rising with pressure until reaching 15
Celsius at 267 Gigapascals, over a couple
million standard atmospheres.
On the other hand we might be able to pull
off pressures like that inside one of our
superstrong tube materials like carbon nanotubes,
the rolled cylinder form of graphene, and
a lot of 2D materials are emerging, many of
which have fascinating electrical properties,
like Stanene, which might turn out to be a
room temperature superconductor, though has
been hard to make, and it is like Graphene
only made of Tin not carbon.
Last I checked, Graphene was the most conductive
material at room temperature and regular pressure,
and silver keeps the role of highest conductivity
of a mundane metal at standard pressure and
temperature.
Incidentally we shouldn’t rule out materials
that not only need high-pressure to create
but maintain, as we’ve gotten very good
with using lasers to create tiny spots of
ultra-high pressure.
The University I went grad school at was very
big on Liquid Crystals – these are crystals
that act as a liquid but have non-symmetric
shapes that can line up when temperature changes
or electric fields are imposed, and thus can
have varying optical properties – giving
them great value when utilised in TVs and
computer monitors, and it occurs to me that
you might have substances that do the same
for specific wavelengths of light – changing
some property or another, not just optical
but hardness or viscosity or permeability
– and millions of tiny lasers might let
you pixelate that at the small scale.
Not a current tech or prediction, just throwing
that one out there, materials that responded
by changing properties under the wavelength
or radiant pressure of a laser beam..
Speaking of viscosity, Superfluid Helium still
holds the record for lowest viscosity of any
liquid, being zero, as superfluids are the
viscosity equivalent of superconductors and
generally need even lower temperatures.
This has that creepy effect of making thin
films of Superfluid climb up and out of beakers,
which is only possible by that utter lack
of viscosity.
Needless to say any superfluid that could
exist at Room temperature or engine temperatures
would have some amazing uses and in roles
besides lubrication.
The solid material with the lowest friction,
slippier even than Teflon, is BAM, a mix of
Boron, Aluminum, and Magnesium that not only
has just 40% of the frictional coefficient
of Teflon, but is very nearly as hard as diamond.
Needless to say, an ultra-hard material more
slippery than ice is probably not a good option
for ice skating rinks, especially for skaters
like myself who tend to slip and fall on our
backsides a lot, but might be an easier option
for summer time rinks, and obviously has tons
of other less athletic uses, like engine pistons.
That’s a non-exhaustive list of a lot of
material properties and their current advances
and record-holders, and I thought we were
talking a lot about things made at ultra-high
pressures, so I thought we would flip around
to looking at materials made in a vacuum or
made in zero-gravity for a moment.
When it comes to space, our interests these
days are mostly in what ultra-lightweight
material can handle radiation damage and the
general corrosive effects of space dust and
unfiltered sunlight, and improvements in those
materials offers us a path to better space
ships and space stations, but space stations
may be the place we do a lot of manufacturing
in the future.
We discussed a lot of these in our episode
Kickstarting Space Industry, but one I’d
point to for today, as we were discussing
ever-smaller semiconductors, is that you can
grow semiconductors with far fewer defects,
in microgravity.
It is very hard to make atomic scale patterns
of elements to allow supersmall semiconductors
because almost anything can throw-off clean
defect-free formation, and gravity is no friend
to this process.
So space offers us much cheaper and better
crystals, and semiconductors are just one
such example.
Cost-wise, transistors and computer chips
are already much more valuable than their
weight in gold.
So the time and fuel spent running them up
and down from orbit isn’t as prohibitive
as it would be for other current purposes.
Interestingly there are materials that will
be handy for space we might not tend to expect,
like a material that fluoresces or one that
gets smelly when cracks emerge in them to
indicate weaknesses in that material, for
in a spaceship hull or helmet.
Much like we put artificial scents in fuel
gases to make people notice leaks, films of
undercoating on materials that when exposed
to oxygen or light grabbed our attention through
glowing or stinking has a shocking number
of real world applications, and such materials
are now being explored for those applications.
One of the most obvious is maintenance, as
vast amounts of money are wasted and injuries
un-avoided from folks simply not knowing a
device or structure they are nearby is needing
some routine maintenance.
Someone once joked to me that the upside of
a sewer pipe over a water pipe is that when
they started leaking people noticed and reported
it, and that is one application of scratch
and sniff tech, damaged components getting
smelly or glowing.
Needless to say, while Smell-o-vision as a
way of augmenting audio and video has been
a joke for decades, digital or material generation
of smells or flavors is also something of
great value if achievable.
Not really something I hear much about in
serious discussion, but same as hearing-loss
really hurts quality of life, loss of taste
and smell does too, and smell and taste simulation
or stimulation has applications in near-future
quality of life issues, not just really good
virtual reality.
It could make prosthetic options available
for damage to those types of organs, which
is common.
It's also a reminder that not all material
advances involve some property like strongest,
coldest, lightest, densest, and so on, but
properties more biological.
As these last couple years have shown us,
rich as they have been in Grandfather Nurgle’s
Blessings, material advances in biotechnology
will matter a lot too in preventing disease.
I mentioned prosthetics a moment ago and we
are constantly battling the rejection issues
we have with prosthetics, implants, and biotechnology
in general, and that’s where materials which
minimize rejection or prevent biofilm developing
to allow growing infections can come in handy.
Polyethylene glycol is one of the most widely-used
polymer coatings for preventing bacterial
adhesion, as are titanium nanotubes.
Sadly we haven’t got time to go into discussion
on these or some other neat options like Programmable
matter, which will be one of our poll options,
which is mostly not about robots – rather
it’s stuff like liquid crystals, folding
proteins, quantum wells, and metamaterials,
but it does include a couple robot examples
like claytronics, which is essentially very
tiny and simple machines designed to clump
up to form more complex machines like a person
molding clay in clay animation.
It's not the same as nanoclay, just a similarity
of name, but that’s another interesting
material hitting the commercial and ecological
realms.
Nanoclays are tiny particles of mineral silicates
that are relatively easy to make and which
have been explored in recent years for their
use, when incorporated into polymers, of improved
mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties,
as well as flame and corrosion resistance,
offering potentially superior alternatives
to coatings that are widely-used today.
Coatings on materials to alter their properties
or improve them is nothing new in chemistry,
but ultra-thin coatings, bordering on the
two-dimensional, is also an emerging option
and takes us to 2D materials.
Now there’s way too much on this topic for
us to do justice to it today, so it will be
a poll option for a future episode too, but
graphene was just the first of many emerging
quasi-two-dimensional materials, one-atom
thick sheets, many of which also have fascinating
properties when stacked two layers thick or
with a second layer of a different 2D material.
But four recent developments I wanted to mention
quickly are boron nitride, sometimes nicknamed
‘white graphene’ which when stacked with
another sheet of itself has ferroelectric
properties showing promise as an option for
ultra-dense and quick computer memory.
Boron Nitride has also been heavily used in
quantum computing, and recent use of it in
tandem with gold films has been enhancing
the brightness of qubits to make ‘seeing’
them far easier.
We also have these materials being used to
make ultra-tiny electrodes, which would be
able to be used for many purposes but for
channel regulars probably the most interesting
would be that you could use it to do a neural
lace good enough to attach to every single
neuron individually, so a powerful development
for mind-machine interfaces and mind augmentation.
Lastly, for today anyway, a mix of tungsten
selenide 2D sheets with black phosphorus sheets
is giving us a polarized and photovoltaic
material, meaning a solar panel light and
flexible enough to be woven into your clothing
to provide power to your devices or woven
into pretty much anything else.
There are a lot of materials we barely had
a chance to touch on, some not even all that
high-tech and many in use now and often strange,
like Blood Bricks – which are exactly what
they sound like, a building brick made out
of sand and blood – and Pykrete, and ultra-strong
material made of ice and fibrous materials,
usually sawdust.
Wood may be waning as a building material
after a period of sharp lumber cost increases
but wood may even have a role in future skyscrapers.
Plyscrapers, as some dub them, utilizing cross-laminated
timbers, have begun to see some use, and are
being sold as a quicker and lower-energy cost
means of tall construction, one maybe safer
ecologically and also weirdly, safer in event
of fires than many buildings too.
As to how tall you can go, even beyond super-strong
materials, we have options like active support
that permit the construction of supertall
buildings we call Space Towers - see that
episode for details.
But folks sometimes ask what might be even
stronger than Graphene, and a lot stronger
at that.
To finish up for today, I thought we would
discuss a few of the hypothetical materials
that are only theoretical possibilities for
now but may one day leave the pages of science
fiction novels for science textbooks.
One of those is Magmatter, which gets its
name from Magnetic Monopoles.
Now magnetic monopoles are a topic of hot
debate in physics and have been for many years,
but if they existed they would represent a
particle that only had a north or south pole.
Normally a magnet has a north pole and south,
and if you cut it in half, you just get a
new north and south on each half, much as
you would get a new top and bottom on each
half.
It’s rather hard to imagine cutting an object
with a top and bottom in half so that it only
had a top on one half, with no bottom, and
vice versa on the other half, and the same
is true of magnetic monopoles but there’s
some decent reason to think they exist in
theory, and indeed they are predicted by string
theory and most grand unified theories too.
If they exist they would effectively be a
very tiny particle, tinier than atoms, and
one limit on material strength is atom spacing.
As I mentioned earlier, the spacing on graphene
for carbon atoms is very small, only .142
nanometers apart, and as an over-simplified
example, an electron and proton at this distance
from each other pull four times harder on
each other than they do if twice as far apart,
so it takes four times more force to rip that
bond apart, and this is essentially what tensile
strength is, tearing apart those bonds between
atoms.
It’s all electric and magnetic forces though
and so distance matters, and magnetic monopoles
are so small they might be spaced to create
“Magatoms” millions of times smaller than
normal atoms and thus with bonds millions
of times stronger, making things like space
elevators a breeze to build.
Indeed I’ve heard some calculations of this
put it as much as a trillion-trillion-trillion
times stronger than normal chemical bonds,
which if true would let you flat out construct
tensile-strength titans like Banks’ Orbitals
and Ringworlds.
These sort of strengths also open the door
to options like Neutronium, which is matter
made entirely of neutrons and which is so
dense it can absorb neutrinos, though I should
note both it and Magmatter are dense the way
neutron stars are dense, even single-atom
thick sheets, or rather single neutron or
magatom thick sheets, are going to be monstrously
heavy if monstrously strong, able to withstand
direct hits from nukes or even antimatter.
Also monstrously sharp, they should be able
to cut basically anything.
If we reach to the deeper future and more
Clarketech style options, those bordering
on magic, we can even imagine materials that
are composed of dark matter or interact with
it, or weirder options like materials so sharp
they can cut space or time.
Materials that can take photons and turn them
into neutrinos or gravitons, much as we have
photovoltaics to turn photons into electricity.
Materials that might be able to generate gravity
directionally or even warp space or time directionally,
crunching it or sending it as a beam.
In a world where superconductors and superfluids
were thought impossible only a couple generations
back, we probably don’t want to rule out
what wonders we might discover hundreds of
generations from now, but as we’ve seen
today, we don’t have to wait generations
to encounter wondrous new advances in Material
Science.
So today’s topic was as much chemistry as
physics and ranged over a broad variety of
subdisciplines, but at its core a lot of the
material on materials is about those basic
chemical reactions and if you’re looking
to understand the science behind those better,
there is an excellent course, “The Chemical
Reaction” over on Brilliant.
Now if you’re a regular of this channel
or lots of other science channels for that
matter you’ve probably heard us talking
about why we love Brilliant, and I think for
myself and others a lot of it is that Brilliant's
the sort of interactive, handson platform
we all wish we had when we learning science.
And I thought that was worth noting here in
the holiday season because so many of us know
folks looking to learn science and math, and
there really is no better gift than the gift
of knowledge.
Brilliant makes an awesome gift for any of
the ambitious learners in your life.
Whether it's an inquisitive niece, an all-knowing
parent, or the neighbor who seems to have
everything, I know your curious loved ones
of all ages will be excited to grow with Brilliant's
interactive learning approach.
Brilliant is the hands-down best hands on
interactive STEM-learning platform out there
which can assist you or loved one in learning
concepts by visualizing them and interacting
with them, the best way to learn.
On Brilliant you can just pick a course you’re
interested in and get started, be it the basics
or advanced.
If you get stuck or make a mistake you can
read the explanations to find out more and
learn at your own pace.
Knowing and understanding Math, Science, and
Computer Science unlocks whole new worlds,
and if you’d like to start your journey
to them, you can try out Brilliant for free
and get 20% off a year of STEM learning, click
the link in the description down below or
visit: brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
So we’re winding our way towards new years
and only have 3 more Thursday’s to go but
we also have our Scifi Sunday episode this
weekend, December 12th to look at folks staking
and jumping claims on asteroid mines and similar,
and two weeks after that we’ll have our
End of the Month Livestream Q&A, on Sunday,
December 26th at 4pm Eastern Time.
But first, a week from now we will have a
discussion of Vertical Farming, the technology
that may let us nourish many billions of people
while keeping our planet pristine.
Then we’ll take a look at Escaping the Galaxy
the week after that, if we need to get away
from someone who has blown up our planet,
before closing out the month and the year
with a look at the Challenges we will be facing
in the next 100 years.
Then we will explode into 2022 with a look
at using Nuclear Bombs to propel Spaceships.
Now if you want to make sure you get notified
when those episodes come out, make sure subscribe
to the channel, and if you enjoyed the episode,
don’t forget to hit the like button and
share it with others.
If you’d like to help support future episodes,
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website,
IsaacArthur.net, and patreon and our website
are linked in the episode description below,
along with all of our various social media
forums where you can get updates and chat
with others about the concepts in the episodes
and many other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
