We all dream of a future in space, but it will 
take a lot of work to get there and more to make  
it a place we can visit and live. Of course, where 
there’s work to be done, there’s jobs to be had.
As you came in to watch this video you 
might have been wondering if the topic  
was was going to be about current Jobs in 
the Space Industry, and how to get into one,  
or if we meant actual jobs physically taking place 
in space nowadays, or even those in the future,  
and the answer is ‘yes’, as we’ll be discussing 
the current state of the industry and how  
to get into it, but also where it is going.
That said, getting to be an actual astronaut  
anytime soon is genuinely possible but not much 
easier than anytime since the space race began.  
Even with record numbers of launches, 
with 211 successful launches last year,  
most don’t have people on them, and there’s only 
been a little over a hundred new astronauts making  
their first trip to space since this show began 
almost a decade ago. If you’re curious about how  
to improve your odds to become one, we did 
discuss that in depth in our episode back in  
the winter on selecting crew for a spaceship, 
and where we also tried to contemplate what  
some of the jobs on spaceships would be.
Now unlike most topics about the future,  
the further forward we look in time the clearer 
the picture gets for Jobs in Space. Which is to  
say, for me the primary point of space exploration 
and development is to set up permanent habitations  
there, settle new worlds, and create 
communities for mankind. At that time,  
pretty much any job you could have on Earth will 
find its equivalent in space, and a few new ones  
too like those involving working in the vacuum or 
making and monitoring breathable air supplies. Or  
planetary terraformer, or when the job is done, 
the person whose work is to monitor ecosystems  
and tweak them when the non-terrestrial conditions 
either derail a food chain and need adjusted back,  
or we need to entirely alter the ecosystem 
to some mix of Earth and that environment. 
That last is a long time off, and I also feel 
obliged to mention that Artificial Intelligence  
and superior automation could render many of these 
jobs non-existent or at least very different to  
nowadays. Even without AI, we often picture future 
lifestyles in space and make analogies to our past  
or present, and mining settlements in the asteroid 
belt or on some barren planet are very common for  
this. Mining has often been a brutal business of 
very hard labor, but even where that persists now,  
it's mostly because existing operations have 
not upgraded their equipment and methods. 
Sometimes upgrading isn’t viewed as worth it, for 
all the costs of setup and re-training, but a new  
operation being setup in the asteroid belt some 
decades or even centuries down the road would  
have very little reason to minimize automation, 
or make do with used mining equipment from Earth.  
We looked at this more in our episodes Nomadic 
Miners on the Moon and Life as An Asteroid Miner,  
but it's unlikely that space would see many close 
parallels to an old West Virginia Coal Mining  
Town, though they have their own unique cases 
for problems we discussed in those episodes. 
We also don’t want to take for granted that 
everything in space, or down here on Earth,  
is going to be seamlessly automated in the future. 
As I think time has demonstrated, inventing AI  
capable of learning does not result in an 
inevitable rapid plunge to Skynet days later,  
so technological singularities that could lead 
to humans not needing to do any work of any kind,  
possibly because we got obliterated, can doubtless 
happen but not overnight. There’s a build up time  
to react, hopefully wisely, to cut off or 
restrict further progress down that road,  
even to go backwards if needed, but I don’t 
expect to see an elimination of people in  
the workforce in our lifetime unless we also 
get radical life extension technology, which  
to be fair I think is decently plausible too.
Of course, I love my work, so retirement holds  
little attraction to me personally, your mileage 
may vary but I tend to feel for most folks it's  
about finding the job they like, and I will 
say I’ve only met a few folks in space or the  
aerospace industry in general who didn’t seem to 
enjoy theirs, the overwhelming majority love it.  
If you’re contemplating a career in space, 
or anything else for that matter, that’s a  
thing to keep in mind. If you love your work, 
you’ll do it better, and it will reinvigorate  
you some days and stress you others, but you won’t 
end up spending half your paycheck and free time  
trying to manage the stress your job gives you.
There’s also that big question of what people  
do with their time if not working, a lot of 
folks tend to think a shorter work week might  
be a good thing but too short of one might be 
self-destructive to individuals and societies. 
This is another reason space is a good place to 
contemplate working in, because it’s good to feel  
your work serves some greater purpose and rarely 
do pioneers feel pointless about their work,  
exploring the galaxy and settling space 
is a massive task and a mighty purpose,  
for a civilization that needs one. It isn’t 
likely to involve a lot of back-breaking labor,  
we do have automation for that, but there is a 
lot of work to be done in a galaxy in which untold  
trillions of worlds may need to be explored, 
settled, terraformed, or even constructed. 
Of course where we want to be for today’s purpose 
is sitting at the helm of a rocketship, preferably  
one about to land on a strange and exciting new 
world with a breathable atmosphere and aliens  
with conveniently parallel biology to our own.
Sadly, as we’ve discussed in our Fermi Paradox  
series, that’s only likely as a future because 
FTL isn’t possible and in a million or so years  
every planet will be populated by mutated 
descendants of this planet who have similar  
biology for that reason. Aliens, if we find 
them, probably won’t have enough brains to chat,  
and we might find alien life even in this solar 
system on Mars or Europa or elsewhere. Which might  
open the field of alien biology, xenology as it's 
sometimes called, but mostly to microbiologists,  
not anthropologists or space cowboys.
Now you might be thinking, “Thanks for  
raining on the parade there, Isaac”, but as much 
as I love Space Opera, it lacks much realism,  
and another of those is that you’ll be getting 
in fights with the laser equivalent of a sidearm  
and dog fighting spaceships around with a joystick 
or yoke. You probably would have an actual flight  
yoke to use for emergency landing and take off, 
and likely will be trained extensively in its use,  
but millisecond reaction times aren’t for meat 
brains, so when you need them, you either use a  
computer or have one stuck in your brain.
Some jobs won’t exist or might require  
augmentation, others, like navigating a ship 
through deep space, aren’t a full time job,  
it’s actually a lot easier navigating around 
space than a planet and the timescales involved  
mean it would just be one minor task added to some 
other job, like Captain or XO or Chief Engineer,  
and in all probability all three would be trained 
to do it and probably engage it it redundantly to  
avoid mistakes or even intentional misdirection if 
the captain went nuts or something. Indeed, a lot  
of the jobs we think of on ships from classic 
science fiction probably don’t need to exist  
or would differ greatly from their portrayal.
I want to talk today about some of those jobs,  
even the more far future ones like 
terraforming or building megastructures,  
but as to the current industry, if you’re thinking 
about getting into it and worried there’s not many  
opportunities or that you have to a scientist or 
engineer to get in, let me assure you otherwise. 
There are 18,000 employees of NASA and 16,000 
military and civilian personnel in the newly  
created Space Force, there’s still far more folks 
working as related contractors or scientists,  
and indeed a lot of folks who say they work 
for NASA are doing so through some company,  
university, or organization contracted to it. 
SpaceX has about 13,000 employees if that gives  
some scale, and Blue Origins about 11,000. The 
18,000 technically and directly employed by NASA  
is only slightly more than either of those and 
could never accomplish all the tasks needed by  
NASA on their own. At least 1 in 1000 people 
in the US are employed in the space industry,  
and beyond that it depends on how we feel 
like defining that, as there’s a couple  
million in aerospace alone, many of which are 
working whole or in part on space projects. 
A lot is how you define it too. I obviously am 
in the Space Industry, more than half my episodes  
relate to space and any of my fellow youtubers 
or podcasters or science journalists who spend  
a large portion of their work talking about space 
are in that industry and community. I’m also the  
President of the National Space Society, which is 
pretty much by definition in that sector, though  
we don’t build or fly rockets ourselves, we just 
tell everyone why they should. Of course, many  
of our members work in space, some literally as 
lots of astronauts are in the NSS, and some work  
nowhere near space but just love space in general.
And one of the things the organization focuses  
on is trying to build the STEM Pipeline 
for folks going into the space industry  
and helping them chart out a career and 
meet folks in it and employers in it,  
and it is a growing industry so if you’re having 
doubts about if you could find a job in the field,  
the answer is yes, even if you’re not a 
physicist, mathematician, or engineer. 
As I mentioned earlier, the longer and 
deeper we explore, travel, and settle space,  
the more jobs that aren’t science or engineering 
are going to pop up, but that is already true.  
I wrote this script back in early March when 
SpaceX’s Crew-8 mission was launching and while  
waiting for the actual launch I poked around 
their website, and they had 1081 jobs currently  
posted. Some were internships, quite few were 
senior-something-or-other and ending in engineer,  
though often software engineer, some required top 
secret clearance, but there were 30 openings just  
in the sales department, 20 in human resources, 
another dozen in customer service, similar for  
legal, and 55 in facilities operation, which 
included hospitality positions and everything  
from HVAC repair and sous chef and cook 
to barista and even spaceport mixologist. 
A quick scan around of other space companies and 
NASA tends to indicate the same wide selection.  
Many of the positions allow remote work, many 
require only a high school diploma. As usual,  
if you want to work on rockets without being an 
engineer or rocket scientist, being a welder is  
probably your best route and there’s a serious 
shortage of welders in general so it's a pretty  
good path to steady employment that pays well.
That presumably illustrates the point that there  
are jobs in the space industry right 
now for anyone who really wants them.  
It’s also a sector that will grow as the number of 
people and objects in space grows. I should also  
say that like every other job, it’s mostly 
non-exciting. While serving in Iraq, which  
I’m still surprised to think was almost 2 decades 
ago, I decided that excitement was not something I  
really wanted in my day very often, but even when 
we were out patrolling, escorting, or in active  
combat operations, it was 99% nothing going on, 
with lots of maintenance and training and waiting,  
hence the US Army’s unofficial motto, “Hurry 
up and wait”, and that’s true for space too. 
And science or life in general too, patience 
should never be confused with thumb-twiddling  
or apathy, the whole concept of delayed 
self-gratification is that it is sacrificing  
the present for a strong chance of that getting 
you more in the future, not patiently sitting  
there while nothing happens or even while things 
fall apart. Sometimes knowing the difference can  
be tricky. That will come up a lot in ecosystems 
we build in space or on other planets too,  
as it will be hard to build those and watch them 
deviate or vary and try to decide if it's drifting  
to a new local and good point of stability or 
headed toward an utter crash. And even now, the  
experiments we are performing with basic biology 
and medicine on the space station, for humans and  
other organisms, is helping us figure out what 
we need to adjust and prepare for when trying  
to build new ecosystems on strange new worlds.
The long term extension of that is terraforming,  
but in the shorter term it will come up with 
hydroponics and that will be a critical role in  
space for providing fresh food, air, and water, 
as well as green spaces for people a million  
miles from home. One thing the urbanization of 
the last century taught us was how important  
having plants and critters in our concrete and 
steel jungles was for our psychology and health. 
Something you don’t see in science fiction 
very often is the ship’s garden or ship’s  
hydroponics. Both Star Trek Voyager and Stargate 
Universe showed us some on-ship hydroponics,  
though the scale was laughable tiny for the size 
of the crews they were meant to feed. I recently  
got to be one of the judges for a VR Chat Space 
Jam, and the entries were unbelievably awesome,  
the event coordinator, the NSS Australia 
Vice-President Greg Hunter, told me some  
folks had added in O’Neill Cylinders to their 
worlds just because they heard I’d be a judge  
and it was amazing to see, but I only saw a few 
entries with a garden or hydroponics and again,  
very small. Yet very critical to space.
One important thing to understand is that  
even with most food plants, the amount 
of edible calories you need for a person  
is going to be a lot higher than the amount 
you need for regenerating carbon dioxide into  
oxygen. You also are going to have a lot of 
scraps leftover that are inedible for humans,  
and you could compost those directly but I would 
tend to assume in most cases you’d be using  
them to feed some animals that could digest 
them or to make into biofuel or bioplastics. 
Many spaceships on shorter runs might opt to go 
for mechanical scrubbing of air to remove carbon  
dioxide and other particles, and trade waste 
air and waste water when arriving at a port,  
it probably depends on how many people are on 
that ship and how long it’s away between stops.  
Hydroponics is considered the go-to because it 
is low mass, no need to haul lots of dirt around,  
but you would probably see lots of dirt-farming 
and gardening too, especially on stationary  
objects like asteroid bases or space 
stations or lunar and planetary outposts. 
“Grow Local, Eat Local” has a whole different 
meaning when the nearest farming operation  
might be a hundred million miles away, not a 
hundred, so this is likely to be a big chunk  
of Jobs in Space. It's also an example of how 
a big task might get most of its labor provided  
by a large but part-time pool, as much of it 
would be routine and easy to train, and odds  
are good a lot folks on long duration missions 
will want to spend time in with the green stuff,  
so using that to produce food, recycle air and 
water, help get crew some exercise, and some  
mentally healthy time in a decent approximation 
of nature, is hitting 4 birds with one stone,  
and all of them critical ones that could lead 
to mission failure without their presence. 
In that regard, most smaller crews and outposts 
of the nearer future probably don’t have a  
janitor either, just someone like XO designated to 
assign cleaning chores and other maintenance and  
make sure it's getting done. The bigger the ship 
and outpost, the more specialized and full-time  
jobs it's likely to generate, until eventually 
it just resembles any town in modern times,  
or future times. Again if we need it here on 
earth, we’ll eventually need it in space. But in  
the more mid-term, the next couple centuries, what 
are some big Jobs in Space we’d expect to need? 
We’ll skip on ship crew, you always need 
someone in charge and someone next in line,  
you always need folks able to do medicine too, 
physical and mental. See our episode Staying Sane  
in Space for some reminders why mental health is 
really important in space and all the extra ways  
it can drive you bananas. You also always need 
your pilot for ships, even with a good autopilot  
unless it’s truly human-smart kinda good, in 
which case it is basically a person anyway  
and probably still deserves that title, same for 
your holographic medical personnel waiting for you  
to state the nature of the medical emergency.
Some things can also be sourced back to Earth.  
Your space colony, even if it has tens of 
thousands of people, really does not need a  
local equivalent to the pentagon or supreme court. 
Even if it did need some on-site lawyers and folks  
serving in security roles by then. You don’t need 
a biologist for every sub-discipline either, just  
one good enough as a generalist to know who to 
consult for complex situations and how to get them  
the data they need, including things they don’t 
know or think to ask for. Such as how an expert  
with some bit of microbiology back on Earth might 
not have thought to ask what your spin-gravity or  
day length was set too on the ship or outpost.
Especially when you have time lag on every  
signal and the practicalities of long distance 
communication limit bandwidth. I think folks  
assume sometimes that experts back here on Earth 
are going to be able to see every nook and cranny  
of a ship or base in glorious 4k ultra-high 
definition, but interplanetary broadcasts are  
very energy intensive and you need to keep that 
data very compressed and minimal. But even with  
good bandwidth, there’s just a lot of things an 
expert back home isn’t going to be thinking of,  
because they’re not actually there experiencing 
it, so you do want someone trained in almost  
everything to at least a basic level.
Thus you probably have gardeners,  
botanists, doctors, and various other biology 
and life sciences people working in space,  
both remotely and physically.
The same is true of geologists, or  
their extraterrestrial equivalents. If you're on 
some rock, it's either to study it scientifically,  
or to exploit its minerals, and that means the 
geologist is king there, something we rarely see  
in scifi. Whether it’s the Moon or an asteroid 
or the Martian surface, advanced probing or just  
collecting regolith and rock samples remotely 
with a drone, that’s critical to that mission,  
from helping select landing sites and 
plan exploration routes to charting out  
that planet’s future economy. We discussed 
that more last week in Colonizing Ganymede.
Space Habitat Engineers and Architects able 
to design and maintain the living and working  
structures are critical too. This ensures 
the base is sustainable and can protect  
the inhabitants from the local environment. Every 
leak, every expansion, every choice for the next  
building to fabricate and what to do it from needs 
serious consideration from an expert and again,  
even if they can call back home for guidance, 
it really helps to have someone trained in it  
to relay on concerns and instructions and 
oversee them actually getting implemented. 
Speaking of instructions, we talk about using 
robots a lot but someone has to repair those  
robots, and the environments they’re working 
in will often be beyond brutal. It is hard  
to say how roboticized our future in space will 
be, its likely to vary a lot by time and place,  
but I doubt it will ever be zero, and even 
if it is so automated that robots repair  
each other and build new ones, you still 
need someone auditing them and checking  
them to make sure they're not going all 
paperclip-maximizer on you. In most cases  
this is going to involve that engineer 
or repairmen being trained and able to  
go outside into the harsh environment in 
question to go repair the damaged robot. 
Though in many cases another robot might 
be sent to drag it back in, and presumably  
a robot technician is decently skilled at 
doing repairs robotically too. Nonetheless,  
this could easily end up being one of the 
more exciting and dangerous jobs in space,  
be it going out into the harsh martian dust storms 
to fix a robot or going EVA in space to fix one. 
And if a robot can’t do it, a person still 
needs to, and that means pretty much all your  
personnel in space need at least some training and 
experience with EVA, extravehicular activities and  
missions, as a stressful crisis is not the 
best time to get used to working in a clunky  
suit while trying manipulate tools while also 
feeling like you might drown in your own sweat…  
spacesuits will probably get more comfortable 
in time but we shouldn’t take that for granted. 
I daresay, spacesuit designers will be a big one 
back home and spacesuit tailors will all play  
important roles in the emerging space community, 
and someone able to repair and alter spacesuits  
is likely to find themselves in high demand. It’s 
very likely we’ll develop something lighter and  
designed for very short term exposure to vacuum 
that people could wear too, as opposed to the  
massive rigs current space suits need to be.
Something you could wear in low priority  
sections of a base or ship where the hull or dome 
was thinner and cheaper, maybe in an agricultural  
dome or blister, where loss of pressure just 
damages some crops rather than kills anyone,  
unless someone happened to be inside at the time, 
in which case some lighter suit comes in handy.  
But fundamentally everyone has to be trained 
in EVA and in proper protocols for tethering  
everything and not ejecting stuff off into space, 
especially orbital space, where it might return to  
smash into someone’s vessel with a thousand times 
the energy a bullet the same size would have. 
One big job in space, be it groundside or orbital, 
is going to be debris monitoring and clearance,  
and we discussed the how-to’s of that back 
in our Space Debris episode in the winter,  
and there’s a fun anime called Planetes that 
follows the work of a debris clearance team  
that is certainly dramatized but does the science 
and mechanics pretty good, there’s another short  
lived live-action series from the 1970s that 
looks at life in the space garbage industry too,  
Quark, though how well either would prepare 
you for a job in that field is hard to say. 
I mentioned earlier that we can’t assume 
missions far from Earth will have much bandwidth,  
and sending signals back and forth is a lot 
trickier than pointing an antenna or dish in the  
right direction and hitting a button. An important 
job in space will be a communications specialist,  
ensuring data transmission of scientific research, 
navigation, daily operations, and personal signals  
home. You want to be able to send all that 
encrypted because astronauts will want their  
private messages and banking to stay private 
like anyone else, and maintaining the software,  
as well as the actual equipment, is critical.
If your communication gear breaks, you can’t  
talk to anyone at home to get help to fix it 
or anything else till that repair happens. For  
that reason, lots of redundancy is good here, 
and you need to ensure whoever is in this job  
is able to rig up at least a basic communication 
system from available materials, since wrecking  
communications gear and its backups is the most 
obvious way to attack or sabotage a mission. 
The same as true of whatever is providing your 
power to run all your air scrubbers, rocket  
engines or ion drives, heating and cooling, and so 
on. My personal guess is that most facilities will  
maintain both a decent supply of batteries and 
a RTG capable of at least running their comms,  
computers, and air scrubbers or vents. An RTG, or 
radioisotope thermal generator, while inefficient,  
is about as simple, durable, long lasting, and 
foolproof a device as they come, hence why we  
still have working ones on spacecraft that 
haven’t received maintenance in decades. 
There’s no electrician to call in, 
and along with a plumber and a welder,  
you really need talented folks and trained 
folks on hand, and you aren’t just talking  
about not being able to get a shower in or the air 
getting a bit uncomfortable if this breaks. Your  
clogged pipes might get followed by a reactor 
meltdown or, on a base on Mercury for instance,  
a countdown clock till how long you all had 
before being cooked when the cooling breaks  
down. You can slap a patch on a leak too, 
in many cases even a thin piece of plastic  
over a hole would work, but eventually 
someone needs to properly weld that leak. 
And then there’s simple logistics and the 
need for a supply chain manager, not just  
to oversee inventory, but also to prioritize and 
estimate what needs resupply missions from Earth,  
and the efficient use and replenishment of 
resources to ensure the sustainability of the  
base overall. Every extra spare part or redundant 
component you bring costs mass, and huge amounts  
of fuel to get there, but there is no walmart or 
amazon or dollar store nearby to get things from,  
and even a shortage of something like pens and 
pencils could seriously impede proper function. 
This is one case where 3D printing comes in real 
handy, and is the last job we’ll mention today  
because it is also one where we wouldn’t expect 
to see it as much on Earth as in space. On Earth  
we can get away with huge supply chains and they 
usually result in a better product for a lower  
cost or effort, in space, having a feedstock for 
producing ‘good enough’ items by 3D printing is a  
huge advantage, and so having someone trained 
not just in running one, but knowing how to  
upload or model something for printing, and who 
can repair that printer, or create new feedstock,  
will be vital to running bases without needing 
to bring along tons of spare parts or an entire  
machine shop and skilled machinist, though that’s 
also a great thing to have if you can manage it. 
On a last note, while NASA works hard to help us 
explore space and prepare the road to develop it,  
it’s not really what they’re designed for. 
Much as we eventually needed to have a Space  
Force to take that burden off NASA and the various 
military branches that were trying to handle it,  
we will eventually need cabinet level offices for 
everything we have here but for up in space. But  
sooner than later we’ll need something like a 
Space Development Department to focus on not  
just developing space commercially but helping 
us start figuring out what sort of labor force  
development we’re going to need so we’re not 
shooting blind or making semi-educated guesses,  
and I’d guess the sooner that happens the 
better, assuming its done right, of course. 
In the long term, as we said, there’s a role 
for everyone in space, but in the short term, if  
you’ve dreamed of working in the space industry, 
you really can make that a reality through some  
hard work and determination, and when it comes 
to actual jobs in space, as we showed today,  
there will be a lot of options available, 
and perhaps not that far over the horizon.
Today we looked at Jobs in Space, and as we 
saw, there’s already tons of jobs in the space  
industry today, many of which don’t require a 
background in Math, Science, or Computer Science.  
Nonetheless, that is the biggest portion of them, 
and if you’re thinking of a career in space or  
technology in general, but don’t tend to think of 
yourself as a math-whiz, don’t let that intimidate  
you. Math, Data, Science, Computers, and AI can 
be fun and easy to learn with the right partner,  
and that’s where Brilliant can help you out.
They specialize in creating fun, interactive,  
bit-sized and effective learning that lets 
you go from the basics all the way to advanced  
materials. Brilliant’s the longest running 
sponsor of this show, and in that whole time,  
I’ve heard a lot of praise from those who’ve 
tried it out, and to date, I haven’t seen a single  
complaint, and I think it’s because they focus on 
continuously improving their own content so they  
can better help you continuously improve your own 
skills, and they also know the best approaches. 
Brilliant helps build your critical thinking 
skills through problem solving—not memorizing. So  
while you’re building real knowledge on specific 
topics, you’ll also be becoming a better thinker. 
Build real knowledge in minutes a day—with 
fun lessons you can do whenever you have the  
time. Learn through problem solving and doing, 
with hands on interactive content that’s fun,  
immersive, effective, and intuitive.
You can try everything Brilliant has  
to offer for free for a full 30 days, just 
visit brilliant.org/isaacarthur or click  
on the link in the description. You’ll also 
get 20% off an annual premium subscription.
So we’re done for today but we’re just getting 
started for June, and next week, on June 9th,  
we’ll return to the Fermi Paradox and 
the nature of intelligence to ask if  
our mind’s themselves may be a ticking 
time bomb waiting to inevitably ruin us.  
After that we will have a pair of episodes 
on Oceanic Moons, ones with surface seas,  
and Paradise Planets, places even 
better than earth for us to live.  
Then we’ll ask what would have happened if 
dinosaurs had never died off, on June 20th. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can 
also help support the show by becoming a member  
here on Youtube or Patreon, or checkout 
other ways to help at IsaacArthur.net.  
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early 
and ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like In-Situ 
Resource Utilization, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
