The vast gulfs between stars may take 
decades or even centuries to travel,  
requiring enormous generation ships carrying 
families and whole ecosystems with them. What  
will life be like on board such arks?
When Jessica was 3 years old her family  
boarded the Francis Baily, a massive 
colony ship bound for Lacaille 8760,  
an M0 orange-red dwarf 13 light years from 
Earth. She barely remembers waving goodbye  
to Earth in 2263 A.D., and knows Earth 
mostly through videos and VR of the world,  
not her family’s small apartment in Tennessee 
or their dog, who couldn’t come along for the  
journey and remained with her grandmother Emily.
Jessica never really thought of herself as part  
of the original crew for the ship, she never 
got any training for space before the flight,  
unless you count the zero-gravity bounce house 
at the daycare she went to for the last few weeks  
before they departed when they were living 
at the space dock. By the time she was 20,  
the number of people born on the trip was 
nearly as numerous as those who signed up,  
and those who were kids when the voyage began were 
the smallest of the three groups and occupied a  
strange spot in the ship’s emerging culture.
As a ship carrying settlers for a new planet,  
even though most of the colonists were making 
the journey in cryo-stasis, many were making  
the journey awake and many of the crew were also 
believers in big families. Jessica herself was  
married at 19, a mother at 20, and widow at 22. 
Her husband Frank was killed when working on the  
outer hull when a damaged section erupted and blew 
him free and severed his tether. To make it worse,  
the automated drone that was dispatched 
to retrieve him misfired after hook up  
and burned all its fuel in the wrong vector, 
pushing him away from the ship faster than  
any of their remaining drones or maintenance 
shuttles could have reached and returned from. 
Frank was the senior member of her 
maintenance section, had helped train her,  
and always been the poster child for safety 
and caution her father pointed to as role  
model. Her father was the deputy director of 
the de-pressurized and EVA Maintenance Wing.  
Like a lot of the younger crew, she’d ended up 
training for the same job one of her parents had. 
The investigation that followed showed that 
a minor software update from Earth had failed  
to properly take into account the relativistic 
time dilation of the ship, and it invalidated  
the clock and position system used by the drone 
as its navigation backup as its main antenna had  
been damaged in that same explosion. Just a freak 
accident and series of minor mistakes that might  
be taken for granted so early into the Starseed 
Initiative and its interstellar ark project. 
Due to light lag Jessica was 24 when she 
got the first condolence letter from Earth,  
from a man named Duncan who was apparently a good 
friend of her late husband’s own grandfather. He  
is on the board of directors at the Starseed 
Initiative and apparently helped Frank get his  
spot on the ship. The letter said he was going to 
make sure the matter got properly investigated,  
and it seemed sincere if a bit distant and 
awkward and asked her to keep in touch. 
She suspects he basically wants her to be a 
spy or informant. Still, Jessica’s parents  
aren’t on good terms with either of their 
own families back on Earth, which seems to  
be the case for a lot of the settlers and 
crew, but she always wanted a pen pal and  
figures having a big wig as a friend can’t hurt.
A lot of the awake settlers think it was a murder,  
not a glitch, especially after instruction from 
Earth seemed to imply that. The ship’s XO says it  
was just standard operating procedure for that 
to be investigated but Jessica thinks she gets  
sideways glances from a lot of people onboard 
the ship wondering if maybe it was her. Others  
think it might be one of the ship’s AI.
Ships have few secrets and lots of gossip,  
and that the Francis Baily is several kilometers 
long doesn’t seem to make it feel any less crowded  
when it comes to cliques and rumor mills. 
There’s only ten thousand people awake and  
most spend their time in the habitation drum, 
a multi-level cylinder habitat. Technically the  
settlers aren’t allowed outside that habitation 
drum and a handful of other parts of the ship,  
and that captain’s own authority is limited 
inside the drum. But these days the lines  
between crew and passengers are getting thinner.
Alternatively, the lines between the original crew  
and settlers, and those born en route, is getting 
much thicker. They’re not going to die off either,  
the super-majority of the settlers and virtually 
all of the crew make use of nanotechnology to  
slow their aging to an effective standstill. The 
birth rate isn’t super-high on the ship, but it is  
still resulting in more people alive on the ship 
who didn’t sign up for the mission than who did,  
and the ratio is growing all the time. The habitat 
is designed to house hundreds of thousands,  
more than enough to support the sleeping crew 
and those born on the journey, along with quite  
the zoo and botanical garden from Earth, with 
far more samples frozen for the journey too,  
embryonic and fully grown critters in some cases.
Jessica never remarried and her own son went into  
maintenance like she did, though by that point it 
was a fast-growing occupation on the ship as more  
and more glitches kept occurring. It broke her 
heart when he also died after another accident,  
and she ended up mostly raising her 
granddaughter, Emily Poole. Jessica  
herself was almost ostracized by her shipmates 
and more than happy to return the cold shoulder,  
and put her focus into making her granddaughter 
the best ship’s maintenance officer she could be. 
By this time it was getting clear that there 
were a lot of maintenance bugs on the ship and  
any message they sent home to Earth to report 
a problem and get advice was taking most of a  
decade to get there, get acted on, and get sent 
back to them. Many of those software packages,  
even minor ones, often had thousands of software 
engineers involved in making and improving them,  
and some orders of magnitude more engineers, 
so what they could do on the ship was limited.  
And a lot of the updates from home were getting 
increasingly buggy as they tried to make fixes to  
ever more divergent and patchwork systems.
Not that many people viewed Earth as home  
anymore. Though some wanted to turn around 
and go home and there were debates on if  
the ship should just refuel once arriving at 
Lacaille 8760 and take back anyone who didn’t  
volunteer for the trip or had changed their 
mind. After all, it had been several decades  
and even many of the most enthusiastic crew 
and settlers who had signed up for the trip  
and remained awake were having second thoughts. 
As for those not yet born when the ship left,  
they never signed up for the mission. They didn’t 
volunteer to suffer and die on some dead planet  
under a red sun 76 trillion miles from home.
Life on the ship is getting no easier. Eventually  
even their internal medical nanobots started 
getting untrustworthy and more of the folks  
decided to go on ice, since that was deemed 
a lot safer and would help stretch resources.  
Jessica is glad that new cryo-tanks are easy 
to build and agrees with the XO’s sentiment,  
that they should stuff the whiners and all 
the settlers who aren’t useful to the ship  
into cryo-stasis for the rest of the trip.
Jessica herself was regularly EVA from the  
ship in her duties and often got heavy radiation 
exposure, an irrelevance in an era where cancer  
was quickly fixed by nanobots, but in the end 
she went on the ice too, reluctantly, on New  
Year’s Day of 2323, halfway to a new world she’s 
spent almost every year of her life journeying to.
I think it’s very easy for those of us who dream 
of a future in space and out among the stars to  
forget how long those journeys will likely be 
and how much they’ll influence the settlers. In  
classic sci-fi everyone jumps on a ship and ten 
days later they’re at some new planet living the  
pioneer life. Even when the story obeys physics 
and limits the journey to sub-light speeds,  
folks are usually frozen for the duration or we 
hear about the journey only in passing. Not many  
authors have tried to set their tales on those 
generation ships, with some notable exceptions  
like Gene Wolfe’s “Book of the Long Sun”, or 
Robert Heinlein’s “Orphans of the Sky'', both of  
which feature inhabitants that have forgotten they 
were on a generational ark ship, and it is perhaps  
best known from the Star Trek episode “For the 
World Is Hollow and I Have Touched the Sky”, where  
we encounter inhabitants who don’t know they’re 
on a ship, which the Orville also looked at. 
It's a fun premise to explore, this idea that 
a ship might travel so far and so long that  
its crew has forgotten its purpose, and 
I could see that happening very easily,  
but it lacked an element of realism to me, 
or the genre-savviness any interstellar ark  
designers would have by the time we made one, 
since they will have read those books too. 
I would not expect any critical technology to 
be lost on any journey, digital data is just way  
too easily stored and duplicated. You might get 
exceptions where some tyrant in control of a ship  
started clamping down on who had access to data 
and limited backups and that led to data loss some  
centuries later, especially if they maintained 
power by threatening to destroy critical archives  
if attacked, but otherwise I couldn’t see it.
Particularly because I think civilization will  
only send interstellar colony missions out in 
three scenarios. First, that prototype effort to  
Alpha Centauri to prove it can be done and for the 
sake of prestige, and maybe a few other ventures  
by those great nations or groups seeking to share 
that glory. After all, unlike the Moon missions,  
you have decades of travel time to wait to see 
if that first mission succeeded in which others  
might decide to send one too, and to a different 
system. But that might get us a few colonies  
around nearby stars, it won’t be the norm that 
colonizes a galaxy of a few hundred billion stars. 
Second is that a post-scarcity civilization heavy 
with technology and resources will send out such  
ships, and I find this case most likely to be the 
norm. I think that after any early prototypes and  
prestige missions folks would wait till an era 
where interstellar colonization was much easier.  
The exception being the third case, that after 
such a wait of a few centuries they realize it  
isn’t getting any easier and start sending on 
missions anyway. And that’s the scenario we  
discussed more in episodes like Crawlonizing the 
Galaxy and The Last Planet. It’s also more the  
case in examples like “Book of the Long Sun”. And 
we could also imagine a case where we had to throw  
together a crash ark ship mission as the first of 
its kind to save humanity, but as we’ve discussed  
in other episodes, I don’t think that’s a very 
plausible scenario, even if it also is popular in  
fiction, and we could treat that as a fourth case.
But in that second case, a post-scarcity and  
high-tech case, it’s probably one where vast 
effort has been put into expanding the human  
lifespan and augmenting people to be more robust 
in many ways. They aren’t having the technical  
issues that Jessica and her granddaughter 
faced on the Francis Baily, because there’s  
already been a few generations of generation 
ships made to get real world experience and  
that came after centuries of science fiction and 
serious speculation by scientists and engineers,  
and also likely after many decades of 
interplanetary settlement including deep  
space habitats out in the Kuiper Belt 
and beyond, even into the Oort Cloud. 
I do not doubt that there will be unexpected 
problems that require tenacity and grace by  
their crews on any such journey, especially the 
first handful of expeditions, but I think we have  
to acknowledge that the overwhelming majority of 
colonial missions, especially once they’re light  
centuries from Earth, are being conducted by those 
who have entire libraries of experience to draw on  
when it comes to living and traveling in space.
Nonetheless, this is my first argument for what  
life on an Interstellar ark will be like, 
and that is long and numerous. Trillions  
of miles from home, on board an artificial 
world, you must have backups for everything,  
including your officers and experts, 
and the knowledge and ability to fix and  
replace everything. And your ship is not magically 
immune to damage just because it's crew is frozen,  
albeit you can expect less wear and tear and 
less acts of negligence, vandalism, or sabotage. 
There are likely to be actuarial odds on a 
generation ship having some sort of human-induced  
catastrophe such as vandalism or a tyrannical 
captain erasing their history, and that might  
be hard to avoid on intergalactic missions or 
someone trying to sail a hundred thousand light  
years to the other side of the galaxy, but outside 
of scenarios like that I think we can assume most  
systems get colonized by multiple ships and those 
sent on journeys from stars not that far away. In  
which case we are only talking about a handful 
of generations and likely often with many of the  
original settlers still alive from life extension 
or freezing or both. And where the world that sent  
them and its many neighbors can and would 
send help or rescue if something happened. 
Additionally, while they might originate 
from a star system a hundred light years  
from where they settled, it is likely that this 
would be because colony ships weren’t sent from  
the fringe of settled space, but from several 
systems back where the origin planet had time to  
grow. If we imagined space outward from Earth as 
spherical shells, each 10 light years further out,  
or thick, then Earth might send the majority of 
colony ships out to those first 10 layers inside  
a light century, but it might be folks from the 
first and second spheres who settled the eleventh  
and twelfth spheres, and a ship en route to 
them is likely to be able to call on other  
pioneer worlds along their way for help. A star 
system settled only a century ago and maybe with a  
million people isn’t likely to have any interest 
in colonizing another star yet, but they might  
have interstellar ships and certainly have radios.
Nonetheless, I’m not really seeing why most people  
would choose to make the journey on ice. Some 
certainly, and many more if it turned out that  
life extension wasn’t viable, but realistically 
speaking if you can repair all the cellular  
damage someone has taken from being frozen, 
and bring them back to life, you could more  
easily have repaired their cellular wear and tear. 
Maintenance is easier than repair, and regardless  
it is basically the same technology, even ignoring 
options like post-human cyborgs or digital minds.  
Or genetically modified people or even uplifted 
animals. For those who remember Emily Poole from  
the Francis Baily from one of the vignettes in 
last year’s episode Life in 2323 A.D., she had an  
uplifted dog who was her best friend, and today’s 
opening tale is the prologue for that story. 
Long voyages through radiation-soaked space don’t 
make mutation too hard to believe either, and its  
popular in sci-fi tales – Orphans of the Sky has 
a two-headed mutant as a major character – but  
I think that would be more likely to occur 
from an intentional act, or sequence of them,  
genetic engineering and cybernetics, rather 
than genetic mutation. Cultural mutation can  
certainly happen and that is the concern behind 
concepts like the Aurora Effect, the idea that  
a generation ship arriving at some hostile world 
might find it harder to handle than they expected,  
or themselves less up for the task, and turn 
around. Which is much easier to believe if  
everyone on that ship was born during the journey.
But I don’t buy it personally. It might happen  
occasionally or for ships that sought to push the 
envelope on distance rather than just seeking the  
next decent and available system to settle, but 
it’s not like any of us picked where we would  
be born or raised at. I was literally named for 
two physicists and a sci fi author – Isaac Albert  
Arthur is not my pen name, my parents were 
geeks who met in their physics class – and  
while I can summon minor irritation for 
basically having my life role cast for me  
while drawing my first breath, I love what I do 
and love the communities in which I was raised. 
I’m hardly an anomaly, some village farmer 
or blacksmith a few centuries back was likely  
following in their father’s footsteps and probably 
most loved what they did too, nor were any of them  
repeating that parent’s life story verbatim, 
it’s a sequel or soft reboot, not a rerun. And  
regardless, they still did it in most cases, being 
irritated at the hand you’ve been dealt is a long  
step short of deciding to abandon your family or 
tribe or scuttle the ship you’re all sailing on. 
It will probably happen and after a 
few hundred times we’ll probably have  
a decent formula in place for mitigating 
that and knowing how far we can sail the  
sea of stars before the probability reaches 
50% of that ship going awry in some fashion,  
the half-life of an ark ship, so to speak.
This episode is about life on such a ship,  
not how long that ship might live, but that ship 
has a lifespan and is essentially a culture and  
civilization epoch that is going to be distinct 
from the place they left or that they found. And  
a very influential one too, think of the hundred 
folks on board the Mayflower back in 1620 arriving  
at Plymouth. I happen to live in a town called 
Plymouth, and it isn’t that Plymouth of course,  
it’s a tiny town of mere 2000 few know of that 
is still 20 times bigger than that settlement  
that everyone in the US has heard of and I 
don’t doubt there’s going to be an entire  
planet called that at some point and sooner than 
later. And in a galaxy of trillions of planets,  
more than a hundred for every person now living 
and many more than every human who has ever lived,  
you may well have a civilization that names 
you as a founder, inspiration, or namesake. 
Now we might question the ethical validity of 
wanting to found a new planet for the prestige and  
early access, but it is bound to be a big motive 
and even if not the reason someone boarded a ship,  
it is likely to be on the Top 5 list of reasons 
everyone on that ship points toward when folks  
start talking about the value of their quest or 
its hardships. When someone stands up in the town  
council or parliament of that ark ship and starts 
questioning their purpose, they are going to get  
a well-polished sermon on their bold quest 
not being for lesser men of frail convictions  
who fear to tread on strange new worlds and 
carve their names into the bedrock of mighty  
civilization they shall forge for their children.
People might gripe about getting born in a ship  
that’s basically it’s own isolated island of a 
few thousands but people already gripe about being  
born in some tiny Podunk town, but those towns 
keep going, indeed there are actually several  
towns called Podunk, and while folks get up and 
leave such places regularly enough, they rarely  
gain a big following for a mass exodus and I can’t 
see anyone rising to power on a ship by talking  
about how pointless their existence and purpose 
is. Alternatively, I can absolutely see people on  
the ship griping about that, and I can absolutely 
see people rising to power by talking about how  
transcendent and important their purpose is.
And a lot of times, promising folks a land of milk  
and honey is not necessary, you can sit around 
loudly proclaiming what a desolate rock you’re  
going to and how hard the work of forging it into 
a civilization is going to be and still get lots  
of volunteers. We often worry that high-tech 
post-scarcity civilizations will hesitate at  
interstellar colonization on the grounds that 
they have very easy and luxurious lives and  
won’t want to abandon those for toil, but let’s 
be honest, that’s exactly the sort of civilization  
that would have a wall of bodies pressing at the 
airlock asking to come on board. Not everyone,  
not even likely a large fraction, but there’s 
always going to be folks looking for a purpose  
and a new place to make something of themselves.
Or to get away from their old life, and it is  
decently likely a colony ship would either contain 
a chunk of civilization that wasn’t fond of their  
home world, a group devoted to some specific 
religious or ideological belief is entirely  
plausible as a source of colonists, or people who 
just want to be gone and possibly because they’re  
not very welcome anywhere else. If even one in 
a thousand folks on Earth felt like that, we’d  
have a constant string of millions of volunteers.
Historically, we usually see a mix, and a direct  
mix too, your ship of a hundred settlers might 
have 80 believers and 20 hired experts who were  
rather indifferent to your cause, and half of 
those true believers might be a kid or spouse  
of someone who was much more devoted to the cause 
than they were. Families are rarely monolithic in  
belief and not much settling gets done without 
them. So we can imagine a lot of folks who are  
less than thrilled about the venture. That’s 
part of the reasoning I usually have about  
ark ships actually being fleets and of 
what we dub the “Gardener Ship” variety,  
where the arrive at a destination, let off some of 
the people on board along with tons of equipment,  
resupply on raw materials for a couple years while 
getting them settled in, then head off to the next  
system with anyone who doesn’t want to stay.
They manufacture more equipment and breed up  
more people on their decade long voyage to each 
stop. Every so often they even build whole new  
ships and divide their fleet, and odds are they 
can spare one ship each time to take back the  
folks who want to make the journey toward the 
inner sphere of settled systems. That ship can  
stop at the first settled world they backtrack to 
and let them off and run more visitors, migrants,  
and trade back to the place they came from.
Now some would settle a system with the smallest  
ship and fewest people needed, but I’d argue you 
tend to go big. As we saw in Exporting Earth,  
it is a lot easier to build an ecosystem 
by transplanting one and size helps in  
that regard. It’s also a lot more attractive 
to people to live in a community of a dozen  
ships with a few thousand people on each of 
them than one with just a couple hundred. 
And such ships might carry hundreds of 
thousands, not hundreds or thousands.  
Why settle a system with less when that 
just invites more settlers to appear in  
the big gulf of time while you’re growing? No 
one is going to feel obliged to ask permission  
to settle on the same continent as a colony of a 
few thousand, let alone a multiplanetary system,  
and if your population doubles every century 
then you are looking at a thousand years to  
go from a thousand people to a million and a 
thousand more to get to a billion. I wouldn’t  
give good odds on a couple thousand years passing 
without others looking at the system and heading  
over. And you might have had to buy that planet in 
some fashion, which is easier to pay for with the  
pocketbooks of a million settlers, not a hundred.
Which brings up the matter of stakes and turfs.  
If you haven’t already allocated that planet to 
various settlers before you even commissioned  
your ark ship, you certainly would have 
by the time you’ve spent a century flying  
through the empty void. In all likelihood part 
of your payment or reward system on board your  
ship is in the coin of that system you’re 
traveling to claim. If you imagine a ship  
of ten thousand people arriving at Earth, with 
its nearly 60 million square miles or 150 million  
square kilometers of land, that’s 6000 square 
miles or 15,000 square kilometers per person. 
That’s Connecticut or Puerto Rico or the 
Bahamas, Jamaica, or Kuwait. And to be fair,  
that’s all a good deal more desolate than even 
Kuwait if it’s a dead rock you’re settling.  
Depending on circumstances it may have been so 
easy to find colonists that they paid heavily  
to fund the expedition and get their stake, or 
you might have been having to promise land and  
free travel to get there. And this is assuming 
something akin to a modern economic system,  
which may or may not exist here at that time, 
and indeed might be the reason they are leaving.  
It’s just easier to speak in modern terms.
That means realistically that even if you  
gave everyone of those 10,000 folks several square 
miles all their own to dome over as they see fit,  
you wouldn’t have even used 1% of that 
planet’s space, let alone that solar system,  
and no legitimate argument could be made that 
anyone wasn’t being given ample land to tend.  
You might be paying folks with additional land 
or mineral rights or claims to asteroids – again  
it is a whole star system and one that begins 
with space travel, it doesn’t necessarily mean  
the destination for everyone is on whatever 
rock there most closely resembles Earth. 
Because of redundancy though, I don’t think it 
would ever be colonies that small and I don’t  
think it would be just one ship or even just one 
habitation drum or ring on one either. Indeed,  
I think they would occupy a lot of their flight 
time building and improving habitation sections of  
their ship. Or ships. Generally those are going 
to be their homes when they first arrive too,  
not some dome down on the planet, and 
being able to detach half a dozen modest  
sized space habitats into orbit or near 
valuable rocks or ice balls elsewhere in  
the system is a nice way to start your effort.
People have been living on those for a long  
time so they are comfortable with it, and many 
might choose to remain there. That’s half the  
notion of a gardener fleet, many on the voyage 
might prefer to keep voyaging. It’s their life,  
and everyone who wants off can go, and those 
who don’t can also go, onto the next star,  
or whichever promising system looks at about the 
right distance for them to have bred up enough new  
people to settle it by the time they arrive
And this is a key notion as it represents  
another escape valve. In many ways life on an 
interstellar ark is no different than life now,  
or a hundred or thousand years ago, the 
ecosystem and civilization is smaller but  
more than big enough to allow people a lot 
of choices in life. Including migration,  
you go to a different ship in the fleet 
or different town in that ark ship,  
moving from Engine-berg to Ice-town, where a few 
hundred folks take care of the cryo-crypts of the  
hundred thousand folks who felt like making the 
voyage on ice. Or decided to part way through,  
or who like to wake up every decade 
for a few years, then go back to sleep. 
Or got told to get in the ice-bin or get 
out the airlock, because the captain’s  
a heavy handed authoritarian and believes 
democracy is for colonies, not passengers,  
and has a short temper for complaints. Or 
outright mutiny or mundane criminals, in a  
civilization with cryo or stasis you just handle 
your bigger problems on voyages by sticking them  
in the freezer. Same for heading home. You need a 
lot of infrastructure and equipment to found a new  
colony, you really don’t need much complexity to 
a ship shooting frozen people back to the nearest  
settled world or all the way to Earth itself.
And you can probably do about one cubic meter  
per person on ice, so a kilometers long ship 
could easily keep a billion people onboard that  
way. I should also note that if you’ve got 
self-replicating tech and nanomachines that  
could let you found a whole planet with just a 
few small cargo bays full of equipment and data,  
but then you could just as easily have 
told that planet-changing tech to make  
you a giant spaceship. So there’s never 
much reason to go small and compact. 
So when you arrive at the colony, your dozens 
of different factions all have tons of paths  
available to them. Those wanting to be on their 
own to go found their personal domed habitat on  
their land parcel that is there for as far around 
as their eye can see. Which if you’re standing on  
a building 25 feet tall on a roughly earth sized 
planet would be six miles around, or 72,000 acres,  
or 29,000 Hectares. Some folks travel on to other 
stars, some go to one of the founding cities, some  
settle in those orbital habitats and stations, 
some claim their own comet or asteroid to mine.  
Some take a ship and travel to neighboring systems 
to begin some trade routes, or carry some migrants  
back and forth who want a change of scenery. 
Some go on the long journey back to Earth. 
As to on the ships, what’s day to day life 
like? Well things get manufactured, maintained,  
and recycled but I doubt this would take the 
bulk of their time and effort. Food gets grown  
and probably most hydroponically. Even most of the 
animals on board for the journey probably have a  
zoo like environment where we mimic their habitat 
but supplement their food from what we make.  
Nobody is steering that ship very often either. 
The ship’s navigator is probably a small committee  
that meets once a month to review data to make 
sure everything is going according to plan, and  
the ship’s crew isn’t some warship or exploration 
vessel with a bridge full of tactical and science  
officers. It’s basically main engineering 
and logistics, plus emergency damage control. 
You probably pay taxes in some fashion, and 
you might be working for the ship’s tax agency  
or as an accountant, or as a police officer or 
firefighter, or elementary school teacher or a  
thousand other jobs we don’t normally think of in 
space but will doubtless outnumber all the shuttle  
pilots and maintenance crews. So much depends 
on technology, and I would imagine they will  
generally be a lot more automated than we are now.
And however they left Earth, as we’ve discussed  
elsewhere there are ways for a fleet to gather 
resources while traveling without stopping that  
fleet, sending off splinters and vanguards, 
automated or otherwise, and settling a star  
system is a long process so being offered the 
task of being on a ship that breaks with the fleet  
to land on some rogue dwarf planet in the void 
to plant some automated mining gear and launch  
devices so you can arrive two years late but with 
an extra share is a gig many might volunteer for. 
Novelty is valuable on a journey like that 
so I doubt volunteers would be hard to find  
and then you’ve got new raw materials to build 
with during the trip and can start preparing  
your orbital ring or space elevator to deploy 
on arrival or pre-fabricating domes or adding  
more habitation rings to your ship, or adding 
another ship, and so on. I don’t think living  
quarters would ever be terribly tight on these 
ships though, space is not at a premium in large  
vessels following the cube-square law, so you 
likely have a decent set of quarters rather than  
a submarine-style packed room full of bunk beds.
They also have endless libraries of entertainment  
and knowledge at their fingertips, more than we 
have now and let’s be honest, if you got told you  
were effectively ageless and would be stuck on 
a ship for a century with only all of Wikipedia,  
Youtube, Netflix, and every book ever written 
for company, you are never running out of new  
and interesting watches and reads. Or a million 
virtual worlds to play in or AI generated  
entertainment. But you still have tens of 
thousands of people to get to know and you would  
still have new data beaming in from back at Earth.
Indeed, you might even have new arrivals catching  
up to your ship. Again a small cryo-crpyt tombship 
carrying a few hundred people and moving a little  
faster than your own ship might not be much 
bigger than a freight truck and rendezvoused  
with even if moving a bit faster than you so it 
could catch up. It wouldn’t need any more slow  
down fuel than needed to slow to match speeds 
with your ship since its people and cargo would  
be so tiny compared to that colony fleet. And 
you are probably equipped to handle this sort  
of resupply option of cargo pods being shot your 
way. Those might be those folks you dropped off  
a few decades earlier to set up a small station 
in the void catching up with you, or folks from  
the previous colony who changed their mind and 
decided to join the fleet, or pirates planning to  
burst inside and seize the ship. Let’s be honest, 
a ship bigger than most metropolises is a tempting  
target to seize, and you might have conflicts 
going on between other ships in the same fleet. 
One way or another, even though it’s a voyage 
of lifetimes through empty nothingness,  
there’s likely to be lots of interesting times 
for those living on an interstellar ark ship.
We talk about transplanting life and civilizations 
from Earth to strange new worlds, and we saw today  
how those ark ships are essentially worlds in 
motion themselves, but in many ways the process  
of transplanting life is really about starting 
biological, and even cultural evolution all over  
again on an alien world unlike our own, on 
some barren planet, something we’ll also be  
examining more this Thursday in our look at 
Primordial Planets. That episode was largely  
inspired by Cell to Singularity, a free-to-play 
science-based game that sponsors our show and  
which I was playing right before drafting that 
episode and editing this one. Amusingly this  
show also helped inspire that game, as many of its 
designers are longtime fans of the show, and its  
shows in the game. Cell to Singularity starts you 
off on a primordial planet, a barren Early Earth  
era of the most basic lifeforms, and takes you on 
a journey through dinosaurs and other epochs all  
the way to modern times, then goes beyond our 
world to forge a future out among the stars. 
Tap into the Extraordinary tale of 
Evolution in this cosmic clicker game,  
where you start as a single celled organism, 
then upgrade your biology, intellect,  
and technology until you engulf an entire planet 
with a civilization on the brink of technological  
singularity. Explore from Early Earth out to 
among the stars, in a game that fits easily into  
your busy day and again is free to play, whether 
you're on your PC or phone, just search Cell to  
Singularity on Steam, Google Play, or iOS, and 
start evolving your new civilization today!
So the month of March is coming up 
and we have 8 episodes to look at,  
beginning with our look at Crystal Aliens 
tomorrow, March first, as our March 2024 Nebula  
Exclusive. Then we will head to the beginning 
of time for a look at Primordial Planets,  
when those could first have formed, and what very 
young planets are like, including Earth 4 billion  
years ago. Then we’ll continue our discussion 
of terraforming from earlier this week when we  
looked at terraforming our own Moon by asking 
if and when terraforming in general is ethical,  
and what sorts of challenges future 
civilizations will face on deciding  
whether or not a planet should be terraformed 
and to what degree. After that we’ll travel  
toward Mars to look not at the Red Planet, but 
instead at its two tiny moons, Phobos and Deimos,  
and ask why and how we could settle them. Then 
it will be time for our sci-fi sunday episode,  
Automated Justice, for a 50-minute deep dive on 
the role of AI in our courts and justice system. 
Next month is an informal shout-out 
to megastructures on the heels of this  
month’s Nebula Exclusive on the Topopolis, 
where we’ll be having some extra shorts on  
some lesser known megastructures, and I wanted to 
give a quick shout out to my friend Neil Blevins,  
the author and artist for the book Megastructures: 
The Visual Encyclopedia, who has been getting a  
lot of requests for reprint of that book 
after it sold out. If you’d like to help  
bring that project to life, he has a kickstarter 
going and I’ll link that in the description,  
and I’m looking forward to your feedback today 
and next month on what megastructures you think  
need their own dedicated full-length episode.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Topopolis: 
The Eternal River, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
