In a future so distant that all has decayed  
to nothingness and time itself ceases to exist, 
might this eternal moment of oblivion bring on 
a  fiery resurrection to all of space and time?
 
So today we’re going to be looking at Conformal  
Cyclic Cosmology, which suggests we may be 
living in a cyclic universe that fades out to  
nothing then resets, along with some other cyclic 
scenarios from other cosmological models that  
might leave remnants behind that we could detect.
A year back we did an episode looking at the  
concept of Omega Point Cosmology, the notion 
that life might be heading to some massive  
unified and eternal mind that was very 
popular under the Big Crunch Cosmology,  
which has grown out of favor with our expanding 
knowledge of Dark Energy and the accelerating  
expansion of our own Universe. As we discussed in 
that episode, simply because Dark Energy is still  
so mysterious there are still pathways by which 
a Big Crunch might happen, and our episodes Black  
Hole Farming and Iron Stars, which were two 
of the show’s early hits about 8 years back,  
explored the alternative eternal expansion option 
for life going on long after the stars burn out,  
known as Dyson’s Eternal Intelligence. 
Those were the start of our Civilizations at  
the End of Time series, of which Omega Point was 
our most recent entry and where we try to figure  
out how civilization could survive into such eras 
and under different fates of the Universe. And in  
those we explore Deep Time at a scale where even 
a trillion years is but an eyeblink of time.
 
But one implication of Big Crunch scenarios 
is that the universe might expand, contract,  
then expand again, Cyclic Big Bangs, and as I was 
finishing up that episode I decided I wanted to  
expand on a theory that had a novel approach to 
both eternal expansion and a cyclic universe,  
Roger Penrose’s Conformal Cyclic Cosmology. 
That ran on Nebula as an exclusive bonus  
companion episode, and was when we switched 
from doing expanded editions of episodes over  
on Nebula to stand alone episodes, as people 
preferred them and I figured I’d bring them  
over to Youtube a year later so everyone could 
enjoy them. Initially I actually managed to keep  
those bonus episodes relatively short, today’s is 
only 10 minutes but most of our Nebula exclusive  
episodes these days are full-length, 
and we release a new one every month. 
 
And we’ll be showing that original in just 
a moment before I go on to expand on some  
of the discussion about how you could see an 
older universe predating ours and what other  
scenarios might produce such remnants, so 
an expanded edition of what was the expanded  
edition of another episode. I will also note 
briefly that this episode’s older segment was  
recorded a year ago before I had surgery on my 
tongue and follow up speech therapy so my speech  
impediment is likely to be more noticeable and 
as always, captions are available. All that said,  
let’s begin our look at the end of the 
universe, and its potential rebirth.
 
Welcome to another Nebula Exclusive short 
extending on our topic today of the Omega  
Point and the Big Crunch, where we also discussed 
an alternate theory on the origins and fate of  
the Universe by Roger Penrose, Conformal Cyclic 
Cosmology, and I felt the topic deserved more  
discussion but that it would carry us outside 
of the zone of that episode. It is probably  
a good idea to watch that episode first as we 
discussed some basic concepts there already.
 
Now the keyword in Conformal Cyclic Cosmology 
is ‘Cyclic’ as it is one of our examples of a  
beginning and end of the Universe where things 
just keep restarting, and similar to Poincare  
Recurrence. In Poincare Recurrence we assume a 
universe that randomly reshuffles back to its  
starting point, much as if you shuffle a deck of 
cards enough times you’ll eventually repeat the  
order the cards were in sometime before that. 
But that doesn’t work in an expanding Universe  
and neither does a Big Crunch Scenario where the 
Universe seems to be accelerating in expansion,  
and thus shouldn’t be able to recollapse unless 
whatever is driving that expansion ceases - which  
as we discussed in Omega Point may be possible. 
We can’t make too many assumptions about the  
properties of mysterious Dark Energy, since 
it’s best known current property is that it is  
mysterious and we don’t know why it exists, where 
it comes from, or why it seems to be increasing,  
nor if it should keep doing so forever.
It’s hard to have a repeating Universe if  
the place is eternally expanding, but Conformal 
Cyclic Cosmology gets around that by basically  
having the grand reset happen when the Universe 
is so old that the only things left that exist are  
timeless particles like photons. In a universe 
where space and time are essentially out of  
play because all that exists are particles that 
experience no time, you can argue that distance  
no longer exists anymore and the whole universe 
is suddenly infinitely dense and pointlike again,  
like a black hole or the conditions at the 
big bang. Conceptually you can think of it  
as saying that things have spread out so much and 
decayed so much that the concept ceases to mean  
anything. We’ll come back to that shortly.
Incidentally since the word Conformal isn’t  
in daily usage by most folks, it is a term 
from math and maps that basically has to do  
with angles and shapes being preserved even when 
curved. Imagine a sheet of grid paper lying flat,  
all squares and 90 degree right angles, now curve 
it and observe that its no longer really squares  
and 90 degree angles between two lines, but that 
at the same time it still is on that sheet. For  
conceptual ease, imagine you crunched that sheet 
of paper into a tight ball. It is now very dense,  
with many lines touching, but the sheet still has 
that wide layout of nice even squares. And this is  
essentially what the concept is arguing.
Conceptually I can expand that sheet too,  
so the squares are feet or meters wide not 
inches or centimeters, or even light years,  
and in the end if I can find a situation 
where it’s the equivalent of all scrunched  
up in some other dimension, it’s still 
a flat sheet but also simultaneously an  
infinitely dense tiny ball. It just depends on 
who is observing it, someone on that sheet or  
outside it. You could do a similar trick 
by rolling that sheet up like a scroll,  
only one very tight to the point it was an 
infinitely thin and dense line, and so too,  
you could replace such a sheet with a 3D 
matrix grid as well, and then squish it in  
a 4-dimensional space into an infinitely dense 
sheet, or infinitely dense line or point too,  
and yet that grid is preserved in the frame 
of reference of that sheet, while smashed up  
and infinitely dense in the frame of someone 
standing outside, much as crumpling a map up.
 
Again that’s the concept, the real math gets much 
trickier, but what’s the physics angle? Well,  
as I mentioned, some particles like photons don’t 
experience time themselves. As we’ve discussed in  
other episodes, time slows down as you approach 
the speed of light and stops passing entirely  
at it. We believe photons have no mass at 
all and travel at the true speed of light,  
though its always possible that they and 
gravitons do have some tiny bit of mass,  
less even than a neutrino, and those go just a 
hair under light speed as a result. Light speed  
is something of a dated term and it should really 
be the speed of causality, or cause and effect,  
but our current belief is that photons do move at 
that speed and that the speed of light, gravity,  
and causality are all the same. If it turned out 
that there were no totally massless particles,  
conformal cyclic cosmology would be invalidated.
Why? Well if I’m a photon being emitted back when  
the Universe is young and hitting your eyeball 
now, I’ve existed for billions of years and  
covered billions of light years, but to me there 
was simply the instant transfer from emission to  
absorption. As that photon, I don’t experience 
time. So let’s imagine two photons on different  
journeys but both passed through the same spot at 
some point, only a billion years apart.To them,  
they intersected, because their journey crossed 
paths and it doesn’t matter it was an eon apart. 
 
Now as channel regulars know, it isn’t really 
mass but energy that generates gravity, so if  
you cram enough photons together at the same point 
and moment in time, you get a black hole, what we  
call a kugelblitz black hole, and we’ve talked 
about using them to power spaceships Over time  
they evaporate via Hawking Radiation and they make 
amazing batteries, see our black hole episodes for  
details.If we have tons of photons intersecting 
a given point over untold quintillions of years,  
you don’t get a black hole, because they 
weren’t at the same place at the same time. We,  
as humans experiencing time, do exist in time 
and thus wouldn’t observe a black hole there.
 
However, as the universe ages even the black holes 
in it expire and turn into photons in the process,  
and every little bit of matter slowly decays 
into something timeless like a photon,  
until nothing left in the universe experiencing 
time exists and no frame of reference exists  
anymore experiencing time. Thus you can argue 
that no time exists anymore, and that’s more  
than metaphysical handwave, remember time is a 
real and changeable quantity that runs faster or  
slower in certain situations like strong gravity 
wells or high velocities. Whatever time is,  
and that’s still a bit of a mystery, it 
is not a constant and unchangeable thing  
independent of the Universe around it.
This then, the moment after everything  
experiencing time ceases to be, the End of Time 
in a very literal sense, could be argued to see  
every photon now being all there is and all in the 
same place at the same time, or all the energy of  
the Universe compacted again into a tiny point. 
And that’s Conformal Cyclic Cosmology, minus the  
math and some more complex physics, including 
the notion that in the absence of time, space  
should also be seen as basically ceasing to be.
Now for quick criticisms, the two obvious ones  
is if it really counts as an absence of space and 
time just because nothing is around to experience  
it, and it’s a little hard to check that. We as 
an observer cannot make observations in any place  
this would be true. The other is the argument that 
not all particles should degenerate into photons  
or gravitons, and that is a long standing debate 
involving proton decay and some other matters. 
 
Penrose does make the argument that this still 
works if the amount of mass in the Universe  
isn’t quite zero, just insignificant, and thus 
not everything needs to be a photon or similar  
massless particle, and again it shouldn’t work 
if it turns out photons have a tiny little bit  
of mass. It also shouldn’t allow anyone to survive 
into a new aeon - his term for each new iteration  
of the universe between big bang and this fizzle 
to heat death. But because gravity also moves at  
light speed, it could survive to new Aeons and 
leave a foot print. We should be able to check  
if the theory is true by detecting that footprint 
and experiments have been proposed for doing that  
but it's too soon to say if it's true or not.
One final fun note on the concept before we close  
out, as gravity could leave a footprint between 
iterations, it would theoretically be possible to  
arrange objects into patterns that would survive 
into the next iteration as visible. This brings  
up the notion of Informational Panspermia, where 
you could write a message to the next Universe,  
or receive one from the prior, carved into 
spacetime by gravity. But as we know from  
other episodes on transhumanism, if you can send 
information, you can send people too, copies of  
their mind for instance, though presumably it 
requires someone in the next Aeon to receive,  
decode, and download that brain. For fans of 
Stargate Universe, who remember the mission  
becoming about trying to see a message in the 
Cosmic Microwave Background radiation, I’m  
pretty sure this is the basis for that plotline.
Either way that’s quite a trick for surviving past  
the end of time, or just sending messages, 
and odds are good if the theory is true that  
someone did send a message and we may be able 
to see it even this century, or download them,  
but not for today, and on that note we’ll 
wrap up for the day, thanks again for joining  
us for another Nebula Special.
        
So we’ll be talking a bit more about how this  
universal re-spawn is supposed to work, why it 
might leave as ghostly remnant, and what other  
scenarios, like Poincare Recurrence, might 
leave remnants too, but first, if you like  
the idea of new universes and life emerging all 
over again intrigues you there’s an excellent and  
free-to-play science-based game called Cell to 
Singularity that starts you from the beginning  
of everything and let’s carry life forward and 
up the evolutionary and tech trees from that  
first moment all the way through a technological 
singularity and settling neighboring worlds.
 
Cell to Singularity’s developers are part of our 
audience, and the game explores many concepts and  
themes we’ve discussed, using accurate science and 
research, but inside an artfully done scifi theme.  
Tap into the Extraordinary tale of Evolution 
in this cosmic clicker game, where you start  
as a single celled organism, then upgrade your 
biology, intellect, and technology until you  
engulf an entire planet with a civilization on the 
brink of technological singularity. Explore from  
Early Earth out to among the stars, in a game 
that fits easily into your busy day and again  
is free to play, whether you're on your PC or 
phone, just search Cell to Singularity on Steam,  
Google Play, or iOS, and start evolving 
your new civilization today!
 
So welcome back to part 2 as we expand 
our discussion on repeating Universes,  
where we’ll talk a bit more about Conformal Cyclic 
Cosmology but also other cosmological models that  
offer some sort of repetition or remnant ghost 
universe left behind. As mentioned, the episode  
was originally a companion piece to our look 
at the Big Crunch cosmology, where the Universe  
expands from a small point at the Big Bang then 
falls back in on itself as gravity catches up with  
things. It could then presumably repeat this 
process of banging back out again, though the  
mechanism for that occurring is a little unclear.
Since it came out a year ago I have had a chance  
to come up with some other analogies and 
explanations that seem to work for folks too,  
and one came to mind after our Zero Point 
and Vacuum Energy episode in the Fall is  
to think of our universe as an expanding and 
dissipating oil slick over a greater and more  
energetic reality. There’s an energy beneath what 
we normally think of as the vacuum where virtual  
particles pop in and out of existence constantly 
and quite a lot of it, and this energy should  
remain even after things in this Universe wind 
down, and occurs everywhere all of the time.
 
Indeed those virtual particles sometimes get used 
as an objection to Conformal Cyclic Cosmology,  
but in discussing the false vacuum I’ve used the 
analogy that our reality floats on the quantum sea  
like an oil slick, and is spreading out with 
time, and someone asked if that might be why  
dark energy is accelerating, less barrier to work 
through, so to speak. I don’t think evidence would  
support that view beyond being an interesting 
conceptual explanation but we could overlay that  
analogy for Conformal Cyclic Cosmology. 
Once that oil slick of reality thins down  
completely, there’s no barrier to new energy 
pouring through from wherever big bangs,  
virtual particles, and dark energy all come from, 
and out from this place comes a new universe. It’s  
all such mysterious and primordial stuff though 
that it doesn’t pay to get too fixated on any  
cosmological theory at the moment let alone 
an analogy presented for discussing it.
 
So we’ll discuss several other cosmologies today 
and continue that by continuing our discussion of  
the Big Crunch cosmology. Dark energy puts a crimp 
in Big Crunch cosmology since the idea there is  
that expansion has some inertia that is slowing 
as gravity tries to bring a finite universe back  
together. So the rate of expansion of the Universe 
should be slowing over time. But current data says  
the reverse, that expansion is actually speeding 
up. The source of this expansion is some unknown  
energy which is mysterious and dark to us, thus 
‘dark energy’. New bits of space and time seem  
to emerge everywhere all at once, and unlike 
with virtual particles, these stick around.
 
So it would seem to put a nail in Big Crunch’s 
shrinking coffin, except that since we have no  
idea what Dark Energy is or where it comes 
from, it’s entirely possible it just stops  
arriving from wherever it comes from, if it 
comes from anywhere at all, at which point  
the universe could presumably contract again. 
I should also note that the old model of the  
Universe that was around from shortly after Isaac 
Newton’s work until the mid-20th century was the  
Steady State Model, which holds that the Universe 
is infinite in size and age and does not fall in  
on itself precisely because it is infinite. 
There’s no center for stuff to fall towards  
and there’s infinite mass on every side of you 
pulling you evenly from all directions. This is  
the cosmology where we first encounter Poincare 
Recurrence and we’ll return to it momentarily,  
along with Boltzmann Brains, which date 
from the same period and speculations. 
 
This model was growing out of favor from the 
appearance of Hubble Expansion and the growing  
knowledge of Thermodynamics arguing entropy 
should be kicking in over time and thus the  
infinitely old universe should already be utterly 
maxed out on entropy and dead. Many attempts to  
fix this model were proposed as patches and one 
that was proposed and often mocked years later  
as absurd was that perhaps new bits of mass or 
energy were occasionally emerging. That about  
one particle of hydrogen would be appearing in 
any given cubic meter of space about once every  
300,000 years or so on average to refresh 
supplies, for new stars to be born from. 
 
This is a flawed notion but I have always 
found it amusing how it was ridiculed in the  
50s and 60s only to reemerge in the similar 
form of Dark Energy a few decades later,  
or the Quantum Foam for that matter. It also often 
got mocked for the absurdity of matter or energy  
appearing out of nowhere, which was particularly 
ironic given that this is the core of the Big bang  
cosmology that was replacing it. Mini-bangs, 
and at the atomic level, but there’s no real  
reason to think that something that happened once 
can’t happen many times, quite to the contrary.
 
But this is also our first example of how an 
ancient universe could leave remnants behind,  
and not in the context of an eternal and infinite 
universe which had no big bangs, as with Steady  
State, but rather a universe in which big bangs 
occur occasionally and leave an expanding pocket  
of new space and matter in them. These may be 
of some specific new amount of mass and energy,  
or they may be spread all the way from the atomic 
level up to bigger than ours, but they pop up and  
maybe the explanation for the continuing expansion 
that accelerates is that they begin merging onto  
the existing wider universe and loose cohesion 
to it faster and faster until merging on in,  
that dissipating oil slick analogy from earlier. 
This wider universe may or may not be infinite,  
and indeed our own Big Bang could have been 
infinite from the outset and merely the portion we  
can see, which is finite, might have emerged from 
a tiny finite portion of a smaller and expanding  
but still infinite proto-universe. Infinity is not 
an actual number and yes you can have infinites  
that are bigger than other infinities. As an 
example, a line can be infinitely long, and two  
perpendicular infinitely long lines can map out 
an an infinitely large area that is infinite in  
two dimensions, and which would be bigger than 
a 2D plane that was infinite in one direction,  
but only finite in another, like an infinitely 
long ribbon. And if that ribbon started off as a  
skinny one and began expanding to be wider, it’s 
still infinite from start to finish, but it is  
getting bigger in that finite dimension.
To stretch the analogy, or rather crunch it,  
we could imagine rolling that ribbon up along its 
width to be an infinitely long and compressed tube  
that might start expanding into new ribbon that 
was flat in some new dimension of our choosing,  
and one can think of that as a decent 
mental analogy for some of our scenarios  
like Conformal Cyclic Cosmology too, if the 
prior explanations didn’t work for you.
 
I should note that there’s a lot of recent 
discussion publicly if the Big bang theory  
might be wrong or off in some fashion and 
for clarification, that’s not new. There  
was a period where questioning it, or if aliens 
might exist or if you could travel faster than  
light tended to result in a few folks openly and 
loudly criticizing anyone who did and often made  
the news, so it tended to discourage people 
from doing many papers or conversations about  
it. Scientists are human after all.
For all that I happen to be a big  
fan of the Big Bang, think Aliens are 
probably ultra-rare or non-existent,  
and don’t believe FTL will ever happen, I 
always loathed that tendency to discourage  
or even sneer at folks who wanted to talk aliens, 
warp drives, or alternative cosmologies. One of  
those ideas getting talked around a lot now is 
that there may have been a second big bang right  
on the heels of the first or several right in a 
row, as possible alternatives to the difficulty  
of Cosmic Inflation right after the Big Bang.
Now Steady State cosmology is still on the outs,  
even though we often still consider the 
possibility the universe is infinitely  
old and vast, just not the portion carved out 
by our Big Bang or its local chunk. One reason  
is that it never handled Olber’s Paradox well, 
which worries why in an infinite universe you  
shouldn’t be able to see stars out infinitely 
in each direction and infinitely back in time.  
Hence the night sky should be white not black. 
And many remnant universes scenarios have these  
same sorts problems of why artifacts of 
prior universes or older pieces of the  
Universe aren’t piling up everywhere, including 
alien civilizations left over from then which  
might have sought to survive the end of their 
Universe or simply expanded from their universe  
into this one from wherever they overlap. 
We get the same issue there with Poincare  
Recurrence, which was made for the Steady 
State Model but tends to have equivalents  
in other cosmologies too. And Poincare 
Recurrence is technically a complete reset,  
where you’ve shuffled the proverbial pack of cards 
until its returned to its original order, but in  
practice you’ve have a huge number of states that 
are ‘close enough’, especially given that the  
intent is really to reset entropy not history. 
We don’t actually care if the Universe is in an  
exact state it previously inhabited with lower 
entropy, just if it is reshuffled to allow some  
new entropy to be available. If all you want 
is your card deck to have five cards of the  
same suit in order, and you don’t care which 
ones or where in the deck they are, that’s  
going to happen way more often then returning 
that deck to the original setup where all the  
cards are in order fresh from the factory.
And this will occur way more often too. In a  
Steady State setup, some region of the Universe 
would grind itself down on entropy and have a  
reshuffle eventually that brought back some order, 
but far smaller than before and in a different  
arrangement, including entirely randomly assembled 
brains, the Boltzmann Brain, relatively often, and  
so you’d get remnants here of prior universes all 
over. However, the reset periods under Poincare,  
even for something as simple as a Boltzmann Brain, 
a randomly assembled brain as opposed to a whole  
galaxy or supercluster, are way longer than stars 
and galaxies live, so all those remnants might  
disappear even between micro-resets. 
Similarly, in a Big Rip scenario,  
where the Universe just keeps expanding faster 
and faster till even atoms are pulled apart,  
we could contemplate that this even rips quarks 
apart. When you tear a pair of quarks apart, the  
energy used to rip them asunder is as much energy 
as is needed to make two new quarks, so you just  
end up converting that energy into two new pairs 
of quarks. Rip those both apart and you get four,  
then eight, and so on, and possibly create another 
local Big bang, and one occurring everywhere in  
the Universe too. Were that to happen it’s 
hard to imagine how you could send anything  
across that atom-rending epoch to survive into a 
new Universe and anything apart at any distance,  
even the human scale, would be scattered over 
whole universe volumes, plus nothing there implies  
this process of rending even atoms apart stops 
either. But perhaps it does and perhaps you could  
send some signal across, and as we mentioned 
in part 1, if you can send a signal, you can  
send a person, or a copy of their mind anyway. 
Now as we discussed there, the idea of Conformal  
Cyclic Cosmology is that in an ancient and burned 
out Universe, nothing is left over that can decay  
over time. Which means anything which experiences 
time is gone, and everything we think of as  
matter which is able to experience time. Only 
massless objects experience no passage of time,  
and all massless objects must experience no time. 
Those are the photon, the particle of light,  
the graviton, the particle of gravity, and the 
gluon, the particle that glues quarks and nuclei  
together. There may be others, but we don’t 
believe the neutrino is massless anymore and  
we can’t actually be sure the others are, 
they could each be one part per trillion  
or gajillion mass energy to kinetic energy, 
it’s hard to disprove something like that. 
 
Assuming they are totally massless, then in 
an era where all other matter has decayed,  
you just have these eternal particles leftover, 
and photons can’t undergo pair production in empty  
space so they should stay that way. Of course, 
the concept of empty space and true vacuum is a  
bit dubious. Regardless, as we explained earlier, 
in the absence of any meaningful concept of time,  
a given photon is going to stretch over an 
infinitely long space, an infinite ribbon  
of that wavelength intersecting with tons of 
other such photons, and essentially you now  
have the mathematical equivalent of an infinitely 
dense point, same as when the Universe began.
 
But that’s where that conformal concept 
comes into play, with conformal rescaling,  
where the universe is resetting but does so in 
a way that preserves the shape of its structure,  
all the angles of that grid of paper you’re 
stretching and distorting, including the  
imprints of massive objects and events like black 
holes and gravitational waves. In this way, you  
can think of it as a Dark Energy eternal expansion 
version of the Big Crunch or Poincare Recurrence,  
for the latter, where the reset is not 100%.
Personally I think it’s a pretty neat theory  
and not the only one of its kind, we also have 
loop quantum cosmology, the Baum-Frampton Model  
and the cyclic brane cosmology approach Paul 
Steinhardt of Princeton University and Neil  
Turok of Cambridge University came up with back 
in 2001 which is the year I started grad school  
in physics and just a couple years after Dark 
Energy got confirmed, or the ekpyrotic model  
they and a couple others came up with at 
that same time to help try to explain some  
of the large scale structure of the cosmos that 
seems at odds with its relatively short age. 
 
Time will tell if we can even come up with a way 
to usefully test these theories and I’d emphasize  
they all have their critics and weak points too, 
and we may explore them more in future episodes,  
but for now, we’ll wrap up our extended edition 
of Conformal Cyclic Cosmology, and if you want  
to catch more of our Nebula Exclusives when they 
first come out, you can sign up for those by going  
to go.Nebula.tv/isaacarthur, to catch our current 
episode, Giant Space Monsters, or February’s  
upcoming episode, Topopolis: The Eternal River. As 
always all the regular episodes of this show also  
come out on Nebula a few days early and ad free.
We have a lot of episodes coming up in February,  
for a total of 8 for February and we had 8 
back in January too that you can watch while  
you wait for those to come out, starting 
with Death Worlds this Thursday. If you’d  
like to get alerts when those episodes come 
out, make sure to hit the like, subscribe,  
and notification buttons. You can also help 
support the show on Patreon, and if you want to  
donate and help in other ways, you can see those 
options by visiting our website, IsaacArthur.net.
 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
