We often look up at the stars and ask, “if
the Universe is so big and ancient, why aren’t
there big and ancient civilizations spanning
the galaxy?”
But what if there are, and they’re just
asleep?
It’s been a while since we visited the Fermi
Paradox directly on this channel and it’s
probably overdue.
In the past, we’ve looked at almost every
solution folks have presented about the Fermi
Paradox, but there’s one group of solutions
we’ve mostly skipped.
A variation known as the Aestivation Hypothesis
has developed within that group since the
last time we discussed the Fermi Paradox.
So now seems like a good time to look at these
solutions more in depth.
Interestingly, this also happens to be a category
of solutions that predates the Fermi Paradox
itself.
The Fermi Paradox is fundamentally a response
to our deepening understanding of the antiquity
of our world and the evolutionary path of
life on it, coupled with the realization that
our galaxy hosts hundreds of billions of stars,
which make up less than a billionth of all
stars in the visible universe.
That took a long time to sink into our collective
consciousness and it really wasn’t until
we were taking our first steps toward designing
spaceships that it slammed home.
Yet, many years before that happened, some
folks were considering it.
One of those was H.P.
Lovecraft, best known for his Cthulhu Mythos,
but not very well known in his time, probably
because these ideas hadn’t really had time
to sink in.
This brings us to our Audible Book of the
Month, H.P.
Lovecraft’s “At the Mountains of Madness”.
This is one of the best known stories that
began that mythos, focusing on the discovery
of a truly ancient and alien civilization
found in the depths of Antarctica, whose existence
covers vast amounts of space and time.
This is one of the earliest examples in fiction
of trying to come to terms with the idea that
if life can arise naturally, with all the
countless billions of worlds, many predating
us by billions of years, there has to be a
reason why they aren’t seemingly everywhere.
You can pick up a free copy of the story today
and also get a 30-day trial of Audible, just
use my link, Audible.com/Isaac or text isaac
to 500-500.
A regular aspect of Lovecraft’s work is
that these ancient beings share nothing of
our own worldview.
They’re not so much evil as operating under
totally alien outlooks.
That’s important to the Fermi Paradox because
our broadest group of possible solutions invariably
revolve around alien behavior and motivation
and we don’t want to make too many assumptions
in that regard.
Even just reading material written by fellow
humans only a century or two old can reveal
some huge differences in perspective and ethics,
and I’ll throw that in as a warning about
our book of the month too.
Anytime you read a classic, and many of our
books of the month tend to be, you can encounter
some shocking views and that’s especially
the case for Lovecraft.
For our purposes today though, that’s actually
a bit of a benefit because it serves as an
example of just how much of a change a few
generations can make to a single culture who
shares the same traditions and biology.
A truly alien mindset might easily be incomprehensible
in its motives, though as we’ve discussed
in regard to Artificial Intelligence, it will
probably tend to be internally fairly logical
and consistent.
An AI might be more human than an alien, for
having been made and raised by humans, or
even more alien than actual aliens, since
those should presumably share the same basic
biological motives evolution would tend to
pressure a species towards.
However, I’ve often noted that classical
evolution makes little sense once you get
technology.
If you extrapolate that out onto geological
timelines rather than just envisioning a species
a few centuries ahead, you can end up with
something just as detached from evolutionary
roots as an AI would be, from centuries of
genetic or cybernetic alteration.
You can expect that they will be sufficiently
logical, but in truth folks already are and
we can see how irrational that often seems.
As best as I can tell, just about every human
who has ever lived has been logical, their
personal assumptions, training, experience,
and worldview just flavor where that logic
starts, how well it is performed, and where
they subconsciously tend to steer it.
If you begin with very alien biology and motivations,
that can end at some very logical but mystifying
behaviors and opinions.
I wanted to stress that point because the
Fermi Paradox has a vast number of suggested
solutions, as we detailed in the Fermi Paradox
Compendium, but most tend to fall into three
broad categories.
The first being that they don’t exist, the
second that we can’t detect them, and third
that we can’t recognize them.
Even most of our solutions we had to classify
as miscellaneous, arguably weren’t outside
those three, but more of a hybrid between
two of three categories.
The first, that they don’t exist, only relies
on motivation of the alien in a very minimal
way.
It’s the category for solutions ranging
from life being very uncommon to intelligence
evolving very rarely, but it also includes
that we might be unnatural in origin – an
extreme fluke of probability like a Boltzmann
Brain, any scenario where we were created
by a god or aliens or computer programmers
– or that we are natural enough but prone
to killing ourselves off with our own technology.
Both of those, unnatural origin and suicide
by technology, do have a motivation component,
though for the former it is the creator’s
motivations that matter, not ours, and for
the latter it’s more of a lack of clear
perspective, you assume the folks wanted to
survive so they did not detect the threat,
or could not bring themselves to recognize
it.
I’ll get to the second category shortly,
but first let’s deal with the third category,
that mostly contains similar examples.
It’s the one for things like aliens walking
quietly among us while we are unable to recognize
they do, either through outright denial or
that we lack the context to even see it, as
we could walk right past a sentient tree or
stone and not realize they had thoughts.
We don’t see them doing anything to indicate
intelligence, but we have to acknowledge that
maybe their motives are simply so different
that their actions appear as simple random
noise or coincidence to us.
A big swarm of mosquitoes that was actually
a hive mind might, very logically, be motivated
simply to gather blood and reproduce.
Now that example can be rebutted by pointing
out that any sort of intelligence or network
requires maintenance and resources, so if
it isn’t providing an obvious benefit it
probably should not exist, and since a big
swarm of mosquitoes ought to act that way
anyway, they derive no benefit from a hive
mind directing them to do just that.
When we get into the second category of solutions
to the Fermi Paradox, that we can’t detect
them, we do a lot of those kind of rebuttals.
Someone says the Universe is full of aliens
but they all keep small civilizations and
hide them, and we examined that in the Hidden
Aliens episode and concluded that it was not
a very logical survival strategy based on
known science, hence it would be very weird
for EVERY alien species to do that.
The alien civilization series differs from
the Fermi Paradox episodes mostly in that
it is entirely likely, even probable, that
lots of civilizations do try to hide, so in
Alien Civilizations episodes we can look at
them, whereas in Fermi Paradox episodes we
aren’t interested in such civilizations
unless they offer a solution to the Fermi
Paradox, and they don’t, any more than an
entire village hiding does, if one member
instead stands up on a hill with a beacon
fire and megaphone shouting out town gossip
and census data.
We call this exclusivity or rather non-exclusivity
and it tends to poke holes in virtually every
category two solution, and indeed today’s
case of sleeping civilizations is not entirely
an exception.
Maybe we can’t detect aliens because they
don’t use radio in favor of something better.
Beyond radio being the detection method the
SETI Institute likes to suggest, it’s just
one of many methods which would not be interfered
with by better communication systems.
This still ignores that you’d expect at
least one civilization to maintain a classic
radio beacon just to say “Greetings, new
species, welcome to the Galaxy”.
Exclusivity is simultaneously a tricky concept,
and a simple one.
Interstellar travel should be exclusive to
species that understand basic math and physics,
since it’s hard to make rocket ships - let
alone fusion or antimatter drives without
it.
Alternatively, we could not say space travel
is exclusive to democracies, or a particular
economic system, since the entire space race
was essentially a proxy war between two ideologies
with polar opposite views on such matters
and both achieved great successes.
We can say space travel ought to be exclusive
to folks who understand algebra, but not that
it is exclusive to capitalists or communists,
democracies or oligarchies, benevolent dictators
or military despots, theists or atheists,
and so on.
We might be able to say it is exclusive to
folks who value technology, as we’d not
expect Luddites to do space, but even that’s
kind of dubious.
One only needs to embrace the technologies
specifically necessary for travel and even
then, just the blueprints, not the science
behind them, and a civilization might embrace
science, and then turn against it.
Similarly we couldn’t completely rule out
something evolving in space, big space squid
that hatch from small asteroids and go floating
around sucking up sunlight and asteroids and
space dust for fuel.
Or say a race of critters with mystic mind-powers
who could teleport to other worlds but couldn’t
do trigonometry.
This mostly doesn’t matter to the Fermi
Paradox though, because such routes seem improbable
enough that odds are even if they maybe do
exist somewhere in the Universe they are rare
enough not to impact the solution.
So our example for today is civilizations
that go to sleep, and at first, from the groundwork
we’ve just laid, this seems as easily dismissed
as most other category two concepts.
If civilizations sleep, what the heck is their
motive for doing so?
And why would all of them do it?
And we would say there isn’t any and move
on, simply saying some might but most wouldn’t
and thus it’s not a good Fermi Paradox solution.
However we recently had a solution provided
that does provide a motivation for going to
sleep, called Aestivation Hypothesis, which
we’ll discuss in a moment.
It’s not a good Fermi Paradox solution itself
- we’ll go ahead and murder it shortly,
but it is an interesting approach and got
me challenging my assumption about sleeping
civilizations in general.
But first let’s discuss Aestivation Hypothesis.
It came out in 2017, a year after both the
Compendium episode was done and the first
Civilizations at the End of time episode,
and appropriately the paper by Anders Sandberg
and others on this is titled “That is not
dead which can eternal lie”, which is a
quote from H.P.
Lovecraft’s Necronomicon, a fictional work
mentioned in some of his stories and popularized
a lot nowadays.
The basic assumption is simple enough, a lot
of futurists tend to assume that thinking
processes will eventually shift from neurons,
or whatever an alien might use, over to a
computer substrate.
Don’t confuse that with artificial intelligence,
an AI might run on a computer but so can a
game of solitaire or your brain.
The basic reasoning is that whether you are
using a physical deck of cards or one on the
screen, you are still playing solitaire, and
so too, whether your brain runs on neurons
or computers as its substrate, it is still
a human brain.
Build a house of stone or brick or wood or
LEGO and it still a house, same reasoning,
not everyone agrees, but that’s the concept.
Now a neuron doesn’t work better when you
make it cold, it eventually dies and freezes,
but computational processes generally do better
when it’s colder and we actually have something
called Landauer’s Principle which shows
the maximum processing a computer can do with
a bit of energy is inverse to temperature.
This adds nothing new to the discussion of
the Fermi Paradox and it’s often been suggested
civilizations might migrate beyond the galactic
rim to where things are cooler to take advantage
of that, indeed that was one of miscellaneous
solutions we discussed in the compendium.
Such civilizations are obviously hard for
us to see, they’d be tens of thousands of
light years away and might be fairly covert.
They might have ridden out there on suns converted
into Shkadov Thrusters and then into Matrioshka
Brains, they might be decentralized with each
spread out to a small asteroid to help with
cooling or even built up into a big centralized
Birch Planet, but we’d have problems seeing
them now regardless.
Back in the Civilizations at the End of Time
episode, Black Hole Farming, done just a bit
after the compendium, we pointed out that
while the period after all the stars had died
off would be the era of the Universe with
the most entropy and the least free energy
available, the expanding and cooling Universe
would permit computation at such cold temperatures
that you might run entire civilizations off
what you need to run a light bulb in our time.
There will be very little energy available,
but you can do so much more computing, or
thinking and simulating with it.
The Aestivation Hypothesis – and Aestivation
means to hibernate or enter torpor – works
on this same reasoning, you put your whole
civilization to sleep until temperatures cool
down so that you can take advantage of those
super cold temperatures and live then, when
there’s less free energy but you can do
far, far more with it.
Now that is a great motivation from the Fermi
Paradox perspective.
It is very easy to argue that most civilizations
tend to shift to the computer substrate, it’s
way more efficient and way better for colonizing
space too.
It also offers simple immortality as you can
easily repair and replace everything.
You can also run your brain faster to experience
whole days in mere seconds or slow it down
to experience a mere second over a whole century.
This un-glues you from classic time, and I
want to emphasize that because it’s what
hit me later on, when I was pondering this
more.
If you live this way you only have two relevant
calendars, your internal one of experiences
and your civilization around you.
For the most part, the natural world and Universe
are not dominating how you experience time
anymore.
So you can just slow down – I don’t think
you’d stop completely, since you’d need
to monitor the rest of the Universe – and
wait until the Universe cools down to more
effectively use your energy.
It sounds like a solid theory, as everyone
should have motivation to do this, and while
doing it would appear non-interactive and
quiet.
However as I said we were going to murder
it and that’s because it has three big flaws.
First, the whole point of waiting till the
end of time to use your resources is you’ll
get vastly more bang for your buck doing so,
but that implies you’d like to have a stockpile
of resources.
If you are aiming for hyper-efficiency, you
should be resource hoarding and that should
result in the same basic Dyson Dilemma we
so often discuss.
Whether you are using every rock and planet
and star for resources and power, or simply
storing them away, it should look more or
less the same.
A Dark Universe where there are no stars because
they waste energy and indeed inhibit processing
speed, that’s the very reason you consider
migrating to the galactic rim, because galaxies
have a lot more heat in them than the intergalactic
void on account of all the bright stars illuminating
it and all the collisions going on.
Nor are those resources static, they are getting
used up while you wait.
So by default such a civilization, before
it goes to sleep, ought to spread over its
galaxy and grab everything to store it securely
for the aeons to come, as they’ll actually
get to those lower temperatures faster by
doing so and ensure more energy and resources
to use when that time comes.
That’s a fatal kill to the Hypothesis right
there - we would notice what is effectively
a K3 civilization with the lights out.
But there’s also our second flaw, which
is that you have to worry about alien civilizations
arising and taking the galaxy while you sleep.
It does no good to wait to harvest space,
if you wake up and find somebody else already
has, and even if you had all the resources
you want, that doesn’t mean that they do.
You could leave triggers in place to wake
up, or more likely just keep at least some
of your civilization awake or just slowed
down, but you would have to deal with that
new civilization in some way, and even if
its a peaceful accord to divide up resources,
all those leftover ungathered resources are
presumably spawning new civilizations you’d
need to wake up and deal with too.
Then there’s our third, which is exclusivity.
We don’t know that every species will converge
toward this just because it seems logical,
and more to the point, we shouldn’t assume
every member of a species does.
That’s just as important for any exclusivity
issue with the Fermi Paradox, not just “Will
all species do this?” but “Will every
piece of their civilization feel the same?”.
A trillion aliens in an empire who all believe
it’s wrong to contact a primitive species
might not do so, but it only takes a handful
of them, maybe even just one, to send a hello
signal or maybe even visit in a ship.
Similarly, most of a planet’s inhabitants
might feel colonizing space is wrong, but
if some faction is very expansionist and does
so, in a few centuries they won’t be a small
minority anymore, but the true new civilization
of which the non-expansionists are a tiny
minority of antiques.
So if 99% of a civilization goes to sleep
while 1% does not, and instead goes around
colonizing, it will be only a millennium or
two before that sleeping 99% has become just
1% of some vast new empire, and millions or
billions of years later, just some forgotten
relic.
On astronomical timelines any pro-growth section
of a civilization will utterly erase no-growth
sections of it, all things being equal.
So on first inspection, the Aestivation Hypothesis
seems dead on arrival.
Indeed, in its default form, it mostly is.
However, the Lovecraftian title of the paper
nagged at my mind, and I started thinking
about some of the other Late Filters we’ve
discussed.
Late Filters being solutions to the Fermi
Paradox which hit a civilization after they’ve
reached our stage, like killing yourself off
by artificial intelligence or inventing a
brainwashing technique that a unified empire
uses to discourage colonization so as to ensure
they create no external threats, or a convergence
to a hive mind that does the same, never breaking
itself up to colonize far away where communication
lag time would prevent the extension of that
mind and again create potential external threats.
Let me talk about that galactic harvesting
though really quick.
I say harvest everything now because it gets
you maximum energy, but in truth, if you’ve
got a civilization with the tech and inclination
to use black holes for energy, not all that
much is lost by stars burning, and it does
take a lot of effort to acquire it all now.
If you were locked into the idea of having
a static population of, say, a billion minds,
all kept near at hand to avoid serious mutation
from the normal, creating more and sending
them out around the galaxy is potentially
spawning enemies.
Over time, those galaxies in the local group
bound to us gravitationally will all fall
together without losing much mass to radiation
and collapse into various black holes.
You’d still have to go retrieve them or
set up shop around them, but as we discussed
in Black Hole Farming, in such eras you are
already running so slow that while it takes
thousands of years for a signal to reach between
two such spots, it would seem like real time.
That epoch is so long that even running at
such slow speeds you will experience a total
subjective time that makes the entire lifetime
of the current Universe seem like an eye blink,
so it doesn’t matter to you.
I pictured thousands of black holes scattered
across the remnants of the galaxy, each home
to either a civilization or a single supermind
slowly experiencing a near eternity but able
to speak to each other in what seemed no delay
at all.
Now that doesn’t help with alien civilizations
arising and taking the resources, but let’s
consider another scenario.
It’s billions of years ago and they are
the first on the galactic scene, these Old
Ones.
Ethics vary and we’ll say they are rather
repugnant in that purist and genocidal kind
of way, but they firmly believe their civilization
is essentially perfect and should tolerate
no threats or distorted imitations.
They know that if they go out and colonize
the galaxy those splinter civilizations will
likely eventually become every bit as alien
as actual aliens.
You don’t trust anything smart enough, be
it one of your own or some AI you’ve made,
to go harvest the galaxy and bring it back,
so anyone you send out is either dialed down
to near-stasis, experiencing virtually no
time at all, or too dumb to do much.
No self-replicating machines or clever members
of your species sent out to harvest the stars
and decide to keep resources for themselves
while they are busy, awake and harvesting
and contemplating.
So you opt to only gather up resources from
nearby, to live only nearby, and to mostly
sleep until the day comes that you can enjoy
the benefits of super-slow, super-cool, ultra-efficient
computing, where anyone sent out would be
forced to experience time slowly anyway, because
it’s the nature of such ultra-cool computing
that you actually have to wait a long time
between each use of circuit so it can cool
back down again on its own.
Nobody left around is thinking that fast,
with a huge energy penalty paid to run hotter,
and communication lag time is eliminated by
everyone experiencing time slowly.
Which helps with isolation mutation.
Yes, you are losing a lot of resources to
time marching on and stars burning out or
getting ejected from the galaxies, but not
that much and if it means you maybe only get
a tenth the total resources in the end, but
only need a billion people to gather them,
you are still ahead of the game, proportionally,
by a hundred million fold.
To them, the Old Ones, it doesn’t matter
how many resources their civilization has,
but how many each of them individually gets
and can use, and having to share with or fend
off many others is not beneficial to that
cause, because all they really care about
is how long, subjectively, they can experience
life.
It doesn’t really matter if this is a billion
individuals, or a hive of a billion minds,
or a thousand supercomputers, or even just
one big one, just so long as all share the
motivation of their continued existence for
as long as possible as the most important
thing, and that any threat to that must be
eliminated.
That’s important because it gives them the
motivation to eliminate such threats.
To kill off any emerging new species elsewhere
or to shoot down their own colony ships from
deviants seeking to colonize the galaxy.
They police the galaxy with very stupid probes,
ones just smart enough to detect civilizations
emerging anywhere in the Local Group of galaxies.
Then they deal with them.
There’s many ways to do this, we’ll discuss
some in the upcoming Interstellar Warfare
episode, but maybe the probe carries a copy
of one of their minds forced to sleep, who
can only fully awaken when it either gets
a go ahead signal from home, or the conditions
of that discovered civilization reach a specific
marker where if it waits longer it won’t
be able to handle them.
Thus decreasing the risk of a rogue agent
doing its own thing.
Any interstellar-capable vessel could easily
wipe us out right as we are now, all on its
own, it’s inherent to either the power levels
needed for interstellar trips or the automation
needed.
But the key notion is they don’t want that
sleeping giant to wake up until the last minute
or one drop more than needed because they
view it as just as nearly as big a threat
as an enemy.
They don’t want it experiencing, thinking,
contemplating, and acting far from home, going
native to protect the locals after monitoring
them for eons or deciding to set itself up
as a new rival civilization.
So instead of the classic genocide approach
of hitting everyone as early as possible,
of even colonizing every planet so nothing
new and alien can arise there, they have motive
to wait until right now.
Such a probe might not even have a mind, simply
making itself easy to find and includes flawed
blueprints for a Suicide Pact technology,
one that seems an amazing find, like a new
power source, but kills your entire civilization
if you use it.
In that way, you ensure all threats, or the
need to share the galaxy is eliminated with
the minimum risk, and you still keep yourself
big enough that you can go wake up and attack
them en masse if Plan A fails.
You are already at the technological limit,
you wouldn’t go to sleep until you were
pretty confident you figured out every cool
and useful bit of science and technology that
could help you be more efficient and safe.
And you probably did gather up a lot of resources
too, just not the whole galaxy.
You might just live in one system, a single
Dyson Swarm, or even one planet, though it
might be a gigantic Birch Planet made by cannibalizing
hundreds of thousands of nearby systems with
automated mining.
So if your preventive measures fail you can
still wake up and attack with a giant and
super-advanced armada, even if they might
have had tens of thousands of years to grow
and advance themselves.
This doesn’t necessarily require a particularly
Lovecraft-flavored set of aliens but it does
bring to mind, ancient, selfish, sleeping,
and cruel ones.
But it gets around exclusivity by requiring
only that they be the first on the scene.
I wouldn’t qualify it as a strong Fermi
Paradox solution, it does not really pass
the Dyson Dilemma test for explaining an absence
of K3 civilizations in the local Supercluster,
just the Local Group, unless such behavior
was more the norm than an exception that just
arrived on the scene before anyone with a
different mindset.
However, I can’t dismiss it as an implausible
one either, this hybrid of Aestivation Hypothesis
and the more classic space opera notion of
old and cold aliens waking up occasionally
to slaughter the galaxy, as with the Reapers
from Mass Effect and many other stories.
That’s what is so potent about Cthulhu Mythos
even a century after it was written, not just
the classic dangerous sleeping predator hiding
in its dark cave and emerging occasionally
to hunt us, but that emerging awareness of
just how huge and old the Universe is.
I tend to think that’s why Lovecraft was
not very successful as a writer while he lived,
but is one of the best known authors nowadays
and is to the scifi horror subgenre what Tolkien
is to fantasy, or Asimov is to robot-centered
scifi.
We grew up in a world that few saw then, but
we know all too well now.
Robots aren’t a novelty like in Asimov’s
time, and the vast age and scope of the Universe,
with possible ancient alien civilizations
hanging around it, isn’t something that
only was really understood by a handful of
astronomers and hadn’t sunk into public
awareness yet.
We know how old and big space is, we know
that the chemistry for life ought to be fairly
common, and we know that the basic evolutionary
mechanics of biology should tend to favor
species that are fairly pre-disposed to seek
to survive and grow their numbers, and their
absence, and the Fermi Paradox, worries us.
I think that Lovecraft was the first writer
to really tackle that feeling, and needless
to say his writing doesn’t encourage optimism.
I disagree with that fear his works are best
known for but it does absolutely make for
a great read, or listen, and has inspired
countless authors and novels, from our book
of the month a few months back, Alastair Reynolds’
“Revelation Space”, to the master of modern
horror, Stephen King, who cites him as his
inspiration, and says no one has yet surpassed
Lovecraft at tales of dread and horror.
Of all his works, I’ve picked “At the
Mountains of Madness” as our book of the
month because it also captures that feeling
of exploration too, and we get to see humanity’s
brighter side as an expedition challenges
themselves reaching out to explore new realms,
something we see as a common part of some
of the best horror in that time whether it
was expeditions exploring the Antarctic or
old tombs and pyramids, questing for ancient
knowledge.
There happen to be many versions of the story
in abridged, unabridged, and radio drama forms,
or in anthologies, one of the nice things
about the classics, so I’d recommend searching
through them for the narrator you like the
most as Audible does let you play a sample
of each performance before grabbing it.
You can pick up a FREE copy of “At the Mountains
of Madness” today, just use my link in this
episode’s description, Audible.com/Isaac
or text promo code isaac to 500-500 to get
a free book and 30 day free trial, and that
book is yours to keep, whether you stay on
with Audible or not.
I won’t say you are going to love it, as
it is horror story charting an expedition
to a strange and barren place, but if you
don’t enjoy it, you can swap it out for
another at any time.
Next week we’ll be doing our own expedition
to a strange and barren place, as we return
to our Outward Bound series to look at colonizing
Alpha Centauri, and we’ll discuss both interstellar
colonization and the special problems of binary
and multiple star systems.
From there, we’ll move back home, to look
at how we can go about building up the orbital
infrastructure we’ll need to colonize space,
and three weeks from now we’ll take another
look at space warfare, and consider the special
problems with doing that at the interstellar
scale.
And lastly, a month from now we’ll return
to the Civilizations at the End of Time series,
for Dying Earth, and what civilizations will
do when the planet and sun they’ve always
depended upon begins to perish.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
