This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. Get 
access to my streaming video service, Nebula,  
when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
Colonizing Space might be about a future beyond 
Earth, but it may also save Earth… or doom it.
 
So it’s Turkey Day here on SFIA, and since 
Thanksgiving is always on a Thursday and so  
are our episodes, I tend not to do Thanksgiving 
Holiday Specials like I sometimes do with other  
holidays. Thanksgiving is one of my favorites 
– partially because it's an excuse to stuff  
yourself to the gills with food and friends and 
family, but also because it encourages folks to  
survey their life and think about their good 
fortunes rather than challenges and hardships,  
and as any channel regular can probably 
guess, I’m a glass-half-full sort of person.
 
So we had the topic come up on one of our episode 
polls of how space colonization can save Earth.  
When I saw the topic idea I thought, ‘what do we 
mean by “save” Earth’. A lot of times saving Earth  
and saving humanity are synonymous, other times 
they’re unrelated or the exact opposite thing,  
saving one at the expense of the other. 
And I thought that’s a good group of topics  
as it’s a chance to look at not just current 
or potential threats we might need saving from,  
but to review how technology has often helped us 
with seemingly inevitable cataclysms or problems.  
However I feel like we have to also look 
equally at the argument that technology,  
and even space colonization, is not what 
can save Earth but potentially doom it. 
 
I’ve heard folks say that for every problem 
technology solves it invents another,  
and indeed that’s probably conservative, but I 
feel that is like griping about how every time you  
answer a question, two more spring to mind like 
the mythic Hydra. Every time I learn something new  
I come up with new questions needing 
answers and yet I’m hardly running in a  
hamster wheel or playing a zero sum game.  
No matter how much I learn about science and  
the world, I’m still as confused as I ever was, 
but now I’m confused on a higher level and about  
more important things. I think most of us feel 
the same. Our curiosity is a hunger never sated  
but unlike glutting yourself at the Thanksgiving 
Dinner Table, asking questions and getting answers  
seems to have few downsides. Except possibly a 
tendency toward feelings of existential dread.  
Indeed if technology does often raise new 
problems, they’re frequently existing ones we  
were just unaware of, or had fatalistically 
accepted as just being part of life.
 
So I want to emphasize that today’s topic is 
not just how space technologies can help, but  
the colonization itself. It goes without saying 
that if research in space leads to us discovering  
a cheap and abundant clean energy supply, space 
exploration helped Earth and its inhabitants,  
but that’s rather like saying that Dark Matter 
research on the South Pole helps us, then arguing  
that colonizing Antarctica will save Earth. One 
argument against pushing out to other worlds is  
that while the experience might help us learn some 
new tricks, most of the things that help Earth  
won’t physically come from space, just technology 
developed in the process that in many cases would  
require little to no actual space colonization. 
And there is some truth to that assertion. I  
wouldn’t really call low-orbital space around 
Earth ‘space-space’. Virtually every satellite  
we have is closer to Earth than most countries are 
to their neighbors, and a few hundred kilometers  
of altitude to get outside of atmospheric drag 
isn’t really colonizing space away from Earth  
anymore than building on the bottom of the ocean 
or another continent is. Cell towers on very large  
mountains or helium balloons holding cell antennas 
or solar cells or wind turbines aren’t really  
space colonization and many of our needs that 
we associate to space colonization are satisfied  
just fine by a Low Earth Orbital presence. 
As an example, we have to worry about defending  
ourselves from asteroids and that is probably 
cheaper and easier if you have expanded around the  
whole solar system, but also adds other places you 
need to monitor and protect. And realistically,  
detectors and defenses in orbit of Earth are 
just fine, a big rock can come at us now but  
we do already have the technology for detection 
and elimination, just not the infrastructure,  
and I’d be hard-pressed to justify spending money 
on missions away from near-Earth as benefitting  
improvements to that. It’s basically just a 
matter of bigger and cheaper eyes and guns.
 
There are definitely benefits for humanity to get 
away from being only on Earth, with literally all  
our eggs in this one basket, but there’s really no 
natural disaster that could get us before we could  
throw some colony ships together, that a decently 
good orbital detection grid wouldn’t spot many  
years out. Even some dinosaur killer asteroid 
is no threat to humanity’s continued existence,  
just our civilization and most of our 
people, and a colony ship doesn’t save  
humanity from either of those any better 
than some super-bunker on the planet would,  
indeed the latter would likely let you save way 
more people and have the planet back up to a good  
healthy ecosystem afterward, long before any 
interstellar colony ship got to a new planet,  
let alone terraformed it. It will always be easier 
to re-terraform Earth than any other world, even  
ignoring that all our manpower and 
industry is already here to help.
 
Now some minor planet a hundred kilometers across 
might change that equation, as might a rogue  
black hole entering our solar system, but it is 
phenomenally unlikely either could sneak up on us,  
or rather any civilization with sufficient tech 
and space capacity that they could contemplate  
sending a colony ship out. We should have seen 
such things centuries before they would arrive,  
and it’s statistically improbable that either 
would occur within the next million years,  
let alone the next couple centuries we need to 
develop our techs and orbital infrsatructure.
 
This leaves us with tons of other man made 
calamities, from doomsday devices to climatic ruin  
or rogue artificial intelligence and many more, 
but the thing about most of those is that having  
another planet doesn’t help with them that. An 
artificial intelligence that wants all humans dead  
can go get them on Mars or Alpha Centauri too, 
it presumably has equal or better spaceship  
technology than the civilization back on Earth 
that did that colonizing and which it defeated. 
 
Of course AI or Aliens aren’t the only threat 
to humans, and the other problem with colonizing  
space is that new colonies will be full of the 
best known threat to humanity – which is to say,  
other humans. Most channel regulars would know 
that I wouldn’t consider an alien invasion of  
Earth to be terribly likely, I’m skeptical of 
there being any spacefaring alien civilization  
in this galaxy or even supercluster, and it would 
be statistically improbable that one did exist,  
was conquest or genocide oriented, and just 
happened to pop up now rather than say a million  
or billion years ago or anytime in between. 
So I’d rate the odds of Earth being invaded  
or blown up right now as astronomically 
slim. However, show me 100 colonized worlds  
and I’ll show you at least 100 potential plausible 
invaders. I live in a country that’s only a couple  
hundred years old and only has two neighbors and 
we’ve invaded and been invaded by both, and we’re  
traditionally friendly with both too. We were also 
principally colonized from a country we’ve been  
to war with twice since then, fought alongside 
many more times, and there’s nothing unusual  
about any of that, quite to the contrary. 
Now you’re probably saying to yourself,  
“Gee Isaac, I thought you were going to 
tell us how colonizing space can save Earth”  
and it’s a good point to remember, saving Earth 
and saving humanity are not the same thing. Indeed  
the biggest threat to Earth in the short term 
is humanity, kill all of us off and the planet  
will probably do okay without us – at least 
until a bigger asteroid comes by and hits us,  
or a supervolcano does, or until the oceans all 
boil off in about a billion years, or until the  
Sun dies off and burns the planet to ash in about 
5 billion years. Or a supernova or gamma ray burst  
gets us. Or I’m wrong about aliens and their 
armadas are en route. A key notion there too  
is that there may indeed be alien civilizations in 
our galaxy, but they clearly aren’t aggressively  
colonizing the place or super-numerous, so the 
overwhelming majority of planets out there are  
dead. Radiation-scarred airless worlds whose 
only water is bound in ice or under ice. 
 
Many may have held life too, it is entirely 
plausible that life did evolve on Mars or Venus  
and just couldn’t make progress on those worlds 
before Mars’s atmosphere evaporated and Venus  
turned into a suburb of hell. We don’t know nearly 
enough about other worlds and life originating on  
them to speak with any sort of authority as to 
what is normal, but I’d say the best guess right  
now is that most planets and big moons never 
get close to allowing life to form on them  
and most of the ones that do; never get a chance 
for that life to get to where we are before that  
world dies. These are the Great Filters we look 
at in the Fermi Paradox series, things that lower  
the odds of life being out there and chatty, 
that make the Universe fairly devoid of life.
 
We want to establish that point because there is 
a habit of folks to look at humanity and Earth and  
say it would be better off without us and that 
we’d just wreck any other worlds we went to,  
and I think we have to acknowledge that this 
viewpoint isn’t hard to understand. Personally,  
I hate when folks refer to humanity like it was a 
swarm of locusts or a virus or how Earth would be  
better off without us. Those sorts of remarks 
resonate with many folks because they have a  
kernel of truth, but they leave out the threats 
that humanity could protect the Earth from, like  
asteroids and natural ecological collapse that 
more than likely end life on many other planets.  
But we can bring life to those planets and 
ones where life could never have formed. 
 
For my part I think we’ll master genetics, 
ecology, and geoengineering before the end of this  
millennium, but if we didn’t, then yes the planet 
would be almost inevitably screwed and then we  
can’t even colonize other worlds, even ones that 
had life, oceans, and oxygen-rich atmospheres.  
So we can’t export those specific kinds 
of problems because we first require the  
knowledge and tech that fixes and avoids such 
problems, in order to export them to new worlds. 
 
And in the balance of that, a planet without 
intelligent technological life is still thoroughly  
doomed. I don’t like to anthropomorphize, 
even though we did an episode on sentient  
planets not long back, but if one does take the 
perspective that it’s humanity versus nature  
it’s probably important to keep in mind 
that the best evolutionary survival strategy  
in the long term is expansion from your native 
ecosystem to the world at large, to be safe from  
local calamity or changes, and the same holds 
for getting off your homeworld to new worlds.
 
We may be the first species to truly imperil life 
on Earth, but Earth’s been threatened before many  
times and is inevitably doomed for a variety 
of reasons having nothing to do with humans,  
though humans might be able to prevent or 
delay it. Only technology can extend its life,  
and the species on it, and could potentially 
extend that from millions and billions of years  
to trillions and quadrillions and beyond. See our 
episode Dying Earth and the rest of Civilizations  
at the End of Time series for how to do that. For 
my part, I tend to see the human species that the  
Earth gave birth to like I see unruly children 
who tax their mother’s health and energy now but  
can also take care of her health in her old age, 
not some nasty parasite or disease killing her.
 
Now none of this changes that the biggest current 
threat to Earth is her unruly children. I think  
if you said there was a 1% chance humanity would 
wreck this planet in the next thousand years, most  
folks would say those are very optimistic odds.
We do not need space colonization to save Earth  
from ourselves though, indeed a million colonized 
worlds in the galaxy or a trillion inhabited  
O’Neill Cylinders in a Dyson Swarm around our 
Sun just increases the number of researchers  
able to develop doomsday devices and the 
number of folks who might have motive,  
means, and opportunity to use them.
Critically we are demonstrating that  
there’s not too much about colonizing space that 
really hurts or helps us in protecting our own  
ecology and climate here on Earth. We can say that 
terraforming technologies developed for Mars or  
the Moon or Venus might help with our own problems 
here, and that is a decent and valid argument,  
but there is likely to always be more 
interest and funding for fixing an Earth-based  
environmental issue than some problem 
on a new and sparsely colonized planet.  
Colonizing the Moon or mining near Earth Asteroids 
gives us an ample supply of raw materials like  
aluminum or iron we can make solar shades and 
mirrors out of, without paying the orbital  
cost of getting things up from Earth. 
That may make or break those sorts of  
climate engineering options from an economic 
perspective but my guess is that it would not.  
The Moon’s a great place to mine materials for 
building up in space but we probably could opt  
to use a mass driver or some other cargo-heavy 
launch system for getting something like solar  
shades up to orbit from Earthside mining and 
manufacturing, and ditto power satellites. 
 
Earth itself already contains roughly the same 
material resources as all the other rocky planets,  
moons, and asteroids in our solar system combined. 
The reality is Earth will never really be reliant  
on off-world raw materials, though they may indeed 
be cheaper in some cases than extracting from,  
say, Earth’s Mantle, which is a gold mine 
far closer than the Moon or any asteroid,  
and which has vastly more of it. We also have 
to keep in mind that the Moon has only about an  
80th of Earth’s overall mass, and the asteroid 
belt in its entirety is roughly to the Moon  
what the Moon is to Earth. Very little material 
there, just way more than we currently use.  
Virtually all of Earth’s wealth is buried 
under kilometers of rock, hard to reach,  
but it's very debatable if hundreds of thousands 
of kilometers of space to the Moon or hundred of  
millions of kilometers to the Asteroid Belt is 
really easier to travel simply for being empty.
 
Again though, lunar and asteroid resources are 
a big advantage for Orbital infrastructure,  
it is just a bit hyperbolic to say access to 
those resources alone will save the planet.  
Though in this case it might be literally accurate 
since it limits our need to carve out big chunks  
of the planet to make stuff. We don’t really 
want to strip-mine our planet, but you can use  
whatever cheap and dirty method you want for 
mining some godforsaken dead rock in space.  
Mass importation of raw materials to Earth 
itself, rather than orbital space, when we’re  
talking about quantities representing significant 
fractions of a planet, is really only something  
we want to do if contemplating building a 
Ecumenopolis on the extreme scale or a Matrioshka  
Shellworld, which admittedly is probably two of 
the more likely scenarios for Earth’s future.  
Being the center of an expanding galactic empire 
potentially opens some doors for extreme wealth  
and resources for enhancing our planet, 
many of which could save it or help do so.
 
So basically, you only need external raw materials 
for Earth where you’re building or lighting whole  
new layers of the planet. In such a case you 
really need to be able to move light and heat  
around at a grand scale too and you really need 
that Orbital or Lagrange network of mirrors,  
shades, and giant anti-asteroid guns for blowing 
up asteroids. Or blowing up offensive ships,  
mostly the latter too as a high-tech civilization 
doesn’t regard incoming asteroids as threats,  
except to the stability of their commodities 
market, they just grab it and mine it for a  
reduced fuel bill. Even something like a rogue 
black hole headed toward Earth is manageable by  
a sufficiently muscular civilization. Of course, 
they need a space based infrastructure to do that,  
and one heck of one to handle 
rogue planets and dead stars.
 
Critical notion, to save Earth you have to 
either save humanity or replace it with some  
other technologically capable and ambitious 
option, and I wouldn’t wager on an AI thinking  
Earth or its ecosystem was any more valuable than 
we do. It might, reality is not some scifi cliché  
where a machine intelligence automatically 
despises biology and ecology and wants to  
turn the whole planet into computer banks 
or disassemble it. Nonetheless the planet  
shouldn’t be gambling any successor to humanity 
is going to do better in that steward role.
 
So fundamentally, saving Earth is about saving 
humanity and here’s where we get to why Space  
Colonization is really necessary. Locked on one 
planet without room to grow or some new frontier  
to fight, we probably end up in some zero-sum 
battle amongst ourselves of a very Malthusian  
Nature. Now you can keep improving efficiency 
locally – decreasing how much resources it takes  
to support a person, miniaturizing your technology 
and even your people – and we will examine that  
scenario from a Fermi Paradox perspective 
next week, but at a core level if everyone is  
struggling for control of a set amount resources 
in a set place we all already live on, it probably  
does not make for a friendly environment. 
Now on the flipside of that, a humanity stuck  
with only one world might be very motivated to 
carefully protect it and efficiently utilize it,  
and I do think its overly cynical to 
assume we wouldn’t be able to act that way,  
but I suspect I’m in a minority on that view 
and even I wouldn’t call it a guarantee we  
would behaves ourselves, just decent odds.
Yes, utilizing the raw materials of the Moon and  
Asteroid Belt can help us build a robust orbital 
infrastructure. Yes, that permits climate and  
weather control via sunshades, and economically 
too. Yes, it opens up the doors to energy and  
resource abundance that eliminates the need to 
devote lands to strip mining, desertification,  
deforestation, or even biofuel production and 
solar farms. Indeed as we saw in Space Farming,  
that might turn out to be viable far enough 
down the road, and energy abundance and better  
automation allow options for farming that 
let us use less farmland to do far more,  
even opening the doors to Vertical Farming. 
Saving land from needing to be cleared for farms.
 
Opening up new worlds to explore and settle, or 
to build from scratch as orbital space habitats,  
will probably improve our skills at ecology, 
genetics, and geoengineering even if we don’t  
absolutely need to travel to new worlds 
to improve those skills with earth and  
its needs right here. They give us places 
for people to grow in and to compete for,  
so not every bit of human ambition is being 
exercised here on Earth, complete with clashes,  
clashes that can involve titanic 
resources and doomsday devices.  
You can send a lot of your folks to 
new worlds who need that challenge,  
that chance to climb and forge a place for 
themselves in civilization and in history books.
 
It also doesn’t pay dividends 
to hold off on investing,  
we may not need some vast interplanetary empire 
to build a good asteroid shield but it’s a heck  
of a lot easier to do both in tandem. All 
the research, funding, basic infrastructure,  
and so on for both those things is very related 
and if a devastating asteroid does come down  
toward Earth in the year 2300, I’d give us 
much better odds of seeing and handling that,  
and more easily, if we have a hundred outposts and 
colonies scattered around the solar system than if  
all we have is a satellite grid. Same, it is so 
much easier to deal with even natural disasters  
like Supervolcanoes if you’ve got that huge space 
infrastructure, and it also means you have folks  
with resources safely located off-planet, who 
can come help us out if things go very badly,  
like friendly countries helping another that 
just got smashed by an earthquake or hurricane.  
And that orbital infrastructure does permit 
weather control to prevent hurricanes.
 
Now each of those outposts is the seed of a 
future rival, and potentially a hostile threat.  
We shouldn’t fool ourselves into thinking we can 
just ignore that or that those opposed to space  
colonization aren’t going to bring that up. This 
is one of the reasons we’re focusing as much on  
the flaws in the arguments for space colonization 
we often hear, as saying what benefits it brings,  
because we might all be pro-space but there are 
going to be folks who aren’t and who bring up  
good or resonating points. Each of those little 
seeds is one more place that might trade with us,  
that might invent some new wonder, might help 
us in an hour of need, and might be home to our  
great-great-grandchildren, but also home to some 
berserk AI recklessly-made, far from scrutiny,  
or doomsday device, or greedy or fanatical 
faction hoping to screw us. Though they also  
might be the rebels that came and saved us from 
some global police-state dictator or such too,  
either serving as havens for those escaping 
it or coming back with a fleet to topple it. 
 
Those seeds are just seeds, probably not any 
better or worse than what we sow here on Earth,  
except they are far more numerous and also 
not just humans. As we saw in episodes like  
Evacuating Earth, Exporting Earth, or Seed Ships, 
we don’t really need that much more technology to  
be able to send out the sum totality of all 
lifeforms on Earth and set them up elsewhere,  
to grow and change and grow some more 
on new worlds or around new suns. 
 
If Earth is not synonymous with humanity, I think 
we could say it is synonymous with its biosphere,  
I don’t think folks really worry about 
saving Earth and think about protecting  
the Mantle or Core, they mean the life on 
it, and driving out to space saves those,  
by transplanting them elsewhere, but also by 
giving us all the knowledge and resources we  
need to keep Earth a protected planet and do 
so long after our Sun, or any natural sun,  
burns out. And if something happens to Earth 
anyway, then most of what we really mean by Earth,  
us and its other lifeforms and its history, can 
be saved in some way, by placing its descendants  
on ten billion other worlds, even if one 
of those comes and destroys us one day.
 
It's not that Earth’s future – or humanity’s – is 
guaranteed by making our way out into the galaxy,  
it’s that fundamentally, if we don’t, 
the only guarantee about our future  
is that it comes with an expiration date.
 
So one of the things we were focusing on 
today and a couple weeks back in our Solar  
System Colonization Strategies episode is 
that while most of us involved in the show,  
watching or creating, are huge fans of space 
exploration for its own sake, that is not  
universal and probably wouldn’t be the major drive 
for exploration or colonization by everyone else.  
I did get reminded by a lot of folks after 
that episode that while that’s probably true,  
the sheer excitement and enthusiasm for the 
Apollo missions all around the globe is also  
an important reminder that curiosity and a love of 
exploration is an almost universal human trait.
 
Incidentally, speaking of the Apollo Missions, 
I wanted to give a shout out to Astronaut turned  
Author Chris Hadfield’s new Book, the Apollo 
Murders, and congratulate him on that becoming an  
almost instant international best seller. He’s 
my favorite canadian astronaut in large part  
for all his efforts to make life on the Space 
Station interesting and transparent to all of us,  
I’ve frequently used footage of him in our 
episodes doing just that. I’ve gotten to chat  
with him recently in regard to future writing 
projects of his, and since it’s Thankgsiving  
it’s a good chance to say that one of the things 
I’m thankful for is meeting all the amazing folks  
and having all the fascinating conversations 
I’ve gotten as a result of producing this show.  
If you are a Hadfield fan, he also has a 
video - Miniverse - over on Curiositystream.
 
As you know, I often write episodes way out, and 
have been doing our January episodes of late,  
and those have been on topics like revitalizing 
project orion - the spaceships driven by nukes  
- and the feasibility of terraforming Mars with 
nukes, and writing those and coming back to finish  
up this episode made me think “How Nuclear Bombs 
can save Earth” might be an amusing topic too,  
so I thought we would do it as a short addendum 
to today’s episode over on Nebula, and maybe  
expand it down the road into its own episode. 
That is one of the thing I like about Nebula,  
I don’t really have to worry about if additional 
episodes or segments would screw up our channel’s  
viewership via Youtube’s arcane algorithms, and 
another thing I’m thankful of is just how much  
Nebula has grown since about a dozen of 
us decided to give it a whirl. I’m pretty  
sure our episode the Paperclip Maximizer was 
the first Nebula Original to premiere too.  
And none of that would have been possible without 
all the loyal fans of those shows helping fund the  
experiment and putting up with the early clunky 
user interfaces and lag while those got improved.  
You all made Nebula possible. And also thanks to 
Curiositystream, which in addition to sponsoring  
a ton of our episodes has been giving out free 
access to Nebula for joining up with them. 
 
As always you can subscribe to Nebula all 
by itself but why not get both Nebula and  
CuriosityStream, the home of thousands 
of great educational videos like Chris  
Hadfield’s Miniverse? And all the great content 
over on Nebula from myself and many others,  
like our extended edition of today 
discussing how nukes can serve earth.  
And you can get all that for less than $15 by 
using the link in the episode’s description.
 
So that will wrap us up for today, but 
not for the month as we still have our  
Livestream Q&A coming up this Sunday, at 4 
pm Eastern Time. For those who often ask,  
while the focus is on science, yes you can ask 
about scifi too, and based on my notifications  
everyone seems to be really interested in my 
takes on the recent adaptations of the Foundation,  
Dune, and Wheel of Time, so feel free 
to ask about those this weekend.
 
That will take us into December and we will 
start off with a look at how miniaturization  
and digital mind uploading can impact the Fermi 
Paradox, and we will follow that up with a look at  
Upcoming Advances in Material Science on December 
9th. Then we’ll have our Scifi Sunday episode  
on December 12th to look at folks staking and 
jumping claims on asteroid mines and similar. 
 
As always, if you want to get notified about 
those episodes, make sure to hit the subscribe  
button and notifications bell, and if you liked 
this episode, you can hit the like button,  
share it with others, or support the 
show by visiting our website or patreon,  
or any of our social media, all of which 
are linked in the episode description. 
 
From all of us here at SFIA, Happy 
Thanksgiving, assuming you celebrate it,  
thank all of you for making this show 
great, and we’ll see you next week!
