This episode is sponsored by Audible.
In the future humanity may come to reside
on strange new worlds, and likely many will
have lower gravity than Earth.
We may find native life on those worlds or
adapt to them ourselves.
But what would those adaptations be?
There is a fairly common assumption in science
fiction that folks living on low-gravity planets
or on spaceships would tend to grow tall and
willowy while folks on high-gravity worlds
would tend to be squat and muscular.
On initial inspection this seems to make sense.
Trees have evolved to reach up high to get
sunlight, above their neighbors and other
plants, and are limited in height largely
from issues like weight and fluid pumping
which are obviously reduced in lower-gravity,
so it stands to reason they’d be able to
get taller if there was less gravity.
Of course they also need to be strong enough
to resist wind, so where there is more of
that they can’t grow as tall.
When we consider places like Mars, with its
infamous dust storms, we sometimes forget
that those aren’t actually very strong for
the speed the air moves at, since the atmosphere
is so thin.
If the atmosphere is thinner, as we often
expect on low-gravity worlds, this makes it
even easier for a tree to grow tall.
However, thin atmospheres are not a guaranteed
thing on low-gravity worlds, and neither is
a tree a very good analogy for an animal let
alone a human.
Our catalogue of planets besides Earth has
grown massively in recent decades, numbering
a thousand times what it was in my childhood,
but not only are most of the new worlds around
distant suns little more than vague blobs
we know little of, but they are almost all
planets that are vastly more massive than
Earth.
It’s easiest to detect the bigger worlds
after all, because they block more light when
they pass in front of their sun, make their
sun wobble more with their mass, and noticeably
change the gravitational lensing effects when
their sun lenses a more distant star.
But smaller planets may prove far more numerous
when we can better detect them.
And so far we really only have Mars, Venus,
and Mercury to look at in terms of places
with less gravity and obviously none host
any known life.
There are four basic factors that make a planet
keep or lose atmosphere.
High gravity holds it in place, high temperature
boils it off, ionizing radiation zaps it away
a little at a time, and geomagnetic fields
protect it from that ionizing radiation.
But remember that an atmosphere is generally
a mix of several gases, and the high-molecular
weight gases are easier to hold onto than
light ones.
Venus illustrates this very well, because
compared to Earth it’s worse on every one
of these factors—lower gravity, high temperature,
more solar radiation, and no magnetic field—and
yet is has a thicker denser atmosphere than
Earth.
To explain how low gravity works on Venus,
we have Peter, the voice of What If.
What If is a science show here on YouTube
where you explore epic hypothetical scenarios.
Well when low and high molecular weight gasses
are mixed, they reach the same temperature,
but the high weight gasses aren’t moving
nearly as fast.
This means, the escape velocity, which is
the speed needed to break out of a planet’s
gravity well, is the same for any molecule
mass, but far fewer of the slow molecules
are needed to break out of it.
Earth actually loses little bits of elemental
hydrogen and helium to space all the time,
but it manages to hold onto heavier elements
like nitrogen and oxygen.
But Venus has lost those gases and holds onto
much heavier ones like carbon dioxide, sulfur
dioxide, trioxide and some nitrogen.
So in theory, a low-gravity planet could have
a dense atmosphere, but this means it would
have to be composed of heavier gases than
what we have on Earth.
A magnetic field would definitely help keep
the atmosphere in place, but as Venus shows
it’s not completely necessary.
Thanks Peter.
And Folks, make sure to check the link in
the description and subscribe to What If.
Back to low gravity...
Given the timelines involved, a planet that
has developed complex life is probably either
going to have a pretty thick and stable atmosphere
or have long since lost all but a trace of
it.
There’s no real reason it would have a thin
atmosphere compared to Earth and yet be thick
enough to permit surface water.
Moreover, we can’t really assume our solar
system is a good model for this, as our Sun
is bigger than most stars and also rather
stable as these things go.
Many stars will be far more volatile, while
others might have less output in the more
dangerous bands of radiation that would tend
to ionize particles.
For that matter, under lower atmospheric pressure,
water boils at a lower temperature, putting
more water vapor in the air that can be broken
into hydrogen and oxygen and that hydrogen
lost.
Whereas if the atmosphere is higher pressure,
water evaporates at higher temperatures.
You also need more air on low-gravity worlds
to get the same surface pressure due to the
lower gravity.
Pressure is the cumulative result of weight
of air and weight is a function of gravity,
so the same quantity of air on a lower gravity
planet as Earth has would be at a lower surface
pressure.
We would also expect that atmosphere loss
is a bit of a runaway process, as you lose
more and more air it goes faster.
The pressure drops and the oceans evaporate
easier, and particles hit by high-energy particles
can travel farther in the thinner air without
hitting another particle to lose speed, and
so you lose more pressure and lose air faster.
Add to that, hotter planets are nearer their
Sun, and hit by more ionizing particles and
solar wind.
So too, they’re more likely to become tidally
locked and have their metallic inner core
slow down as a result, and it’s those big,
spinning balls of molten metal that generate
those magnetospheres, if that weakens, they
lose air even faster.
So we do indeed have reason to think low-gravity
worlds and hotter worlds will lose air faster
and be less likely to have an atmosphere by
the time life of complexity had developed,
but we also can’t assume that’s a hard
and fast rule.
Large Moons around gas giants might be shielded
in part by the magnetosphere of their massive
parent world, for instance.
Worlds around less volatile suns might get
less pounded by solar radiation and wind.
Planets might get hit more often by comets
bringing more water and other materials in,
and so on.
They will be less likely overall to have thick
atmospheres than bigger worlds, but they are
also likely to vastly outnumber those bigger
worlds, so it may be that the majority of
worlds with oxygen-nitrogen atmospheres are
actually worlds less massive than Earth, simply
by raw numbers.
As I mentioned a moment ago, Venus is hot,
has virtually no magnetosphere, and has slightly
less gravity than Earth, yet possesses a very
dense atmosphere – though much of this is
heavier carbon dioxide.
Beyond not wanting to assume life definitely
needs water to live, or oxygen to breathe,
a world heavy in carbon dioxide might retain
a higher pressure atmosphere while also being
warm farther from its sun, as carbon dioxide
is a greenhouse gas.
Many other permutations of atmospheric composition
are potentially plausible and viable too,
and needless to say this only applies to worlds
with surface oceans and atmosphere, many moons
and lesser planets will have oceans beneath
the layer of ice in which life might originate.
We’ll focus on the liquid water under an
atmosphere case though.
Now this all assumes a natural setup, when
it comes to terraforming worlds we could probably
keep an atmosphere even on our own moon simply
by setting up a powerful magnetic field around
it.
And it’s easy enough to do too, you don’t
need a big ball of spinning molten iron for
this and it’s far easier to simply create
a big solar-powered electromagnet ring around
such a moon or planet, as we discussed doing
in Springtime on Mars.
It’s a big task to be sure, but less than
folks tend to think, it doesn’t require
that much power, and is far easier than trying
to drill down to a core and dump millions
of megatons of atomic bombs down there, as
folks often suggest for Mars.
For comparison, it’s like deciding your
backyard gets too much wind and building a
wall or hanging tarps to block the wind, versus
trying to set off Earthquakes and volcanoes
to make a new mountain arise to block that
wind.
And of course you can always just go the construction
route and cover a world with vast numbers
of domes to hold air in, what we call para-terraforming.
It sounds like quite a project too but it
is tiny compared to actual terraforming.
So too, bringing in the occasional comet to
hit the world, or get detonated right before
hitting to avoid a big impact, allows you
not only to add an atmosphere but refresh
it if it’s leaking a bit too much.
And since it is mostly leaking hydrogen, and
a little bit of helium, the first and second
most abundant materials in the Universe, you’re
hardly in short supply of replenishment sources.
As to oxygen, it is the third most abundant
element in the Universe and most rocky planets
are overflowing in it, tied up in those rocks,
it usually makes up the first or second most
abundant material of those places.
You can easily remove it from those rocks
for your atmosphere and atmospheres are only
a tiny part of the total mass of planets like
Earth anyway.
Needless to say this only is allowed under
artificial circumstances, planets we come
to inhabit with our technology and industry,
though we might imagine any number of interesting
phenomena that might allow it to be natural.
As an example, planets around red dwarf stars,
the most common kind of star, might easily
have their own robust Kuiper Belts or Oort
Clouds full of icy comets, water is ridiculously
common in this Universe due to hydrogen and
oxygen being so abundant, and any such comets
entering in close would have a shorter path
between the frostline where they melted and
impacting the planet, which also takes up
a bigger effective cross-section for collision
in that solar system since it’s more compressed
around that smaller, dimmer star.
So they might get hit by comets much more
frequently and replenish their gases that
way.
Now as to life living there, however it arose,
natural or transplanted, what really is different?
Again it’s likely to have a decently thick
atmosphere or none worthy of note, so we shouldn’t
assume the natives need giant lungs, or that
trees can grow however tall and broad they
want without fear the wind will knock them
over.
What about the critters though?
Are they more tall and willowy from the low
gravity?
Perhaps but we have to ask why they would
get taller.
A tree has a reason to get taller.
Tall is only advantageous in nature because
it makes a critter look more threatening or
reach food that’s higher up, and there’s
a reason we don’t really have as much megafauna
as we used to.
As to thinner bones and less muscle, one might
ask why?
Birds have thinner bones to make them lighter
for flight, though hardly lack in muscle.
That comes at a price of being less sturdy
against blows.
We need thick skeletons to support our mass
and absorb the shock of falling and walking
but also to support us against inertia of
hitting or being hit and inertia is not affected
by gravity, just weight.
Nature also cooked up ways for critters to
get big, like having air pockets in their
bones, as large dinosaurs often had.
Peter, are there any alternatives?
Well, a cool thing you’ll find on a low
gravity planet is that you can have thicker
bones, as well as more muscles compared to
what you might have on Earth.
This is due to your body weighing less.
It will still take effort to alter your enertia
but you’ll weigh a lot less and be able
to carry way more mass.
Heh, think of how cool you’ll look when
you’re at the gym.
We can look at Megafauna in the past who also
benefited from higher oxygen levels.
If we wanted to achieve similar pressure than
we have on Earth we’d need more air, which
would significantly impact the weather, as
well as the biology and chemistry on the planet.
Flight is easier in lower gravity as well.
Though flight mostly has to do with speed
and air density, we could see massive critters
flying about.
Ew, gross.
Since gravity would affect swinging and jumping
as well we could also see a lot more creatures
living in trees, engaged in branch hopping
or even gliding.
These wouldn’t just be tiny little squirrels
either.
The creatures living in these trees could
be massive.
The reason why they aren’t up there right
now is because it’s too dangerous for large
predators to be in up in tall trees, as it’s
too risky for them.
With this low gravity we could also see creatures
who could parachute as well as ones with wings!
However, this low gravity world could hurt
smaller flying creatures, like insects.
These creatures rely on the air being thicker
at small scales which helps for flight and
maneuverability, even in lower gravity.
The new insects we find on a lower gravity
planet would be kind of like dragonflies,
only smaller, or they might be microscopic.
But what would happen to these insects if
we lived on a planet with much higher gravity?
Well you can check out our episode "What if
Earth was as big as the Sun?"
right here.
Back to you Isaac.
That part about bones having air pockets in
them from a moment ago might result in quite
the opposite effect on tree height too, on
higher-gravity worlds.
As we said earlier hydrogen and helium escape
fastest from planets, and gravity really does
play a role in retaining gas.
What’s more a bigger planet is likely to
have a stronger magnetosphere to hold on to
those gases.
Such being the case, we might see higher gravity
worlds featuring tree-equivalents that made
use of biochemistry to separate the lighter
gases from the atmosphere and used internal
bladders of lifting gas to let them grow far
taller, potentially even photosynthetic bladders
as a leaf analogy.
Such plants would still be vulnerable to wind
but they might be able to deflate themselves
in wind and storms then re-inflate.
Of course something like that could have evolved
under any gravity, it really depends more
on if the atmosphere’s composition is rather
spread out in terms of the mass of air particle
types.
Virtually all of our atmosphere is diatomic
nitrogen and oxygen and they are about the
same mass, only a 14% difference, as opposed
to diatomic hydrogen and carbon dioxide, where
the latter masses 22 times as much as the
former.
If it had larger portions of gases that differed
by much in molecular mass, such lifting-gas
approaches to weight might show up, creatures
that were essentially organic blimps that
sucked in the air and retained the lighter
molecules to serve as a lifting gas.
We do after all see it in regard to oceanic
creatures which frequently use air and water
ratio changes to alter their buoyancy.
Indeed it’s possible you might not simply
end up with two ecological layers, ground
and treetop, but an entire biosphere layer
suspended in the air, if that lighter gravity
world was maintaining its atmosphere in large
part from having a big molten core and much
tectonic activity, you might have a good deal
of dust and moisture in the air and organisms
floating up there to maximize light and feed
off those atmospheric contaminants to achieve
both nutrient and buoyancy.
In lower gravity it’s easier for wind to
pick up dirt and soil and loft it into the
air too.
But speaking of dirt, we’re not limited
to going upward either.
Much of our own ecology is beneath the ground,
and is partially limited by the rising pressure
and density of the dirt.
You might have deeper topsoil just from a
reduction in gravity and weight compressing
things.
Such worlds might have far more caves too.
The Moon has many large underground lavatubes,
as probably would many smaller worlds, because
they don’t collapse as easily, and it is
easier to dig through dirt or gravel and shore
up tunnels in lower gravity.
You might have far more burrowing creatures
and far more large caverns as well.
What we’re seeing though is that the gravity
itself, while a major factor in how a world
is setup, still leaves a very broad ranges
of options available.
Taken as a whole, I don’t think we can make
the assumption that critters would evolve
to be skinny and large, though large seems
plausible.
Just in this case large might also be musclebound
brutes carrying a lot of bone.
You might also tend to see more internal storage
too, akin to the camel and its hump of water,
motion still takes energy and is mass-dependent
but a lot of critters spend a lot of their
energy just standing, you burn more calories
standing than sitting or lying down for instance,
and that’s purely a function of weight.
But big also moves slow, even if it’s got
the muscle to run quick, because it’s not
very agile, it’s very hard to turn on a
dime when you’re an elephant after all,
compared to a mouse.
As I said, many of the planets, and most large
moons that we will encounter in the Universe
will be smaller than Earth.
We’d expect to find more worlds with less
gravity than more.
I suspect life, at least surface based land-life,
to be more likely to exist where gravity was
a bit higher but it could be that the larger
number of smaller worlds will make up for
them being less likely to host atmospheres.
But I also mentioned that while we were focusing
on worlds with surface oceans and atmospheres,
we would have a lot of such worlds where the
water was trapped under a layer of ice, places
like Jupiter’s Moon Europa.
Such worlds would be scanty and meager in
their life, there’s just not much energy
to run an ecology without the Sun, but they
may be quite prone to having life develop
regardless.
It’s also a good reminder that our oceans
are affected by gravity too, and not just
tidal forces.
Pressure is a function of weight above you
and that’s lower if gravity is lower, so
you might see quite an expansion in oceanic
layers.
Now, the top thin layer of water where light
can reach abundantly is still where most of
the action would take place, with much beneath
it being those organisms living on debris,
marine snow, descending from that top level.
That might see some interesting adaptations
toward the vertical.
Near the shore we often see plants that grow
on the seafloor, getting nutrients there,
but reach up to the top for light.
Out in the deeper sea things either live on
the bottom without light or up top with light
but little nutrients.
In lower gravity that shore-zone where they
can reach from the seafloor to the top is
expanded as plants can grow taller and reach
from seafloor to surface further from the
shore.
Possibly a great deal as traits that improved
that option would probably be more easily
favored by evolution.
You might see plants growing rather tall in
the sea, moving your coastal ecologies out
much deeper.
However, nutrients that are heavier than water
also sink faster in higher gravity so we might
tend to see more abundant ocean life.
Most of Earth is covered in deep sea, life
is not terribly abundant there compared to
the shores or inland because sunlight is up
at the top and nutrients far below, or scarcely
diffused into the water near the surface.
If it’s easier for nutrients floating in
the water to persist near the top, then more
biomass would arise in those areas away from
the coastline.
Combined with the lower pressure, this might
result in very verdant oceans, potentially
clogged with life on the surface so that you
could literally walk across the water.
Hard to say of course, and this is all very
speculative, but we see a door open to far
more ecological options than we might initially
expect, compared to the usual notion of thin,
dusty, dry worlds of low gravity.
Of course that is very dependent on having
a thick atmosphere and as mentioned earlier,
once one of those begins dissipating it probably
is a bit of a chain reaction, losing air faster
and faster.
Such things would still be on geological timelines,
so life might adapt as the air thinned and
oceans diminished.
Until the early 20th century, we thought Mars
had canals left over from ancient oceans.
And while better telescopes have revealed
that those barely-visible lines were just
surface fissures, it also appears that Mars
did have oceans and an atmosphere, long ago.
Hopefully someday soon, we’ll get to do
some serious excavating and geology there
to see how long ago it was and how quickly
it ended once that atmospheric loss hit critical
tilt.
There’s a lot of books set on Mars of course,
and while modern ones usually focus on us
colonizing it and bringing life there, those
of a few generations back tended to assume
life was already there, but diminishing, that
Mars was dying off.
We see one such example in C.S.
Lewis’s “Out of the Silent Planet”,
the first book in his Space Trilogy, our Audible
Book of the Month.
C.S. Lewis is best known for his classic fantasy
series “The Chronicles of Narnia”, which
along with his friend J.R.R.
Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings helped breathe
life into the emerging fantasy genre.
But over a decade before Narnia he wrote the
Space Trilogy, and its protagonist, Philologist
Elwin Ransom, is said to have been modeled
on Tolkien as an inspiration.
I happened to have gotten an omnibus edition
of the trilogy as a Christmas gift from my
fiancée Sarah, who promptly borrowed it to
read on a trip, leaving me to need to grab
the audiobook version instead, which to be
fair is my preference as I quite prefer listening
to tales anyway.
Unsurprisingly it inspired today’s episode.
While the science is of course dated and never
was C.S.
Lewis’s strong point anyway, the first book
paints a fascinating portrait of the Red Planet
and the life that emerged there, the culture
and language that developed, and the philosophy
of colonization of other worlds.
Audible has an amazing catalog of audiobooks
and Audible members can choose 3 titles every
month: 1 audiobook and 2 exclusive Audible
Originals you can’t hear anywhere else,
including access to news, original audio shows,
and guided fitness programs, and since you
can listen to your audiobooks anywhere on
any device, and seamlessly pick up where you
left off, they’re great for commuting, running
errands, or going to the gym.
You can start listening today with a 30-day
Audible trial.
Choose 1 Audiobook and 2 Audible Originals
absolutely free.
Just visit the link in the episode description,
Audible.com/Isaac, or text “Isaac” to
500-500.
So we have our monthly livestream coming up
this weekend, Sunday March 29th at 4pm Eastern
Time, and then we’ll move into April’s
line up starting with a look at New Technologies
that might be in the cards in the coming decades.
Then two weeks from now we’ll flip that
around, and ask ourselves what things might
be like if Technology came to a stand still,
and what might cause that, in “Technological
Stagnation.”
Don’t forget to check out the video “What
if Earth was as big as the Sun”, over on
What If
and subscribe to their channel
and of course don’t forget to hit the like
button and subscribe to this channel if you
enjoyed today’s episode,
and remember we’ve got our monthly Livestream
coming up this Sunday.
Until then, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
