This episode is sponsored by Audible.
The expansion and evolution of life is not
impeded by the extinction of a species, rather
when one door closes, another opens for someone
new, or something.
Today we’re celebrating our fifth anniversary
here on SFIA, and I thought we’d commemorate
the occasion by revisiting one of our favorite
topics, the Fermi Paradox, and specifically
the line of reasoning we call the Dyson Dilemma
that derives from our discussion of megastructures
in that original episode five years ago.
Wrapped up in the core reasoning of those
ideas is a notion that extinction, while a
popular notion for explaining the Fermi Paradox
and the seeming absence of other civilizations
in the galaxy, often drives life forward faster
rather than stopping the train or ending the
story.
Also to celebrate the occasion, we’ll go
back to our roots with a very long episode,
so grab a drink and a snack, hit the like
and subscribe button, and settle in, as we’ll
be here a while.
Since we just did our 200th commemorative
episode, we’ll skip much celebration this
time, but non-coincidentally the original
episode came out right before my birthday
on September 20th and the second episode sprung
out of a chat I had on New Year’s Eve, birthdays
and new years are good times for introspection
and contemplating the past and planning the
future, and unsurprisingly led me to write
up scripts about humanity’s future.
Our world whirls around the sun and the seasons
change and new stories begin even as chapters
end, and while birthdays and calendar changes
are admittedly rather arbitrary moments in
time, they are a good one for reflection and
deep thoughts.
The concept of extinction is inextricably
linked into this idea too, as most times things
go extinct it’s because something else has
risen up to replace them.
We tend to think of species as being defined
by a specific type of DNA.
However, they’re not a single exact sequence
but a broad zone of similar DNA, and that
zone is often nearly as arbitrary as calendars,
and that’s a good comparison in this context
because a species tends to occupy a distinct
bit of space and time.
In many ways extinction is what drives evolution,
as much as the other way around, but it can
be a troublesome concept when we try to think
of it in terms of species, which is honestly
a bit of hangover term from earlier eras of
knowledge when we didn’t know we were all
related, down from some distant common ancestor
billions of years ago.
Such a time was so incomprehensible to us
that we never even considered the world could
be that old, probably part of the reason our
ancestors - who were quite acquainted with
mutation and breeding - never really contemplated
shared ancestry until we started realizing
just how ancient our world, and our universe
was.
And indeed it’s that very age, it’s sheer
hugeness, and the incomprehensibility of such
times to us at an intuitive level, that I
tend to think causes so much problems contemplating
the Fermi Paradox and it’s myriad proposed
solutions.
But I’m getting ahead of myself.
No organism has identical DNA to another,
not even twins, indeed your own DNA varies
a little from cell to cell and from time to
time as mutation is a constant thing.
In an asexual organism, one that divides into
two, species is an almost meaningless concept
because everything branches like a tree at
that point, never intertwining again.
All those descendants just keep dividing and
mutating and further diverging from one another.
Indeed if we call such an asexually dividing
organism a species then one could argue that
the very first organism, way back in the mists
of early Earth, was a species and we are of
that same species.
We of course have names for categories of
relation above species, like Genus, Family,
Order, Class, Phylum, Kingdom, and Domain
in ascending order, but it stops there because
the category above is just “Life”, and
we only have Earth life to look at, nothing
of extraterrestrial origin.
If we get into sexually reproducing organisms,
who can exchange DNA, then you don’t get
this constant divergence of clades, a group
of organisms of common descent, but an intertwining
of those still genetically similar enough
to reproduce, which we call a species.
That’s a bit blurry too, as for instance
you can get hybrids of species like a lion
and tiger, the liger, but the normal way is
for some prospering species to get two or
more chunks of it fairly isolated from each
other for many generations, so that cross-breeding
shared mutations doesn’t happen much, and
grows less likely to occur or produce viable,
fertile offspring.
That original species is now essentially extinct,
even though its descendants might be quite
numerous and prosperous.
Even without isolation creating distinct branches,
you still eventually have the original species
go extinct, humans a million years from now
– even without technological tinkering – probably
couldn’t breed with us even if nothing earth-shattering
in terms of mutation occurred, like an extra
eyeball or finger.
Though of course with technological tinkering
they probably could, and for advanced civilizations,
even just at our level, genetic mutation really
is no longer a big factor.
We could, if we wished to, keep our basic
gene-template for billions of years, since
DNA printing allows you to store that genetic
data digitally and avoid the equivalent of
copy-fatigue.
We could also of course go all-in on genetic
or cybernetic alterations, and we’ve discussed
all those options before.
Critically though, when we talk about extinction
of high-tech or spacefaring civilizations
we usually mean a total wipe out, rather than
the progressive changes of slow mutation.
Which has a parallel for civilizations too.
Folks like to talk about civilizations or
empires falling, but this usually mirrors
classic extinction, this or that empire moves
its capital or a chunk of it separates off
or allies to a neighbor who conquers part
of it and renames it.
There are exceptions, but they are exceptions,
not the rule, as folks often imply.
It’s very easy to argue that Rome never
really fell, any more than whatever common
ancestors humans had with monkeys and apes
went extinct, as there are almost countless
modern and historical cultures and nations
that claim to be its successor or at least
its descendants, and the city that empire
arose from might have been sacked, but it
had been before and would be again and is
now larger, more populous and more prosperous
than under even the greatest of the old emperors.
So what does all this have to do with the
Fermi Paradox?
And what is the Fermi Paradox?
I usually give an abridged form, that it is
the big question for why, in a Universe so
vast and ancient, we don’t seem to see other
civilizations all over the place.
But there’s some critical assumptions in
there.
One of those is the Dyson Dilemma, an abridgment
of a note I scribbled down on a napkin one
winter morning at breakfast with my friend
Jason, who was a sounding board for a lot
of the concepts on the show.
I rarely mention my friends or family in episodes
to respect their privacy, but it seemed doubly
appropriate to do so today since he had just
started seriously dating a young lady at the
time and they just got married a few weeks
back, congratulations Jason and Christina!
At the time we were continuing a conversation
we had at his place on New Year’s Eve, where
my recent messing around on Youtube to discuss
megastructures had come up and somehow we
ended up discussing aliens and the Fermi PAradox.
I mentioned how if megastructures offered
a vastly more spacious and convenient alternative
to terraforming relatively rare Earth-like
planets, they should naturally progress to
fully englobe a star - a Dyson Swarm, as you
could just keeping adding them as need demanded
and resources permitted.
That even if we did colonize planets around
distant alien suns we’d likely repeat that
process of englobement around them too as
those distant colonies grew and built more
and more of them to use every beam of stray
sunlight.
That even as that was happening, some pioneering
sorts would doubtless decide to go stake a
claim on the next empty solar system and repeat
the process over and over until every star
in the galaxy was fully englobed in Dyson
Swarms.
I noted that these Dysons are quite a dilemma
for the Fermi Paradox.
Not just that we don’t hear from distant
alien civilizations around all those stars
in the night sky, but that we can even see
any of those stars, since they ought to be
shrouded inside a fog-like swarm of orbiting
megastructures sipping at that sunlight.
Essentially that there are no advanced civilizations
we can see - inside our light cone - and thus
probably none closer than a few billion light
years.
As I said I’d been scribbling on napkins
at the time, and tucked them in my pocket,
a habit of mine since my early days studying
physics in college, and I decided to make
another video discussing this Dyson Dilemma
of the Fermi Paradox.
Not long after I decided I really ought to
list all the various solutions to the Fermi
Paradox I knew and did yet another video,
and the rest, as they say, is history.
A light cone by the way is essentially a distance
or volume modified for the time it takes for
light to reach you.
We cannot observe events on Mars more recent
than several minutes ago, because light from
there hasn’t reached us yet to observe,
or at our nearest stars more than several
years ago.
Needless to say light from galaxies millions
of light years away is millions of years old,
so someone could be living there right now.
Now, when you’re talking about swaths of
Dyson Swarms, whole chunks of galaxies going
black, or infrared anyway, you can see something
like that out as far as the effective edge
of the Universe, but out past a few billion
light years, you wouldn’t expect an advanced
civilization to have emerged yet when that
light left.
Regardless, we don’t see any such thing,
near or far, and we could if they existed,
and we have looked.
But you can’t rule out life emerging after
the most recent photons to reach us had left,
so Andromeda, 2 million light years away,
could have some galactic civilization by now,
you can go from primitive tool-using apes
to galactic sprawl in that much time, and
we ourselves probably will do just that in
around that timeline.
The thing is, it’s all a stats game.
A galactic civilization could have formed
in Andromeda a million years ago, and the
light from their expansion just not reached
us yet, but if it were so common our nearest
neighbor had such a civilization within a
million years of our own, then many of the
other galaxies a bit farther away ought to
have one too and one of those ought to be
old enough to be in our light cone, as a few
tens of millions of years is really nothing
on astronomical timelines.
If you double your search distance, that represents
8 times the volume and 8 times the stars or
galaxies on this scale, if you look a hundred
times further out, that’s a million times
more stars and galaxies, and indeed there’s
about a million times more stars in that volume
than in our galaxy, which has hundreds of
billions of them.
Past that distance, where everything is over
a billion years old when we see it, you can
start arguing that the odds of a civilization
has already arisen by then is pretty low,
particularly as you know it has to be pretty
low in the first place if there aren’t tons
of ancient galactic empires nearer.
You don’t see many stars with high metallicity
much older than that, and you aren't likely
to have a lot of large rocky planets like
Earth around stars without high metallicity.
We’re formed out of the same stuff the Sun
was formed out of, but our gravity was too
low to keep all that hydrogen and helium,
leaving only the heavier elements behind.
Go far enough back and you just don’t get
many rocky planets, maybe a few, but again
it is a stats game, if those rare handful
of rocky planets way back could have evolved
life and advanced civilizations, that implies
it’s so easy and likely to happen that we
ought to be swimming in alien empires by now,
many arising before our world even formed.
The farther we look out from Earth, the more
space there is in the distance, but the younger
those galaxies were when they emitted the
photons we see now.
So life is far less probable to be in those
earlier galaxies than it would be now, and
if you go far enough out, vastly less likely,
but the farther you go out, the more places
and hence more chances for civilizations to
have formed, and the quantity will rise far
faster than the probability should drop, until
you get so far away life just isn’t plausible
that early on.
I don’t know if dinosaurs would have evolved
to be a civilization if they hadn’t gone
extinct, they were around as the king of the
hill for around a hundred million years and
didn’t, but if we assumed every galaxy had
formed only a few such species like that around
a hundred million years ago, and only a few,
well that’s a million such examples inside
our light cone that we’d be able to see
if just one of them had built spaceships and
sailed out to new worlds and dyson swarmed
them up, instead of going extinct, presumably
with the help of an asteroid impact.
Go back far enough in time and there just
wouldn’t be any planets to evolve on, but
our planet isn’t even vaguely at the beginning
of the period that rocky worlds started becoming
normal.
And for the first billion years or more life
was on Earth, it didn’t do all that much,
it’s very easy to believe even worlds the
same age as ours might have evolved into complexity
just a couple hundred million years faster
than we did.
Based on what we know of astronomy, and assuming
we’re fairly mediocre as evolution goes,
we just have no reason to think someone couldn’t
have been at the level we’re at now at least
a billion years ago and that would make so
many galaxies candidates that you’d figure
even if very few such civilizations ever went
the Dyson route, we ought to see at least
one.
But we don’t, and it makes so much sense
to follow this strategy that you’d expect
nearly everyone to do so, not a small minority.
After all, you can't climb up Darwin’s ladder
if you aren’t biologically prone to growing
your numbers and that should generally give
you that expansionist leaning.
That’s the extrapolation of the Dyson Dilemma,
that because no one is apparently pursuing
this strategy they probably aren't because
they don’t exist.
Technological civilizations are so darn rare
that you’d have to scour at least millions
of galaxies to find another example of it.
That civilizations will tend to build up around
their stars so much that they occlude it from
view, in visual light anyway, they absorb
that for power and re-emit it as waste heat
in the infrared range.
You and I can see stars, so if anyone lives
there, they aren’t very advanced yet.
There’s some assumptions about how civilizations
work and we’ve also discussed alternative
but equivalent pathways in other episodes,
like how a black hole centered civilization
will still look like a dyson swarm because
they take stars apart via starlifting to feed
them into those black holes, but you can catch
those episodes or the Dyson Dilemma episodes
for details.
As mentioned though, there are a couple of
assumptions there for the Dyson Dilemma.
Beyond assuming that a given civilization
has to desire to grow this way, they have
to have both the capability to do so and not
have the capability to expand in some other,
better fashion.
One example that would break it is if someone
developed a thermodynamics breaking technology,
that let them perfectly recycle waste heat,
which might also obscure them from detectability
by infrared waste heat.
You only expand this way in the first place
because you need more energy and raw materials
if you want to expand, and there’s countless
billions of stars waiting nearby offering
those to you.
Another option then would be the ability to
easily move to parallel Universes, near-infinite
uninhabited clones of their original homeworld,
since there’s no place like home and no
point building massive interstellar generations
ships if you can step through a portal to
a copy of Earth where everything was the same
but smart apes haven't evolved yet or went
extinct.
Essentially scenarios that give you a superior
alternative to galactic expansion, though
it should be noted that many of them folks
suggest merely slow down when this would happen,
such as going digital or miniaturizing.
You don’t need more space and resources
because each person needs way less of them.
The core assumption is that a growth-oriented
group is going to grow exponentially as long
as they can comfortably do so, and whether
that rate is faster than it was last century
for humanity, where we doubled our numbers
twice, or that doubling takes thousands of
years, that’s nothing on astronomical timelines.
A modern Earth-sized population only needs
to double their numbers 70 times to fill an
entire galaxy with fully populated Dyson Swarms,
so it would take us only 3500 years at 20th
century growth rates.
However, even if it took a million years to
double, that’s just 70 million years, nothing
on galactic timelines.
And something offering greater efficiency,
like going digital and running your uploaded
citizens on hyper-efficient amounts of power,
is only going to add some extra doublings.
Such a thing might actually speed up your
timeline too, since pathways like going digital
usually imply operating at faster subjective
speeds, so your generations might take mere
days, even if to those folks it felt like
centuries, and they went extinct in mere centuries,
in the sense of being replaced by a new version.
Not too mention it makes colonizing space
way, way easier, see the Seeding the Stars
episode for details.
So you inevitably need some reason why your
population growth drops off even when it offers
no obvious advantage.
Modern comparisons are tempting, as our population
growth has slowed in the 21st century, but
even ignoring some dubious reasoning about
causation and correlation attached to modern
birth rates, it just doesn’t apply to galactic
expansion by a high tech civilization.
You’re probably dealing with folks who do
not age or grow less fertile with age, who
do not have to worry about priorities of kids
versus career, and who do not feel any particular
resource pressure, with an unused galaxy at
their fingertips.
If you’re two hundred years old, souped
up on physical and mental augmentation so
that you probably qualify as a genius by modern
standards, have a lifestyle that would make
a modern millionaire look like a beggar, but
are still considered rather young and middle-class
for your era, your basic biological strategies
on reproduction just aren’t the same as
now.
You can basically have as many kids as you
want, if you want, and some folks will want
just that, probably most.
If you live centuries in a resource-rich,
labor-low civilization, you can wait till
your centuries old to have kids, the equivalent
of a modern millionaire with multiple doctorates,
and focus on only one kid at a time, and still
have dozens of them and raise them in ideal
conditions.
Keeping those kind of factors in mind, there
either has to be a dynamic in play that disinclined
all advanced civilizations to adopt no-growth
policies universally, or you have only a temporary
hiatus on growth until some faction of that
civilization that is pro-growth has enough
time to become the majority and the prior
no-growth elements go effectively extinct.
So as long as there’s no compelling reason
to encourage folks to have few kids, you keep
heading back to the notion that some will
have a bunch and will pass that tendency on
to their own kids and you end up again with
a society that favors growth, at least until
it runs into some other compelling reason
to not grow, and that takes us right back
to the Dyson Dilemma.
The Dyson Dilemma incidentally is not a Fermi
Paradox solution itself, it’s just a problem
most Fermi Paradox solutions have no good
answer for.
In fact the only one that does is the solution
that just says advanced civilizations either
rarely develop or life rarely evolves to complexity,
or worlds life could evolve on are super rare.
The Rare Earth or Rare Intelligence or Rare
Technology camps.
None of these are exclusive by the way, it
could be Earth-like planets are fairly rare
and the evolutionary path to complexity and
intelligence rarely get followed and that
not many of those intelligences go on to abstract
thinking and also to inventing serious technology,
and there are many steps along the way, many
hurdles, some of which may filter out most
worlds.
We call these hurdles Filters and they can
be minor things, coin flip odds, or major
ones few worlds pass, or even lottery-odds
ones, what we call great filters, and you
can see the Great Filters series for further
discussion of those.
For those curious, while I have no official
stance on the Fermi Paradox, too many unknowns
still, I tilt to Rare Technology and consider
that the best stance on available data, or
the least worst anyway, that spacefaring technological
civilizations, the only kind we could detect
right now, seem to be absent.
I’ve no idea why, maybe intelligent life
only develops on one in quadrillion planets
but once it happens technology is inevitable,
and there’s billions of worlds in our galaxy
alone covered in simple algae or its alien
equivalents.
Or life only kindles under such rare conditions
it’s only happened a few times in the whole
Universe but inevitably proceeds to galaxy-spanning
civilization when it does.
Maybe intelligence isn’t nearly as advantageous
to life as we tend to assume, and most times
when something develops it, it isn’t worth
the energy-bill to run such a big brain and
they go extinct.
We don’t know, but I’d tend to guess there’s
a lot of little filters that each lower the
odds and a few big or Great Filters too.
We just know such technological civilizations
appear to be very rare.
That again is the point of the Dyson Dilemma.
One popular alternative related to this idea
that civilizations are rare is that they actually
aren’t, they just don’t turn into galaxy-spanning
ones much.
That such civilizations just tend to stay
at home rather than spread out, and we could
easily miss them then so long as they aren’t
super common, since the Dyson Dilemma is about
looking for huge dark blobs of millions of
darkened suns in the middle of galaxies or
galaxy sized spots emitting tons of infrared
light.
Another is that they have access to physics-breaking
technologies, what we call Clarketech, like
my earlier example of being able to violate
the laws of thermodynamics, or just meander
off or ascend to some higher planes of existence,
which we’ll look at more next week in Aloof
Aliens.
The other option, of course, is that they
do want to expand and grow but they go extinct.
Critical to this whole idea is that a species
can travel to and colonize other stars, and
that they have a tendency to grow in numbers
and expand.
It’s hard to do that if you get wiped out,
but as I was saying earlier, species extinction
rarely means that and when it does, it either
means an ultra-catastrophe or that it was
out-competed by something better at survival.
We looked at some of the possible catastrophes
that might hit interplanetary or interstellar
civilizations some weeks back, and the only
plausible options that work with the Fermi
Paradox are those where it’s sort of an
inevitable convergence.
An example, though a bad one, would be a tendency
to make computers and artificial intelligence
and be wiped out by that AI.
That’s a bad example, not because it would
be super-implausible if almost every advanced
species made AI and got hammered by it, but
because it still leaves you an AI.
That species is extinct but that AI is still
around, Homo erectus is gone but Homo sapiens
remains, Rome burned down but Constantinople
is flourishing, the humans are all dead but
Skynet is busy colonizing the galaxy.
So in that regard extinction only works as
a Fermi Paradox solution if it is both going
to end with nothing left with colonial or
growth tendencies, and is virtually inevitable.
We have a concept called Non-exclusivity that
comes up in Fermi Paradox discussion here
a lot, and it’s the basic notion that any
solution that can’t plausibly apply to every
likely case isn’t a good one.
Asteroids might wipe out a civilization, though
not an advanced one, which would regard an
approaching asteroid as a great economic boon,
but statistically not many civilizations would
get hit with Earth-killers.
Indeed the only time we had one was probably
when we got slugged by the hypothetical dwarf
planet that gave us our moon.
The one that allegedly wiped out the dinosaurs
would not wipe us out, just set us back a
few generations, and indeed it may not have
wiped them out either or just been a contributing
factor to a long process already in progress
for million of years.
Assuming it was even a factor, not just an
event that happened to occur during around
the same million year swath of time they left
the scene.
If that was the case, that they would have
stayed the king of the hill, then maybe they’d
not have evolved high intelligence, they arguably
weren’t well designed for improving in that
regard.
That freak extinction may have removed a strong
player who was a dead end but too strong to
have otherwise died off.
Alternatively if they could have, that just
raises the whole issue again of someone getting
a jump start on us.
65 million years is a big headstart, we’ll
probably have swarmed over not just our galaxy
but our whole local cluster by then, and would
expect anyone nearby who had that head start
to have long since done so and be rather visible
to us now, particularly as they might have
colonized Earth, in which case I guess they
wouldn’t be visible to us, but only because
we wouldn’t be here to see them.
Similar things apply to most extinction events,
even when we say it was ‘sudden’ we mean
on geological timelines.
Of course some might have been rather sudden,
that asteroid case or a super-plague, or if
a species only lives on one specific island
and a volcano erupts, another good reason
to colonize the galaxy, don’t keep all your
eggs in one basket.
But for extinction in general, normally it’s
a gradual fall off to mutation and competition.
This doesn’t work well for advanced civilizations
and the Fermi Paradox.
First, because once you’re interstellar,
it’s really hard to have a natural calamity
kill everyone off.
Truth be told, it really shouldn’t be possible
even once you’re genuinely interplanetary
since unless your own sun goes supernova – which
it won’t since such stars live way too briefly
to even let their planets form and cool down
enough for life to even think about starting
– you’re going to have stuff survive,
even if it’s a handful of asteroid or comet
mining colonies buried deep under the protective
layers of rock or ice.
Second, because fundamentally the same principle
applies as with species expanding out from
an origin spot onto a fertile continent.
They don’t need to be coordinated, it doesn’t
matter if the ones still living at the origin
spot are around, and the chunks of that original
group that most favor growth and expansion
are going to be the ones who make the most
of it and probably pass that trait on to their
descendants, until and unless they encounter
something that makes them revise that policy.
And there may be such things in our future,
but none of the suggested candidates seem
to hold up, especially in the face of Non-exclusivity,
again the notion an individual scenario has
to apply to everybody, every strange and diverse
alien, for it to work.
Otherwise stuff can go extinct but generally
just gets replaced by something tougher and
more aggressive or expansionist.
Don’t assume that means nasty or locust
like, aggressively colonizing sterile dead
planets so you can fill them with life, or
some post-biological equivalent, is the exact
opposite of locust like behavior.
I think my habit of talking about tearing
about planets to build space habitats to build
dyson swarms sometimes conjures that rapacious
locust swarm to folks mind.
It’s not that locusts are evil of course
or that we’re really nice, they’re just
really dumb.
Of course sometimes so are we, but generally
our expansion approaches are rather more long
term and getting longer all the time.
This incidentally is why we assume most alien
species will be expansion oriented, fast or
slow, violently aggressive or peaceful.
In nature, you don’t exist as a species
for long if you don’t manage to birth and
mature enough offspring to replace your numbers,
and any branch of your species which does
that more or better will rapidly replace the
others too.
This doesn’t mean you spawn litters or lay
thousands of eggs, anymore than humans do,
just that your pre-technological origins have
to be able to replace your numbers and probably
also keep up with some expansion into unexploited
areas.
This means tribes that get a bit big and have
lots of free territory nearby can divide up,
and keep doing that till they get all the
good spots.
Key point though, they have to be able to
replace their numbers or they go extinct,
and since pretty much all the early applications
of technology are about making it easier to
not die, they will have a surplus of people
being born.
Overpopulation is nothing new, and truth be
told, even though were more numerous than
ever before, we actually are less pressed
by that than our ancestors usually have been,
since we’ve been technologically boosting
our carrying capacity – how many people
we can support off a given chunk of territory
– much faster, and also have technologically
made accidental increases in population less
common.
Nature has plenty of ways of dealing with
overpopulation, as did pre-modern human cultures,
like I said, not a new problem.
It just doesn’t work out from a Fermi Paradox
perspective, going extinct from a decline
in birth rates.
There’s no pressure to discouraging expansion
that really makes much sense, if you have
the technology for sailing off to new worlds
or building them, and if your population is
just declining because folks don’t like
having kids, and so you don’t bother colonizing,
eventually some group or faction is going
to be all for big families again and after
a handful of generations they’ll outnumber
everyone else.
That original culture basically went extinct,
but merely to be replaced by one that liked
big families again, and that might go out
of style in a place and time where population
pressure arose again.
For that matter, you’ve got all sorts of
technological options for rapidly boosting
your population if you need to, and it seems
improbable a high-tech civilization would
just have extinction from low birth rates
sneak up on them and not attempt any of the
many obvious solutions for avoiding that.
Potentially even including mass cloning or
uploading minds and duplicating them.
You can do that same trick if you have the
technology for colonizing other stars but
life is so Utopian back home no one really
wants to go.
You just find a decent small sample of willing
and able colonists, say a few thousand, and
randomly copy and send a group of a thousand
of them off to each new world, the originals
can even stay home in Utopia if they like.
They’ll diverge so much in those unique
settings and groups they’ll be all new people
anyway, and their kids will be too.
They all diverge and evolve on those new worlds
under aliens Suns.
We looked at that option more in Mind Uploading
last year.
This is the fundamental idea though, extinction
doesn’t usually end life and growth, but
rather drives it on to more of both.
On those rare occasions it’s by cataclysm
and genuinely results in a scenario where
something is wiped out and not replaced by
something better at survival and growth, advanced
civilizations would mostly be immune to those
anyway, and unless there is some inevitable
suicide-pact technology everyone discovers,
like some awesome-seeming power source you
will always discover and always use without
realizing it will kill you off before it’s
too late, then non-exclusivity would apply.
Some might die that way but not all and not
most.
But even if it were most, or nearly all, you
only need that one civilization that can expand
and likes to do so to swarm the whole galaxy
over, or many galaxies.
And they will get every star not just those
with an earth-like planet, and they won’t
really care that much about such planets anyway,
because they can build better places to live.
Last week we noted how hard it is to terraform
a planet like Mars and I mentioned then that
it’s easy to build habitats instead, and
of course our original episode, 5 years ago,
was a summary of some of the cooler such megastructures
you can build and we later expanded that into
a series focusing on each one.
The planet-centric focus of a lot of science
fiction was part of the reason the channel
started, as I wanted to encourage more authors
to feature these sorts of artificial worlds
or the sort of massive ships and structures
advanced civilizations could build, and few
authors tended to look at.
There are some exceptions, Larry Niven’s
Ringworld maybe being the best known, but
nobody really explores it like the late Iain
M. Banks does in his Culture Series, beginning
with Consider Phlebas.
He not only gives us a look at such giant
constructs but contemplates the kind of civilizations,
or cultures, that might build and live on
such things.
A lot like we do on the show, he tries to
see how a given technology, from the fairly
plausible and mundane to outright Clarketech,
alter a culture and it’s members outlook
on life.
Banks’ Culture series is one of the biggest
influences on this show and one of the handful
of books mentioned way back in the original
episode, and it’s past time he won our Book
of the Month.
You can get a free copy of Consider Phlebas
at Audible.com/Isaac or text Isaac to 500-500.
Audible offer a 30 day free trial, but each
month you’re a member you now get a free
audiobook and 2 audible originals, and those
credits rollover to the next month or year
and stay yours, along with any books you got,
even if you later discontinue your membership.
And with their convenient app, you can listen
on any of your devices and seamlessly pick
up where you left off, whether you’re listening
at home, commuting, running errands or off
jogging or at the gym.
Audible makes it cheap and easy to access
a vast collection of amazing stories.
Another thing the Culture Series likes to
look at is the notion that spacefaring civilizations
tend to leave behind the mortal universe and
‘sublime’, or ascend to another plane
of existence or something similar, and we’ll
be looking at that and some related notions
next week as we return to the Alien Civilization
series with “Aloof Aliens”.
Banks also gives us some interesting looks
at the sorts of extreme environment and space
suits you might need to visit some places,
like walking around on Venus, and we’ll
explore Space Suits and extreme environments
in two weeks, to look at some of the challenges
in making better suits and some options advances
in technology might give us for really awesome
ones, before heading to Venus to look at how
we might go about terraforming that molten
hot world, in Winter on Venus.
If you’d like to help support 5 more years
of episodes like that, we’d appreciate your
support, and you can go onto our website,
IsaacArthur.net, to see some options, from
Patreon to Paypal to buying some awesome channel
Merchandise, or even sending it by snail mail,
and for the record, I am always delighted
to get postcards,
or given the date, birthday cards.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
