Today’s episode is the second of a three
part series we are going to do looking at
what life might like on colonies or colonial
spaceships.
Today we are focusing on those ships, mostly
on the interstellar kind but also the ones
we might use in our own solar system and we
will start with those to introduce some concepts
about size and spaceships.
We are not too interested in how they get
from point A to point B though.
We talked about that in the Spaceship Propulsion
Compendium and for the interstellar ships
I will be assuming they have at least working
fusion technology, though as we have discussed
before we do have options for interstellar
expansion that rely strictly on a mix of solar
and fission technology.
Now to ask ourselves what it is like to be
on a colony ship we have to know a lot of
particulars about that ship and its mission.
So we are going to invent a bit of fictional
narrative to help us follow along today and
we will continue that into episode three.
We will make some assumptions about the crew,
the mission, the ship, and the technology
but I will give quick asides about the alternatives
as we go.
I also want to add that I won’t be tailoring
my assumptions to what I consider most likely,
but what I feel best illustrates the concepts.
So we will be looking at two scenarios and
two ships.
The first will be a colony ship to Saturn,
which we will arbitrarily say is going to
include 200 people and last 2 years, from
when they leave to when they arrive.
The second will be an interstellar colony
ship to Tau Ceti, 12 light years from here,
and it will house 200,000 people and arrive
in 120 years.
What it does when it arrives we will discuss
in episode 3.
To make things simple to follow I will name
the first Hyperion, because that is the name
of their destination, Saturn’s Moon Hyperion.
I will name the interstellar one Unity, for
my favorite space colonization game, Alpha
Centauri.
That was the name of the ship that brought
the folks there.
Now we will also assume Hyperion is going
to be one of the first fusion powered ships
and that the technology is still very weak
and iffy.
It can run life support and an ion drive.
Hyperion also has a mission, it is going to
get to its moon of the same name and start
mining and manufacturing a space elevator
to be used on its neighbor, Titan, where a
much bigger colony is planned.
Hyperion is a pretty big ship, people will
be on it for two years and it had to be constructed
in space.
It’s about 200 meters from stem to stern
and about 50 wide and high, it also masses
out around 100,000 tons, on par with an aircraft
carrier, though much of that is reaction mass
for the ion drive.
But everyone lives in the Habitation Module,
which is a series of ten nested cylinders
each spaced a bit over head-height apart,
and all rotating 6 times a minute to simulate
Earth normal gravity of one gee on the outermost,
‘bottom’ deck and 90% less on the floor
above.
One handy aspect of nested, layered rotating
habitats is that if they are all spinning
at the same rate their gravity and floor space
is proportional to their radius, so the cylinder
half as wide as the outermost one will have
half the gravity and half the floor area.
We’ve got ten so the gravity is all 10%,
20%, 30%, etc.
The Habitation Module is about as long as
it is wide, and only about a quarter of the
ship.
It has one more non-spinning layer outside
it with a vacuum sleeve to keep the friction
down and you enter and exit it through the
two necks on Deck 1, which is basically just
a long corridor between those with ladders
and stairs down.
The rest of the ship, which is most of it,
is pressurized but has no gravity and is on
the cool side.
It’s all cargo, fuel, and a couple workshops
where gravity isn’t necessary or maybe unwelcome.
The folks who go out there to grab supplies
or work there wear sweaters and have space
heaters in their workshops.
The engineers who keep the engines and power
plant from breaking work out here so it is
no surprise they tend to be a cranky lot.
Anyway someone on the ship has to be cranky
and I don’t want that to be the doctor.
I know ship’s doctors are supposed to be
cantankerous sorts who will smoke a cigarette
while examining you but ours need to be friendly,
as we will see in a bit.
This is not the first colony ship, there are
already tons of colonies closer into the sun
mostly running on solar power and providing
all the metal for the huge industrial complexes
orbiting Earth and other places.
Most have been around long enough they’d
like to expand but to do that they need to
grow more food on site and they need nitrogen
to do that.
They need thousands of tons of it, and that’s
why Titan, with its dense nitrogen atmosphere,
is now a desirable colony.
With the space elevator in place there it
will be able to cheaply ship tons of nitrogen
into the inner and middle solar system colonies.
Hyperion is the one that will manufacture
that elevator and get the docks and industries
in place for rapid expansion on Titan.
It wasn’t easy to recruit for, it’s not
a prestigious job and space isn’t that prestigious
anymore, a few million people already live
and work in space, albeit mostly in low earth
orbit, so a two year trip to the edge of nowhere
wasn’t something that had lines stretching
out of the recruitment center.
This makes life a bit hard on the ship’s
captain, the ship’s cook, and the ship’s
doctor.
When they left they found out that the company
contracted to hire on all the miners and manufacturing
teams was getting a bit desperate and would
take anyone with the right skills, many of
who don’t have much past history.
Or rather they probably do have a lot of history,
they are just trying to leave it all behind.
So when our doctor goes to open up his patient
files and history’s he’s horrified to
find out that almost half of them consist
of name, age, and blood type and nothing else.
This isn’t a scientific voyage either, so
he hasn’t got any fancy DNA analyzers.
We know what his life on the ship is going
to be like for the next two years.
Morning, coffee, appointments all day except
for emergencies.
Checkups, of course, even on the folks in
seemingly great health.
And trying to pry information about patient
and family histories out of taciturn crewmembers,
many of who get touchy, evasive, or even angry
when you ask about their family medical history.
Plus he’s trying to deal with the ship’s
hypochondriac, who is convinced he has every
illness known to man including some fictional
ones.
And the ship’s psychologist hasn’t dealt
with that yet because he’s busy dealing
with Dave, the ship’s navigator, who is
convinced the ship’s computer is out to
get him.
On top of that the ship’s captain keeps
pestering him to let her look at the files
on the crew he has gathered because she has
the exact same problem of wanting to know
everyone’s background but having scant personnel
files to work with and the last time he mentioned
doctor-patient confidentiality covering those
files she gave him detailed instructions on
where he could file any complaints about confidentiality.
Now we’ve got the cook who spends a lot
of his time on the upper decks where the gravity
is low because plants don’t much care about
gravity besides using it to orient themselves
off of.
Most of the upper decks are for hydroponics
and even deck 1, which is mostly a wide corridor,
has plants all over it.
A few dozen of the crew work on these levels,
just growing food to supplement their supplies
and he’s up there a lot with his assistants
grabbing plants for meals and arguing with
the ship’s botanist about what should be
getting grown.
For a trip shorter than a few years you don’t
actually benefit from growing food, except
to supplement your diet with some fresh produce
and to help recycle your air and water.
You can pack around a year’s worth of food
for one person into a cubic meter if you have
to and there’s a cutoff point where all
the equipment you need for growing food will
mass more than the amount of food it will
grow.
But their colony is going to be expected to
grow all its own food so right now they have
been converting every extra space into more
gardens to further stretch out there original
supplies and to get more people trained to
do it.
The manufacturing teams have been getting
practice recycling the old food storage packaging
into more hydroponics trays and it’s not
all hydroponics anymore either.
The ship didn’t start off with any dirt
and soil on board, but it seems to be acquiring
it at a rate of about 100 kilograms a day,
non-coincidentally about the dry weight of
food consumed each day.
They also are not vegetarians so they have
chickens, fish, and some goats on board.
No cows, too heavy and messy.
But they’ve got goat’s milk for some dairy
and eggs from chickens and the fish are intricately
connected to their hydroponics.
That’s not their only animals either, so
they have a veterinarian.
At some point in the history spaceflight some
lazy scientists let the lab rats escape and
ever since there have been rats on ships and
space stations and that gave people an excuse
to have cats and that led to dogs because
if cat-lovers get their pets you can’t go
leaving man’s best friend behind, and ferrets
too because they’re more useful.
Now all the people live down on the bottom
deck where gravity is what it should be.
It’s not that cramped at all.
That bottom deck has almost 8000 square meters
of floor space and with only 200 of them,
they could each get away with a fairly comfortable
10 square meter personnel cabin and still
have only used a quarter of that deck.
The rest being common areas like gyms, the
cafeteria, the bathrooms, and so on.
We will find that the further ahead we go
in spaceflight the more living space ships
tend to have.
We have talked about this before, especially
in the arcologies and impact of fusion episodes
where we got a bit more specific about how
much energy you need for each person when
you have to make your own sunlight for plants
and what it converts into is that you basically
are controlled in population by how much heat
you can get rid of, which in space can only
be done by radiation, which in turn is controlled
by the outer surface area of your ship.
This isn’t an issue for our ship Hyperion
yet, but it will be a big one for Unity, our
interstellar version, which we will get too
soon.
I have opted, semi-arbitrarily, to put the
exterior surface area needed for each person,
to get rid of all the heat associated to keeping
them alive and happy, at 100 square meters.
This would correspond to a power budget of
about 40 to 50 kilowatts per person, though
also has to include the energy lost to heat
in the reactor while it produces the electricity
they need, which itself will mostly be artificial,
spectrum-tailored sunlight to grow plants.
Again those aforementioned episodes discuss
the nuts and bolts of that.
Hyperion’s Hull is close to two hundred
thousand square meters, which would let you
purge close to 100 megawatts of heat, about
an order of magnitude more than the ship is
producing to keep the crew happy.
Hence why the areas outside the habitation
module are cold.
They also could have gotten away with more
people on the ship, maybe ten times as many,
but let’s talk technology real quick and
distinguish a passenger ship from a colony
ship.
A Colony ship needs to build its colony when
it arrives, a passenger ship needs to just
carry people.
Now we often consider having robots arrive
and build everything, or colonists who don’t
need much equipment because they can make
it on site.
Ships following the robots with people, or
that don’t need much gear, are not colony
ships anymore than a passenger plane carrying
some migrants from New York to Omaha is.
Even if that entire plane was chartered to
carry folks who were planning to move and
become farmers, it isn’t a colony plane,
they aren’t bringing their tractors with
them.
Hyperion is a colony ship, it is mostly cargo,
it is going to flat out land in a crater on
the moon Hyperion and everyone is going to
keep living in that habitat module for months
or even years afterwards as they unpack and
expand and get their colony going.
So it is mostly cargo and they have plenty
of space, their real limit on space was making
sure they could keep everyone warm, because
even their hull and shielding material is
cargo they are going to eventually cannibalize
to build with, using local rock to replace
most of the radiation shielding.
If Hyperion was a passenger ship they’d
probably only need a few kilowatts for each
person, because they’d only be growing some
food to freshen up their diets and recycle
air and water.
Though it still wouldn’t be particularly
cramped because building large in space is
a lot easier and doesn’t cost you as much,
relatively speaking, but colony ships will
never be cramped because of the need for a
lot of cargo space, which in space actually
means cargo mass, and a lot of construction
material can serve double duty as part of
the ship’s hull.
I don’t just mean in the sense that you
could recycle it, though any spacefaring civilization
needs to be very good at recycling, but in
the sense that a ship’s hull is almost entirely
about radiation shielding, not keeping space
in and air out, which a hull a thick as a
soda can will do.
Your crate of solar panels can be opened up
and pinned against the hull instead of boxed
up, to add shielding.
Your tanks of water can be on the hull, to
provide shielding, so can your fuel, and so
on.
All right, let’s move on to the interstellar
side of things.
About a year ago we did an episode on Interstellar
Colonization where we looked more at the mechanics
of spaceflight, but I mentioned there 5 categories
of colony ship.
We will be adding a sixth one today, which
is what Unity will be, but let us review the
original five.
Those were, #1, Methuselah Ships, ones that
take a long time to arrive but the crew is
nearly immortal so it is the same people arriving
as left a century before.
We assume someone has cracked a way to extend
life indefinitely or nearly so.
#2, Sleeper Ships, where all or most of the
crew are on ice for the duration of the voyage.
#3, Generation Ships, where people live their
normal lifespan and it is their children and
grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren
who colonize the new world.
#4, Seed Ships.
These are heavily automated ships, typically
with no human crews, that arrive with frozen
DNA material and set about colonizing and
terraforming a new planet with follow up passenger
ships ready to arrive at premade facilities,
or even having humans grown in tanks and raised
and educated by those machines.
#5 was data ships, where we skip the organic
part entirely, either because the people are
digitized themselves, or maybe were artificial
intelligences already, or the organic component
was stored strictly digitally, we can print
DNA after all.
Now we detailed those more in the Interstellar
colonization episode but I want add a sixth
category, Gardener ships, which I basically
made up last week, and also discuss the misconception
about freezing people.
Let’s do that first.
Cryogenics is an awesome technology, because
it lets us freeze people now and hopefully
resurrect them down the road.
We can’t do that yet, and what a lot of
people miss is that the technology you need
to resurrect human popsicles is automatically
the same one needed to extend their life indefinitely.
We might figure out some way to extend lifespans
without medical nanotechnology but you need
that to bring people back to life after freezing
them.
The simple ability to unfreeze humans implies
a near certainty you can also repair all the
damage associated to aging.
So category two, Sleeper Ships, would not
exist to ensure your crew didn’t die of
old age.
That only leaves keeping them alive the whole
time or keeping them out of the way as a hassle.
But it is never an issue to keep people alive
on an interstellar spaceship because the kinds
of energies needed to get any ship up to interstellar
speeds is just huge compared to the energy
needed to provide life support even over thousand
year long journeys.
Your power limitation on an interstellar ship
is only about getting rid of the heat you
produce, because the energy needed to run
that ship is tiny compared to accelerating
and decelerating even if you are only going
1% of light speed and your voyage will be
a thousand years long.
If you are going ten percent of light speed
you need a hundred times the energy to get
to that speed and your life support needs
are cut to a tenth, as the voyage only last
a tenth as long.
Proportionally it now makes up a thousandth
of the energy budget the 1% of light speed
ship needed to keep people alive, which was
already small compared to its acceleration
and deceleration needs.
We will be assuming for Unity, our example
interstellar colony ship, that it is traveling
at 10% of light speed, which is about the
top speed fusion permits.
Now fusion fuel is stupid cheap, it is the
most abundant stuff in the Universe, so you
can bring as much cargo as you want at those
speeds.
Our two big alternative power sources for
higher speeds, antimatter or black holes,
are likely to be quite expensive as fuel sources
so even if you have them you probably opt
for lower speeds for colony ships, half the
speed, four times the cargo minimum for the
same fuel.
Passenger ships might go a lot faster, ditto
seed or data ships, but a colony ship constructed
to carry people and cargo in quantity will
be better off taking its time and arriving
with more equipment and manpower.
So you only freeze people if they just want
to skip the voyage, because if you have the
tech to unfreeze them they are also able to
live indefinitely.
If you don’t then you have to use generation
ships anyway, because you lack the technology
to extend life, unfreeze people, or to use
seed or data ships.
This kinda raises a problem.
The whole point of a colony is to spread humanity
out and increase our numbers, so your preferred
colonist likes children and doesn’t mind
roughing it a bit, compared to the standard
of living back home at least.
They might consider ‘roughing it’ to mean
they have to work a couple hours every day
and their home only has twenty rooms in it.
But they key thing is that your colony ship
does not have a static population.
You can force that, with the immortal methuselah
ship you say no kids till we arrive and get
the colony setup, for the generation ship
you tell people no more kids than are needed
to replace those dying of old age and accidents.
But the funny thing is you don’t really
need to and might be better off not doing
it.
You’ve got these ships that are going to
be cruising through space for decades and
are assumed to be equipped specifically to
allow you to engage in a ton of in situ construction.
They are the result of decades if not centuries
of practice back in our solar system of setting
colonies up to manufacture almost everything
they need on site and an interstellar colony
has to be able to manufacture everything on
site.
Not right away but they need to make everything
except new technology there.
Earth can keep beaming the colonists new scientific
and technological breakthroughs, just a few
years out of date from the light lag for data
to arrive.
But an interstellar colony has to make everything
they need, including replacing all their machines
for making things, and fixing anything the
ship needs too.
So first off, with a 120 year voyage to Tau
Ceti, our ship Unity doesn’t need its colonist
fully trained when it leaves.
It doesn’t matter if the colonists are immortal
or the grandchildren of the original colonists
because they still have 120 years to train.
Unity is not a ship carrying colonists and
colonial equipment anymore, it is a place
that manufactures colonists and colonizing
equipment.
If it is a generation ship it constantly needs
to birth and train new people with all the
knowledge and skills needed, and they probably
need to work to maintain their gear.
So I am just going to assume Unity was a Methuselah
ship where half the folks opted to be frozen
and half did not, and before arriving they
will have doubled their population.
Nice even thirds.
During the voyage they also got some tech
updates from home that made colonizing and
staying alive on that ship a bit easier, and
that’s why they decided they could have
children.
They probably also had extra sleeper pods
to accommodate anyone who changed their mind
part way there or as spares and they could
manufacture more if they needed to.
Personally though, I can’t imagine going
on ice to relieve boredom.
I don’t think the ship would be boring and
even if it was I have thousands of books and
shows and films to get around to reading and
at least that many being beamed to us from
home every year.
I might even decide to make some of my own.
I, personally, could keep making these videos
and sending them home the whole trip.
They’d be years old when they arrived but
they’d be new to the audience.
And this isn’t a ship of a few people or
a few hundred, it’s a ship of a few hundred
thousand.
We are transplanting humanity to a new star
system.
So let’s scale up Hyperion, ten times wider,
conveniently the ideal diameter of a rotating
habitat as it allows full earth gravity at
only two rotation per minute, which does not
appear to cause any problems at all for anyone.
Now let’s make it ten times longer too.
Otherwise identical.
We now have a ship with a thousand times the
volume but only a hundred times the surface
area so it can only purge 100 times the heat,
enough to let us support 200,000 people comfortably.
Probably a good deal more.
We will assume when we left we had 200,000
people and half went on ice and half remained
awake.
When we arrive we will have a 100,000 sleepers,
100,000 more who lived through the entire
flight, and another 100,000 who were born
along the way.
Now with improvements made since we left we
figure we can easily squeeze in another 100,000
people if we had to do this all over again,
supporting those 300,000 all awake if we wanted
to.
But we arrive with 300,000 this time.
Many of those who spent the entire journey
awake or who were born en route are no longer
entirely happy with the idea of settling at
Tau Ceti.
The ship is now home.
The ship can be repaired and refueled, and
it would have a whole century to the next
star to turn raw materials into new colonial
equipment.
Heck they could even expand the ship at Tau
Ceti if they wanted to, they could settle
the next system even better with all the new
tech and improvements sent from Earth and
from the first interstellar colonization effort
at Alpha Centuari, which is already up and
running and has been for decades now.
The provisional governor of the colony checks
with the people now that the frozen ones are
awake and it turns out many do like the idea
of staying on the ship to go colonize another
system.
It doesn’t have to be a lot, they can breed
up new people in the century to the next destination.
So he tells them that Unity will remain to
help set ups the colonies for a few years
and to get refueled and get raw materials,
then they can leave with anyone who still
wants to go or has since decided to do so.
Now it is essentially a new type of colony
ship, which I will call a Gardener Ship, because
it can just keep working its way out to ever
new solar systems, traveling for a few generations
to replace their people and manufacture new
colonial equipment and dropping a chunk off
at each new system.
Each time some elect to remain behind on the
colony and others on the ship.
Rinse and Repeat, all the way to the edge
of the galaxy maybe.
They could stop forever at any system they
wanted to or pause for a generation if they
wanted to or even divide the ship to make
two, like an amoeba, to cover two new lines
of colonization.
And in many way this isn’t a ship to get
to colonies, it is a colony all on its own.
With a couple hundred thousand people it has
its own farms and factories, and its schools
and universities to train colonists, but it
has everything else too.
Its own shopping centers and restaurants and
probably landmarks and monuments.
As it plows through space to the next system
it will probably have a great big monument
built on some deck to each colony it founded
for instance.
It will get its entertainment and science
from back on Earth and colonies it founded
but it will make its own and develop its own
customs and traditions.
I have to admit the Gardener Ships, seeding
world after world, appeal to me a lot.
I’d enjoy being crew on something like that.
I mean if you’re immortal I can think of
worse ways to spend your time than being an
officer on some ship meandering out toward
the edge of the galaxy, stopping every few
decades for a couple years to seed a new colony.
And if you got bored with it you could always
stay at the newest colony and give up your
crew slot to some person born on the most
recent leg of the eternal journey that thought
crewing a ship would be more fun than being
a colonist.
I’m not sure how practical Gardener Ships
would be compared to one-shot ships constantly
sent out from back at Earth or the nearest
system that was populated enough to want to
make their own, but they sound cool and an
interesting aspect of that would be that each
new colony would have neighbors near them
with a shared background and relatives, which
might make interstellar relations easier.
I can imagine getting on one and staying on
it for thousands of years, maybe even going
on ice from time to time, and getting out
to the edge of the galaxy and looking at the
others and saying ‘why not?’ and just
sailing off to another galaxy.
It’s fun to daydream, kind of what the purpose
of this channel is for, we just try to give
it a little formal solidity of science.
All right, so that’s life on a colony ship,
next week we finish out with those passengers
arriving at their new solar system of Tau
Ceti.
If you want alerts when that and other videos
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode, make sure to
hit the like button, share it with others,
and try out some of the other episodes on
the channel.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great day!
