In the future we will not simply travel to 
visit new worlds but seek to build homes  
and forge lives on them. So what would 
being a pioneer in space truly be like? 
Chloe and George Astrid move to Venus in the 23rd 
century because the holovids showed them a life of  
rural splendor in their own private sky castle. 
George had proposed to Chloe on the observation  
balcony of the 3783rd floor of the arcology 
in New York they both grew up in. The view  
way up there was above the clouds, where the sun 
still shines even when it was raining down below,  
and he said spending time with Chloe made 
every day a sunny day for him, and he wanted  
to spend the rest of his life with her.
Venus is a nightmare on the ground,  
a burning land where it rains acid on a molten 
terrain, but far up above, you can fly a blimp  
filled with normal breathable air because the 
thicker Venutian atmosphere is heavier than air,  
and the temperature has cooled quite a bit. You 
can take a virtual tour there where your blimp  
can slowly move along at a pace no faster than 
a person might jog and keep up with the Sun,  
so that the Sun never sets.
Life in the 23rd century is  
in many ways far better than at any time in 
the past, but it still has its harsh moments,  
and after some personal tragedy hit them George 
talked his wife into moving to Venus, to set up  
their own floating homestead far from anyone else, 
floating above the clouds in perpetual sunshine. 
There’s some subsidies and low-interest loans 
available for those wanting to pack up to Venus,  
and the default trade for those seeking to be 
sky farmers is a floating home that has solar  
panels for sucking in and separating nitrogen from 
the atmosphere, which is 96.5% carbon dioxide,  
3.5% nitrogen, and a handful of other traces 
gasses. Every so often a remote tanker will come  
by to remove much of their nitrogen, and they’ll 
grow plants hydroponically to support themselves  
and sell and trade the excess to neighbors or 
even on the Hesperides, the twilight sky city  
that floats on the day night terminator of Venus.
Their home is under a diamond glass dome woven  
from the extra carbon in atmosphere, surrounded 
by thin solar collectors, and both rest upon a  
vast thin storage balloon of many chambers, and 
as they gather nitrogen into those they rise  
higher in the sky and when a tanker docks and 
drains some away they dip down into the clouds. 
Theirs is not a homestead of soil and 
grass, but of carbon fiber and aerogel,  
floating like a great sky-ship amidst the golden 
clouds of sulfuric acid, refining nitrogen to  
export to distant places out among the solar 
system and growing food to feed Venus’s growing  
numbers. Robots help with a lot of work and they 
buy and trade for many things, but they like to  
keep to themselves and make most of what they need 
and they try to make the most of what they have. 
In their free hours they often put on their thin 
protective suits and breathing masks that they  
use for outside maintenance, and instead get their 
hang gliders and fly around the clouds of Venus. 
It’s a simpler life than most, and a harder one 
that keeps them busy, but their home is their  
sky castle, under the eternal sun and above the 
clouds, and they wouldn’t have it any other way.
Homesteading is a bit of a nebulous term 
these days but is generally a lifestyle  
emphasizing self-sufficiency, and typical in 
a rural environment. The motivations for this  
lifestyle are as variable as the styles and 
degrees of approach, but it is obviously one  
that would seem to translate well to settlers 
on a new planet. After all, self-sufficiency is  
a fairly critical approach to any individual or 
community seeking to set up shop far from Earth. 
We’ll talk a bit about motivations for 
homesteading in a moment and how they might  
translate on to space. However, a key notion 
for today is that often our notions of people  
going settling and pioneering are a bit romantic, 
especially compared to the reality of that life.  
We’ll ask today if that truly is an option for 
interplanetary or even interstellar settlement,  
or if we are tricking ourselves into 
thinking of space as the next or final  
frontier, the Wild West of the Galaxy.
The 900-pound gorilla in the room is that  
currently advanced technology makes true 
self-sufficiency basically impossible. In  
the past you could get your family, load it 
on a wagon with a lot of tools and supplies,  
and make your way on the Oregon Trail to a 
farm where you might not see neighbors for  
days or weeks at a time and where you could be a 
mountain man and spend a whole season out hunting  
or trapping or prospecting and never see another 
soul except your partner or your trusty mule. If  
you’ve played the Oregon Trail video game you 
have a pretty good idea how often the journey  
to these lifestyles was beset with misfortune or 
how often those who chose to go without neighbors  
and communities were ruined by the effort, but 
the possibility existed and was attainable. 
As we’ll see today, that possibility does 
remain, but much like nowadays, you will  
usually be within reach of phones, the internet, 
and Amazon. Again there’s a lot of motivation  
for homesteading and if your goal is to be so far 
from others they don’t know you’re there and can’t  
reach you in days of travel or even communication 
time, there are options for that, like the Oort  
Cloud or eventually even the galactic rim. 
Many might want that option one day too,  
and we’ll explore the Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis 
of the Fermi Paradox a bit today too, though I  
gave it an episode of its own up on Nebula not 
long after writing this, in order to examine why  
some people might flee civilization even if they 
weren’t particularly introverted and recluse. 
And options like 3D printing, robotics, nanobots, 
and digital archives do open the door for true  
isolation, whereas in our modern society our 
supply chains are so enormous that, as we  
learned during Covid, basically every industry 
is essential and we’re more interconnected and  
interdependent than ever before.
Homesteading was not a new idea  
when Covid started but it gave it a bit 
of a boost. I am a Homesteader myself,  
by most definitions I’ve heard, though in a moment 
I’ll explain why I don’t think of myself that way.  
My wife and I have tons of friends who identify 
as homesteaders, and since she and I seem to check  
more boxes than most of them I figure it probably 
applies to us but there’s a missing element. 
Examining my own motives, I doubt they’re the 
norm, but my ideal lifestyle is essentially  
what I already do. I love my job, my work here 
on this show and the various other hats I wear  
in life. And I do them better in my nice quiet 
farmstead where I can concentrate on my work. Or  
could until we adopted 3 little kids last year. 
My wife and I were both homeschooled as kids,  
and we homeschool our 3 hooligans now, so it took 
a bit of effort to adapt my workflow around that.  
I’ve mostly managed to train them to be quiet 
when I’m writing or recording but my youngest  
son Geo often does his schoolwork in my office 
and last time I asked him to go out so I could  
record and let his brother and sister know, he ran 
through the house yelling for everyone to shut up  
so dad could record before coming back to shout 
through the door that everyone was quiet now. 
For my wife and I, the lifestyle was no 
sacrifice at all, she was raised on a farm  
and we’re both the quiet introvert types, which 
is amusing since we’re both professional public  
speakers. We both have jobs that let us control 
our days better but often have to work long or  
late hours. A lot of the stuff that comes with 
homesteading is stuff one or both of us grew up  
doing or do as a hobby so it’s part of why I 
tend not to describe myself as a homesteader.  
I’m an eccentric scientist and writer who lives 
in the country, and my wife describes herself as  
a farmer, same as she has done her whole life, 
and same as most second and third generation  
farmers do, rather than as a homesteader.
Most of the folks I know who identify specifically  
as a homesteader do so after it being a big life 
change for them and often a big sacrifice. There  
is an implied element of migration to the 
term I think, even if you only moved out of  
town to the nearest rural area, not half-way 
around the country like in pioneering days. 
Obviously, definitions can vary but there’s the 
element I’m trying to bring to focus for today,  
in terms of what separates a space homesteader 
from any other space colonist or someone who  
just lives on a developing planet that 
is still sparsely populated but on which  
their ancestors have lived for several 
generations or even thousands of years. 
The introductory story at the beginning of the 
episode was inspired by a number of stories others  
have told me about their motives for essentially 
resettling themselves. That’s not new either,  
the Green Acres TV show of the 1960s 
sympathetically parodies the trouble  
a big city lawyer has packing up and moving 
himself and his wife to their new farm in the  
middle of nowhere. It’s not unique to the US or 
even the last couple centuries, but often in the  
past it was in the other direction, get off the 
farm and get a better life in a town or city. 
Picking up and moving to a better 
life, and changing lifestyles,  
is not a new idea and often is an effective 
strategy – it can be a very bad one too,  
as many a person discovered on their challenging 
journey to that golden destination, their own  
Oregon Trail, either finding it harder to get to 
than expected or that the grass wasn’t very green. 
We seen an amusing example of that with David 
Weber’s fictional Planet Grayson, where the  
colonists were originally techno-primitivists 
on Earth looking for the simple life and bought  
rights to colonize a beautiful blue-green gem of 
a planet, Grayson, 500 light years from Earth and  
made the journey at sub-light speed on ice. It 
was such a gem that they intentionally didn’t  
bring teachers and textbooks with them intending 
to bring only a little higher technology to get  
started and abandon that for their desired 
tech-level. They discovered their seemingly  
paradise like world was so green because it 
was ultra-rich in arsenic and cadmium. Their  
descendants led very rough lives and quickly 
embraced technology as soon as they could get  
access to it again and took up orbital farming.
Which as a minor tangent isn’t a good approach,  
you would be putting a vacuum sealed environment 
full of purified soil and water into orbit to  
bring food down to your planet. As opposed to 
simply building a dome with a floor sealed against  
significant leakage to fill with purified water 
and soil, which you do not need to haul supplies  
and food back and forth from space for . To be 
fair, they have anti-gravity in that setting,  
so going up and down to space might not 
be any harder than trucking it across a  
continent which we often do nowadays. Also, 
there’s definitely room for space farming,  
we’ve discussed it in multiple episodes, but as we 
saw in our recent episode on Agriworlds, there’s  
a fairly narrow window of future technologies 
and development for bulk interplanetary food  
trade to be economically viable.
That matters for our discussion  
for today because for a lot of folks historically, 
homesteading was intended to be a path to personal  
prosperity. Folks were often leaving for the 
goal of independence or a promised land but also  
often with prosperity as a primary or secondary 
motive and that’s a bit harder if space requires  
a huge personal investment only the ultra-rich or 
those backed by government monies could achieve.  
The latter is likely to come with strings 
attached which might make it less appealing  
to those wanting personal independence. The 
workarounds we typically see in science fiction,  
besides hand waving it aside, are to assume a 
gold rush type of scenario, something in space  
is making for a very fast and high return on 
investment, typically with a lot of risk too,  
or the cost is a bit secondary because Earth is 
so packed to the rafters with people that there’s  
a lot of mechanisms in place to export them.
There’s a tendency to assume populations grow  
unavoidably, toward Malthusian Catastrophe, but 
I’d say the evidence tilts toward civilizations  
tending to react when pushing that limit with 
something other than a casual shrug that mass  
starvation will tend to correct the issue for 
them. I think what we tend to see instead,  
is that where it’s starting to feel cramped 
the culture will start encouraging smaller  
families or immigration to new places, 
while throwing on subsidies, laws,  
or tax incentives to immigrate to new planets, 
build space habitats, or have fewer kids. 
My own guess though is that overpopulation doesn’t 
get managed directly by just shipping folks off  
to new and distant planets, but rather that’s 
where you encourage elements of your culture  
to go to who specifically desire large families 
or big frontiers. Locally you just build more  
space habitats in orbit and arcologies on the 
ground while shifting focus off big families. 
Those incentives for leaving can 
also apply to groups you don’t like,  
who volunteer in order to flee persecution, or 
perceived persecution, or get sent into exile,  
or some combination thereof. The Grayson scenario 
is a perfectly plausible one, folks leaving for  
their promised land, and in their case getting 
stuck in a proverbial desert akin to the Exodus  
from Egypt under Moses. For those who’ve seen the 
Expanse and remember the big Nauvoo colony ship,  
it’s a very similar scenario and also parallels a 
lot of religious or political pioneer settlements  
in the colonial era. And other eras too, 
it’s been fairly common throughout history,  
and probably pre-history, for chunks of humanity 
not fitting in well to seek abroad, indeed many  
young person’s leave their family or village or 
tribe for a life in a traveling trade or as a  
merchant or musician or soldier for this reason.
And science fiction has explored many of these  
scenarios, but I would tend to guess the most 
likely one is that some group with a lot of  
resources – a nation, corporation, religious or 
ideological group – gets enough resources together  
to found an initial outpost and reasonably 
legitimate claim on a given planet or piece of  
planet, and does so basically as soon as they 
can make a respectable effort at it. As such,  
it’s always a bit resource-strapped, 
even in a relatively post-scarcity  
scenario. They also are going to get a lot 
of pushback if they’re constantly planting  
half-baked settlements to claim new real 
estate – be it militant or more polite. 
That means they are looking for more investment 
– literally and emotionally – which means a lot  
of them are going to be trying to find a method 
to encourage people to come and in a way that  
minimizes their own expenditure, but also without 
risking such a failure rate that it makes them  
look bad. After all, very few powerful leaders 
are indifferent to their reputation, especially in  
terms of an appearance of competence and success.
It’s also a lot easier to avoid the claim you’re  
over-reaching while planting new settlements 
out in space if those all have a relatively  
open-door policy to people going there, not 
just your personal supporters and cronies,  
and if it is seen as successful. If country X 
tries to claim some 100 kilometer wide asteroid  
or 100x100 kilometer chunk of the Martian 
landscape, it makes their claim easier to  
maintain if their allies and rivals and own 
citizens view it as a successful colony that  
they can move to or compete inside for business. 
In a post-scarcity society, we may or may not  
have the same overall commercial perspective or it 
might be that the term ‘money’ gets replaced with  
prestige or reputation for certain applications.
And that’s where your basic homesteader situation  
comes in handy. You might pledge everyone a free 
ticket to your new location and a chunk of land.  
Depending on how badly you want them, this might 
include a standing subsidy for being there or a  
lot of equipment, or it might be that you 
give out low-interest loans for gear and  
tax waivers. Your objective is to devote the 
minimum resources for the maximum success so  
you definitely want to be focused on getting 
people in there who are predisposed to not  
expect a lot of help and so that attitude toward 
self-sufficiency that tends to be associated to  
homesteading is likely to be something you 
want and will aim your marketing toward. 
Of course they might also be future pains in 
the neck for trying to establish more control  
over the area as it grows, and in a high-tech 
civilization there’s no guarantee that when  
that happens in a hundred or so years that the 
original settler who left to become independent  
isn’t still there, rather than a descendant 
of theirs who might be just as glad to see  
the Wild West era transition into one with 
a lot more infrastructure and government. 
Which raises the question of what the draw is 
for them to support themselves, and an important  
caveat. That a settler might not need much support 
from home, now or later. It is entirely possible  
that by the end of this century we will have 
managed to achieve some or all of the following  
technologies: Life extension, 3D printers, 
nuclear fusion, reliable medium-intelligent AI. 
Let’s consider the impact of that with a quick 
scenario. In the not-too-distant future an  
organization sets out to create a big encyclopedia 
of everything you need to know as a settler,  
including textbooks and augmented reality training 
videos of every profession and major hobby. Their  
foundation releases the Encyclopedia Galactica and 
keeps it updated. They also put in a big library  
of every book, song, movie, recipe, software, or 
medicine that’s free from copyright or willingly  
donated. Along with this they include 
a database of blueprints for any useful  
tool or building or piece of equipment or even 
a child’s toy they think a settler might need,  
along with suggestions of what to use and where.
They call this database their Standard Templates  
and Constructs, or STCs. Neither the Encyclopedia 
Galactica nor the STCs have all of human knowledge  
and design in them, not by any means, but it’s got 
everything they think a settler might need. A lot  
of it is baseline models from companies donated 
to include their brand name on the 3D print and  
with a note that a better design is available 
for a small premium. This all comes in a nice  
sturdy briefcase along with a 3D printer, and the 
case includes some solar panels and batteries. 
That printer can actually print its own parts 
or those for a handful of more specialized or  
larger printers or industrial machines. But one of 
its most useful abilities is that it has diagrams  
for cheap and sturdy solar panels and transparent 
dome material and batteries and it can make them  
out of many different combinations of available 
materials. It’s no match for the state of the  
art mega-machines some have available and it's 
often clunky tech twenty years out of date but  
you can open that box anywhere the sun shines, 
or where you can plug it into a power supply,  
and the limited AI on board can 
consult with you about what you  
want to build and how best to get to building it.
It is not a big old ball of gray goo that’s going  
to spit out sophisticated electronics in seconds 
or turn an asteroid into spaceship overnight,  
but when you arrive on Mars and they hand 
you your case and your personal rover full  
of supplies and a deed to your 100 hectare plot 
of land, it is sufficient that you could drive  
off to that spot and start building your dome 
equivalent of a log cabin. If you have more  
resources you might build a power receiver so 
you can get energy beamed down by microwave  
from satellites in orbit, to work faster.
I chose Mars as an example because I know  
it’s a popular spot for folks to contemplate us 
settling but I’ve never heard a convincing case  
for how it would ever profit Earth except as a 
dumping ground for more people and as a prestige  
project. Unlike asteroid mines or orbital power 
arrays or space farms, Mars doesn’t really have  
anything to export you can’t find easier elsewhere 
and without the large gravity well. It is a place  
that could handle large self-sufficient 
settlements though, and which we already  
know has a personal draw for many people.
It only takes one cheap mass space launcher  
to make settlement viable at this point, 
as one orbital ring around Earth with a  
few ground tethers can get you into orbit for 
costs on par with a plane flight, and then you  
can ride a large, slow Aldrin Cycler out to Mars 
with several thousand other settlers each trip.  
The key thing here is that you are a de facto 
post-scarcity civilization at this point. It’s  
not that robots simply do everything automatically 
and with no oversight, but rather that production  
is pretty massive and automated and that you can 
mass produce cheap sustainable power generation. 
An advanced 3D printer with a lot of templates 
and a simple AI in it is not a Star Trek  
style replicator, but it fulfills a similar 
purpose in clever and industrious hands. Also,  
the usual Genie-in-a-lamp rule about not being 
able to wish for more wishes does not apply,  
there is no reason a 3D printer or replicator 
can’t make all the bits and pieces needed to  
make a copy of itself. The very existence of 
every single biological cell on this planet  
proves that is the case, and also proves you 
can make machines at least that small. That  
said I think it is a big jump to assuming the more 
extreme scifi cases where you could dump a vial  
of nanobots on the surface of a planet and watch 
it magically terraform the place in a few hours,  
or that any 3D printer is going to pull off either 
the speed or intricacy a Star Trek replicator. 
That doesn’t mean one couldn’t give you 
the necessary instructions and blueprints,  
based on what you have available, to make your 
own domed home, pressurized rover, or personal  
spaceship. It is just likely to require a lot of 
time and effort of mind and body on your own part,  
even if it might be a lot less arduous than 
anything the pioneers had to do and produced  
a far more luxurious lifestyle. Which isn’t to 
say you can’t have automated tech so good that  
people just step off a spaceship right into their 
own personal mansion on a new planet, and will  
consider that scenario more in just a moment.
For the homesteader in a civilization that  
still has scarcity and economic limits, even 
fairly high-tech ones, that Mars scenario is  
still possible, I just think that’s more 
of a case where someone is looking for a  
place to call their own and is less focused on 
operating a profitable home farm or business. 
Venus and the nitrogen farm we discussed at 
the beginning seem more plausible to me as  
while Earth hardly needs nitrogen, all our other 
space colonies would, and it’s rare in the inner  
solar system. Venus is a bit easier to get off 
of than Earth, has considerably more nitrogen in  
its atmosphere than we do, and I suspect people 
will complain about us removing much nitrogen  
from Earth. The other obvious location for that 
is Titan, but it strikes me as a less appealing  
place to live on. Or over anyway, living on 
Venus’s surface is a nightmare, though living  
there is possible with sufficient brute force 
application of heat shielding so it might be home  
for the motivated hermit or some doomsday bunker.
Asteroids are another good pick for a homestead  
life, especially as many are small enough an 
individual might plausibly own one. There’s  
around a million asteroids in the belt a 
kilometer or wider, more than large enough  
to stuff an entire major metropolis into or build 
an entire O’Neill Cylinder out of. There are tens  
of millions a 100 meters across, as big in 
every dimension as a football field is long,  
and with more than enough resources in them 
to build a Kalpana scale habitat all on your  
own while providing you resources for trade and 
lots of silicon to be building a solar farm from. 
But solar farms, or space farms, are also a 
plausible pathway for a small group, family,  
or individual, we talked about the economics 
of space farming more in our episodes space  
farms and Agriworlds, but it's not too hard 
to imagine a family that wanted to stay in  
real-time communication range with Earth opting 
to setup a hydroponic or dirt farm in one of the  
Lagrange Points along with the large cloud 
of other facilities that might grow there,  
as we looked at recently in our Lagrange 
Point Settlements episode. How many tons of  
food per year do you need to export to other 
space settlements or spaceships for that to  
be profitable? In the earlier space settlement 
days, that might not need to be much more than  
your own family eats, as a new variation 
on subsistence farming that was the norm  
for a lot of people in the last few Millennia.
How much oxygen and metal do you need to refine  
from your hab-dome built over a small crater 
in the Moon to buy that food and replacement  
gear for your refinery, smelter, and in-home 
water recycler? How many square meters or feet  
of thin solar panels do you need to build and 
clean and maintain to beam out enough watts of  
power from your cislunar orbital power grid to 
buy oxygen, food, water, and air scrubbers? And,  
of course, to service your loan on buying 
the place or pay your taxes or rents. 
It is worth remembering that homesteading 
might have a traditional history of literal  
subsistence farming, trading for a few things 
you can’t make yourself with your surplus,  
but this might as easily be a family server 
farm in orbit overseeing data moving around  
or the big node for the local internet cache 
in that section of the asteroid belt so that  
those nearby don’t have to send queries all 
the way back to Earth to load a webpage. 
Let’s make up a hypothetical case. The average 
human settler near Jupiter needs 10 new liters  
of water a day, between building up a cistern 
and some loss and leakage, and can pay 1% of  
their total income for water and half of that goes 
to shipping. Thus a homestead on Europa melting  
and purifying ice or pumping it up from the 
subsurface ocean kilometers below need to produce  
200 liters per person per day, probably more for 
equipment and setup costs, but to indicate how low  
a threshold that is, a family of 5 would need 
only a cubic meter of ice a day to get there,  
to meet their needs as ice miners on Europa. Even 
that far from the Sun, they don’t need that many  
reflective panels or parabolic dishes to melt 
that much ice, or to run the cutting beams for  
getting chunks out and dropping them into an 
ice catapult to launch to orbital collectors.  
Which might be another small farm equivalent.
Up in orbit of Mars a small rotating habitat  
uses a slow spinning but large orbital mirror 
as its counterweight, the paper-thin mirror  
kept rigid by that spin, and the light and power 
it shines down feeds the homestead down on Mars.  
In the realm of high automation and efficiency, 
and when the goal is material subsistence plus  
some to spare, you don’t necessarily need much 
to work off of. Post-scarcity doesn’t imply that  
you casually burn resources, and in practice 
what it really means is that you don’t have to  
scrabble for basic survival or worry that the 
supply is rapidly diminishing and won’t last. 
And that takes us to a final train of thought, 
because in a post-scarcity civilization of that  
variety you’re not leaving home because you’re 
worried you will starve to death or that the stars  
contain great riches for you personally. Some 
suggest that since it does imply a harder life,  
only the very independent sorts of people might 
do it, and that reasoning seems sound enough  
but we need to remember that one of the big 
keystones of post-scarcity tends to be virtual  
reality. People aren’t really motivated by 
an abundance or scarcity of oil or water;  
they are motivated by their ability to fulfill 
survival needs and wants of a complex variety that  
we see in things like Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs.
Basic physiological ones like food, water, sleep,  
and shelter, but also other things like amusement, 
status, fantasy, and do so in a way that Virtual  
Reality can offer and which many a book, movie, 
or game already does. You can be king of the  
world in VR, even if you’re in a cramped apartment 
somewhere eating Ramen noodles, and so your metal  
and oxygen dome on the Moon might simply be your 
way of paying for computing time, life extension  
treatments, and nutrapaste. Your personal fiefdom 
or space homestead doesn’t need to be very much  
to support your lifestyle. In practice I suspect 
these would be much more purposeful lives with  
more luxuries into which people often spent 
time in VR, but that’s probably not Universal. 
But to take a contrary note, the reality of 
options like this is that in some scenarios,  
if you’ve got your own ship and 3D printer 
and STC and Encyclopedia Galactica,  
you don’t actually need anyone else, the ship 
AI can feed you plenty of believable persons  
and places to enjoy. And that takes us to the 
Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis of the Fermi Paradox. 
For my part I don’t believe that people would 
universally bury themselves in Virtual Worlds.  
There’s also the concern that civilizations 
would collapse from the ability of devices  
like advanced 3D printers to let some lone 
madman build doomsday devices. Even if only  
1 in a million people want to build and unleash 
a nuclear bomb, then society either collapses or  
spreads way out. I tend to think this is 
unlikely too but that’s more of a hunch. 
Also, regardless of if it’s true it just needs to 
be believable. If tons of people with access to a  
personal spaceship, de facto biological 
immortality, STCs, and an Encyclopedia  
Galactica think they need to be far away to keep 
surviving, and can survive in indefinite luxury  
even far away from others, then lots of them are 
going to do this, even if just temporarily for a  
few decades or centuries. And in my opinion, 
if technology does permit this strategy, for  
an individual or a small group even, then tons of 
people are going to do just that, and I consider  
this scenario more likely than not to occur.
Indeed, I rather expect that the main wave  
of colonization out into the galaxy will 
constantly be bumping into various worlds  
or systems where someone fled at full 
speed and stopped when they felt they  
were so far away no one would ever get there.
But where this becomes a Fermi Paradox solution  
is if we assume both conditions are true, that 
folks can live indefinitely in isolation and  
that any place civilization gets big enough and 
lasts long enough it inevitably gets wrecked  
by some lone madman or idiot playing with 
dangerous AI or some other doomsday tech.  
Folks inevitably survive from that, or are 
nearby and can flee, and eventually get the  
point that survival is about having a large stash 
of resources to run your machines and computers. 
So there’s very little communication or 
astronomically visible signs of life and  
folks tend to grab up a personal stash that will 
last them a few billion years – which might fit  
into a ship not much bigger than a very large 
house if they’re efficient with resources – and  
then fly off into the intergalactic void 
since they have all they need and they  
want to be somewhere nobody will find them and 
they don’t have much reason to have way more  
resources than they need as some might come 
after them to steal it. They don’t qualify  
as Loud Aliens and aren’t visible. And again we 
deep dived this a couple months back on Nebula  
in our Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis episode.
I’m quite sure folks will do this if they can too,  
I just tend to think it will be the minority and 
most will prefer to stay in or near civilization  
and that civilization will find ways to work 
around the tendency to implode. That we will  
see plenty of new planets with tons of people 
and suburban space habitats, but also various  
folks living more on their own or far from others. 
This will doubtless go through a lot of different  
iterations in various times and places.
The good news is that if you want your  
personal homestead, you can probably have 
it. Whether that’s a space farm or a dome  
on Mars or the Moon, or your own floating 
sky garden above the clouds on Venus.
I think part of the appeal of settling space 
is that pioneer spirit, to travel to new  
lands and see new sites, and to help forge 
new worlds, to take a barren wasteland and  
turn it into a paradise. If that sounds like 
fun, you should try out Cell to Singularity,  
a free-to-play science-based game that lets you 
take life from a barren Early Earth era of the  
most basic lifeforms through dinosaurs and other 
epochs all the way to modern times, then go beyond  
our world to forge a future out among the stars.
Cell to Singularity’s designers are also fans of  
our show so they take Science & Futurism 
seriously, while also giving the game a  
compelling science fiction flavor. Tap into the 
Extraordinary tale of Evolution in this cosmic  
clicker game, where you start as a single celled 
organism, then upgrade your biology, intellect,  
and technology until you engulf an entire planet 
with a civilization on the brink of technological  
singularity. Explore from Early Earth out to 
among the stars, in a game that fits easily into  
your busy day and again is free to play, whether 
you're on your PC or phone, just search Cell to  
Singularity on Steam, Google Play, or iOS, and 
start evolving your new civilization today! 
We’ll get to the schedule in a moment, but 
speaking of pioneering space and boldly  
going where no man has gone before, I wanted to 
congratulate William Shatner, the original Captain  
Kirk of the USS Enterprise, for winning the 2024 
Heinlein Award which he’ll be coming by to receive  
at the International Space Development Conference 
in Los Angeles at the end of May. He will be only  
the 19th recipient since the award’s inception 35 
years ago, which includes fellow Star Trek Alum  
Gene Roddenberry, and such other notables as Elon 
Musk, Stephen Hawking, Carl Sagan, Robert Goddard,  
Arthur C. Clarke, Freeman Dyson, Gerard K. 
O’Neill, Wernher von Braun, Neil Armstrong, Buzz  
Aldrin, James Lovel, Chuck Yeager, Robert Zubrin, 
Jerry Pournelle, Peter Diamandis, and Lori Garver.  
So very good company indeed. For those wondering, 
I received the Pioneer Award back in 2020’s ISDC,  
not the Heinlein, it’s one of the 4 awards we give 
out from the National Space Society, of which I’m  
just finishing my first year as President of, and 
I’m very much looking forward to this year’s ISDC,  
more details to follow as we get closer to the 
event and flush out the schedule post-holidays. 
Speaking of schedules, this weekend, on February 
11th, for Sci-Fi Sunday, we’ll ask what might make  
a civilization quarantine an entire planet and how 
that might be enforced. On the 15th we’ll explore  
various technologies made possible through black 
holes, including galaxy-wrecking weapons we call  
quasar cannons. Then on the 22nd we’ll ask if it 
is possible to terraform the moon to have green  
lands, blues seas, and white clouds, just like 
Earth, and then visit the topic of Vacuum Trains  
and other hyperfast transit systems on Sunday 
February 25th, before finishing the month on  
February 29th, as we leap into the topic of life 
on colony ark ship carrying people to new worlds  
that will carry us ahead into this leap year.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Topopolis: 
The Eternal River, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
