So today’s topic, the Kardashev Scale, is
a familiar one for channel regulars.
We have talked about it before in passing
a few times but we have never actually focused
down on it and discussed the implications
of what it means, what sort of abilities civilizations
with it would have, or what sort of flaws
it has as a scale.
This episode can also be viewed as either
a culmination or summary episode of a lot
of the other episodes or as an introduction
to them, as we have discussed a lot of the
individual abilities of these kind of civilizations
before.
So I am going to be referencing previous episodes
a lot.
If this is your first time to the channel
you might want more detail and can go to those
episodes for them, and you probably also want
to turn on the closed captions.
We might as well start with the basics, back
in 1964 astronomer Nikolai Kardashev created
a clever scale for identifying the size of
civilizations.
Unfortunately, it only has three official
steps, planetary, solar, and galactic.
This is kind of like have three sizes of drinks,
where you’ve got large, extra-large, and
gigantic, and to make it worse if the large
size was a one liter cup, the extra-large
would be an Olympic Swimming Pool, and the
gigantic is the Earth’s oceans.
This is a bit of an awkward scale to use if
you want to describe a tablespoon sized civilization
or maybe a bathtub sized one.
The other issue is that it goes strictly off
available power, which isn’t bad if you
have to pick one thing to use, but is not
really ideal either.
After all a modern computer can walk all over
something like ENIAC from back in the days
when vacuum tubes were state of the art technology
and a modern one uses much less power.
So too, the post-stellar civilizations we
discussed in the Black Hole Farming video
run on so little power they make a Double-A
battery look like the Hoover Dam, and yet
they would regard even the biggest civilization
we will discuss today as tiny newcomers.
Kardashev wanted a quick and simple system
and it caught on.
So we are kind of stuck with it now.
I doubt he expected it to go into common usage
or he likely would have scaled it better.
I will link the English translation of the
original 1964 paper, “Transmission of Information
by Extraterrestrial Civilizations”, in the
episode description, but it will put context
on why it seems like I am being critical of
the scale but not of Kardashev himself.
The scale itself is a quick aside to give
a general notion what we ought to be looking
for when looking for alien civilizations.
He does not even care about our own, which
does not even make it onto the scale as a
Type I civilization, let alone anything pre-technological.
Now the three types he outlines, types 1,
2, and 3, are defined by how much power they
have access too.
A Type I has access to an energy budget equal
to a whole planet, a Type II a whole star,
and a type III a whole galaxy.
Humanity would not yet be a Type I. Though
a planet sprawling super-city like we discussed
in Ecumenopolises Episode would be.
A Type II would be a full on Dyson Sphere
or Dyson Swarm which we have talked about
in many episodes, but as a reminder it is
a collection of power collectors or artificial
habitats around a star that absorb most of
its light, though it is often portrayed as
a big shell.
Type III is not a galaxy-spanning civilization
as most tend to think, where people inhabit
most of the decent planets around most yellow
stars.
That might sound bigger than a Dyson Swarm,
a Type II, but in fact a Type II, or K2 civilization,
one with a Dyson Swarm, would flat out smash
such a galactic empire.
A Type III, or K3 civilization, is one where
every single star has been turned into a Dyson
Swarm.
Lots of folks have proposed minor alterations
to the Kardashev Scale, or whole new scales,
but I think Carl Sagan had the best modification
that keeps it as basically the same scale,
but a bit more useful.
He basically just tweaked it to follow a better
order of magnitude scale, nice even tens.
So in Sagan’s a civilization with access
to about a Megawatt of power, or 10^6 Watts
is a Type-0, a Type-1 one would be 10^16 Watts,
a bit less than Earth gets, a Type-2 would
be 10^26 Watts, which is pretty close to our
sun’s output, and a Type-3 would be 10^36
Watts, a bit less than the Milky Way’s output.
This is a lot better, because it means you
can just take the exponent of 10 to the whatever,
subtract 6 and divide by ten and have a nice
smooth scale.
It’s not quite as smooth and intuitive as
I’d prefer, but it holds to the basic Kardashev
scale and is a lot easier to work with in-between
states.
In the Sagan modified version a classic Kardashev
1 would actually be a 1.1, but K2 and K3 would
remain a K2.0 and 3.0, and now we can scale
smoothly to any size, so I will use that the
rest of the episode.
I should also note that while planets and
galaxies vary in size quite a lot, stars vary
even more hugely, from ones that are millions
of times more powerful than our star to ones
less than a ten-thousandth as powerful.
That’s ten whole orders of magnitude, an
entire level on our scale.
And possibly excluding the very brightest
and shortest lived stars, you would want to
build a Dyson swarm around any star.
It is not like planets, where those you might
terraform to be Earth-like will all be within
an order of magnitude or so, and even galaxies
do not vary that much in size.
Now as I mentioned, energy access does not
necessarily tell you much about the technology
or population of a civilization, but we also
have to decide what we mean by energy access.
Current world power consumption is about 12
terawatts, or about 10^13 watts, which would
match up on our Sagan modified Kardashev Scale
as a 0.7 civilization.
We would be a Type 0.7, or K.7.
But we use a lot more power than that in truth,
arguably the whole planet, since our food
crops use a lot of energy, way more than we
do.
Once you get past the K1 stage that sunlight
energy for plants starts to be something you
have to pay for, either by creating it in
fusion reactors or building habitats in space
exposed to sunlight.
In that regard we would already qualify as
a full blown K1.0 civ, or close to it.
Of course viewed that way we have been pretty
close to that for a long time.
Alternatively a K0 civilization ought to have
about a megawatt of power, which in more classic
terms is 1300 Horsepower.
Or in more humans terms, about 10,000 people-power.
I find that an appropriate number, since the
term civilization originally referred to living
in cities, and those do not emerge until you
start having thousands of people bonded together
a bit more interdependently then even loose
associations of multiple tribes that hunter-gatherers
often had.
This is also when you can start having machines
more complex than very simple one that just
amplify or focus human strength, like the
level or wedge or axe.
So I would say the dawn of history would be
when we reached K0
The Scale is inevitably arbitrary in many
respects, after all if I included all the
energy used by a hunter-gather civilization,
to include the sunlight used to grow the plants
which produced the nuts and berries they gathered
and the fed the animals they hunt, an individual
person requires very nearly a gigawatt to
survive.
While that same land and sunlight could support
a hundred times as many people with fairly
unsophisticated farming techniques.
One would think the latter civilization ought
to be much higher on the scale.
Similarly those of you who recall the Ecumenopolises
or Matrioshka Brains episodes would see how
these would also presumably rank much higher
than the usual K1 or K2 civilizations they
would be compared to.
These energy levels tell us nothing about
technology, again the scale was meant for
civilizations past where we are now.
But higher states doesn’t imply more technology,
except insofar as you would expect that to
get to those higher places on the scale you
had to be around for quite a while with a
very large population, meaning you have a
ton of researchers who have been working for
a very long time.
Of course technology might just come to a
halt, we cannot assume we can always just
discover new things.
You do not need much more technology than
we have now thought to colonize the galaxy.
We have discussed before how we basically
only need fusion, and maybe not even that,
to colonize the entire galaxy.
So while we can at least say no one is getting
themselves onto the classic Kardashev Scale
without roughly modern technology, we cannot
assume any technology beyond that.
With that in mind, we will be looking at scenarios
where the only new tech of significance ever
invented are just those we might call near
horizon, not necessarily guaranteed but in
that zone where most scientists would say
‘yes, that’s quite likely’ and few if
any would say ‘no, that is probably impossible’
or ‘I would not even know where to start’.
And be it K1, K2, K3, or even higher, we figure
they have not discovered one new big thing.
None of us think that will be the case, but
as we discuss some of the awesome things K2
and K3 civilizations can do, just using technology
we have now or nearly do, just remember how
much more majestic they would be with those.
As we will see, they are pretty awe-inspiring
without them too.
Now even the modified Kardashev Scale, which
is way better at doing increments, is not
that great at providing scale.
In some way it easier to think of it as a
population scale, and the Sagan-modified one
is pretty decent for that since you can just
remove the decimal place and treat that as
the order of magnitude.
A 1.0 is 10^10, or 10 billion people, a 2.0
is 10^20, or 100 billion-billion people, a
3.0 is 10^30 or a million-trillion-trillion
people, and the in-betweens increments will
work pretty well too.
As we have also discussed before, while delaing
with people who are basically human in their
biological needs, a megawatt of power is a
pretty generous power budget per person even
when you need to supply the sunlight for your
food too.
It’s not perfect but it gives a decent zone
that is about right.
If we assume a classic K1 civilization, one
with the full output of all the energy that
hits their planet, you would probably wonder
where one that had terraformed all the other
rocky planets and moons in the solar system
would be.
You might be disappointed that it was only
a 1.1 or 1.2.
It goes up in orders of magnitude after all.
Something like the Federation from Star Trek
might make it in as a 1.3, Isaac Asimov’s
Empire from the Foundation series of tens
of millions of worlds a 1.7.
And a galactic empire of billion of planets
would just manage to make it in as a K2 civilization.
A whole sprawling galactic empire just barely
manages to match one lone Dyson sphere in
scale and power.
Yet as we have discussed many times on this
channel, a star encompassing Dyson Sphere,
the thing which defines a K2 civilization,
is not super-advanced technology that only
some ancient high-tech civilization sprawling
over thousands of solar systems might build.
Quite to the contrary you would probably have
started construction before the first interstellar
colony ships left on their long voyages.
I imagine you would get better at building
it as your technology improved but you do
not actually need to have that improvement.
So what can a K2 do?
We have talked about some of their abilities
before.
They can move their own star, albeit slowly,
by means of the Shkadov Thruster we discussed
in megastructures episode 8 and which is an
innate ability of any Dyson Sphere.
It can flat out blow up any planet in the
galaxy, as good as the Death Star from Star
Wars, either by use of giant laser beam or
more likely laser propelled relativistic kill
missiles, RKMs, that we discussed in episode
9.
It can send those out one after another destroying
planet after planet and even arrange for them
to hit all at the same time.
It is civilization that regards building a
death star sized object as a minor expense.
It also is not one that has any shortage of
construction material.
We talked about that a couple weeks ago in
the Starlifting episode.
They also have no shortage of labor to use
to construct stuff with even if they haven’t
got the kind of super-automation we discussed
in the self-replicating machines episode.
A K2 civilization would outnumber us by at
least a billion to one.
For every citizen we have on Earth they have
an entire Earth’s worth of population.
Even with no other major new technology to
their advantage they simply would dwarf us
like an elephant next to ant.
They would presumably have better tech too
since where we have hundreds of thousands
of researchers they would have hundreds of
trillions.
I have mentioned before, in regard to the
Fermi Paradox, that no civilization would
bother hiding themselves since once they have
sent out those first radio waves the cat is
out of the bag.
I have also mentioned that interstellar empires
do not need to wait till a world has discovered
radio to detect them.
This is why, because while we employ thousands
of professional astronomers, a K2 civilization
could as easily employ trillions.
Enough to employ more than one person to constantly
watch every single star in the galaxy.
And you could build telescopes much bigger,
and also much cheaper, when you already have
an industrial base in space.
They could build a trillion telescopes, each
of which made the Hubble telescope look like
a toy, each aimed at a solar system constantly
and manned.
This does not even include that they can send
ships to all those places too.
In the star lifting episode we saw that a
civilization could pull thousands of Earth’s
worth of metal out of their own sun, but even
one-thousandth of an Earth’s worth of building
material would be enough to build an aircraft
carrier mass spaceship 100 trillion times
over again.
Enough to send whole fleets to every single
star in the galaxy without making a tiny pinprick
in your available construction mass.
And they can man every single one of those
fleets with millions of crew members too.
Not that you need to send giant armies out
to invade other solar systems hundreds of
light years away since you can breed your
invasion force during the long trip.
Colonizing the galaxy is obviously not a big
problem for them.
Whether they leap frog from star to star or
just settle everything directly from their
home system doesn’t much matter.
They can get out and colonize the galaxy and
turn every single star into another Dyson
Sphere.
This is where fiction just breaks down.
Authors rarely seem to try to tackle a K2
civilization let alone a K3.
I am not sure if the scale just blows their
mind, it certainly blows mine, or if they
think the audience just won’t be able get
into any story that is set on that kind of
scale.
It’s hard to write about a battle with one
when it could dump a billion soldiers on a
planet as an invasion force and regard that
like sending in a single small squad of advance
troops.
Or that, even if they were quite peaceful,
they could have the equivalents to Arlington
National Cemetery that could sprawl over entire
planet sized areas as labyrinthine necropolises.
Of course a K2 might be a biologically immortal
one, we talked about that option in the Transhumanism
video, but if it weren’t, if they were just
like us, then they’d have several billion
people being born and dying every single second.
I wouldn’t expect they would bury them all
in the same place, or even to necessarily
bury them at all, but using the typical 50
square foot burial plotyou would fill up several
thousand square miles in a second and have
the entire North American continent as nothing
but head stones in every direction inside
an hour.
You’d be able to layer the entire planet
with corpses every day, and a new one each
day.
Of course there’s no reason you would bury
everyone in the same place, and indeed I do
not want to imply a K2 would be some unified
civilization.
The thing about a classic Dyson swarm, say
one made of rotating habitats in the O’neill
Cylinder range, which has about a sixth of
land area of Long Island in New York, is that
you would need trillions of these things each
home to around a million or more people.
Or less if it was a dedicated nature preserve
or something.
That’s another ability of K2 civilizations,
they could devote a tiny portion of their
energy budget to nature preserve habitats
and have thousands of planet’s worth of
habitats just for critters.
A K2 has over a billion times the living area
we do, and you can make habitats on par with
large islands or places like Yosemite National
Park without needing any super-strong materials
and you could make billions of those without
them being even a percent of your space, because
you have trillions of those kind of habitats.
Yet in spite of that, when formed up as a
Dyson Swarm, they would not be any nearer
to each other than a few thousand miles or
kilometers.
Space is big, and a Dyson Swarm is not a 2D
flat shell, it can be tens of millions of
kilometers thick.
It’s a foggy cloud not a shell.
Each of those habitats is basically its own
nation-state and if it is orbiting as part
of a ring then it only has two permanent neighbors,
the one before and the one after it in their
orbit around the Sun.
These are very self-sufficient constructs
and it probably could not even be blockaded
from the sun’s light since it likely would
have a backup fusion reactor or something,
and if it did they could have billions of
years’ worth of fuel stored up on hand,
and they can pretty much recycle everything
else.
Trying to besiege one might be a process of
several million years if you are not willing
to actually attack it, just embargo it.
You can certainly blow up an O’neill cylinder,
but trying to invade and occupy one would
be a nightmare with essentially only two skinny
openings to come through.
So you have a setup that trends toward a lot
of autonomy, since once built, especially
if they do have fusion technology, they do
not need new shipments of material or fusion
fuel more often than on huge timelines and
you are pretty much limited to telling anyone
who feels like being isolationist to do as
you tell them or you will kill all of them.
Which is not as good a negotiating position
as it sounds like.
You have got ‘we will cut off your internet’
and ‘we will blow up your habitat’ as
your diplomatic arsenal.
Presumably you would end up with at least
a lot of leagues of associated habitats who
had at least a loose set of rules you had
to follow to stay in that group.
It could be a lot more unified than that too,
but that is the caveat on the sheer scale
of these civilizations because there is no
obvious means of compelling unified action
short of outright blowing up habitats.
Don’t expect that to result in inaction
though, we have never had a single unified
planetary government and we still get a lot
done, and that has been the case for countries
with very autonomous subdivisions or very
unified ones too.
A billion colony ships launched by a tiny
sliver of a K2 instead of hundreds of trillions
is still pretty effective at colonizing a
galaxy.
Any individual habitat ought to be quite capable
of building an interstellar ark all on its
own too, or people from all over could crowdsource
them.
But it is another good reminder of scale,
you could have entire religions or political
parties kicking around a K2 whose numbers
dwarfed even our biggest modern ones that
could get regarded as a tiny little cult.
I was joking after I made the megastructures
videos on Discworlds and Hoopworlds that they
are indeed very impractical but I figure someone
would still build one.
They are quite impractical but you could crowdsource
construction of something like that in a K2
civilization just off the tiny percent of
the population who thought it was amusing
enough to chip in the equivalent of ten bucks
to the fund it.
They could do the same for whole fleets of
colonizing vessels.
I keep coming back to scale on this because
it is what always gets missed in contemplating
it.
I think the mind shudders back from the concept
of a K2 civilization, something we might easily
be in under a thousand years, because that
scale is just so overwhelming.
It is a civilization in which a band most
people have never heard of could fill a planet
with their audience and have them packed in
as tightly as a mosh pit.
It is one where the heat energy released by
everyone watching a primetime TV show, if
released on the Earth, would incinerate every
living creature on land.
Going to war with such a civilization, even
if you did not have a technological edge,
would not be comparable to the United States
fighting a small country like Malta, it would
be like the entire NATO alliance picked a
fight with a single kindergartener.
There’s no point trying to hide from such
a thing, especially because a classic K2 civilization
is not a real one anyway, since they have
means to engage in robust colonization of
other solar systems long before they reach
full K2 status.
It does not matter what other technology you
might have, once you have a basic Dyson Sphere
partially built, even just a percent of a
percent of percent, you get access to all
the energy you need for Interstellar travel.
We have talked about that before, even if
you never get fusion and never get cool things
like kugelblitz black holes to drive your
starships, you can shove even large ships
up to relativistic speeds using nothing more
than modern technology and a ton of power.
Slamming trillions of watts of laser into
the back of a spaceship is not the image of
space travel we normally have, it is a very
brute force technique, but it gets the job
done.
And as I pointed out in the Interstellar Colonization
episode, you would also expect them to be
settling all those frozen rocks and rogue
planets that hang out between solar systems.
Not to mention colonizing your own outer solar
system which we will have an episode on soon.
So even as that Dyson Sphere is getting built
ever more completely, slowly adding more and
more objects to the swarm, your outer solar
system is getting colonized, your Oort Cloud
and every frozen rock in it is being made
someone’s home, and all those stars nearby
you are getting colonized too.
And I mean all of them.
There might be a marked preference for Yellow
Suns with Earth-sized planets that have liquid
water but when you get to the point that most
of your population was not even born on Earth,
but in some rotating habitat, a nice ring
of asteroids around some red dwarf looks quite
appealing.
Or even a dead white dwarf or a gas giant
that’s out in the frozen void
This does not even consider that those people
might not be much like us, they might be transhuman
cyborgs or outright digital people who live
on microchips and only care about how many
watts of energy they can get their hands on,
not what color the sun is.
Though of course every star is basically white
regardless that we tend to call them yellow
or orange or red.
So I would tend to think that by the time
most folks completed their first Dyson Sphere
they would actually be 2.1 or 2.2.
Even if 90% of the population lived back around
their own sun they could easily have several
thousand solar systems settled inside a century
of the first ships leaving.
The nearest star might be 4 light years away
but space is three-dimensional, and there
are over a thousand solar systems within 50
light years.
And if you sent a million colonists to each
one, they would fill up quite fast.
People can double in a single generation,
more actually, and even more if you have life
extension technology good enough that folks
are still having children when they are also
having great-great-grandchildren.
People mostly like children, we are kind of
wired up to do so, and in a post-scarcity
setup they aren’t a huge burden.
Especially if you are some 400 year old Methuselah
who has centuries of knowledge, experience,
and accomplishments behind you, and still
have all the vigor and hormones of 20 or 30
year old.
Colonists to new solar systems have no reason
not to increase their numbers and quite likely
jumped on a ship for a long voyage partially
for the ability to do so with impunity, or
even applause.
So you could see Dyson Spheres getting under
way around those even before we finished our
own while new systems are still being colonized
further out way back from Earth and then they
start getting underway.
At the edge of new space you’d probably
always have a shell of a few hundred light
years of newly colonized systems at various
degrees of expansion, around an iron core
of Dyson Spheres.
This would eventually absorb the entire galaxy
into a genuine K3 civilization.
The funny thing is that unless you actually
have found some way to travel faster than
light, or at least communicate faster than
light, both of which are probably impossible,
you never get a K3.
I mentioned already in regard to K2 civilizations
that the default setup, trillions of rotating
habitats that seem packed together but in
reality have a lower population density than
earth, would probably tilt toward a lot of
autonomy and local sovereignty.
But there at least you do have the option
to have common authority of some sort since
you can threaten to just blow up habitats
that misbehave too much and there is at least
a minimal need to get along and make sure
you have some basic rules for radio traffic
and ships and habitats to move around.
It is not much, but there is some minimal
need for cooperation and some option to compel
people to cooperate.
Once you get into other solar systems there
is just none.
Yes the original solar system and later the
core systems near it will probably have a
strong headlock on technology and science
and new art and entertainment.
But it would be very hard to prevent anyone
from getting their hands on it considering
it would only take one infiltrator with a
decent laser beam to send that information
on to their rebellious home system.
So to be honest I just don’t think anyone
would try to maintain an interstellar empire.
I don’t think you would see interstellar
wars either.
I can imagine hundreds of wars going on inside
a K2, with armies and fleets that would make
World War 2 look like a schoolyard brawl,
though ironically even such conflicts might
be considered minor squabbles inside an otherwise
peaceful solar system.
But interstellar ones, without faster than
light travel, would almost have to be limited
to squabbling over all those tiny icy rocks
in between those solar systems which might
best be regarded as rural villages of mighty
metropolises.
Space, again, is also 3-dimensional, so you
have not got a few neighbors to pick a fight
with, you have dozens.
Now I could see interstellar organizations,
or relative loose confederations with agreed
on trade rules and currency, that sort of
thing, but not what we would think of as an
interstellar empire, maybe the occasional
close union of a few hundred systems set against
the backdrop of a few hundred billion colonized
systems.
So in that sense a K3 civilization, as a unified
thing, is probably something that can never
happen without some sort of workaround to
the speed of light.
As a caveat to this though we need to remember
that there are quite a few places in the galaxy
where stars are much closer together and in
those you could get some genuine interstellar
empires.
Similar, from what you can do with Starlifitng
and Shkadov Thrusters you could easily see
fairly tightly packed artificially created
pockets of red dwarf stars forming some sort
of super Dyson.
Or with fusion, no stars at all just a massive
cloud of habitats packed in as tight as they
can without cooking form their waste heat
or collapsing in together under their collective
gravity.
You get this kind of swarms even if you have
better sources of power than suns or fusion,
like black holes or antimatter, because you
want to be as close as you can to others for
communication and the distances between objects
in these swarms is already huge enough to
satisfy privacy.
The average distance between habitats is huge,
and if that is not intuitive enough, the average
distance between individual people if we scattered
them evenly would be on an order or tens of
miles or kilometers.
So people are not spacing themselves out more
for privacy, they’ve got it.
They are doing it for waste heat and gravity.
Closer together allows you to talk to people
who are not in your habitat real time or with
minimal light lag.
Historically empires have often managed to
keep things welded together even when it took
routine communications months to get from
point A to B and armies a year or more to
travel.
So if we were generous an and assume a 1-light
year radius could hold together, and we contemplated
that as a place where we just packed habitats
in as much as we could without needing some
new way to get rid of heat, that could actually
be a few billion times more energetic than
a classic Dyson sphere and that would be pretty
close to a K3.
I have no idea what to name something like
that and I don’t feel like coining a term
so if anyone can come up with one let me know
in the comments.
Some giant sprawl of habitats numbering in
the billions of trillions, each running on
their own fusion reactor in some giant light-year
wide cloud bathed in infrared waste heat.
Probably with quadrillions of ships flowing
in to stop at each one every few thousand
years to re-tank their fusion fuel from massive
bunkers left over from using starlifting to
cannibalize a thousand suns.
Anyway, that’s about the only scenario I
can see, if the speed of light remains a barrier,
for anything like a unified K3 civilization,
and that could stomp all over a K2 the way
a K2 could stomp all over us.
Now there really is not anything a K3 can
do that a K2 could not do anyway.
They would probably have way better technology
but we already agreed not to use that as our
standard.
After all the Kardashev scale is entirely
power based and a classic K3 would be a tiny
slow pipsqueak compared to a single Matrioshka
Brain, which is a K2 or maybe a K2.1 at best,
But there is a long way between a K2 and a
K3, and any number if 2.1 or 2.2 or 3 could
engage in all sorts of projects like moving
or making stars.
I joked about a K2 crowdsourcing the construction
of a discworld or hoopworld earlier, these
could probably get away with crowdsourcing
an Alderson Disc.
Such civilizations can be moving and making
Stars.
They could be crowdsourcing bizarre megastructures
like an entire star with a shell around it
in the shape of face of a popular philosopher.
Or they could be taking an example like the
horsehead nebula and sculpting one to look
like their favorite musician when viewed from
their area of the galaxy.
You can do some pretty extreme stuff at that
level even if you are still running only on
the sort of technology we can see ourselves
developing in the next century or so.
You can even start launching projects to go
grab other galaxies that left to themselves
would drift over the cosmological event horizon
and drag them back.
You can move galaxies as easily as stars,
technology-wise anyway, obviously you have
to scale things up a lot.
Our own galaxy will stay locked to a handful
nearby us even as the expansion of the Universe
drags other galaxies away but you can get
out to probably at least several thousand
nearby galaxies and convert large chunks of
them into Shkadov thrusters powerful enough
to shove their galaxy our way fast enough
to beat that out.
Maybe a good deal more too.
Even if you had to expend fully half that
galaxy’s mass to get it back here and it
would take a hundred billion years that might
be worth it.
This brings up the notion of civilizations
beyond a K3, something Kardashev deliberately
avoided defining as he viewed it as rather
pointless.
Even a civilization that had swarmed out over
an entire Galactic Supercluster still would
not meet the definition of a K4 using our
open-ended Sagan modified form.
And even a civilization which somehow had
access to the entire mass of the Universe
and could convert it into energy could still
only operate as a K5 civilization, on with
10^56 Watts of power to work with, for a few
million years.
Civilizations at that scale can only be contemplated
if you definitely have access to either faster
than light travel or there is a multi-verse
and you can access that.
Or you have just learned to sneer at the Laws
of Thermodynamics and genuinely do have the
equivalent of a power strip that can run by
plugging it into itself.
I think we will wrap up on that note.
As mentioned, we discuss a lot of these ideas
more in other episodes and will probably have
even more episodes on some of these topics
in the future.
By now you ought to have some feel for how
immense these sorts of civilizations can be
and why we could and will probably become
one ourselves.
This also wraps up closely with the Dyson
Dilemma of the Fermi Paradox since it is contemplating
what these sorts of civilizations can do and
how likely they are that leads to the conclusion
of the Dyson Dilemma that intelligent life
must be exceedingly uncommon or we should
see these everywhere by now.
By the way I would like to thank Martin Rezny
of Rezonance for providing the musical accompaniment
for this episode.
If you would like to hear more of his work,
or just hear it without me talking over it,
he’s on soundcloud and there’s a link
in the episode description to his work.
If you enjoyed this episode, make sure to
subscribe to the channel for alerts when new
episodes come out, and please like and share
the episode with others.
Unitl next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great day!
