This episode is brought to you by Brilliant
As natural disasters go, exploding stars are
to a volcano what a volcano is to a house
fire.
As weapons go, they are to a hydrogen bomb
what a hydrogen bomb is to a hand grenade.
None of which you want to be near when they
go off...
Or do you?
When the largest of stars explode, for a brief
moment that supernova will outshine every
star in their galaxy combined, unleashing
energies that will shred their orbiting planets
and might sterilize thousands of neighboring
solar systems.
Today we’re going to be examining how future
stellar empires might avoid, mitigate, or
prevent such disasters, and also how they
might intentionally create them as a weapon.
But more than that, we will look at how they
might be used to run those empires, how the
stars that cause them might be the most valuable
in the galaxy and how even the supernova itself
might be harnessed for our ends, to run engines
of breathtaking scale.
If you’re new to the channel, welcome to
SFIA, where explosions that can decimate whole
worlds are under contemplation as engines
of creation.
Don’t forget to hit the subscribe button
if you want alerts when more such videos come
out.
Of course Supernovae are already an engine
of creation, and are well known for their
role in creating all the heavier elements
we need to live from the hydrogen and helium
forged shortly after the Big Bang.
But giant stars exploding is just one type
of Supernova, and neither it nor the other
types are the only source of those heavy elements,
many of which are not even created in your
typical supernova.
A couple weeks back we looked at colonizing
giant stars and we limited ourselves only
to those stars of less than 8 solar masses,
which is to say less than 8 times our Sun’s
Mass.
Virtually every star in the Universe is from
8% our Sun’s Mass to 8 times our Sun’s
mass, but we do have rare stars more massive
than that, some more than a hundred times
more massive than our Sun, and they are easy
to see as they are many thousands of times
brighter than our own Sun, some being even
more than a million times brighter.
They are not thousands or millions of times
more massive than our Sun though, and this
is part of why they are few in number, very
large stars burn their fuel up far faster
and less efficiently than most stars and they
die quickly.
Indeed the biggest might only live a million
years, while the smallest stars might live
over a trillion, and in comparison the one
is a dim campfire that will burn all night
while the other a truckload of TNT set off
in under a second, such giant stars might
end in a fiery explosion but compared to a
red dwarf, their entire lifetime is essentially
a brief fiery explosion.
Such being the case it results in an assumption
that you would never colonize star systems
too close to a giant star that was a supernova
candidate, let alone colonize that star system
itself, and today we will challenge both assumptions.
In the first place, we need to remember that
everything is relative, and we use the term
‘astronomical’ to talk about something
being huge or hugely improbable precisely
because the astronomical scale is so insanely
big compared to our own existence.
If someone told me that they had two options
and only two options, to settle a giant star
set to die in a million years, along with
its dozens of neighbors, or to stay home and
colonize nothing, then even knowing they would
die, even if I was certain that was the only
outcome, I would still tell them to ship out
to that supergiant and its endangered neighbors,
because a million years is as long as humanity
has even been around and a hundred times longer
than human civilizations have truly existed.
However, that’s not the only outcome.
We have many ways to extend that timeline,
both in real years and subjectively, and to
see how we can do that, we must first understand
why stars explode.
First off, the notion that they burn their
fuel up and explode is not really accurate.
For these big stars, they are burning hydrogen
into helium or helium into carbon or so on,
and not just in their core.
That’s simply where it happens first and
fastest, and where it eventually stops once
the core is turned to iron which is the end
of fusion in stars.
Emphasis on that, there’s no fusion going
on in that core anymore when the explosion
comes.
Indeed the star will have come to resemble
an onion, the outermost still principally
made up of hydrogen, and the layers in between
dominated by helium, carbon, Neon, Oxygen,
Silicon and finally iron at the core.
These outer layers are what will be spread
by the supernova while the iron core turns
into a stellar remnant, a neutron star or
black hole.
Only stars massive enough to permit silicon
fusion into iron can go supernova.
Though in point of fact, the silicon does
not make iron at all, it makes Nickel-56 which
decays into Cobalt-56 which decays into Iron-56
over the course of a few months.
They expand into red giants, or red supergiants,
and may undergo quite a few changes, even
pulse and enter a blue loop where they rise
then drop in surface temperature.
But at some point down in the core the carbon
that’s been collecting from Helium-fusion
begins fusing, and this starts the doomsday
clock of about a thousand years as neon accumulates.
Once it switches over to burning neon, the
end is only a few years away, for oxygen burning
processes, mere months, and for silicon, mere
days, as nickel accumulates and decays into
iron.
This big ball grows until we have a metal
core of 1.4 Solar Masses, and now the sheer
mass of that metal ball with no fusion to
burn, to create outward pressure, and keep
it apart causes that core to collapse, in
mere seconds.
As it collapses it picks up speed while falling
inward, and therefore energy.
The collisions as it falls and gains energy
heat that metallic core up, emitting gamma
rays that tear the iron apart into what will
eventually be nothing but a dense ball of
neutrons, or a neutron star, assuming it doesn’t
collapse even further into a black hole.
All of this is emitting neutrinos, tons of
neutrinos, which interact so weakly they can
escape this ultra dense core to be absorbed
by the outer layers of the star and begin
shoving it away, initiating the Supernova.
I should note this collapse is insanely energetic
and emits a lot more than neutrinos, but the
sheer density of matter is now so high that
nothing but a neutrino could escape.
We’re now left with a dense core near collapsing
into a neutron star, but too hot to do so,
and we get a several-second thermal neutrino
blast, and while most of these neutrinos exit
the star without being absorbed by the upper
layers, some are absorbed and continue powering
the ejection of those layers.
These are some reasons why a Supernova is
not an ideal weapon, it’s omnidirectional,
most of it is neutrinos which are harmless
to anything not either super-dense or super-thick,
and of course it's hard to move a star where
you want it to be.
Note that when I say hard, that’s what I
mean, it is quite possible to move stars and
as we’ll see, moving big stars is often
easier than moving small ones.
This doesn’t mean you might not use a Supernova
as a weapon, but that implies some ability
to set one off, and that process is obviously
not natural so we need not limit ourselves
to merely natural ways of them occurring.
This could potentially be done by throwing
a big ball of iron into a star, or having
two such balls be shot from different directions
and impacting at the center of that star.
Our modeling of supernovae and stars in general
isn’t good enough to let us say how much
iron you would need other than that it would
depend on the star, with a bigger older star
needing a lot less to trigger.
It’s relatively easy to set one off around
a white dwarf, a stellar remnant from any
star not big enough to go supernova, which
is very nearly all of them, so they are very
common and you can ignite a nova simply by
dumping fresh hydrogen on it, causing a rapid
short flare up.
A supernova can be kindled on one of these
by simply putting far more matter in, so the
flare up rips the dead star apart, and this
is a Type 1 Supernova.
But let's go back before the explosion and
dead stars.
Again these largest stars die very quickly,
but they spend a long time just burning hydrogen
and then a decently long time as an expanded
giant burning helium too.
During all of this they are often giving off
huge amounts of matter, many times the amount
of solar wind our sun produces.
Indeed here is where we need to consider the
different masses of giant stars, because stars
can change in mass.
And I don’t mean in small amounts either,
like our own Sun does, or when they go bang,
or even the mass lost by fusion of hydrogen
into helium and sunlight.
Our Sun emits about 1.5 megatons of material
as solar wind per second, mostly hydrogen
and a little helium.
Now that’s a lot of material, enough that
if you are hanging at Earth’s distance from
the Sun in a spacesuit you would be getting
hit by around a trillions such particles a
second, however our Sun loses mass at almost
3 times that rate from fusion itself.
Between both the Sun loses something like
a couple hundred million megatons of material
a year, which as huge as it sounds, is still
trivial compared to the Mass of Earth, which
is around 30 million times that, let alone
the Sun, at around 10 trillion times that.
That mass leaves the Sun because it's super
hot, and you can think of it as something
like sweat evaporating off the Sun, carrying
material away.
The bigger the surface, the more comes off,
and the hotter it is, the more comes off.
Indeed the most massive stars, the Wolf-Rayet
Stars, can easily lose entire solar masses
over their lifetimes.
R126a1, a star in the Large Magellanic Cloud
on the edge of our galaxy and the current
record holder for most massive star known,
at over 200 Solar Masses, is thought to have
shed over 30 solar masses during its million
year lifetime.
So it is shedding material nearly a billion
times faster than our own Sun does.
That is very much at the high end, and there
are several mechanisms for mass loss, but
the critical elements are rotation and heat.
We went over the specifics of that process
in our Star Lifting episode, where we looked
at how to strip mass off our own sun by various
means, from the simple solar mirror heating
up a spot to the huff-and-puff method of magnetically
crunching the star to shoot out polar jets
of material.
The handy thing about bigger stars is they
already produce a lot more solar wind and
have much hotter surfaces during their main
sequence life.
Only O-Type and hotter B-type main sequence
stars, B0, B1, and B2-type can go Supernova,
and surface temperatures range from 20,000
Kelvin for B2 stars all the way up to 50,000
Kelvin for the hottest O-type main sequence
stars.
O-type stars are enormously bright, we estimate
around 1 in 10 million stars are O-type main
sequence, but several are naked-eye visible
from Earth, in spite of there only being around
5000 stars visible to the typical human eye.
These are not the brightest stars, that status
belongs to those near the end of their lives,
as they enter their own red giant, or rather
supergiant and hypergiant phases.
We tend to use the term ‘red giant’ to
mean all stars off the main sequence now burning
helium or even carbon for fuel, but the color
or spectral class can be any of them, be it
a Red “M-type” or a yellow G-type or Blue-White
B-type.
These produce even larger amounts of solar
wind and at lower speeds, since the star is
all expanded and less dense, so the escape
velocity is lower.
Stars off the main sequence are the easiest
to harvest for mass as they have spread out
so much their surface is barely gravitational
bound to the star anymore, but where these
big stars are concerned that’s a pretty
dangerous task.
Now mind you, stars don’t go supernova unpredictably,
and the reason we can’t predict them precisely
is because they are very rare anywhere near
us close enough to get good observations and
we have only been gathering real data on the
lifetimes of such stars for maybe a human
lifetime.
There’s no reason to expect stars would
go Supernova unexpectedly, or that those civilizations
near one would even have to guess as to what
year that would happen in.
Though since the key details are going on
down under millions of kilometers of superhot
gas, it probably helps to be better at neutrino
detecting, as any given type of fusion will
produce neutrinos of different speeds, so
a sudden uptick in neutrinos associated with
carbon burning or neon burning tells you it’s
time to start getting out of Dodge and a sudden
uptick in silicon burning tell you it’s
probably too late.
However, let’s not overdo the destructive
power of Supernovae.
Much like nuclear bombs, they are so associated
with obliteration that we can forget that
there is a range to which they are deadly
and that range depends on not just their own
strength but your armor.
As an example, while you would need to worry
about fallout, you are basically safe from
the blast and detonation of even a typical
hydrogen bomb if you are in a ditch or behind
an earth embankment even just a few kilometers
away.
So too, a supernova does not blow all the
planets in orbit around it into smithereens.
You do not need to be too far away from a
Supernova to ride out the explosion, indeed
it’s a pretty good way to give a starship
a speed boost out-system.
If you were evacuating a system where a Supernova
was expected and you could mark that time-zero
moment down decently accurately and confidently
then you would know exactly how close your
spaceships, based on their design, could be
and survive that explosion and even get a
push from it, like the universe’s biggest
and least efficient Orion drive, good for
just a single use.
And that evacuation time window would be on
a human timescale.
Supernovae do vary in strength but during
the month or so they shine brightest they
tend to be on an order of 10 billion times
brighter than our Sun, which means at 100,000
times the distance from them that Earth is,
or 100,000 AU, they would be as bright as
our Sun is, as 100,000-squared is ten billion,
and light and blasts in space fall off in
strength with the square of distance.
Of course 100,000 AU is pretty big, 1.58 light
years, but it should be easy enough to shield
a ship for a month even against 100 times
that energy, especially as much of it could
be reflected backwards to push your ship,
and 10,000 AU is much closer, especially given
that stars capable of going supernovae are
already thousands of times brighter than our
own Sun even when on Main Sequence and require
you to live hundreds of AU away from them
even before they entered their supergiant
phases.
As we discussed recently in Colonizing Giant
Stars, stars in these lifetime ranges are
not going to offer you planets you can terraform
because Earth-sized ones won’t have finished
coalescing and cooling by the time their star
dies.
Now as to evacuating neighboring systems,
that’s not a concern at all.
Such destructive blasts could damage ozone
layers of planets in neighboring systems but
that is easily shielded against by spacefaring
civilizations with advance notice.
We have a number of options, but the easiest
might simply be a physical barrier.
We looked at some methods for doing that in
our collaboration episode “5 Ways the World
Could End - And How We Can Survive It” with
Joe Scott a couple years back, but you only
need a relatively thin shield between your
world and the blast.
It’s harder to do if you are trying to protect
many planets and space habitats, but you have
far more manpower in such cases and each habitat
can be shielded and made reflective against
some of the incoming energy.
Yet another way living in space habitats is
much more practical than terraforming planets
to live on.
A full blown Kardashev-2 Civilization a few
light years from such a blast is ironically
more vulnerable to that supernova because
of all the extra energy coming in and nowhere
to put it.
For a Dyson Swarm englobing a nearby star,
you will have very nearly introduced a full
second sun into what is essentially a stellar
engine, running on a star, and not really
well suited to having the available sunlight
kicked up by 50% or similar for a whole month.
Now with advance warning that’s manageable
too and a supernova candidate is not going
to sneak up on you, so you can configure your
solar industry and capacity around the blast,
but you would be vulnerable to something like
a surprise supernova being set off on a white
dwarf remnant, or even a regular nova if the
white dwarf is fairly close.
Which is a thing to remember, these big stars
are often clustered together in groups, tight
packs where it isn’t 4 light years to the
nearest star but light months or days or even
minutes, as such colossal stars often have
binary companions or are in multiple stars
systems or even clusters.
Now one advantage of being spacefaring is
that it is fairly easy for you to build the
simplest type of stellar engine, the Shkadov
Thruster, which is essentially a Dyson Sphere
full of thin mirrors you use to bounce light
from a star in one direction so as to act
as a thruster.
These are most effective on big stars, where
the luminosity providing the thrust is vastly
higher compared to the mass resisting that
thrust than on a star like our own, let alone
a Red Dwarf.
A star a thousand times more massive than
another might need 1000 times as much push
to get to the same speed, but if it is producing
a billion times as much light and hence light
pressure, it’s accelerating more than a
million times faster.
Thus if you have two stars near each other,
one big and one little, one threatening to
explode, you build your Shkadov Thruster to
move the big one away not the little one
Now there are better ways to move stars faster,
see our episode Fleet of Stars for several
star moving methods, and some also work better
with bigger stars, like those relying on using
the solar wind as rocket propellant.
Indeed that works even better when you are
focusing the star's own sunlight back down
on it to heat it further and using that increased
solar wind, channeled in one direction, as
your propellant.
However, we won’t go into that option too
much for a couple reasons.
First while moving stars is awesome, it's
also time consuming even for supergiants,
and they have to be moved somewhere.
You could opt to shoot every supernova candidate
out of your galaxy by firing it up or down
from the galactic disc, but this still requires
a lot of lead time, and you’d have to be
careful you aren’t lobbing a grenade into
someone else’s territory.
Second, it's wasting mass.
When you’re done you have a shockwave of
matter containing some heavier elements, a
huge chunk of energy wasted as neutrinos,
and some worthless stellar remnant of a black
hole or neutron star.
Now both of those have potential uses we’ve
discussed in other episodes like Colonizing
Black Holes, but in general its smaller black
holes that are handy and our interest in the
one’s supernovae make is essentially of
the “Well it's here, we might as well use
it” variety.
Personally I don’t want to be bossed around
by some giant burning ball of plasma trying
to blow me up, and I suspect our descendants
will feel even more disinclined to let stars
dictate to them, which we will be exploring
in our next episode, Exo-Stellar Civilizations.
So our approach is essentially to destroy
that star, killing and dismembering it before
it can do the same to us.
Star lifting stars to get materials from them
is faster on hotter stars and faster on expanded
giants, so you are in a position to strip
a star down pretty quickly, using its own
heat and energy to power the process.
You’re just amplifying what they already
are doing in terms of heightened solar wind
or even the planetary nebulae often made by
red giants as they expand and shuck off their
outer layer of hydrogen.
I don’t want to make this sound like an
easy process, though a number of methods are
possible and some are fairly simple, and you
certainly have the energy for it.
These stars are pumping out trillions of times
more power than the Sun shines down on Earth,
and that’s a vast amount of energy.
The other aspect of it is that your civilization
has probably learned how to do controlled
fusion by some means other than H-bombs or
stellar-mass pockets of gas by then.
However, even if you haven’t, you could
be creating vast supercollider rings around
such stars to ram elements together to make
heavier elements rather than waiting for the
star to explode and do it, which incidentally
is not an energy efficient process.
You might pull off enough mass to lower the
star below the Supernova Threshold, of around
8 solar masses, while constantly cycling it’s
mass around to remove the helium and carbon
before they got to the point the could cause
it to leave the main sequence and you could
extend that stars life quite a lot in that
process, even cycling the hydrogen you removed
back down into it.
So you go to that star and start pulling material
off it as fast as you can, to form into either
a smaller star or even simply large self-gravitating
balls like gas giants or brown dwarfs, or
even thin shells or balloons full of gas at
Earth-size or much smaller.
You could even move these gases further out
in the system, to a colder region where they
would liquify, potentially storing them in
orbit around an outer planet, maybe commandeering
once small moons for your depots.
Heck, you might already have the gas mining
and processing infrastructure in the region.
But in the end you may need to harden that
infrastructure.
If ultimately you can’t prevent the explosion,
we did contemplate something called a Nova
Drive in that Fleet of Stars episode, and
that was a literal name and can be staged
up to Supernova levels, and works as a massive
engine if need be too.
An object designed to absorb a Supernova blast
and utilize all its energy and material shouldn’t
be considered impossible, especially given
that we don’t known what materials and tech
a future civilization might have, like 100%
reflective synthetic materials, but even with
mundane matter a big enough globe can suck
up a blast and the longevity of a civilization
is not necessarily about how long it lasts
in real time.
We often contemplate ultra-cold and efficient
civilizations living after the death of all
stars, such as in our Civilizations at the
End of Time series, the type that would need
these vast reservoirs of star-lifted materials,
and there we point out that even if it takes
a millions years to have a single thought,
when you are having them for a trillion, trillion,
trillion years you are existing for subjective
time scales, slowed though they are, that
are vastly longer than our Universe has existed.
However the reverse can be true, and is an
option we contemplate for Cosmological Fates
of the Universe like the Big Rip, where time
is more valuable than energy.
Here folks might opt for low efficiency ultra-fast
computing, existing for only thousands of
years around a supergiant star, or even only
a month around a supernova, but having so
much energy during that time that they can
run huge minds experiencing eons in mere seconds.
Such Super-Matrioshka Brains might be one
way to solve big problems in a hurry, running
it only briefly but at enormous power to solve
the problem.
All in all though, while a civilization around
these titanic stars would dwarf a typical
Dyson Swarm Kardashev-2 Civilization nearly
as much as one of those would dwarf our own,
I suspect the real way we will colonizing
these potentially dangerous stars is by killing
them, disassembling them before they blow
up, and we might end up doing that to all
these short lived stars.
However you might also take all that hydrogen
you siphoned off them and use it to run artificial
fusion or other processes, far from any natural
star, in the deep voids between stars or even
between galaxies.
We will examine such civilizations next time
in Exo-Stellar Civilizations.
Today we were looking at the life cycles of
stars and it can be a tricky topic, as can
be a lot of math and science, and if you’re
looking for a detailed and hands-on approach
to learning more about that topic, checkout
Brilliant’s Astronomy Course, and their
look at the life cycles of stars and the fusion
processes inside them.
I don’t think I have to tell anyone who
watches this channel both how important and
how rewarding learning is, you wouldn’t
be here if you didn’t have a passion for
scientific knowledge, but what is the best
way to learn something?
It’s not from dull lectures or memorizing
formulas.
We have a ton of research telling us what
the best methods for learning are but it probably
won't’ surprise you that the most critical
part of learning is that you have to do it.
You learn best while doing and solving in
real-time, and Brilliant’s website and app
are built around that principle.
Jump right into solving problems and be coached
bit-by-bit until, before you even realize
it, you've learned a new subject in STEM.
You won't need to memorize long messy formulas
and endless facts — just pick a course you’re
interested in, like Astronomy, and get started.
If you get stuck or make a mistake you can
read the explanations to find out more and
learn at your own pace.
Brilliant has something for everybody — whether
you want to start at the basics of math, science,
and computer science, or dive into cutting-edge
topics like Cryptocurrency or Quantum Computing,
and they do it all in a fun and interactive
way.
If you'd like to join me and a community of
8 million learners and educators today, click
the link in the description down below or
visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
So as mentioned we’ll be continuing our
discussion this weekend in our Scifi Sunday
mid-month episode, where we’ll look at the
idea of civilizations who are exo-stellar
and do not rely on stars for power, living
in the voids between stars or even galaxies.
Then next week we’ll be taking a look at
how to restore life with technology, in our
Episode “Resurrection” on March 18th,
and two weeks from now we’ll ask the big
question of what Sentience really is, then
close the month our with our Monthly Livestream
Q&A on Sunday, March 28th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us itunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
