Today’s topic is self-replicating machines,
particularly von Neumann Probes and Berserkers.
We will be looking at the basic concept of
self-replicating machines and some misconceptions
about them, then moving in to discuss those
two specific types of them and some others.
There’s also three things we should clear
up about self-replicating machines straight
from the outset.
First, Self-Replicating machines do not have
to be small.
Second, we are arguably capable of making
one right now.
Third, Self-Replicating Machines are not necessarily
just machines, they can be alive.
Now in fiction self-replicating machines are
usually implied to be small, tiny little nano-robots,
but they hardly have to be, nor do nano-robots
need to be self-replicating.
They are also usually portrayed as essentially
a single type, when you could easily have
swarms of them composed of many sub-types
and sizes.
Often if something larger is desired they
just clamp together to make it, but that’s
not actually a good approach.
For instance if we want metal to make more
of the little buggers we could send them in
to go remove individual atoms of metal from
dirt, which is a regular portrayal but kind
of silly, or we could have them form into
a conventional kiln to smelt metal, which
is also pretty silly especially considering
the whole point of the kiln is to smelt the
very metal they are made out of, and so them
too.
It would make a lot more sense to have them
just build a kiln, so this is our first strike
against the classic concept of grey goo, some
swarm of robots that looks like goo while
eating up planets.
The original concept for this is usually in
John von Neumann’s concept of a Universal
Assembler or Constructor, something Drexler
followed up with as a Molecular Assembler
which is pretty much where all the concepts
for nano-machines come from.
But self-replicating machines way predate
that, to at least the time of Rene Descartes,
who apparently told Her Majesty Christina
of Sweden that the human body was a machine.
The queen, being quite the scholar herself,
apparently pointed at a clock and told him
to make it reproduce.
Then not long after Darwin’s notions began
circulating Samuel Butler toyed with the notion
of self-replicating machines mutating and
evolving consciousness.
So this concept is a good deal older than
people tend to think and did not focus on
tiny machines.
On the second point, that we could probably
make one now, that size concept is important.
If I have some automated factory rolling around
eating up rock and spitting out new fully
equipped factories that is still a self-replicating
machine.
A 3D printer able to print itself is a self-replicating
machine as well.
It need not be able to make its own construction
material though.
After all, you and I are self-replicating
machines and we not only do not typically
convert matter into food directly ourselves
but actually use a lot of integrated but independent
life forms to keep ourselves alive.
We don’t just eat other organisms, we have
lots of little buggers hanging around in our
guts helping us digest them.
We even have mitochondria in every cell of
our body that reproduce themselves using their
own genetic code.
Useful hitchhikers for eons who we’ve formed
a genuinely symbiotic relationship with even
though we do not actually have code for them
in our DNA.
So a giant factory that replicated itself
for instance would still be a self-replicating
machine even if it had other self-replicating
machines inside it that it was dependent on
but did not actually make itself.
Since we are comparing them to organisms,
let us examine that claim that self-replicating
machines are alive.
Now there is no universally agreed upon definition
for life but generally we would include the
ability to eat, grow, excrete, replicate,
and to adapt to and interact with its environment.
The reason it is often hard to nail down a
solid definition is that almost any of those
can be done away with while leaving a valid
claim to life, at least in theory, but that
is an important qualifier when we are discussing
building and tinkering with life.
I have never seen a definition for life that
comfortably contains all the normal examples
but which would also exclude a self-replicating
machine, though it might exclude some types
of them.
And I do not mean in a sort of vague way like
we might say fire is alive or crystals are
alive.
This is not semantics, the typical self-replicating
machine we envision would have some ability
to eat, replicate of course, and have some
equivalent to DNA it used for that.
Now it need not necessarily have the ability
to grow or repair itself, so long as it is
able to make another full-grown copy of itself
in decently less time than it usually takes
for it to breakdown.
Biological organisms do not use that method,
of just manufacturing something separate and
fully-grown, they get bigger and subdivide
into two or make small copies of themselves
that grow up.
A self-replicating machine could be built
to do the same but it has that third option
to construct a fully grown version too.
But a self-replicating machine does need a
blueprint to work off of, same as any other
organism, and rather than invent a new term
or just say machine DNA, I will just call
this DNA even though it would almost certainly
not be DNA in most cases.
In some it might be.
After all quick path to self-replicating tiny
machines is just tweaking the DNA or RNA of
existing cells or viruses to do a job.
GMOs, genetically modified organisms, are
an example of self-replicating machines, and
again something we have now.
So this brings up what we use these for.
What is their task or mission?
Obviously they do not have to have one besides
copying themselves but a machine is built
with a purpose in mind.
Now you could use such devices for any number
of things but the two big ones tend to be
use off the planet or use inside a human being
or other complex device.
This is because the most appealing quality
of them is that they can help repair things,
like help a human heal from injury or fix
a piece of equipment so you did not need to
throw it out or take it in for repairs.
That’s very handy for things like space
probes since it means you could send a probe
out at relatively slow speed and expect it
to still be working when it arrived at its
destination solar system thousands of years
later.
Now before proceeding I want to go ahead and
kill the common myth that self-replicating
machines invariably mutate.
We mutate, other organisms mutate, and indeed
a bunch of little robots could too, but they
do not necessarily have to.
Even on astronomical timelines.
Mutation is an absolute necessity for evolving
from that most simple organism that presumably
once assembled itself into more complex ones,
but mutation is not a desirable trait if you
are building to a specific purpose.
I do not want my probe heading off to the
Andromeda Galaxy to mutate in the millions
of years it takes to arrive.
If I hand someone a book and tell them to
copy it word for word we know they will fail
at that task, they will make a couple mistakes,
and if they hand that to someone else that
person will probably copy those mistakes while
making a few new ones, and so on until you
get a copy that is just nothing like the original.
That is mutation.
If that is my only way of copying and preserving
data, say I am some old king and I want to
make sure my scribes maintain my memoirs properly,
I can order three copies made of my memoir
by three different scribes, that way if the
original is destroyed they can compare those
three copies word by word and if they come
across a word that is different in one than
in the other two, they know it was probably
the two that are correct not the one, and
can fix that.
Of course it is always possible those two
scribes made the same error, or that all three
copies disagree, but both of those events
are less likely.
They are still likely enough though that it
can happen and with potentially millions of
lines of code and millions of copying events
you would often get two identical errors or
spots where all three disagreed.
If you add in a fourth copy, these odds decrease.
If you add in five or six it gets even less
likely, and you can increase that to the point
where while it is still possible, the odds
of it happening even once over the age of
the entire Universe is less likely than not.
So for instance I could have a setup so that
to make a new machine it required multiple
machines to get together, just as with sexual
reproduction but more polygamous, as it were.
Say, twenty other ones had to assemble together
into a dodecahedron, a platonic solid with
twelve faces and 20 vertices, with each at
one vertex, and they’d build the new one
in the middle.
Before adding each new bit they check and
agree.
If all twenty agree on a given chunk of the
blueprint, all is well.
If not, then the odds of less a majority of
them having the right bit are freakishly tiny.
We have done these kinds of extreme improbabilities
before but the brain does not tend to work
well with them and I am sure some of you are
thinking right now, “Sure, but it is still
a chance so it will happen”.
This is technically true but reaches a point
of absurdity when you begin dealing with improbabilities
so high that they would be less likely than
not to occur if every atom in the Universe
were turned into the things and we sat around
waiting until the stars all burned out.
So you could for instance tell every machine
it needed to match back up with 19 of its
buddies once a year for a check where they
compare data, or to shut down if they can’t
find 19.
You could also have all sorts of different
species and protocols for dealing with unexpected
events, and you can always ‘what if’ your
way into some bizarre circumstance but that’s
not really the point.
You might want your robots to mutate, you
might not, but if you want to send your robots
off somewhere confident they won’t mutate
before arriving, that is an option.
This one of the objections to what is called
a von Neumann probe, so I wanted to clear
that up before jumping in.
John von Neumann came up with the idea of
universal assemblers, often just called von
Neumann machines or Grey Goo, and this sparked
5 major concepts for how this might be used
in regards to deep space.
One is the basic version and I’ll just call
that a von Neumann Probe even though the others
are too, here are those 5 categories.
1) Von Neumann Probe
2) Bracewell Probe
3) Terraforming Swarm
4) Berserker Swarm
5) Grey Goo Swarm
A basic von Neumann Probe is simply an interstellar
probe able to maintain itself with little
robots and stop over place to repair, refuel,
and reproduce copies of itself to explore
more places.
Now in practice if it can self-repair this
way you’re better off launching all your
probes from our own solar system.
Even if you needed to budget a hundred tons
for each probe, about ten times what the Hubble
telescope masses, you could still get away
with manufacturing a trillion of them, more
than the number of stars in the galaxy, with
the available mass of just one medium-large
asteroid.
Those could all go cruising off from our solar
system and arrive at their destination far
sooner than if you send out a handful of probes
that slow down at the nearest stars, build
more, launch those, which slow down again
to build more, and so on.
You’d be better off using that automated
production ability to have a small probe arrive,
grab a small asteroid, and convert it into
a bigger monitoring station that can also
act as a relay for information from ones further
out.
Now the second type, the Bracewell Probe,
you would be most familiar with from the movie
2001.
The monoliths in that were Bracewell Probes.
A Bracewell Probe is designed to communicate
with other life forms, so it needs to be a
good deal smarter and more adaptable.
The most simple form would just be one that
was able to self-repair and identify planets
with a decent probability of life, and then
setup shop nearby there and sat around transmitting
a repeating radio loop of how to make contact
with us and some basic info about us.
Sort of giant flashing neon sign saying hello,
here’s our phone number along with a Rosetta
stone for how to talk to us.
Typically this is envisioned as a human-level
or greater intelligence though.
Something with actual brains and decision-making
capability.
Now technically a Bracewell probe doesn’t
have to be a von Neumann machine but considering
the timelines for interstellar travel and
how long it might need to wait when it arrived,
you would need to be building the components
unbelievably tough to expect it to survive
for those kind of duration without the repair
capability of either being a self-replicating
machine or able to make use of them to fix
itself.
Also again it is probably more advantageous
to ship these all out from our own solar system
and just have them unpack and build themselves
on arrival at the target.
This has the advantage that it could set itself
up on some small asteroid and send in satellite
surveillance and even ground probes to collect
data.
Or make contact rather than have to sit around
broadcasting.
If it can manufacture on site and has human
level intelligence it could pick up enough
data to send in androids that looked like
the hypothetical primitive young race of aliens
and chatted.
For instance someone doing this to Earth centuries
ago might start with satellite surveillance,
then stealthy aerial drones, then little android
birds or mice for close looks and to get the
language and customs observed, then send in
an android to ask questions it could not get
from just listening and watching, or to give
them information.
Obviously you could take that into the ethically
grey realm of trying to teach them or pretending
to be a god.
Incidentally both of these approaches work
just fine for building manned spaceships too.
You can build larger spaceships for people
to be on with self-replicating machines helping
in the building and maintenance but the assumption
is you can always build these automated versions
cheaper and faster, both in terms of construction
time and their velocity in interstellar space.
Now a Terraforming Swarm is essentially the
notion that you are sending out von Neumann
probes in advance to scout places for human
settlement and that those probes either have
terraforming capability or would be followed
up by ones that did and followed up by manned
ships later.
The probe arrives at the destination and sets
to work expanding itself so it can take on
terraforming a planet.
Or even turning the entire solar system into
habitats as we have discussed before when
talking about Dyson Spheres.
This is another morally grey one because if
you do not include an intelligence in that
Terraforming Probe it might just go and terraform
an inhabited planet, cheerfully disassembling
the local flora and fauna in the process.
That would seem pretty ghastly even if there
was no intelligence on those planets, on the
other hand you might think it was fine to
Terraform a place that only had amoeba on
it.
Individual views range from this being wrong
only if there was intelligent life to it being
wrong even if there was a decent possibility
life might arise on that planet one day.
Of course some might feel it is fine even
if it had intelligent life on it.
The Berserker is usually seen as something
a civilization might build if it had those
kind of views, or made a terrible mistake.
The name comes from a series of novels by
Fred Saberhagen where the robotic ships or
probes explore the galaxy to seek out new
lifeforms and blow them up.
The ones from the series are not actually
von Neumann machines individually but the
collective whole was.
A Berserker is essentially a malevolent Bracewell
Probe, in that the Bracewell Probe’s mission
is to seek out new life and meet it, the Berserker
Probe is to seek it out and kill it, and our
last type, grey goo, just wants to eat it.
Grey Goo is occasionally called a Hegemonic
Swarm, which I think originated from author
Iain M. Banks.
This doesn’t have to be robots or tiny little
machines, the specific grey goo case, so I
will use Hegemonic Swarm as a maybe more appropriate
term.
This could be grey goo, where self-replicating
machines just fling themselves across the
void stopping at stars and turning all the
matter into more of themselves, but it could
also apply to something like the Borg from
Star Trek or a crazy machine intelligence
that has decided it needs to turn the whole
Universe into paperclips.
Alistair Reynolds even had a particular variety
of this in one of his books that began as
a terraforming swarm and through bad design
was racing around turning everything into
habitats around a star, into Dyson Swarms
basically, already filled with flora and fauna,
but was attacking colonized planets and spaceships
too, to add them to the habitats.
This is one of the reasons I wanted to take
some time on the mutation issue because it
is often assumed any self-replicating probes
would turn into Berserker Armadas, Grey Goo,
or Hegemonizing Swarms given enough time to
mutate.
Once genuine mutation is in play, especially
on machines that were not sentient, it is
reasonable to assume they would start mutating
toward strictly Darwinian goals like survival
and replication.
From that comes an assumption that left loose
to run around the galaxy unsupervised for
long times most of the nice and benign or
helpful types of these von Neumann machines
will turn all evil.
So it worth remembering there are ways to
prevent mutation, but something often overlooked
is that mutation does not change something
from A to B, it turns A into a whole alphabet
and then a library, given enough time.
There is a reason right now that even though
my billions of times great grandfather was
an amoeba I am sitting here at the moment,
and there’s also a reason why there are
still tons of tiny and simple micro-organisms.
So you would expect a runaway mutating self-replicating
machine to result in a whole ecosystem.
At the solar system level you would expect
to see the bottom of the food chain probably
be self-replicating machines that swarmed
in the trillions around a star sucking up
its light then other things which came by
and ate them and got eaten in return.
Probably complete with detritus eating versions
at the far end of the food chain and ones
swimming around Kupier Belt grabbing comets
and small asteroids freshly arrived from deeper
out.
Such things are not an example of machine
life, they are just an example of life, its
kind of silly to think of it any other way
at that point.
And it is worth remembering that is how life
began on Earth too.
Our planet did get gray-goo’d by those earliest
life forms and probably more than once.
I occasionally find it amusing to think of
intelligent life as an adaptation of grey
goo to produce a new wave of it that can leave
an atmosphere or solar system, since classic
evolutionary processes do not lend themselves
to those kind of jumps.
Okay some final notes about self-replicating
machine and nano-machines in general.
I already mentioned that mutation does not
have to be an automatic feature of these,
but with that reminder that we basically descend
from grey goo I should address the misconception
some get that tiny little robots swarming
around can just disassemble whole planets
in days.
I mentioned speed limits a couple videos back
where 3D printing machines are concerned and
tiny little robots have them too.
Just for conceptual purposes, keep in mind
that bacteria can reproduce quite quickly
compared to us, often able to double on a
timeline of an hour or so.
Meaning if you start with one you could have
a million the next day and a trillion the
next day and a quintillion the day after that.
On paper anyway, in practice exponential growth
tends to get dampened by other effects.
However there is a clear evolutionary advantage
to being able to grow and replicate quicker,
and to be as omnivorous as possible about
your sources of food and fuel.
Yet bacteria do not split in two every second,
even the fastest viruses, which are incredibly
simple critters if they are organisms at all,
are not that fast.
Complexity has a cost, it takes longer to
assemble.
Now a machine should be designable that does
replicate faster than biological life, but
it is not very likely to be many orders of
magnitude faster than organisms of the same
size.
It is also worth remembering that chemistry
and construction tend to produce a lot of
heat, there is a reason bread dough or compost
or other things bacteria go nuts in tend to
get hot.
You can only go so fast replicating before
the heat would get so bad it destroyed the
machines doing it.
It is also a lot harder to snatch and place
molecules in something you are building when
it is hot and all the molecules are bouncing
around much faster and also bouncing into
whatever you are building.
We tend to forget that at the molecular level
hotter temperatures mean stuff moving quickly,
but building at that scale in a hot environment
would be like trying to pitch a tent in the
middle of a hailstorm.
Heat, as we have seen in a lot of our topics
on this channel, tends to be a big bottleneck
on a lot of processes.
You also have to remember that tiny things
are very fragile and that each component adds
more material, more time to build it, and
slows the process.
How are your tiny little robots getting power?
Solar energy?
Not very useful for anything but the surface
layer when its sunny and a solar panel can
only be so thin before it would be incredibly
fragile.
You are not getting a nuclear power source,
fusion or fission, that small.
That just is not how that works.
That leaves either battery power, which it
needs to go recharge somewhere and could get
quite bulky, or using existing fuel in whatever
it is disassembling.
That is great for medical nanotechnology,
you can design it to run off your own power
supply in your cells, but tiny and universal
chemical fuel eaters are not exactly doable.
You would almost have to give it a separate
engine for each type of fuel supply so it
could run on oxygen and methane in one place,
solar in another, sugar in another, etc.
Adds more complexity, adds more bulk, adds
more replication time.
Want to shield it from an EMP blast?
Add shielding, adding more bulk and more replication
time.
Also slows down how quickly it can do other
things since it uses more energy to move its
greater bulk and has more of its mass devoted
to things other than moving and assembling
and disassembling things.
Want it smarter, more material, more energy,
slower replication times.
Probably a lot faster than biological life
but not likely to be superfast.
Scale always been hard on people, lots of
folks think your typical biological cell is
made up of atoms and molecules like they were
LEGO bricks, in practice cells do not have
dozen of atoms or hundreds or thousands, they
tend to have trillions.
If you’re thinking of atoms or small molecules
as building bricks of cells, don’t picture
a house, which has several thousand bricks,
picture a major metropolis, or even an entire
planet, that’s the scale of most cells compared
to atoms and simplest molecules.
Even a typical virus tends to be in the hundreds
of thousands, more akin to a skyscraper than
a house.
Your average mammal like a human or a puppy
would be more like a galaxy in this atom equals
brick analogy.
So yes you could build machines that were
quite tiny compared to bacteria, probably
were pretty sturdy, versatile, clever, and
fast to reproduce but we do not want to get
carried away and think of them as invincible
swarms of grey goo moving over a planet like
a tidal wave or possessing magic powers.
We also want to remember they could come in
a lot of sizes, from on par with a virus to
quite larger than a person.
So when will we have these?
I would guess quite soon, again we arguably
already have them and it’s an important
area of research.
Automated construction, both for factories
and for use in space, would be very useful,
and is already very useful.
At the microscopic scale the medical applications
are huge and so is the convenience angle of
having colonies of specialized tiny robots
that hung around our appliances fixing them,
particularly since you can make things smaller
if they do not have to be durable enough to
survive minor damage which could instead be
repaired.
You’ve got two options on something like
that too, you don’t have to have the machines
able to self-replicate, you could have them
without that and produced somewhere and you
buy a vial of non-replicating ones with an
expiration date.
Back at the factory for them slightly bigger
machines churn out millions of the tiny ones
constantly, which is advantageous since you
can save mass and energy by making them more
specialized and without all the extra bits
for reproduction and have some smarter bigger
control bots that can issue them orders.
They’d probably be more like a solution
of various species of nanobot.
Ditto you could still go the replication route
just have that done a couple steps up, with
smarter bacteria sized mobile factories that
built them as needed and could get updates
and issue updates.
Lot of potential uses and a big game changing
technology.
One I suspect most of us will live to see,
but also not a magic wand or instant doomsday
device.
Their value for medicine is huge, potentially
making us biologically immortal, and their
value for space exploration and colonization
is equally huge.
That leads to our topic for next week, Spacecraft
Propulsion, where we will be doing a quick
survey of all sorts of spaceship propulsion
ideas either in use now or on the drawing
board, including the EM drive.
That topic was selected by Drew McTygue, the
first winner of the topic contest we had over
on the Patreon account for this channel.
I’ll be drawing the second winner in a few
days on Sept 20th, coincidentally my birthday,
so you can still go over to Patreon, become
a channel patron, and submit a topic which
will follow Dark Energy, our poll winner from
last week, and either come right before or
after Crypto-currency, the runner up, depending
on how much time I need to develop that topic.
Incidentally we will be shifting all future
polls to the channel’s new facebook group,
Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur, and
those will now be ongoing and we will have
one set of polls to suggest ideas and another
to pick the winner from the most popular,
and again that will just be getting constantly
updated.
Since this is the debut week for that facebook
group, I will be hanging out there the day
this video comes out to answer questions,
though I’m quite active on facebook normally
anyway.
My thanks to all the folks who agreed to help
mod and admin that, since that lets me leave
it a lot freer for general discussion of other
subjects too like other channels you like
or general discussion of science and science
fiction.
I do get asked a lot what other channels I
watch and its mostly comedy and scifi on youtube,
science-wise I have a few recommended channels
on my channel page for Joe Scott, Grant Thompson
the King of Random, and Cody Don Reeder from
Cody’s Lab, Cody in particular has given
me some great advice in the last couple weeks
on running the channel for which I’m quite
grateful, but more importantly he makes some
great science videos, so I’d suggest checking
them out if you haven’t already.
There’s not nearly enough science, I mean
real science, out there on this medium and
it’s nice to see other folks trying to correct
that too.
Last note, there is now a sub-reddit for the
channel though we will be launching that officially
next week to give Tim a bit more time to polish
it up and let me focus on the new facebook
group this week, and of course you can follow
me on Twitter, visit the website, IsaacArthur.net,
listen or download the audio-versions of the
episodes from Soundcloud, or find me on patreon.
Again next week is Spaceship Propulsion Concepts,
followed by Dark Energy, and I hope you will
swing by a join the facegroup page, say hi,
and vote in the episode polls and stop by
to do that regularly.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great day!
