The industrial revolution saw the rise of
factories so big they often grew entire towns
or cities around them to operate, but in the
future entire planets might be used to fuel
the titanic projects for conquering the stars
themselves.
Welcome back to Science & Futurism with Isaac
Arthur for another Scifi Sunday here on SFIA,
where we examine popular concepts in science
fiction and ask how realistic they are and
what a future with them might truly look like.
One of the common themes of science fiction
is the idea of a giant city full of factories,
and often these are dark and grungy places,
where even the homes workers come back to
after 12 hour shifts are dirty and grimy.
There are no gardens or parks, except maybe
the occasional crime ridden one with a few
petrified and ash covered trees left over.
These sort of factory cities are portrayed
as bleak places and draw heavily on the gloomier
moments of the industrial revolution for inspiration,
like the London Smog.
It isn’t much of a stretch to imagine that
repeating itself in the future, or even worse,
especially if translated up to the planetary
scale.
We’ll discuss some of the reasons why a
planet devoted to industry might not be a
trash heap, but this is a case where fiction
might be close to right.
This episode is also an informal sequel to
our episode Hive Worlds, our scifi Sunday
episode back in May of this year, where we
tried to imagine what cities covering a whole
planet might look like, and with a more grim
bent than the show is often known for.
There’s a reason for that too.
The term Forgeworld was popularized as meaning
a whole planet devoted to industry from the
Warhammer 40,000 setting, which also popularized
the terms Hiveworlds and Grimdark, so we see
few examples of anything not totally dystopian
in that setting unless it’s a rare example
about to get destroyed or a fake mask hiding
something even more sinister.
We’ll explore this more in our episode Agriworlds
in a couple months.
In that setting the forgeworlds are the fiefs
of the Martian Mechanicum, and were principally
colonized in a time where Mars had degenerated
from a beautifully terraformed paradise into
a ruined hellscape populated by mutants and
cyborgs.
Those cyborgs worshiped technology and got
the upper hand and periodically sent out colony
ships to found new settlements following their
Cult Mechanicum.
But in their case, they are religiously devoted
to industry-reverant principles – that flesh
is weak and efficiency is vital.
They absolutely have the technology to run
cleaner operations and ones that are less
horribly flesh and soul wrecking, but they
have no real motivation to do so.
They’re not big into individualism, and
they view everyone as essentially expendable,
themselves included, all a big cog in the
machine.
If you excel in that environment, and have
net value to them, you’ll get augmentations
to replace damaged bits or improve your performance.
If not, you get turned into a servitor – a
lobotomized cyborg basically – or you just
get recycled.
They wouldn’t repair a planet to pristine
paradise if it even cost them only 1% in efficiency.
Indeed, they might actually sacrifice some
efficiency, since they would rather a citizen
have artificial lungs than clean air normal
lungs could handle, because they would view
that person as better than before.
And they'd probably also view the toxic air
from industry as a good thing since it helps
remind people why mechanical body parts are
better than weak fleshly ones.
They loathe artificial intelligence incidentally,
and do view increasing technological enhancements
as a journey a fleshy person undergoes toward
perfection, so they start off with baseline
humans, albeit often genetically tailored
ones.
That’s a quick overview of the Mechancium,
which is basically a micro-empire inside a
larger human empire that they do all the IT,
technology and most of the industry for, with
technology temples maintaining the industries
of other non-Mechanicum planets.
They make a lot of guns, and a lot of tanks,
and a lot of warships, because that wider
empire is always at war with everything.
In my opinion, the Mechanicum is one of the
few justified examples of dystopian mega-industry,
precisely because their motivation to let
their factory-communities be garbage heaps
isn’t casual greed, like in so many other
portrayals in fiction.
Rather, they view it as something in between
a necessary sacrifice with silver linings
to an actual blessing.
In the more default setting, such as the cyberpunk
genre in general, the motivation is always
sheer greed by the powers that be, which certainly
has historical precedent but can get a bit
over-the-top and mustache-twirling.
It also runs into the issue that if your workers
are all falling over dead at age 40 from lung
cancer or some other environmental ailment,
then even if you send most kids to sweatshops
at age 8, you’re still losing a ton of productive
time from those adults.
You’re also only getting the least valuable
production out of them, the kind that robots
and general automation tend to do so well.
So why not spend a few extra bucks to have
a robot mop and vacuum cleaner keep the workshops
and apartment stacks cleaner?
In a meta sense the answer is because the
setting is supposed to show a brutal dreary
and short life devoted to no worthy cause.
You’re not working yourself to death to
save humanity from alien invaders or some
catastrophe, you’re doing it to line some
jerk’s pockets who spends all day enjoying
the hedonistic luxury you only know of because
glimpsing it makes your own life seem even
worse.
There is no escape except to join gangs who
prey on others or devote oneself to some empty
cult that’s secretly sinister, and whenever
hope rears its head, it gets stepped on.
Until the protagonist shows up.
Though they often get stepped on in these
stories too.
The thing is that most of what we produce
is designed to improve standard of living
and generally has spread that around, even
if unevenly, a fact that has been taken into
account in some science fiction series.
You can see this in Anne McCaffrey and Margaret
Ball’s book Partnership - the second in
McCaffery’s Brainship series - where a planet’s
industrialization around a single mineral
is the catalyst to improving the lives of
inhabitants -- not forcing them into a life
of dependence and drudgery.
The inhabitants of the planet Angalia, an
intelligent species called Loosies, use the
profits from a corycium mine to go from a
poor planet dependent on interplanetary aid
to a thriving worker-owned industrial planet
with the mine at the core of its economy.
In this case, the Loosies end up owning the
resources that they are taught to mine -- and
it works out pretty well for them.
If your factories are running on slave labor
or serfdom, this is probably not the case,
but then your issue is the slave labor part,
not the high-productivity part.
That means if your overlords have any desire
to be nice and take care of you, they have
way more resources to spare doing that.
Or to be fair, way more resources to more
thoroughly oppress you.
Either way though, if their technology is
even a little better than ours is today, they
really don’t need to have you do back-breaking
labor.
Hence why the Martian Mechanicum seems more
realistic, they would like you to do back
breaking labor so that you will value the
cybernetic spine they replace your broken
back with.
Nor do humans have the attention-span for
doing 12 hour shifts of oversight or quality
control which is also something AI can probably
be used to help with.
The sun-up to sun-down death shifts common
in grimmer fiction wouldn’t serve much point.
So they're not really going to work people
to death and if they really only keep people
around to lord it over them, because Virtual
Reality fantasy isn’t enough for them, then
the majority of people on your factory planet
aren’t going to be working in a factory,
but be households servants, where the boss
can enjoy lording it over you more directly.
And you’re probably genetically engineered
and indoctrinated to be fine with that.
The default dystopia is, in my humble opinion,
not realistic not just because it assumes
way too much malice and evil, but too much
incompetence on their part too.
It’s good that some sci fi authors have
pivoted away from this kind of simplistic
representation, like in Julian May’s Ramparts
World series where the group of companies
called Hundred Concerns experimentally proved
that their radical principle of treating the
indigenous inhabitants of planets they explored
respectfully would lead to higher profits
than exploiting them as slaves or serfs.
This philosophy was confirmed when they were
given the local delicacy Rozkoz when their
main business was running a platinum mining
operation.
It turned out Rozkoz is a confection more
delicious than chocolate, so they switched
to producing it instead, and the commodity
became the basis of their fledgling company’s
wealth.
Of course that’s fiction too and the real
future is hard to see, but I still think the
dystopian settings are way too Darwinisitiac
for villains that evil to live, hence again
why I find something like the Martian Mechancium
a little bit more plausible, because for them,
the toxic and oppressive landscape is a design
feature, not a flaw.
And it’s a reminder that fiction isn’t
about realism, it's about telling a good story,
but science fiction is supposed to seek realism
a bit more often.
Your typical corporate higher-up is as likely
as not a workaholic, and the churn and burn
rates at the top tend to be higher than the
bottom of any hierarchy too.
Folks either reach their true objective, X
amount of money or security, and leave, or
they burn out, and often a mix of both.
The islands of stability tend to be those
whose goal for doing the work is, well, doing
the work, and usually there’s a chunk who
are also decently social about it too, and
thus good at mentoring, recruiting, or alliance
building.
It also means you can maintain a 100-hour
work week while still socializing since you
can go have lunch or drinks or conferences
that are part of work with people who share
your interest in that work.
And this is in every aspect of life, not just
the corporate world or politicians.
We do it in the arts and sciences, trades,
small businesses, even in the youtuber and
podcasting world.
The long-timers all survive burnout by loving
their work and being energized by it.
Though nobody is one-dimensional either, I
don’t spend all day keeping up on science
and scifi when not working on the show.
I just came back from coaching my son’s
soccer team and have been tabbing back and
forth between this script and recipe ideas
for zucchini, to figure out how to cook all
the zucchini our garden seems to have bumper-cropped
this year.
And that’s a key thing to keep in mind,
we could be talking about a single huge factory
that makes one thing.
A whole planet that was nothing but robots
sucking in raw material and outputting tanks,
and we will contemplate that today too, but
outside that sort of case, even a whole planet
devoted to industry is going to have a lot
of other things going on.
Which brings us to another related kind of
industrial planet - Corporate or corpworlds,
where rather than the whole planet being devoted
to a single industry, the whole planet is
instead owned by a single corporation.
This is relatively common in science fiction,
from the giant commerce monopoly Combine Honnete
Ober Advancer Mercantiles (CHOAM) in Frank
Herbert’s Dune which dealt in a series of
commodities and products, including the spice
on Arrakis to the Sirius Cybernetics Corporation
in Douglas Adams’ Hitchhiker’s Guide to
the Galaxy whose Complaints division takes
up three entire planets in the Tau System.
These are usually not depicted as dystopias
-- even if they are at times a little kafkaesque
-- and are generally more realistic.
That’s probably because this kind of thing
is not uncommon on Earth already -- Company
Towns can be found on every continent, serving
industries from diamond mining to textiles
to nuclear power plants.
Even ignoring the community needs of workers,
it would also seem like the main industry
would need to have some further end.
We joke about Paperclip maximizers who make
paperclips for the sake of making paperclips,
or some hegemonizing swarm turning the whole
galaxy into more of itself and its preferred
widget, but that’s an example of mis-programming.
Something was done stupidly or went awry.
Your factory produces things for a purpose.
An industrial planet is producing things for
some wider goal, maybe guns to fight alien
invaders.
The folks working there or owning it may believe
in that purpose or just like the paycheck,
but that purpose remains, and I thought we
would use some fictional examples to illustrate
this.
Earlier this week we discussed Starship Factories
and that’s a good example to begin with,
because if we could imagine an entire world
devoted to manufacturing starships, it does
imply starships are so abundant and the demand
from other planets so high that interplanetary
trade in those ships is also common.
Such being the case, is this planet making
Starships from raw materials or are lots of
parts coming in from other places?
Is payment in raw materials from asteroid
mines or do they mine the planet itself?
It’s easy to imagine a bulk freighter bringing
in parts and raw materials and bringing small
space yachts away.
Are they building ships on the ground or just
some parts, with assembly in space?
How many ships do they build a year and how
many people live there?
Always hard to answer in a far future context,
as a planet sized factory might have no inhabitants
except one big AI, or it might be no more
robotic than nowadays, or it might even have
the equivalent of fixed-term seasonal workers,
and we might have a situation such as in Dan
Abnett’s novel Xenos where the people of
the planet Hubris live on a world so elliptical
in its orbit that most of the population spends
most of the local year on ice, waking for
the warm periods, and I could imagine setups
where civilizations went into stasis for part
of the year.
Or in the case of the planet Magarathea from
Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy, which manufactured
custom planets for the super-rich, the whole
civilization went on ice after a recession
hit until the galactic economy could afford
their services again.
Unless you are manufacturing something of
planetary scale though, like Magarathea did,
the very existence of a dedicated factory
planet implies there’s some benefit to off-site
manufacture, as otherwise every inhabited
rock manufactures all it needs on site, or
nearly so, as with some sort of super 3D printer
or Star Trek style replicator.
What’s permitting this place to be so good
at making ships compared to everyone else
that is able to devote itself entirely to
that goal?
Well, maybe nothing.
They might be the only place allowed to use
some dangerous bit of technology needed for
making ships, or the only one their wider
realm offered a permit too, or just the one
that secures all the lucrative government
contracts and can subsidize the other production
with it.
They might use half their production on government
warships and then can use the other half for
making private yachts or space freighters
at below cost from others wanting to get in
the market.
And again there’s no guarantee there’s
a market, they might just flat out designate
the planets that make widget X and over the
years they discarded every other industry
to ramp up that production and avoid failing
to meet demand and losing their monopoly.
It could be a recent thing too.
In a no-FTL universe you might get reports
that a dozen colonies 30 light years away
got attacked by what appear to be an invasion
force moving at an average of 20% of light
speed and you’ve got to turn your peaceful
forest planet into one giant factory for battleships
while your neighbors spew out other items,
all so in about a century you can muster a
big force across a light-decade wide battlefront
to meet those invaders.
Maybe one of those planets just makes guns
or tanks or clones or drones for battle.
We also want to keep in mind that just inside
one system working its way toward being Kardsahev-2,
devoting one planet to industry is not that
big a deal.
And a Dyson Swarm might need ten billion people
manufacturing paperclips to keep up with demand.
How much spaceship you produce per person
is a bit of a tricky one, but for context,
a big plane like a 747 costs something like
half a million dollars per cubic meter, while
an aircraft carrier is more like a hundred
thousand dollars a cubic meter.
A freight truck might be more like a thousand
bucks a cubic meter and an oil tanker similar.
That’s a fairly wide range, and one notably
absent any actual modern spaceships, which
have an even higher price tag, but to a loose
approximation you can talk about something’s
cost or production rate in terms of dividing
the total dollar cost by the average labor
cost or even the GDP per capita, since we’re
looking at the very large scale.
There may only be a hundred dockworkers welding
on that ship, but there’s folks all the
way back to the mines providing the metal
and the factories making the mining equipment
that needs to be considered in the final price.
And what that means is that in modern GDP
per capita translating as citizen time, it’s
taking between about 4 person work days per
cubic meter to 7 person-work-years [a]for
the more pricey stuff.
So if your ship-building factory planet of
10 billion people is automated enough to be
turning out spaceships at about a cubic meter
per citizen per year, then you are making
10 billion cubic meters or 10 cubic kilometers
of ship a year.
Or a hundred thousand aircraft carrier sized
ships.
Or some single behemoth of a ship 5 miles
long and nearly a mile wide.
In normal shipbuilding you can’t exceed
a ton per cubic meter since that’s the density
of water and it would sink, spaceships can
be denser or thinner, of course, by entire
orders of magnitude.
Similarly, some gas freighter might be way
cheaper and way less dense too, and you might
be milling out several million big volatile
gas tankers or ice pushers, each larger than
our biggest modern oil tankers.
And this all without assuming any more automation
than nowadays and no external sourcing of
anything.
You are buying all that stuff with the money
you make selling the ships.
And presumably there’s a lot of local industry
for things where it’s just easier and cheaper
to do it on-planet even though it means diverting
manpower to that industry.
You presumably still have restaurants and
schools, and with 10 billion people, at least
a sports league or two.
It is worth remembering that our modern cities
are mostly built around this dynamic, especially
within the last century.
A city is attractive to a potential new factory
for having an available supply of workers
and also lots of existing infrastructure,
and so some will build there even though this
often has higher costs in other respects.
Alternatively, another factory might site
itself in a place with far fewer people, cheaper
land, and less existing infrastructure and
regulation as they expect to attract workers,
and the city will then spawn all sorts of
other businesses and services to meet the
needs of that workforce.
But I said manpower a moment ago and note
that we assumed a fairly classic or modern
labor and production rate.
What about all those bots?
Does your factory planet even have big visible
factories people work in or is it some sprawling
well-manicured garden of suburb sitting on
top of huge underground, robot-run industries?
Which presumably have a lower layer of criminals,
outcasts, and mutants beneath them for a good
place to set a grim tale.
And again, what are these factories producing?
If we used the same GDP per capita on the
modern military assault rifle, it works out
to be around 100 per citizen per year, so
a planet of 10 billion is pumping out a trillion
rifles or lasguns or whatever a year, using
modern tech, and if we’re assuming that
rifle needs overall replacement every decade,
and that only 1% of the population needed
equipped, then the implied civilization they’re
supplying is one quadrillion people.
The equivalent of over 100,000 classic scifi
planets or in more realistic terms, not even
a thousandth of modestly populated Dyson Swarm.
Which presumably would need a few thousand
such planets or their equivalent in space
habitats to fill that order.
So yes, there’s absolutely a place in the
future, even a pretty peaceful future, for
some entity the size of a major nation state
to have space guns as its primary industry
and be just one of many thousands of such
entities in a single solar system.
The Remington Rotating Hab.
In Dyson-scale terms, if a few people are
employed in something nowadays, a few planets
worth of people could be in a full-scale Dyson
Swarm.
Whatever we need millions of a year, they
need quadrillions of.
And it hardly needs be something like guns,
the war footing just gives us a mental vehicle
for why people might put up with living in
a dumpster-fire of an industrial wasteland.
In a Dyson Swarm, which we are probably less
than a hundred generations from living in,
ignoring technological changes, you need whole
planetary populations just working in the
factories that produce earbuds for people
to listen to music on or nail clippers or
hairbrushes.
And not just one but many of them.
Do they have to be covered in smog?
Well no, it obviously would depend a lot on
what they were building, but they may have
known what they were wanting to make and picked
an airless world with that in mind.
The alternative to a Dyson and the better
known one from scifi is a big galactic empire
and there are probably at least a trillion
planets in this galaxy with gravity you or
I would find comfortable.
Whether or not they have sunlight or water
is kind of secondary with enough energy available,
and that’s rather implied by having access
to casual regular and FTL travel, much as
superior automation is implied inside a Dyson,
since we’re assuming construction costs
are low enough to economically build space
habitats.
In that Dysonian setup you probably don’t
have planet-sized factories, because you build
them O’Neill Cylinder sized or as big as
your materials economically allow, but you
probably have factories bigger than that where
those habitats get built.
We could imagine a megastructure, call it
Magarathea, a hollow shell of a megaplanet,
where they don’t build rotating habitats
but rather construct habitable and landscaped
shells around micro-blackholes.
Custom shellworlds for the discriminating
quadrillionaire or mega-nation.
The sort of drydock you are using for building
the huge planet ships we talked about using
for intergalactic colonization of our supercluster.
For the more familiar FTL case.
You picked your forgeworld from a list of
cheap and metal-rich planets in a red dwarf
system not too far from Earth, which along
with other early colonies is the biggest market
for everything.
You plan to mine that planet initially and
outsource some of that raw material production
to the inevitable asteroid miners who pop
up in any system, many of whom aren’t much
better than the space pirates who prey on
shipping and are often probably the same people.
Maybe you buy material off of them to minimize
their urge for piracy.
But that planet had no noteworthy atmosphere
and you didn’t have any plans of terraforming
the place, so you just blow waste right onto
the open landscape since it’s a barren garbageheap
anyway.
It would be an interesting question how much
waste gas you would have to ventilate to exceed
the amount of the local atmospheric escape
rate so that it began collecting.
Amusingly, since oxygen is typically the first
or at worst second most common element on
any rocky planet’s surface, or moon or asteroid,
and gets released in most efforts to refine
metals or silicon out of rock, you could end
up with an oxygen rich atmosphere fairly quickly.
Relatively speaking of course, there’s over
a quadrillion tons of oxygen in our atmosphere,
and way more nitrogen, so you would have had
to have produced at least a quadrillion tons
of locally-sourced industrial output to leave
a breathable atmosphere hanging around.
This might be a phase planets go through too.
As we noted in our Prison Planets episode,
and many of our other Rogue Civilization series
episodes, situations are not eternal and even
a culture that only lasted a couple centuries
on a small portion of one planet is already
rivaling our greatest civilizations of history,
and thus is pretty noteworthy.
A planet that began as a prison planet, Australia-style,
might be a normal way to terraform planets.
You offer prisoners or malcontents a free
ticket to a new and harsh world with the understanding
that their parole is forging this place into
a better land for their descendants and future
migrants.
In future eras that leaves behind a planet
that has "prison planet" as an interesting
historical influence – and maybe a boastful
comment for descendents of prisoners to make
at parties – but is otherwise just another
regular planet.
That could be the same for forgeworlds.
We often imagine some paradise planet transmuted
into some industrial wasteland but that could
go the other way.
Maybe you terraform Mars by baking oxygen
out of the rock while you get vast amounts
of metal to make all the equipment for terraforming
or to sell to pay for nitrogen freighters
from Titan or Venus or the Kuiper Belt.
So if you’re turning out a quadrillion tons
of product, what are you building?
A single thing that needs to be produced at
one spot like a spaceship or a ton of some
specialized widget for export?
What masses a quadrillion tons?
Well, a hundred thousand O’Neill Cylinders
comes to mind.
7 Million Gloriana-Class Battleships, for
our 40k fans, though I always find their ship
mass estimates implausibly low.
10 billion modern aircraft carriers.
100 quadrillion rifles, or microwave ovens,
a quadrillion cars.
About half a million years of our modern annual
steel output for Earth.
What are they really producing though?
With robots doing a lot of the work we don’t
need to assume the production rate itself
is based on manpower, but rather on waste
heat limitations and a market that wants stuff.
We could use Mars as an example but it ought
to be the same in any system, when they first
arrive they need a whole interplanetary infrastructure
and all those big thin solar power collectors,
mirrors and shades.
Those might only need a few tons of material
per square kilometer but you need billions
of them to terraform a planet that’s too
hot or cold or to beam in the energy to run
a high-tech world.
So too, a hundred thousand O’Neill Cylinders
may sound like a lot but we assume between
hundred thousand to a million inhabitants
each, and so that’s only enough homes for
10 billion to 100 billion people, so there’s
definitely enough market for a lone planet
in a growing Dyson Swarm to be pumping out
a thousand of those a year and still not keep
up with demand and still need millions of
years to deplete the available iron or aluminum
in that planet’s surface crust, let alone
the vaster supply in the mantle or core.
Would they be building those on-planet?
Probably not.
Big ships or habitats would likely be built
at an orbital ring and launched from there.
A big equatorial band 30 kilometers or 20
miles wide might easily have 20,000 standard
O’Neill Cylinders under construction on
that band at any time, just getting woven
outward along the axis, each taking a decade
or more to complete.
Maybe you have 10,000 workers on each habitat
each shift welding things in place or bossing
around the welder drones, and that’s still
only 200 million folks doing that job, and
since it’s an orbital ring, only an hour
of travel from the surface.
So most of them live up there, others don’t,
others run the welding drones from home by
remote telepresence.
A 20 mile-wide band like that, while as bright
as the full moon to those down on the ground,
is still covering much less than a percent
of that planet’s surface.
They could have multiple rings or have them
further out.
That production alone easily pays for shipping
in the nitrogen for terraforming that airless
rock, and filling all those cylinders with
air, oxygen and nitrogen, means you’ve got
that terraforming supply pipeline setup already.
So maybe this is the natural temporary pioneer
state of many future planets, to be turned
into industrial worlds initially to pay for
the terraforming of the paradise world it
becomes.
We also occasionally talk about disassembling
whole planets for raw materials and this is
more of what that would look like rather than
blowing it up and scooping the debris.
You just mine the planet at the rate at which
the mantle will cool to replenish the amount
you’re mining in any given period.
This isn’t necessarily resulting in an ever-shrinking
planet either, since you might be using a
lot of the less exportable bits to just make
layer after layer of hollow planet.
We talk about dumping compressed abundant
hydrogen or helium gas into such a shellworld
to replace the mass for gravity, and that
could just be into shells in those layers,
hydrogen, helium, excess oxygen, or even dark
matter and micro-black holes, which are great
for powering that planet too.
Keep them evenly distributed and shells are
as good as centrally located mass.
But you might not bother and just let folks
adapt to ever-lowering gravity till all that
was left was a massive hollow planet.
And an Earth-sized planet with density like
a hollow ship is going to still have gravity
parallel to our own Moon or Jupiter’s Galileans.
And it might have vast pressurized chambers
stuffed to the gills with fusion fuel or refined
raw materials to support the population after
the resources ran dry and they ate that planet
after millions and millions of years of continuous
industrial output beyond anything we do nowadays.
Every industry has waste and the big pollution
of industry in general is heat, so I would
always think of industrial planets as hot,
as one running at maximum would probably mean
running as hot as they could without causing
more problems, or catastrophic problems anyway.
A given civilization might decide the max
meant no more than 1% of the normal incident
solar power on that planet, another might
think double was just fine because they can
air-condition individual habitats and folks
can wear cooling suits if they have to go
into hotter parts.
Double the heat output of a planet, and in
a first order approximation you raise its
temperature by 19%, but that’s absolute
temperature, so for Earth that would be more
than 50 kelvin or Celsius and around 100 degrees
Fahrenheit hotter.
But on Mars that temperature increase would
actually make the place comfortable.
This might be how you get and keep your temperature
right for all those forests and gardens in
the open air you want one day, and the only
pollution technology should not offer a fix
for handling is waste heat itself, so might
as well put it to use making your world beautiful
instead of wrecking it.
If you’ve got some frigid planet that’s
a nice mass for settlement – and probably
has lots of water and nitrogen if its cold
and big like that, then you might think it’s
a lot more economical to beam power in to
run factories and warm your planet and expand
your resources through production and trade
instead of just beaming in sunlight, and maintaining
that network at great cost with no other benefit.
Here, you might be using a 100 gigajoules
of energy to mine, refine, and manufacture
a metric ton of valuable equipment, but you’d
need to produce at least a trillion tons of
that equipment a year to have a sizable impact
on the planetary temperature of some place
like Mars to make it livable, probably a lot
more, especially if a lot of that was being
done in space where it’s blocking sunlight
coming in and radiating its heat elsewhere.
So yes, industrial planets producing thousands
of big ships a year is very plausible, unrealistic
only in being too small, and more realistically
it’s how many ships have to dock every day
just to haul off the cargo produced.
As we said near the beginning, while dystopian
industrial fiction has production principally
for no good end, seeming to just make garbage,
smog, and oppressed people, real industry
exists to fill needs.
You’re making a quadrillion tons of things
people need and which raise their standard
of living, and indeed you’re making the
habitats they’ll live on.
Your forgeworld is literally forging new worlds,
each new cylinder habitat or arkship it makes,
and in the end, the most important world you
might be forging is your own.
Sometimes science fiction shows us industrial
planets like we discussed today and portrays
them as a dark age yet to come, but there
was another, not too long after the Big Bang
that lasted nearly a hundred million years,
before normal stars began to form.
And yet we think there may have been strange
stellar objects, Dark Stars, and other phenomena
we believe may have existed in this dark age
at the beginning of time.
We’ll explore that topic in this month’s
Nebula Original, Dark Stars at the Beginning
of Time, which is out now on Nebula, our streaming
service.
On Nebula, you not only get to see every regular
episode of SFIA a few days early and ad free,
but all our other bonus content, including
extended editions of many episodes, and more
Nebula Originals like, Life As An Asteroid
Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters,
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will, Conformal
Cyclic Cosmology, Colonizing Binary Stars,
and more.
Nebula has tons of great content from an ever-growing
community of creators.
Using my link and discount it’s available
now for just over $2.50 a month, less than
the price of the drink or snack you might
have been enjoying during the episode, and
it goes to supporting new content from myself
and other creators.
When you sign up at my link, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only
get access to all of the great stuff Nebula
offers, you’ll also be directly supporting
this show.
Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, and with
all the exclusive bonus content, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
Before we get to our schedule of upcoming
episodes, I wanted to let everyone know that
the National Space Society's Space Policy
Debates Program is calling on high school
and university students around the world to
debate the hottest topics in space.
Astropreneurs are rocketing towards a thrilling
future!
With launch costs plummeting, space is no
longer a distant dream but a trillion-dollar
opportunity by 2040.
Who will govern this new frontier?
What's YOUR role in the universe?
If you enjoy debate and are a student, or
a teacher interested in mentoring them, and
want to dive into the cosmos and shape the
future, you can join this electrifying journey
at spUN Debates.
I’ll link the details in the episode description.
So next month’s scifi sunday will be on
the concept of Human-Alien hybrids, but we
have several episodes before then, starting
this Thursday October 19th where we’ll discuss
if Life Extension Is Ethical.
Then we will look at another type of dedicated
planet, Fortress Worlds, on October 26th,
and in two weeks we’ll finish October, with
our monthly Livestream Q&A, on the 29th.
Then on November 2nd we ask if the Rebel Space
Colonies we often contemplate in scifi and
futurism might occur and what they’ll be
like, before we release our big-3 hour long
updated and extended edition of the Fermi
Paradox Compendium on November 9th.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
[a]I think this should be in person-work-years
as it is time per single person.
