We often discuss if space travel is feasible and 
if we can settle strange new worlds, but if we  
can, there is still the question of if we will..
Welcome to Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur  
for a holiday bonus episode. We talk a lot about 
how we could colonize space on this show, and odds  
are good that if you watch this channel much, you 
probably believe we can and should colonize space. 
If you’re new to the channel, then welcome, 
grab a drink and snack because even our ‘short’  
bonus episodes tend to be on the longer side, and 
don’t forget to hit the like & subscribe buttons. 
As we wrap up the year and get ready to enter 
the 10th year of this show, I’m also near the  
end of my first year as the President of the 
National Space Society, and something that’s  
been major internal discussion in 2023 is the 
abnormally large number of generally negative  
articles on the possibility of space development. 
Most of these are honestly poorly researched even  
when appearing in bigger publications and 
without naming names a few smelled like  
they’d been written by either an AI or someone 
who thought glancing at the first paragraph of a  
Wikipedia article made them an expert on the 
topic, and still others felt like they just  
cloned the talking points of such a paper.
There’s always room for criticism of course  
and I’ve had my own over the years about overly 
optimistic and daydream-like visions of our future  
in space, and we’re not here today to criticize 
any single article or author nor to speculate  
about why this uptick in space-pessimistic 
articles seems to have occurred. Rather, it got  
me thinking that there’s more to space development 
and settlement than the actual ability to do it or  
the apparent advantages overall. Indeed there are 
some apparent disadvantages, and lacking much real  
data to compare, nobody can really say a future 
in space is provably better than one without. 
I could, and will, make the argument that the 
possibility of a mountain-sized rock hitting  
Earth sometime in the next billion years is 
high enough that one can assume we need a  
defense against this and that without we may 
cease to exist, but in truth the probability  
of one able to wreck civilization and keep 
it down for millennia is on the small side,  
and the odds of one that could sterilize the 
planet even smaller. The cost of being in space  
in a major way for millions of years just to avert 
a catastrophe that probably would only set us back  
for a century or two at most, is likely to exceed 
that rebuilding cost by orders of magnitude. 
So even our arguments that we must not keep all 
our eggs in one basket get kind of iffy because  
the only real existential threats to humanity 
tend to be the sorts of things we would export  
with us to every new settlement in space – like 
ourselves, AI, and doomsday devices – and which  
could occur on any one of those planets and 
radiate out from there to get us all. So instead  
of one planet that might develop a murderous and 
powerful AI, you get several hundred that could,  
or even several billion. You are a lot more 
likely to get struck by lightning if you walk  
around with a metal antenna, and even more so 
if you decide to erect a hundred antennas and  
connect electric cables to them and hold 
on to the whole bundle during a storm. 
Simply put, what are the odds a 
once-in-a-hundred-million-years asteroid  
will hit us in the next 10,000 years, and also 
manage to wipe us out, and what are the odds the  
10,000 or so interstellar colonies we might found 
in the next 10,000 years might unleash a murderous  
and brilliant AI on accident, or even decide to 
come home to attack and conquer or exterminate us? 
I think you can say that a small island nation on 
an empty planet increases their odds of survival  
over all by spreading out to other islands, but 
this is not really a scenario that protects that  
island and the folks living there. More plagues 
and war from abroad threaten them. On the flip  
side, far more innovation is available when 
coming from a hundred neighboring lands too,  
and allies can help you if that 
island gets hammered by a hurricane. 
I think the equation works out in favor 
of spreading out, but there’s a lot of  
unknowns and a lot of subjective values in there, 
and today we’re a bit less interested in what the  
actual status of things are and more in how 
many will perceive them. And in this regard,  
you can make a case that colonizing off Earth, 
particularly out of this solar system, offers  
little survival benefits to Earth itself.
On the other hand, just because I said  
the ‘all your eggs in one basket’ 
survival idea isn’t all that strong,  
it does not mean everyone feels that way.
The one critical factor in play we will  
also keep coming back to is that humans as a 
group are prone to wanting to wander off and  
start new tribes when things get to feel a bit 
full, crowded, or slow in upward mobility. If  
interstellar colonization is practical, then we 
won’t need everyone on board to do it, just some. 
Of course, the rebuttal to that is that 
if the majority feel starting new colonies  
exposes us to a net danger, they can easily 
ban interstellar settlement trips, in terms  
of the physical capability to do so. Spacecraft 
are not stealthy and very easy to shoot down,  
particularly since the ship needs to carry 
fuel to slow down at a destination and a  
torpedo chasing them does not. Typically speaking 
the same engine design will allow a ship – or  
missile - to go twice as fast on the same fuel 
without needing to slow down. There are defenses  
against missiles following you in space, but they 
enjoy more advantages as the pursuer and a planet  
can send wave after wave after that ship.
This is the strongest argument against space  
colonization in the sense of if we would do it or 
not, as opposed to if we can or should. That we  
would not view space as getting all our eggs out 
of one basket, but rather transplanting embryos of  
civilization that could bring about our ruin. That 
we might be planting the seeds of our own doom. 
It is very easy to imagine some planetary 
government deciding that future settlements  
besides limited and controlled scientific and 
military outposts might represent an awful lot  
of existential risk to civilization as a whole 
and reasoning that it did not wish to support  
those activities. It need not even be particularly 
authoritarian and tyrannical to conclude that,  
though they would seem more likely to. For the 
foreseeable future, interstellar colonization is  
unlikely to happen without a lot of governmental 
support. Even a major corporation wishing to  
bankroll such an enterprise would be decidedly 
vulnerable to government or public pressure to  
cease and desist, or simply wait. This might 
persist as a situation for many centuries  
if no one develops a means of making space 
travel practical as a smaller scale endeavor. 
Now in the long term, where ‘long’ is on a scale 
of tens of thousands if not tens of millions of  
years, we should assume all the technology you 
practically need for space colonization is going  
to get developed even if you’re not actively 
trying to settle other star systems. Either  
interstellar colonization is feasible, or it 
isn’t, and again this episode is more about the  
will to try rather than the technical feasibility.
I have difficulty imagining that a civilization  
would be able to maintain the political willpower 
for banning and enforcing bans on interstellar  
colonization for tens of millions of years without 
pause, and once the bans go down and some colonies  
get made, it's very hard to stuff the genie 
back into the bottle or close Pandora’s Box. 
Not impossible, but it would probably require 
some proof that it was a horrible idea early  
on that scarred humanity against it. Also, 
we’re talking interstellar colonization not  
interplanetary and while you could maintain 
a single government over a fully developed  
star system due to the short communication time, I 
tend to doubt you ever would. I tend to think that  
contrarian behavior being what it is, if Earth, 
the Moon, and Mars all ban interstellar flight,  
then the Asteroid Belt mining conglomerates 
will cheerfully bankroll it. And even a unified  
government tends to have powerful internal 
factions so unity, even tyrannical unity,  
doesn’t necessarily stop this effect.
Thus, I can’t see the ban, or soft ban by  
stepping on funding, being very enforceable unless 
people really despised the idea. So too, I have  
difficulty seeing all humanity being opposed to 
space settlement. Putting it bluntly, we have not  
got a huge rate of tangible return on investment 
from space exploration compared to certain other  
research & development avenues, and people still 
love it. I’m sure I don’t get exposed to a random  
and fair distribution of people and opinions on 
space but in years of doing this I’ve only met a  
couple folks who really disliked the idea of space 
settlement. There’s no public outcry to defund  
NASA and against various Moon or Mars expeditions, 
and what little there is typically comes from  
pro-space camps wanting to shift that funding 
to another space project, not eliminate it. It’s  
mostly the various folks inside the space industry 
and government who tend to just be tight-fisted  
with taxpayer money in general, which I generally 
approve of, or who criticize each other’s projects  
in favor of their own, which is also arguably 
healthy if unpleasant to watch, or of late, for me  
personally at least, to have to try to arbitrate.
Circular firing squads come to mind, but in the  
long term these will have no negative impact on 
space colonization, and again healthy criticism  
is a good thing. As I like to point out 
on this topic, we are not in a big hurry,  
space is not going to save us from ourselves or 
our mistakes. I see no reason to go slow or be  
patient, but time is on the side of easier space 
travel. All technological improvement makes space  
development cheaper, much as space technology 
does frequently gives us benefits down here on  
Earth. But folks worry about time running out and 
the answer is that it probably is not going to,  
but if we’re imagining some doomsday climate 
scenario, space won’t save us from that. Mars is  
far harder to terraform than Earth is to fix, even 
if we nuked Earth so hard it glowed in the dark. 
For my part, barring a sudden improvement in 
either fusion technology or public opinion on  
fission technology, I’m rather expecting a big 
growth in renewables. I expect solar panels and  
battery improvements to reach a level of genuine 
economic viability or even favorability in the  
next 10-20 years, from a mix of new science, 
experience of manufacturing and implementation,  
and economy of scale. Many would argue 
that the tipping point has already been  
reached and their arguments have merit.
I also do not expect us to nuke ourselves  
into oblivion or unleash Skynet, and again 
those can migrate anywhere we do too. I expect  
humanity to still be around in a few thousand 
years, or a close approximation of us anyway,  
and I don’t expect space settlement 
to take that long, but if it does,  
it really means nothing on galactic timelines.
Alternatively, on galactic timelines, we can’t  
wait too long, or we might lose the galaxy to 
aliens. Channel regulars know that of all the  
Fermi Paradox explanations out there, while none 
sit with me just right, the one I find the strong  
lead contender – or least flawed contender – is 
the idea that no other intelligent life beat us to  
the punch on space settlement. At least not within 
many millions of light years of Earth. There may  
be vast numbers of planets with simple bacteria 
or even animal-intelligent life in this galaxy,  
but not folks out colonizing the galaxy yet.
Wait 50 million years though and that might  
change. And we have no expectation they 
would be kind to us if they arrived here  
and found us an isolated planet. Nature rarely 
encourages the critters in it to be gentle or  
fair. Though where we see those traits, it 
often is in us and other smarter mammals,  
so it might be the norm with aliens too. It is a 
big gamble though, and even if they left us be,  
I think we would be a lot more upset as a lone 
planet in a galaxy colonized all around us by  
others than simply a lone planet in an empty 
ocean of the night, as seems now to be the case. 
Either way, it is a strong long-term motivation. 
It also is for dealing with Artificial  
Intelligence, since some terrifying machine mind 
run amok still must follow the laws of physics,  
which means it can’t send a fleet of 
murderbots to a neighboring solar system  
overnight or faster than the speed of light 
bring us a warning. If we colonized a volume  
of 100 light years all around, that’s roughly 
60,000 stars, most probably with several major  
planets and thousands of minor planets each 
we could settle. That’s a lot of places that  
could spawn nightmares, but that is also a lot 
of places that can band together to fight them. 
As an example, let’s imagine Earth, as it is, 
has a 50/50 chance in a given millennia of an  
invention or event occurring that had a 
50/50 chance of wiping out the planet,  
like a powerful AI getting made and let 
loose. So, a 1 in 4 chance in a thousand  
years of us ceasing to be, and basically zero 
odds of still being alive in 100,000 years,  
far less time than humans have already existed.
Now if we expand to 100,000 planets parallel to  
Earth, even assuming the odds didn’t go 
down from shared knowledge of dangers,  
we expect 25,000 of those worlds to get 
burned out in a thousand years, or 25  
every single year. That might be 25 murderous 
machine demigods unleashed on settled space  
every single year. That’s not a gentle future, 
but honestly it’s a decently realistic one. 
The question then becomes, is 100,000 worlds 
better able to deal with 25 flare ups a year than  
1 world is with a 25% chance of one in a thousand 
years. And the answer is we don’t know, since some  
threats might simply be so terrifying that they 
would crush a star league a hundred light years in  
radius as easily as one single world. But overall, 
it would tend to seem like the hundred-thousand  
fighting 25 a year is going to manage it better.
What’s more, it would seem very likely that people  
could flee in a controlled and clever way. If we 
imagine spaceships can move at 25% of light speed,  
then a threat popping up on one side of this 
settled sphere 100 light years across needs  
100 years for the message to reach Earth and 
400 years at least for the threat to get here,  
and double that for the folks living on the other 
side of the Settled Sphere. That’s a long head  
start to send out an Exodus Fleet and one that 
can not be easily tracked once it’s gotten a  
decent distance out and changed course and divided 
up, potentially even on extra-galactic journeys. 
I think we can make the case that threats are 
increased by colonization but our capability  
to handle them rises even more, while at 
the same time any ban on colonization in  
the long term seems unfeasible and there’d be 
a growing worry we were running out of time. 
Against that, we still have the simple 
reality that people like to travel and  
grow. It is literally built into us. In any 
reasonably stable society, many folks will  
feel they are not having as much opportunity 
inside that society as if they traveled to the  
frontier. History has shown this many times and 
each of us feels it in our heart, the frontier  
beckons. It is also very likely lifespans will 
keep on rising and medical improvements will  
help us retain our vigor longer, and that folks 
will be restless waiting decades to reach the  
equivalent of middle management in their career.
So too, those groups who want to be free of  
society, such as a given religious or political 
group that feels restricted by that society,  
are prone to packing up and leaving for the 
promised land. And in a civilization that tends  
to dislike them but also has some ethics, it might 
be viewed as better to hand them a space ark to go  
settle their new utopia. Probably with some sighs 
of relief and a lot of folks looking forward to  
seeing them fail with their flawed ideas and 
overthrowing themselves or calling home to  
Earth for a bail out. Especially in a prosperous 
or even post-scarcity society, spaceships and  
even planets will be cheap early on, but the value 
of not having to put up with group X complaining  
all the time might be priceless. You may “insert 
here” whichever organization or ideology most sets  
your teeth on edge, and I’d imagine you can see 
yourself cheerfully waving them good-bye at the  
dock, or perhaps waving goodbye to them as you 
yourself set off. I’m not sure how admirable a  
motivation for colonizing space that is, but it is 
a common motivation, and it too points to space. 
On the matter of praiseworthy motives, 
there’s also the notion of an inner scorecard,  
both individually and collectively. One of those 
bits of life advice that makes the rounds and is  
usually a pretty good one is that we are 
prone to measuring our success and lining  
up our anxiety based on our position in our social 
hierarchy, and that this is principally determined  
by those we most interact with, rather than your 
specific status in humanity. Few folks worrying  
about their financial status in the US or EU 
are thinking about what the median income of  
the planet as whole is… it’s about 3000 bucks 
a year incidentally. And we certainly don’t  
compare it to all 100 billion or so people who 
have ever lived. We judge by those around us,  
and not just individually, groups and nations 
do this too. When on a race for survival,  
those next to you and just ahead and behind 
are those you focus on, and so even if there’s  
just twenty nearby you and thousands behind, 
those twenty get your attention and worry. 
And generally the income of those you socialize 
with is going to rise over time, those near you,  
both from your old friends growing in income as 
they age and get skills, and from you generally  
making new friends who are in your area. As 
a result, you tend to need to gain a lot more  
ground in wealth and influence to get a reduction 
in feelings of anxiety or stress. In a prosperous  
civilization, this can start getting very detached 
from personal survival and any realistic source  
of happiness, so we tend to encourage folks to 
develop an inner scorecard rather than trying to  
“Keep up with the Joneses”. If you find yourself 
in that state of mind, try thinking of all the  
things you’ve accomplished that matter to you, 
as a complement to that list of things in your  
life that you should be thankful for. I finally 
got to formally adopt my three kids, Kristofer,  
Isabella, and Geometry, so I certainly 
have plenty to be thankful for myself. 
But I think that in a civilization that has every 
box checked for not just personal survival but  
luxury too, as a post-scarcity civilization 
might, there will be a lot of push to turn  
those efforts ever more toward worthy goals 
and a galaxy beckons. Those who might naysay  
that goal are likely to be trodden under 
in the rush for some commendable purposes. 
I’m writing this episode back in Thanksgiving 
and with the expectation it will air the day  
before Christmas and that many folks often 
tend to feel down this time of year as the  
days get short and it always seems dark 
and gloomy. The main intent is to make  
folks feel more upbeat and optimistic 
about humanity’s future out in space,  
and to do so by rational and reasoned arguments, 
but I think the final argument to make in favor  
of that works at the individual level too. 
Inner or outer, individually, or collectively,  
it’s good to have a scorecard, and to 
populate that scorecard with worthy goals. 
And that’s our final argument for if we will 
colonize space, that peoples and nations and  
even corporations will all have scorecards 
and while the outer ones might be less worthy,  
to have the bigger nation or the bigger net 
assets or more people or a whole planet to  
call your own or the prestige of planting your 
flag on a new world, they do manifestly encourage  
colonization of space, as does the desire 
to seek out a new land to grow upon without  
the ceilings of the culture you left.
And on the other side of the fence,  
where one is less focused on if the grass is 
greener than the other side, those more worthy  
inner goals also would seem to encourage many 
to wish to venture abroad or help others do so. 
That doesn’t mean we shouldn’t seek to clean up 
our messes here at home, and indeed that’s our  
topic for later this week to close out the year, 
but we can not only walk and chew bubble gum at  
the same time, we often get better at solving one 
problem with what we learn from solving another. 
And if life is a grand adventure in pursuit 
of admirable endeavors, a trillion new worlds  
beckon us out into the galaxy, and I do not 
doubt we will choose to answer that call.
As we were discussing today, there’s a lot 
of indicators our future is going to be a  
grand and awesome one out there in space and 
here on Earth, but we have a lot of hurdles  
still to making that happen and two of them are 
Artificial Intelligence and personal privacy,  
and unfortunately we’re seeing the former 
getting used a lot now to exploit us and  
take away our privacy, to harvest our data and 
sell it to others. This is often legal too and  
you can ask for that data to be removed, if you 
can find it and who posted it and tell them to  
remove it. They use the high-speed automation of 
AI to harvest and post your data and you can't  
keep up with sending those takedown requests.
But two can play that game, and that’s where  
our sponsor, Incogni, comes in. They deploy AI 
to focus on finding your information online and  
send automated takedown requests for you.
All you have to do is sign up, give them  
permission to act on your behalf to delete data, 
then they go to work, and your data goes away.  
You can check up on the progress and see who 
had your data and how detailed and risky it  
was considered. Icogni makes these data harvesters 
take your info down, and they keep doing it too,  
making sure that it stays down.
Incogni is available risk free for  
30 days,so you can try it out, and get a full 
refund if you aren’t happy with the service.  
Use code IsaacArthur at the link in the episode 
description to get an exclusive 60% off an annual  
Incogni plan Go to https://incogni.com/isaacarthur 
and take your data back.
Thanks everyone for joining us for this impromptu 
bonus episode today and hopefully you’ve been  
enjoying the Holiday season and today’s episode 
made your day a bit brighter. We’re done for  
today but we still have one more regular 
episode this year, on clearing space debris,  
and our final live stream a week from now, 
on New Yea’s Eve, or afternoon anyway. 
Then we’ll move into our tenth year here on SFIA 
with a return to the Fermi PAradox and a look at  
Pancosmorio Theory, and the idea that colonizing 
other planets around distant stars may simply be  
ecologically unfeasible. Then we’ll have a bonus 
episode on atypical satellites like the Statite,  
Lagite, and Quasite on Sunday January 
7th. Then we’ll explore the concept of  
uplifting animal intelligence and the ethical 
conundrums we might encounter in that process. 
Make sure to hit the like, subscribe, 
and notification buttons to get notified  
about those upcoming episodes. You can 
also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of 
SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on our  
streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, like this month’s Neula  
Exclusive Episode, the Hermit Shoplifter 
Hypothesis at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
