This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
We often worry about Earth getting overcrowded,
but in truth it’s not about how much space
we’ve got
but how much energy & resources we need for
those people,
and if we’ve got those, we might be able
to support far more people than today
and in far more comfort than now.
We have a concept we discuss sometimes on
the channel called an Ecumenopolis, a planet-wide
city, and these show up in fiction fairly
often and usually as capitals of vast interstellar
empires, like Coruscant from Star Wars or
Trantor from Asimov’s Foundation series
or Earth itself in the Warhammer 40k setting.
They are also often depicted as having a trillion
people on them or more.
I thought today though that we’d try to
ask ourselves what it would take to have a
trillion people on Earth and what the Earth
would look like if it did.
The first and most critical point to hit though
is that a trillion people, while more than
a hundred times as many folks as are alive
now, and indeed ten times as many people as
have ever lived by most estimates, would not
even begin to require a city that covered
the whole planet.
Earth has a surface area of approximately
half a billion square kilometers or 200 million
square miles, about a quarter of which is
land.
If we assumed we paved over everything, from
the deepest ocean to the frozen tundra, a
trillion people would have a population density
of just 2000 people a square kilometer or
5000 per square mile.
That’s hardly a small figure, but that’s
not even a fifth the population density of
New York City, which is not even the most
densely populated city in the world.
And while those not living there mostly know
it for its skyscrapers, indeed few cities
have more, they’re only a tiny fraction
of the buildings there and not where most
folks live.
Even if we didn’t have any multi-story residences,
even if we limited ourselves only to land
and not sea, you’d still have 1400 square
feet or 130 square meters per person, hardly
a cramped home for a single individual, or
even a modest family, and again, that’s
no second floor and no basements, let alone
towering skyscrapers or vast artificial islands
or sea-steads.
Now, needless to say, that doesn’t include
any businesses or public buildings or roads,
nor gardens and parks, let alone farmland
or nature preserves.
People need food, and raw materials, and an
ecology of some sort, and energy for it all,
and also some way to get rid of all the waste,
which includes the main limiting factor, the
heat leftover from producing and using all
that energy we’d need.
We often worry about even supporting our current
population of 7.7 Billion, and that was a
concern before I was even born in 1980, when
the earth's population was just 4.4 billion,
little more than half of our current population.
Indeed it was quite a concern even back in
1798, when the population was approximately
1 billion, a thousandth of what we’ll contemplate
supporting today, when Reverend Thomas Robert
Malthus wrote his famous, or perhaps infamous,
“An Essay on the Principle of Population”,
which gave us the concept of Malthusianism
and Malthusian Catastrophes.
I should note that while I and many others
are often terribly critical of Malthusianism,
indeed I tend to use it as a curse word, it’s
no criticism of Malthus himself, who simply
observed that growing populations need more
food while farmland is a static value.
Or essentially that finite resources can’t
support eternal growth, thus eventually requiring
you either limit your population or suffer
catastrophe and hardship as people begin starving
and the likely chaos that ensues.
And the point is an entirely valid one.
Those of us who object to it generally are
doing so in a short term sense of improving
technology letting us get more food and production
from less land or material or energy.
Whether or not our population growth will
continue to the point that we even need to
house a trillion people on Earth or if there
is some maximum limit to how many people we
can support, our objective today is to show
that we could house this many on Earth and
present what sorts of technologies might be
needed.
Fundamentally you need a lot of energy, because
with enough energy you can deal with all the
other problems like food, every problem except
getting rid of heat, and we’ll return to
that point in a bit.
You obviously can’t run a civilization much
larger than our current one off fossil fuels,
but we do have the option of nuclear fission
or orbital solar power.
The thing is, you need a LOT more energy to
support a trillion people than simply what
you use nowadays times a hundred or so.
Hidden in the background of all our energy
budgets is the massive free supply we get
from the Sun, our hidden solar economy that
long predates the invention of solar power.
At any given moment the Sun is shining down
on Earth approximately 200 thousand, trillion
watts of energy, which either gets reflected
or gets absorbed and later re-emitted as infrared
waste heat.
Only a small portion of that absorption is
into photosynthetic plants and organisms,
essentially the foundation of our ecosystem
and food chains.
Approximately 98 to 99% of the photons reaching
us never get involved in photosynthesis, being
absorbed by other things, reflected away,
or just not being frequencies plants use for
photosynthesis.
We also don’t use the majority of the energy
converted this way for human food either,
and even more of it gets lost to biological
middlemen between the sun hitting a plant
and something hitting your dinner table.
Humans only need about 100 watts a piece of
food energy to live, which would be 100 trillion
watts for a trillion people, whereas even
if we assume that only 1% of light was used
in photosynthesis, that would leave 2000 trillion
watts.
Humans would only have to achieve 5% efficiency
on using that foundational biomass that itself
is only at 1% efficiency to feed a trillion
people.
So yes, we probably could switch over to hyper
efficient plant varieties grown inside greenhouses
with high internal reflectivity to feed those
trillion people, while probably still keeping
a large portion of the Earth’s surface area
as ecological preserves, especially if we
were supplementing those preserves with food
we’d grown to help ensure biodiversity and
long food chain species remained plentiful.
Needless to say, switching over our own diets
to vat-grown genetically modified super-algae
or switching over our bodies to be cybernetic,
or our minds uploaded digitally to run on
computers, would also potentially allow a
trillion or more people too.
However, we’ll mostly bypass those options
for today, especially as the cybernetic or
mind-uploading technologies do not yet exist
and also could only exist in tandem with other
technologies that also permit far more people.
As an example, if you can upload a human mind
to a computer, it means you already have the
capacity to make robots more than smart enough
to be doing a lot of work with little guidance
up in space, which unlocks options like power
satellites and space farms, and obviously
orbital habitats and planetary colonization
too.
Similarly, if everybody’s gone cyborg to
the degree that they need little or no food,
then they can cheerfully live off Earth too
without even needing any of the habitats like
the O’Neill Cylinder that we often discuss
as future homes for humanity.
Our goal today is not specifically to see
how we can house a trillion people on Earth
with the minimum technology, but we will be
trying to keep to the lower-tech and nearer
term solutions.
If you’ve seen our Matrioshka Worlds episode
then you already know that yes, you can rather
easily cram many trillions of people on Earth
with a few core technologies, and they wouldn’t
feel very cramped at all.
So we are trying to limit ourselves mostly
to near-term tech.
However, it is worth keeping in mind that
even if we were growing at 20th century levels,
quadrupling every century, or doubling every
50 years, we’d still need 7 doublings or
about 350 years to get to a trillion people,
and honestly such growth rates would probably
only occur in a civilization that had biological
immortality or close to it, or one that had
banned birth control or really put a cultural
focus on having as many kids as you can, which
is certainly possible but would generally
be the opposite direction of where we’ve
been headed in recent generations.
It is worth remembering though that much if
not most of our declining growth rates are
from a drop in accidental or unintended births
and folks starting families later and/or keeping
them smaller.
If you suddenly can extend human lifespans
and fertility spans, and if there wasn’t
a perceived need to watch our population numbers,
that trend could flip right back the other
way and then some.
A civilization where folks can live centuries
while being biologically 20 or 30 something
and with no pressing worries about food supply
or ecological ruin is one that can grow a
lot faster than doubling every 50 years and
probably would.
People like kids, and a pretty big chunk of
the population would cheerfully have another
one every few years indefinitely if they were
economically and medically able to do so and
had no worries about a Malthusian Catastrophe.
So while I personally doubt we’ll hit a
trillion people within a mere 350 years, by
2370 AD, either all on Earth or with some
or most in space, it is possible and could
happen even sooner than that.
Key notion though, if we’re discussing near-term
technologies, is that 350 years is a long
time to discover these, and in general we’d
only need 1 or 2 of them out of several that
would do the trick for allowing that many
people, and most are technologies I’d honestly
be surprised if we didn’t have by the end
of this century.
This would seem especially true if we have
many times our current population to throw
at scientific research and technological advancement.
For a civilization on the rise, the number
of scientists and specialists in general that
you have rises faster than your population
does.
With the caveat that if we grew too fast,
we might downward spiral into a Malthusian
Catastrophe, though probably to no one’s
surprise I doubt the former will happen and
very strongly disagree with the notion that
we’re already in one.
But that’s not the topic of this episode
so we’ll list that as an opinion and bypass
it for now.
Short form, if you’ve got more people and
they’re not all busy trying achieve basic
survival or cannibalize each other, you’ve
got way more scientists working on cracking
these technologies.
So what are these technologies?
Well, there are plenty but the three big general
types would be improved automation, enhanced
biological knowledge and manipulation, and
superior and renewable energy.
Each of these has multiple avenues of development
and each could achieve our goal, a trillion
people on Earth and in a sustainable way,
either by themselves or in tandem with the
others.
On the improved automation front first, if
your robots are really good it utterly alters
your economy even if that’s your only new
technology.
Almost everything gets cheaper, which includes
building stuff like solar panels, batteries,
greenhouses for food, the robots that plant,
tend, and harvest that food, and very large
structures for folks to live in.
There are all sorts of pathways available
to us that aren’t economical right now,
but way more productive and efficient, if
your simple labor tasks are being done by
robots.
We have a lot of crops we don’t grow much
because they are labor intensive, even though
they produce more calories per acre than most
of our staple cereals crops.
We also grow stuff under an open sky because
glass or polycarbonate greenhouses are quite
expensive to build and maintain, but such
structures produce an order of magnitude more
food per unit of land area and use far less
fresh water and nutrients and those climate
controlled facilities are also less susceptible
to disease and disrupting the local ecology,
or being disrupted by it, such as via a swarm
of locusts.
If your robots are making the glass, doing
most of construction and maintenance, and
tending and picking all the food inside, not
only do you have a huge boost in food production
but you’ve got way more folks available
to be working on new technologies too.
Such robots hardly have to be brilliant either,
barely insect level.
Improvements in biological sciences, our second
avenue, could potentially achieve the same
thing, hacking plants to be more efficient,
perhaps also hacking animals to farm the plants.
It’s sounds rather less science than science
fiction to imagine critters tending our crops
or modified organisms growing greenhouses
like they grow shells or coral, but maybe
not that big a jump either.
Nor would be hacking plants to be able to
maximize their use of sunlight, potentially
growing various simple organisms that we could
process and print into whatever food we felt
like, or at least a facsimile good enough
to pass the taste and texture test.
Not that it necessarily has to, while food
is a great source of pleasure and we’re
all glad for the diversity that modern agriculture
and transport permit us, most of human history
didn’t allow for particularly diverse diets
and much of our culinary arts were about how
to make tasty or at least edible food that
was mostly made of whatever the local main
staple crop was.
So I’m quite sure we could find a way to
make even some gene-hacked algae types more
palatable than what most of our ancestors
not only lived on but were grateful for.
I hate to call us spoiled, and certainly hope
our own descendants will regard us as having
suffered great hardship compared to them,
but our ancestors certainly had it rougher
and the episode is not titled “Can we have
a trillion people living in Utopia?”
Now the third big one is just energy.
If you’ve got a cheap renewable power supply
you can just flat out grow all your food under
artificial lighting, but that power supply
can’t just be cheap and renewable, it needs
to be abundant too.
Fusion is obviously one option, though shouldn’t
be regarded as some magic wand of ultra-cheap
energy, and indeed as we mentioned in power
satellites, it’s actually not your best
way of maximizing how much electricity you
can have on Earth.
A fusion plant, by default, like any other
power plant, is going to be producing a big
chunk of its energy as waste heat, and we
can only get rid of so much heat without building
some of the more over-the-top megastructures
like we looked at in Matrioshka Worlds.
Alternatively, microwave power transmission
from space-based solar removes that problem,
ground based microwave antennas, rectennas,
convert microwaves into electricity at 80-85%
efficiency, way better than you’ll get out
of any power generation system that relies
on boiling water to turn a turbine.
It can also be beamed pretty much to where
it’s being used, cutting down on transmission
loss to heat, which gets a big chunk of our
current electricity, and it’s all off-Earth,
so heat created in converting sunlight to
microwaves can be mostly disregarded.
You can also be throwing solar shades or mirrors
up around the planet or at our L-1 Lagrange
point that are transparent to visible light
but not infrared, which really has no value
to our planet besides keeping it warm.
Needless to say if you’ve got robots you
can do this mass construction project rather
easily and based off the Moon, it requires
no new tech, besides those robots, and not
really very much considering the majority
of the work is basically smelting and rolling
mirrors, not exactly a process that’s hard
to automate.
Now suddenly you can be dumping in several
thousand trillion watts of electricity into
your power grid without overheating the planet
and of course it’s fundamentally solar so
it’s quite renewable.
This one works great in tandem with improved
automation because it lets you do multi-story
climate-controlled artificially lit food production
mostly built and run by those robots.
This also really only requires software improvements,
not any vast leaps in physics or chemistry.
If you’ve got a climate-controlled multi-level
warehouse with reflective walls and ceilings
and LED lighting calibrated to just the right
quantity and spectrum for maximizing photosynthesis
of a given crop, with most of the grunt work
of maintenance and construction being automated,
you’ve got a massive farm with a very minimal
footprint.
Indeed you can potentially have skyscrapers
hundreds of stories high that on the inside
all look like suburban housing and hydroponic
lands and farm field, or even forests.
That’s more or less the notion we looked
at in Arcologies some years back, and as we
noted in its companion video, Ecumenopolises,
going this route let’s you get away with
cramming your entire population into giant
buildings while leaving 99% of our planet’s
surface entirely wild if you wanted too, and
with a trillion people, rather than the usual
bleak look of Ecumenpolises, planet-wide cities,
in science fiction, where the whole planet
is nothing but metal and concrete.
Now that’s not to say you would do it that
way, and each of these potential technologies
would likely result in a very different setup,
and even more if in combination with just
one other.
As an example, if you’ve gotten ultra-strong,
cheap, and durable construction materials,
you can do a lot of this multi-level growth
and housing without even needing better automation,
because building them is a big investment
of time and money but they don’t really
require much maintenance once built, unlike
modern structures.
Similarly, if you’re content to do space-based
farming and have built orbital rings for mass
conveyance of material on and off Earth, you
don’t need to grow any food on Earth and
can just ship it down.
Again our big issue in terms of land is food
production not housing or any of our other
buildings and if we’re just talking housing
and other such facilities, you could cram
a trillion people into large skyscrapers with
lavishly spacious apartments and not even
use a percent of our land surface, or even
into subterranean facilities and not even
see human civilization on the surface except
where the tethers from the orbital rings carrying
cargo and power entered into them.
Of course it’s not just technology that
would control the setup, but taste and preferences
and specific economics, all of which are pretty
unpredictable and probably rather fluid and
variable from culture to culture, so you’d
probably see a mix of options in use even
if one was working better.
Note that not all of these options involve
utilizing space, rather than sticking just
to Earth, but most do and it does raise the
question of why you would have a trillion
people on Earth, especially since most of
these setups also imply you could be doing
a lot of the other options we’ve looked
at, such as O’Neill Cylinders or terraforming
other worlds, where folks might prefer to
make their homes.
Ultimately though, for our original question,
“Can you have a trillion people on Earth?”,
the answer would seem to not only be yes,
but yes and probably much more comfortably
than we live now and without having to pave
over everything to live in some barren world
of concrete, metal, and smog.
And while to do this probably does require
a fair amount of technological advancement,
even if we see a spike in population growth,
we should still have a few centuries to make
those advancements and work out the details.
So yes, we probably can have a trillion people
on Earth one day, but it's probably not something
we need to be rushing to do any time soon.
One thing we didn’t discuss too much today
is how you’d handle all the waste that some
Ecumenopolis of trillions of people might
generate, everything from regular garbage
to waste heat, and we discuss that in our
episode “The Future of Garbage”, which
is out now for early-release on Nebula, along
with Conscious Stellar Objects, which contemplates
both how life might originate, naturally or
artificially in or around stars, and our Nebula
Exclusive Series, Coexistence with Aliens.
Nebula, our new subscription streaming service,
was made as a way for education-focused independent
creators to try out new content that might
not work too well on Youtube, where algorithms
might not be too kind to some topics or demonetize
certain ones entirely, or just doesn’t fit
our usual content.
And if you’d like to get free access to
it, it does come as a free bonus with a subscription
to Curiositystream, which also has thousands
of amazing documentaries you can watch, on
top of the Nebula-exclusive content from myself
and many other creators like CGP Grey, Minute
Physics, and Wendover.
A year of Curiosity Stream is just $19.99,
and it gets you access to thousands of documentaries,
as well as complimentary access to Nebula
for as long as you're a subscriber, and use
the link in this episode’s description,
curiositystream.com/isaacarthur.
This Thursday we’ll return to the Fermi
Paradox series to contemplate the scenario
where civilizations exist and are talking,
but we just can't hear them, in “The Fermi
Paradox: Whispers in the Night”.
The week after that we’ll be teaming up
with our friends over at What If to consider
what if life emerged on Low Gravity Planets,
and then we’ll close the month out with
our Monthly Livestream Q&A on Sunday, March
29th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
which is linked in the episode description
below, along with all of our various social
media forums where you can get updates and
chat with others about the concepts in the
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and we’ll see you Thursday!
