This Episode is brought to you by world Anvil
A new model suggests that nearly a quarter  
of the Universe is now colonized by a few 
thousand grabby alien mega-civilizations,  
each one controlling not just millions of 
worlds, but millions of galaxies, and that  
Humanity will likely join their number shortly, 
as the heir to quadrillions of stars and planets. 
So, just over a year ago, Robin Hanson and some 
colleagues released a paper in the Astrophysical  
Journal titled: “If Loud Aliens Explain 
Human Earliness, Quiet Aliens Are Also Rare”,  
which we’ll link in the description, as well as 
a website, grabbyaliens.com, and almost as soon  
as it came out folks started asking if I’d do a 
video on this new solution to the Fermi Paradox,  
and I joked that we had already done several.
Grabby aliens is a cool mathematical model  
but we need to say from the outset that it is 
not a new Fermi Paradox Solution, it’s modeling  
a trio of variables we have some data on that are 
related to civilizations getting out to the stars,  
and it seeks to show us that for any plausible 
value of those variables, the only one that makes  
sense is that alien civilizations don’t pop up 
much, that the kind that remain fairly quiet  
from an observational standpoint aren’t vastly 
more common than the big loud expansionist ones,  
and that therefore, humanity doesn’t see 
aliens because we’re among the earliest. 
It suggests that there might not be any of what 
we would consider to be alien civilizations in  
this galaxy and that it’s probably half a billion 
light years, if not more, much more, to the next  
high-tech alien civilization. Alien life isn’t 
really rare, it’s just rare right now, and any  
alien civilization that emerged in its local 
corner of the Universe is very likely to be doing  
as we do, wondering where all the other life is, 
and concluding that someone had to be the first,  
and for that region of space, it was them. The 
concept being that life spreads quickly, so, much  
as the first amoeba on Earth might see a whole 
empty ocean, it and its offspring would probably  
fill that whole ocean before life independently 
evolved elsewhere in that ocean again. 
Channel regulars know that’s the default 
position of this show and it’s the argument  
I advanced in Season 1 episode 1, way back in 
2015, the Dyson Dilemma, which isn’t a Fermi  
Paradox solution either, but supports this same 
solution which is the Rare Intelligence camp  
of the Rare Earth Hypothesis. This is no surprise, 
Robin Hanson is best known in these circles as the  
gentleman who gave us the term “Great Filters”. 
These describe the various hurdles that life has  
to pass through to get from dead young planet 
to building rockets, like evolving life,  
cellular nuclei, brains, tool use, etc. all while 
not being wiped out by asteroids, climate shifts,  
supernovae, or older civilizations who come 
and take the planet for their own uses. 
Now, that wasn’t quite a new idea then either, 
Brandon Carter – an astrophysicist best known  
on this show for his discussion of the Anthropic 
Principle and Doomsday Argument – had discussed  
this in the 1980s but had borrowed the term ‘Hard 
Steps’ from the medical field. I have rather  
intentionally not reached out to Dr. Hanson before 
writing this script, as I’m trying to be properly  
critical of the theory; which is hard enough when 
it’s strongly backing my own preferred stance on  
the Fermi Paradox and it’s written by a man whose 
work I respect, so I didn’t want to make that  
worse by reaching out for a dialogue, instead, 
just reading the paper. As a result, I don’t know  
if they opted to use the term Hard Steps instead 
of Great Filters, because he had coined that term,  
but it has resulted in Hard Steps showing up more 
in Fermi Paradox discussions these last several  
months and I rather regret that such is the case.
I mentioned Hard Steps was borrowed from medicine,  
and there, it is discussing the probability of 
mutation on the road to cancer and I hate when  
anyone compares humanity to either cancer or a 
swarm of locusts when talking about us on this  
Planet or heading out into the Galaxy. So I’ve 
always avoided the term and prefer Great Filters  
and rather hope Hard Steps doesn’t catch on. I’m 
also not terribly fond of the term “Grabby Aliens”  
as to me at least that puts a negative connotation 
on the entire concept of space colonization,  
but, fundamentally, both are just nitpicks by 
me that have nothing to do with the concept  
at hand. It needed a name and it was clearly 
catchy, and brought more interest to the topic,  
so no complaints, and it’s much more compact than 
Aggressively Expanding Civilizations, in keeping  
with Jay Olson’s Fermi Paradox paper from 2015, 
“Homogeneous cosmology with aggressively expanding  
civilizations” it helps make the case that we 
can’t just limit our notion to aliens colonizing  
one galaxy, but also moving beyond, and as we’ll 
see today, the assumption is that grabby aliens  
grab a lot more than one galaxy or even thousands.
The paper also explicitly rejects the Zoo  
Hypothesis, the idea that Earth is a zoo 
and surrounded by aliens who keep themselves  
hidden from us, and while that’s fine for 
the running of the model, I don’t believe  
that’s justified as a conclusion. For the 
model, it's kind of necessary, as otherwise,  
you could get alien expansion spheres erupting 
inside existing ones or you could have aliens  
inside another civilization that didn’t know they 
were inside of one, and we could easily be one.  
See our episode on the Zoo Hypothesis for more 
explanation of the pros and cons of that solution. 
That’s the basic intro though, for channel 
regulars, this isn’t a new Fermi Paradox solution,  
it’s a new model that adds support to the Great 
Filters and Rare Earth or Intelligence solutions.  
Today we’re going to look at that model, its 
assumptions, and some of its strengths and  
weaknesses, but overall it’s quite strong, and it 
follows from Carter’s own earlier reasoning on the  
Anthropic Principle that even though space 
travel is slow compared to human lifetimes,  
it can be incredibly fast compared 
to planetary and stellar lifetimes,  
so the first species in a galaxy – or supercluster 
even – who get intelligent and gets expansionist  
is going to colonize everything in that area 
before anybody else arrives on the scene,  
because intelligent life and the spawning 
of an intelligent, cooperative civilization  
from it, isn’t very likely to occur on 
worlds in any given galaxy, at a frequency  
that is faster than the travel time of colony 
ships across that galaxy – or supercluster. 
Thus, every species that colonizes a galaxy 
started by asking why the place was so empty,  
and found out that it was because it actually 
was empty before them. Nobody else ever gets the  
chance to wonder that because they can’t evolve on 
a planet that someone else has already colonized  
or disassembled for building materials. They 
can’t peer into the night sky and wonder if  
anyone lives around those stars because those 
stars aren’t visible to the naked eye any more,  
they’re surrounded in Dyson Swarms, and at 
most, your world is a protected nature reserve  
they left behind or uploaded into a computer 
simulation or has been pushed into a pocket  
Universe of its own by higher technology.
And we’ve discussed those options and many  
others in our Fermi Paradox series and our 
Alien Civilizations series, and to save time,  
we’ll reference some of those episodes as we go 
for those wanting more discussion on the matter. 
So, the paper mentions Loud Aliens and 
Quiet Aliens, and for general context,  
Quiet Aliens are those who 
contribute to the Great Silence,  
The Great Silence is the observed condition of the 
Universe by modern astronomy and SETI – the search  
for extraterrestrial intelligence – that we don’t 
see anyone, and the basis for the Fermi Paradox,  
which is the question of why we don’t see any 
civilizations in the vast and ancient universe.  
Why we see this Great Silence? Quiet aliens are, 
by definition, the only kind we currently observe,  
since they preserve the Fermi Paradox, and Loud 
Aliens are what we are looking for with SETI. 
For the purpose of the paper though, 
loud aliens have 3 characteristics:  
they expand fast, they last a long time, and 
they make visible changes to the places they go,  
like terraforming planets and building 
megastructures and Dyson swarms  
and so on. Quiet aliens are those that 
don’t do at least one of those three,  
maybe they don’t expand or do so very slowly even 
on cosmological timelines, maybe they ceased to  
exist, blew themselves up for instance, or they 
don’t really leave a footprint where they go,  
like a non-technological species of giant whales 
that lived on gas giants or inside stars which  
might migrate between them at a galactic scale 
and still not leave anything behind we would see. 
And of course, there are dozens of different 
methods or exceptions to each of these conditions,  
but critically, none of them really discuss 
technology, motives, or culture of aliens  
involved, only the most general condition and 
one that we can see, a species that expands fast,  
lasts long, and leaves marks. Making 
them easy for us to notice, or loud. 
Grabby Aliens in the paper are those which, quote 
“(a) expand the volumes they control at a common  
speed, (b) clearly change the look of their 
volumes (relative to uncontrolled volumes),  
(c) are born according to a power law in time 
except not within other GC volumes, and (d) do  
not die unless displaced by other GCs ” unquote.
Let’s unpack that. 
First, a GC is a galactic civilization, and we 
may extend that to include Intergalactic ones too,  
or even multiverse-traveling ones. Indeed based 
on the model’s results, a GC in this context  
is likely to be a multi-million galaxy empire 
rather than a civilization inside a galaxy or  
controlling an entire one, what GC usually means 
and what we call a Kardashev 3 or K3 civilization,  
and I’d suggest maybe the civilizations in 
this model should be considered K4 instead. 
Second, this is all about setting up a computer 
model of various origin planets of various aliens  
randomly distributed at a given density, and each 
with a random expansion speed and duration, in  
order to see how likely we are to be first in our 
region of space, and if so, what that indicates  
about how often that loud, grabby aliens occur and 
run into each other. From the model they typically  
expand to get to a million or so galaxies 
before running into neighboring expansion waves. 
That quote from a moment ago is them setting up 
the parameters. So, we have expanding volumes  
under their control at a common speed. What does 
that mean? In this case, it means that every GC,  
once it starts expanding, will move at 
the same speed the whole time – until it  
bumps into a neighbor – and that all those 
neighbors move outward at the same speed.  
That’s got some problems we’ll get to in a 
moment, but models always need to simplify  
some variables. We’ll be pointing out 
some of those simplifications today too,  
and some might matter for the 
conclusion but probably not this one.  
We assume ships will get faster with time and 
thus colonization rates outward would speed up  
but at the scale involved, that probably would 
be maxed out long before it really mattered. 
A few thousand years of spaceship propulsion 
improvements to get from 1% light speed ships,  
up to 80%, matters a lot in a system where 
civilizations all start popping up within  
a few thousand years of each other and 
expanding a few thousand light years,  
like we see in the typical space opera of 
hundreds of aliens in a galactic region, but  
it really doesn’t matter at extragalactic scales 
of millions of years of travel time or more.  
We assume the same physics applies Universe-wide 
and that loud aliens are curious ones too,  
where science is concerned, and thus 
work to improve their ship drives  
until everyone ends up with that 
same optimized engine concept. 
From a practical standpoint, that means that all 
the expanding bubbles of new GCs expand at the  
same rate from their homeworld even if not from 
the same start date. In practice it would seem  
like what will actually matter for colonization 
will be if there’s a maximum safe speed to travel  
between galaxies, as most of our expansion time 
in this model is intergalactic colonization  
and K3 civilizations, or even K2, really 
shouldn’t have any problem building powerful  
and long enough acceleration ramps to let 
ships reach 99% of light speed for that voyage,  
but that might be too much for safe travel on 
voyages lasting several million years. Barring  
that, it would be my expectation that at the 
intergalactic scale colonization occurs at .99c,  
a tiny fraction slower than light speed.
A possible caveat, however, is that intergalactic  
space is orders of magnitude emptier than 
interstellar space, so it may just allow  
for higher cruising speeds after all, owing to the 
lower risk of dust collisions. See our generation  
ships series and Intergalactic Colonization 
episode for more discussion of that, including  
hurling planet-sized ships out of the galaxy, 
or moving galaxies back here for harvesting. 
Second bit, B, that grabby aliens 
clearly change the look of their volumes  
(relative to uncontrolled volumes), is easy 
enough to understand. Uncontrolled volumes or  
natural volumes of space not yet colonized will be 
recognizably different by astronomy than those the  
aliens have reached and colonized or otherwise 
utilized, like building Dyson Swarms around  
every star or giant beacons or any number of other 
megastructures, or even just sucking bits of space  
dry for bringing back to their homeworld – or 
home dimension, we don’t want to take for granted  
that our Universe is the only board in the 
game, though understandably the paper does this,  
for simplicity I assume. And condition B basically 
amounts to saying when you colonize a place it  
looks different then when it was untouched.
Third, grabby aliens are born according to  
a power law in time, except not within other GC 
volumes. Which means the older the Universe gets,  
the more likely any random spot not already 
occupied by a GC is going to produce intelligent  
life. More stars have formed, more heavy elements 
of big planets, older planets with more time for  
life to have emerged and evolved. And the model 
will effectively argue that no new GCs would be  
emerging after about 4 billion years from now, as 
the whole Universe should be full of other GCs,  
even in very pessimistic occurence and 
growth rates. In terms of the model,  
it means the longer it runs, the faster new 
intelligences are appearing in unoccupied space,  
but that they do not appear inside already 
occupied space. Or where they might, that  
they would just expand at the same speed as part 
of that wider GC from a practical perspective. 
And again, they reject the Zoo Hypothesis 
here, for the purpose of the model at least.  
There are a lot of good objections to that, but 
they mostly should not matter for that model.  
For instance, us getting killed off by 
Artificial Intelligence of our own devising  
in the next few thousands years; doesn’t matter 
to this model anymore than if it takes us a  
century or a hundred centuries to perfect our 
spaceship drives, in terms of maximum speed.  
Us getting replaced by AI or by a human-descendant 
clade or by some terran or alien species  
we found and uplifted - supersmart dolphins for 
instance – just changes that GC marker to either  
shift it to be quiet aliens or still loud aliens 
but with a different profile pic, so to speak.  
Same business, new owners.
Lastly we have D, that a  
grabby alien civilization or empire does not die 
unless displaced by other GCs, which is that, GCs,  
once they get rolling off their homeworld, just 
aren’t going to evaporate away. They might have  
that AI rebellion that replaces them but if you’re 
spread out to a thousand worlds and growing,  
only an AI that wanted to do the same would 
really be a threat, as opposed to parking on  
the colony world they rebelled on. Indeed, you 
getting chased out by pursuing waves of angry AI  
or uplifted chimps is a pretty good way to 
encourage fast and loud colonization too.  
As we discussed in our Extragalactic Sanctuaries 
episode, where we had folks colonizing whole  
star systems and turning them into giant 
fortresses and death traps, merely because  
they are running in retreat across the galaxy, 
hurling quintillions of ships and troops at the  
invader just to slow them down and distract them.
An expanding GC is not implied to be unified here,  
just that any given elements near its current 
frontier edge tend to be prone to expanding  
that frontier, even if on various sides of that 
GC’s bubble, none of them have ever spoken to  
each other or know much about the other side 
of the frontier, nor do they even necessarily  
still resemble one another. A million years of 
evolution, genetic engineering, and cybernetics,  
might mean that the ‘humans’ expanding into the 
Western part of the galaxy resemble those on the  
Eastern Fringe no more than a cougar resembles 
a shark, for all they are ancient relatives. 
Now, once they began running these simulations 
with different values for the parameters  
and in random setups over and over, the evidence 
tilted to us being about in the middle of Galactic  
Civilization emergence, which would seem to 
be 4 billion years ago to 4 billions years  
from now, and that GCs already controlled about a 
fifth to a quarter of the observable Universe and  
generally colonized outward at nearly 80% of light 
speed. That the light of expansion evidence has  
reached 35% of the known Universe and we’re in the 
roughly 65% that can’t see another GC yet. Most GC  
Bubbles, as they expand and maximize like a big 
bubble in a sink or bath touching many others,  
will be bigger than our GC bubble, with 62% being 
bigger than humanity’s eventual GC. Not that we’ll  
be crowded, we’ll probably have a volume of 
space at least as big as our whole supercluster  
of 100,00 galaxies before we bump into another 
GC. Roughly 7000 GCs will appear in an Observable  
Universe-Sized Volume. As usual we do not know 
how big the entire Universe is, possibly it is  
infinite. We assume the Observable Universe is 
relatively small compared to it and in this case,  
that portion would have 7000 GCs. Note that 
this is essentially the approach of looking for  
the most crowded Universe that fits the data and 
model, nothing in this says that GCs can’t be even  
more spread out than that, nor does it imply that 
Earth isn’t the only place life ever appeared,  
we may be be 1 in gajillion, this model just seeks 
to say we are not less than one in a quintillion,  
in terms of stars giving rise to GCs. We might be 
civilization 100 to appear, not 4000-or-something,  
or even #1. Though we expect the model to roll 
out the same, it would just shift from 10-18  
billions after the Big Bang to more like 13 to 20.
We had reached that parallel conclusion in the  
Dyson Dilemma discussion way back when the show 
started and it’s a logical extrapolation of prior  
work, all the way back to at least Michael Hart in 
the 1970s, who coined the term the Fermi Paradox,  
and argued that since interstellar travel seemed 
increasingly plausible and biological life  
should be prone to wanting to expand, 
intelligent life had to be very rare  
or we should see it way more often.
In our case, we looked it at with as  
little math as I could get away with, just as 
today I’m trying to skip as much as we can,  
and we also looked at it from the angle of how far 
off we could see expansion occurring given that a  
species that emerged 4 billion years ago as a GC 
needs to be less than 4 billion light years from  
us for us to have seen that emergence; Indeed, 
a good deal closer due to Hubble expansion,  
but Hanson et al does it much more 
rigorously and mathematically than we did  
and it's very nice to see this properly 
modeled at the intergalactic scale. 
And as is normal for these lines of reasoning, 
it is assuming that faster-than-light travel  
is not possible, which bugs many folks, but as a 
reminder, FTL only exacerbates the Fermi Paradox,  
as it means that a civilization appearing 10,000 
years ago in the Andromeda Galaxy could already  
have colonized our galaxy, as opposed to the 
multi-million year journey otherwise required.  
You should be able to run this same model at 
various superluminal expansion speeds and the  
result would just be to expand those individual GC 
bubbles and thus imply GCs were even less common. 
Now, in a lot of the discussion around Grabby 
Aliens I see folks bringing up how it mentions  
that our star and planet have a much shorter 
window for life than normal, with the majority  
of stars being red dwarfs that can live a trillion 
years or more, and with our planet likely to  
become uninhabitable inside another billions years 
or so. Channel regulars know we’ve discussed ways  
to extend a star’s lifetime, and that we wouldn’t 
expect GCs to really be bound by star lifetimes or  
types much once they got rolling, but honestly 
I didn’t see the relevance of star lifetime  
to the discussion at all. We don’t know how likely 
life-bearing worlds are to form around red dwarf  
stars compared to yellow ones, but, longer-lived 
stars being able to spawn their first civilization  
far later, say 100 billion years after forming, 
really would only matter if it turned out that  
it is less likely for intelligent life to 
form on worlds around those longer-lived  
stars than it is for intelligent life to form 
on worlds around yellow, orange, or white stars. 
We could stretch that, our Sun has been getting 
hotter every year we’re around it, as stars do,  
growing slowly brighter over time, and thus 
the habitable zone of a system will change.  
Red Dwarf’s planets really don’t have this 
issue, they are slow to age and brighten,  
but it might be that stars much bigger than our 
own sun, while likely having far more planets  
and bigger habitable zones, may brighten too 
fast to allow life to be sustained on them,  
so that even stars that live 5 billion years 
couldn’t have intelligent life emerge on them even  
though our own sun only is 4.6 billion years old.
The obvious problem of course is that, at no fault  
to the authors, we just don’t know much about 
alien life yet, and we probably will get to  
find some examples of unintelligent life before we 
come across what is indisputably-intelligent life  
or other GCs. Indeed, under this model 
you would expect to have the leading edge  
of your GC run into more primitive worlds or 
even smaller proto-GC bubbles far more often than  
it runs into full GCs, as it still works under 
the usual assumption that the time between now,  
and us colonizing every star in this galaxy, 
is on a similar order of magnitude, as how  
long since we discovered fire. A million years 
to go from fire to rocket ships, and a million  
years to go from them to galactic dominance.
To me, that’s a bit more permissible for the  
Zoo Hypothesis, as, first off, we are not 
really assuming any real relation or rapport  
between elements of a GC besides maybe 
locally within a few hundred light years.  
Nobody really sits around waiting thousands of 
years to get an email back from all the mutants  
living in their tiny corner of the galaxy for 
instructions on how they should handle this new  
planet they found with smart slugs on it, and 
by that point in time there would probably be  
accepted branches of humanity that bore less 
resemblance to you than those smart slugs. 
In that regard, I don’t think expanding GCs are 
necessarily bad for younger worlds near them. In  
a system with many competing and rival interests 
– like a GC or even a small piece of its expanding  
frontier – extermination policies don’t work 
well, on top of being monstorus. Nothing can be  
done in secret, and now all your neighbors know 
you’re a bunch of genocidal maniacs and even if  
you’re all derived from the same homeworld 
and that initial spacefaring civilization  
was entirely fine with exterminating aliens, 
you’ve diverged beyond that and you also know  
the universe has other GCs at that point and have 
to worry about them knowing what you did when you  
do inevitably run into them and also while knowing 
that you cannot do it to them quite as easily,  
since they will likely to be expecting it even 
more so if they’ve seen you do it once before. In  
a non-FTL and expanding universe, there’s no real 
winning percentage for an eternal expansion into  
your neighbors at the Supercluster scale, even if 
you began with a billion year headstart over them. 
So, I don’t see rolling over other younger worlds 
and burning them really happening universally,  
and more importantly, I just wouldn’t 
expect a single GC to have a universal  
policy on encountering primitive worlds, let 
alone every GC having an identical policy.  
Probably just absorb and add into 
the local interstellar ecosystem,  
and if there’s a tendency for GCs to go 
post-human, or post-alien and inorganic,  
then it's entirely possible nobody would 
care if their neighbor had evolved from smart  
slugs rather than a monkey like them, just one 
more icky option they don’t like to dwell on. 
For the math-inclined I really do recommend 
the paper, and I want to emphasize that you  
should not be taking away from this that Hanson 
et al have gone and proven it is possible to  
travel at 80% of light speed economically or that 
there are 7000 intergalactic empires out there,  
and that roughly 4000 have already emerged and 
we’re next. That there’s a little under three  
thousand whose galactic capital homeworlds are 
busy somewhere between developing photosynthesis  
and discovering fire, while some of the older ones 
already have empires a billion lightyears wide.  
Relatively minor changes to the numbers or 
additions of other parameters, or more or  
less hard steps could alter the dynamic a lot. 
And for all that it's essentially extrapolating  
off the Anthropic Principle, the Mediocrity 
Principle is still in a lot of the basic concepts  
and it seems rather normal that we’d 
end up in the middle of the distribution  
like that. Each GC presumably has run this same 
model and gotten similar results, adjusted a bit  
for the age of the Universe when they ran it, 
whether they were #1 or 4000 or 7000 in truth. 
But if the thousand oldest and biggest GCs had 
already settled 10% of the Observable Universe  
between them, then that means they’d average 20 
Billion-Billion Stars each, and given that we  
were talking about the Kardashev Scale last week 
and I’m sure that’s brought up the idea of K4  
civilizations, it always does, we are going to go 
ahead and semi-officially dub a GC of this size,  
a K4 civilization, which is a bit ironic since 
again GC is short for Galactic Civilizations  
and those are the definition of 
a K3 or Kardashev 3 civilization.  
Maybe we should call them an Average Hanson 
Bubble or GAC, Grabby Alien Civilization, K4,  
though if anyone has a better and appropriate 
acronym, let me know in the comments below. 
In the meantime, while again, it’s 
not conclusive proof of anything,  
and we already mentioned some exceptions and 
have discussed other ones in other episodes,  
I do think it shows us a fairly plausible model of 
what our Universe and its civilizations look like.  
And it’s one that (on paper) almost guarantees us 
at least a few galaxies and trillions of stars to  
ourselves, if not a few million galaxies, which 
is about as far as we can probably expand at this  
point in our Universe’s age and expansion.
The one big take away from the model though,  
and the Rare Intelligence solution to the Fermi 
Paradox, is that us and any other alien who’s  
smart enough to be able to look up at the night 
sky and see stars and wonder what they are,  
has a good chance of becoming the ancestors 
of a civilization which will control every  
one of those dots of light, even the smudgy 
ones that represent neighboring galaxies.  
That if they proclaim that all that they can see 
is theirs, then they will turn out to be right  
if they only put the effort into earning it, and 
aren’t so foolish as to destroy themselves first.  
And if they do, there are many 
worlds waiting in the wings to rise  
and take their forfeited place a 
few million years down the road. 
And hopefully, we won’t forfeit 
our place among the stars.
So today we saw a theory that makes a strong 
case for humanity having at least as many  
worlds free for us to claim as there are 
living humans, and indeed many times over,  
even if that future is still centuries ahead 
and trillions of miles away. Thankfully,  
we already have endless worlds at our fingertips 
that we can behold through the mind’s eye,  
and one of our great assets as a people is 
our ability to share those with each other.  
I think it is easy to forget sometimes just how 
awesome it is to be able to share stories and  
tales and imagined worlds with each other, and 
I was reminded of that recently as my gaming  
group had been on hiatus for some months and we 
finally had a chance to start a new campaign. 
If you’ve ever had occasion to roll some 
20-sided dice around in some pen and paper RPG  
or their computer and online version, then you 
probably know what I mean. And those shared  
settings can become amazingly complex, the game 
we just restarted returns us to a campaign setting  
we’ve been playing on and off again now for almost 
20 years and I was very glad to have World Anvil,  
the award winning worldbuilding toolset, to 
help. It made it easy to transfer our various  
remaining notes in a dozen different formats 
into a collected and easily accessible format.  
It was also the first time one of our 
players had seen World Anvil in action  
and they said almost word for word the same 
thing I said when I first started using it,  
“I wish this existed when I first started gaming”.
I love the ability to upload many different  
setting maps and link them together along with 
articles, whether they’re text and images I’ve  
carefully written or even just a photo snapshot 
of some old notes I had but don't have time to  
retype and reformat, it just makes it so easy 
to tie all my notes together and add more and  
do it in a way that’s not only easy for me to work 
with, but easy for my players to navigate through,  
and easy for me to lockout materials they 
shouldn’t be able to see yet or which only  
certain players should see. And while its 
highly versatile, world anvil also makes lots  
of standardized gaming needs like timelines, 
genealogies, map-connecting, character sheets,  
and articles on people and places very easy.
But the newest feature of World Anvil that  
I loves is their whiteboards, it's a canvas 
for connecting articles, diagrams like family  
trees or hierarchies, tavern boards, mindmaps, 
and character arc development. There are just  
so many features that make worldbuilding and 
sharing easier and better, with world anvil,  
but the very best feature is all their easy 
online tutorial videos that not only show you  
how to do everything, but give endless ideas for 
uses you might not think of on your own, that will  
just keep making your setting better and better.
With world anvil, you can elevate your setting,  
whether it's for a game, podcast, or a novel, to 
a whole new level. If you would like to give World  
Anvil a try and let it help you forge new worlds, 
just click the link in this episode’s description!
So that will wrap us up for September 
and the eighth year of SFIA,  
and we’re heading into October to start year 9 by 
looking at the idea of colonizing planetary rings,  
like Saturn’s, and if life might be able to evolve 
in such places. Then we’ll ask the question of  
what we do if all these options for space travel 
never pan out, and we are stuck here on Earth,  
and then we’ll have our Scifi Sunday episode 
to look at what happens if space travel  
does indeed pan out and what strange 
alien environments we might encounter.  
Possibly on your own Personal Spaceship, 
which we’ll look at on October 20th. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social media  
forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
