When our ambassador to the aliens of the D’Narparty
System found out he was invited to be the
guest of honor at their annual feast, he told
his alien colleagues he was very nervous trying
to come up with a good speech.
Thankfully they assured the ambassador that
he needn’t worry about it and they merely
wanted to have him there for dinner as a man
of wisdom and good taste.
I generally tend to fall into the category
of being skeptical that there are any alien
civilizations within our own galaxy and probably
even our small corner of the Universe.
A lot of the reason for that comes down to
trying to think through how a given alien
civilization would act if they arrived on
the galactic scene ahead of us, and also considering
this in the light of various concepts for
alien behavior folks in science fiction have
come up with.
Frequently these are high concept scenarios
like “what if life evolved on a world with
no sun, or two suns?”
or tweaking existing traits to a greater extreme,
like the warrior culture of Klingons from
Star Trek, or a science and logic devoted
culture like the Vulcans.
A lot of times the behavior seems to break
down on examination or suggest unexpected
pathways the behavior should seem to almost
inevitably lead to, frequently counter-indicating
such a species could really exist, or if it
does, should generally act as what we call
a ‘loud alien’, the kind we would absolutely
expect to see on the galactic stage if they
arrived before we did.
And which seem rather absent.
The biology and psychology of aliens is hard
to contemplate beyond presumably being Darwinian
in origin, or in the case of some successor
species, engineered by those aliens, like
if they made artificial intelligence and that
later wiped them out, enslaved them, or even
ate them.
This is our topic for today though, contemplating
what an alien species would be like that was,
for lack of better words, very hungry.
Needless to say, it depends a lot on what
we mean by hungry.
We could be talking about a species who has
a taste for human meat, which is probably
the default of what folks were expecting coming
into this episode, or we might mean a species
that’s fast growing in numbers, or an individual
body or entity, and driven principally by
a need for food production.
That would be normal enough in nature, but
I would go so far as to say that a lot of
what separates advanced civilizations from
natural species is a tendency to lean away
from basic survival urges as their key motivation
and impulse.
But we could also get more metaphorical about
hunger, or metaphysical for that matter.
Civilizations that are driven to expand and
gobble up their galaxy or by an insatiable
hunger for something else, like knowledge,
or euphoria-inducing drugs, or some vampiric
race that sucks the life out of others in
some physical or metaphorical way, or even
some metaphysical soul-eaters.
Of course, this is SFIA, where episodes generally
run around half an hour, so I think we can
spend a little time on each of those options.
So hit that like and subscribe button, grab
a drink and snack, and let’s talk about
hungry aliens.
We may as well begin with the classic sci-fi
case of aliens deciding they like to eat humans,
and realistically there is no reason to think
eating fellow sapients beings would be considered
a big no-no out there among the stars.
Cannibalism is ridiculously common in nature,
it solves the dual problem of trying to get
some food while eliminating competition for
that food.
In evolutionary terms it’s not tricky to
have cannibalism, it's tricky getting the
mutations that discourage that.
Especially considering those new mutants without
the cannibalism trait are likely to get eaten
by their still cannibalistic non-mutant siblings.
However the upside of not wanting to eat your
own is that it does make social behavior a
lot easier, but isn’t actually necessary.
Prairie dogs are an example of a cute cuddly
mammal that’s principally vegetarian and
isn’t a lone wolf but does engage in cannibalism.
Same for hamsters, hedgehogs, pigs, and even
occasionally rabbits, and it is way more common
in other animal classes, spiders and sharks
are notorious for it, but even chickens, which
are quite social but also not terribly nice
to each other.
It’s also popped up in lots of human cultures
over the centuries.
Plus cannibalism is eating the same species,
often actual siblings or other close relatives,
but an alien wanting to take a bite out of
you isn’t even as closely related to you
as you are to a hamburger, and that includes
a vegan one.
I don’t tend to think aliens will be terribly
obsessed with DNA – or whatever they use
– in terms of their identity, same as we
don’t feel more kinship for random human
skin cells someone shed as we do for a cat
or dog.
They are likely to love or hate us based on
a lot of our other traits, physical and mental
and social, not just our genetic diagram compared
to theirs.
Nonetheless, the taboo on cannibalism in an
evolutionary context is presumably about species
survival so we have no reason to assume it’s
universal or that other civilizations out
there in the universe would widen their taboo
on eating themselves to include us, if they
had such a taboo.
This last weekend’s Scifi Sunday episode
on hive worlds, which is basically a concept
synonymous with dystopian civilizations, explored
the big issue of where those mega-cities were
getting all their food and also their sheer
enormity, and the recognition that while it
isn’t really logical to feed a person up
from birth to eat them like cattle, it also
is generally logical to recycle all your waste
in the most efficient way possible… and
you can draw your own correlations on where
that leads a civilization.
But odds are it means at least some civilizaitons
go to a funeral both to sincerely mourn a
lost relative and get a free meal.
We can’t really assume they have any fear
of catching diseases from eating one another
either.
The situation gets a bit grimmer too, because
while eating a piece of meat that in turn
ate tons more calories to make isn’t terribly
efficient, we already do this when it comes
to livestock, and the degree of inefficiency
is higher but may not matter much to a post-scarcity
civilization.
So a lot might come down to whether or not
they had developed a good means of synthesizing
meat before encountering fellow aliens and
also considered it a good substitute rather
than a cheap knock off for the real deal.
In spite of all that I really don’t see
any civilization choosing to keep intelligent,
reasoning creatures around principally for
food.
It’s not efficient and it's very dangerous.
If you think having a bull running around
is risky – and it certainly can be – it's
still nothing on the trouble a human can cause,
let alone billions of them kept around for
snacks.
For my part I do tend to think certain core
ethics like murder and theft are intrinsically
wrong, but whether or not it is, it’s also
hard to imagine a civilization long lasting
that didn’t have that baked in.
So too, empathy is a trait that is socially
valuable to at least have a bit of, and trying
to picture a civilization that actually enjoys
eating intelligent aliens to the point of
blowing vast amounts of effort and resources
at keeping them as livestock instead of some
synthetic version, even a VR version if they
enjoy the hunt, just seems like something
beyond crazy and evil.
Which is easy enough to imagine in fiction,
some over-the-top psycho-civilization, or
even for some very powerful and solitary entity
like the sorts of monstrous dark gods those
fictional civilizations often worship.
But it is very hard to imagine how these groups
or entities would actually function without
collapsing on themselves in short order.
We almost have to contemplate a civilization
that specifically views other intelligent
life as fair game but not so much each other,
and this seems very likely to be the sort
of opinion that causes schisms and fragmentation
into various ideological camps, which in space
colonization terms basically means rival neighboring
civilizations.
Ones that presumably have relative technological
parity to your own.
This is a very key point to galactic colonization
in a Universe that doesn’t seem to allow
FTL, faster than light, travel.
Whether or not there were aliens in your corner
of the galaxy when your civilization became
spacefaring, after tens of thousands of years,
as you colonize that region and start looking
like more than a tiny dot on the galactic
map, you are a diffuse sprawl of billions
of worlds with centuries of time lag between
communications.
You’re not unified, especially with all
the divergence likely to be introduced by
vast physical separation, genetic engineering,
cybernetics, and adapting to life on different
alien planets.
There may not have been any aliens when you
left your homeworld, or none within a million
years of travel, but before very long there
are plenty of aliens and they’re right on
your border and odds are many of them do not
like you, especially if you are not very likable.
And while ethics can vary, there isn’t a
lot of reason to think that your cousins would
come if you asked for help against some alien
aggressors or those seeking revenge, if they
also were nasty characters, unless it was
to enjoy front row seats to your destruction,
or lend a hand.
Always one of those critical points, because
while quite a few empires and mighty realms
have been built or thrived while having some
absolutely treacherous and villainous folks
at the helm and manning the oars, it has even
more commonly been the case when that civilization
was slamming into an iceberg.
It’s probably overly-poetic to claim that
evil is its own worst enemy and turns fratricidal,
nonetheless internal feuding and everyone
thinking they’re all mutually contemptible
people doesn’t really sound like a recipe
for stable and long-lasting mega-civilizations.
I would argue that the implications of that
are that any activity which would seem illogical,
heinous, and not in any major way beneficial,
should have a half-life in a large and non-unified
civilization, as there’s bound to be folks
occasionally noting that the activity is incredibly
wasteful, probably evil, and serves no good
end, and that generally would provoke folks
to push against while even many of those who
personally like it will defend it weakly or
come out against it, and over time erode the
behavior down.
That might just be my often-noted optimism
of course.
Now we can argue that for the case of eating
people, or alien people, as we can assume
they don’t have any physical need for sustenance
derived from an animal not native to their
home world, and even if they really wanted
to, they ought to be able to use some mix
of cloning or synthetic meat growing and VR
or other brain augmentation or tweaks to eliminate
any real need to go for the original and 100%
natural free range human.
That might shift if we’re throwing more
metaphysical or supernatural scenarios on
the table of course.
But what about the alternative case where
they just happen to be hungry?
Which is to say their civilization is consuming
resources faster than they are renewing them
and in a very short term and unstable way?
This one would actually seem really easy to
contemplate as you could make a very good
case it was the default state of humanity
and every living organism, but we have to
contemplate in a no-FTL case, which where
scifi can kinda trick us.
Invading another solar system to take their
stuff and increase your own numbers as a result,
or longevity, has some major and maybe insurmountable
issues with it.
Humans aren’t superfast at reproduction,
it’s not hard to imagine an intelligent
species that could do a lot better than our
rates of growth.
It also isn’t hard to imagine human subgroups
opting to go for ultra-big families, especially
in a space colonization era, or accessing
technologies like cloning and artificial intelligence
to raise their kids.
Especially on that latter one, I believe that
fad is coming and soon, though I don’t mean
in an exclusive sense of some robot raising
your kid from birth.
But the Teddy Bear version of ChatGPT.
Childproofed on language and topics and tweaked
to help with basic learning.
That is right around the corner and probably
one of those inventions that whoever pulls
it off convincingly first will be raking cash
in like it grew on trees and was autumn in
the forest.
Point being though that while at the moment
we seem to be curbing our growth compared
to the explosion we had in the 20th century
– quadrupling the human population in 100
years – a lot of that is a mix of fear of
overpopulation and scarcity mixed with people
wanting to start families later and keep them
smaller so as not to impinge on other life
pursuits, and the goal of technology is to
allow folks to have their cake and eat it
too.
So if you’re in situation where folks feel
like they can comfortably expand their numbers,
that’s probably what’s going to happen,
that’s the first condition of the Dyson
Dilemma of the Fermi Paradox we’ve discussed
since episode 1 of this show and the term
‘comfortably’ has never been limited to
simply having some extra resources at hand.
What this means though is that a civilization
can expand very quickly if it wishes to, in
terms of ramping up its numbers, and if it
has the resources to fuel that.
We usually say a Dyson Sphere can hold upwards
of a billion times what our current population
is and that’s roughly 2^30th power or 4^15th
power, 30 doublings or 15 quadruplings.
If your population is quadrupling every century,
you max a dyson sphere in about 15 centuries,
give or take.
It also gets worse when we throw in longevity-increasing
technologies.
For a little context here, if that civilization
is capable of warp driving around the galaxy
Star Trek Style, it would fill up all the
reasonably terraformable planets in the same
time, and hit K3 status of turning every star
into a Dyson Swarm sometime around the year
5000 AD.
And even if it were only doubling every thousand
years, that’s really only pushing this back
to 60,000 AD.
This is why every Fermi Paradox solution has
to find some way of sabotaging this scenario
if it includes FTL as a possibility.
It's still a big issue in a no-FTL universe
but the dynamics shift, as you can’t actually
export your surplus population off fast enough
from that home solar system to support that
sort of growth, unless you intentionally shift
to matching your surplus population growth
with whatever you can sustain in terms of
shipping people to other stars.
Moreover, a century is a very plausible timetable
to reach another star and establish some sort
of community, and you could easily quadruple
your colonists on that ship or fleet in that
time too.
There’s lots of free time to have kids and
raise them during that voyage.
Nor can you really be sending out waves of
conquering invaders, as while amusingly you
could breed, grow, or train your invasion
force in route from a smaller initial supply,
your target systems needs to be significantly
weaker than your invasion force or it is going
to have your entire multi-century trip to
grow its numbers and build guns and star fortresses,
or build self-replicating automated guns and
star fortresses that can rapidly grow and
just murder the incoming fleet.
You can do multi-generational invasions from
solar system to solar system but it tends
to imply moving walls of civilizations that
have actively colonized their Oort Cloud and
Deep Space.
So the border isn’t light years deep, just
light hours.
You also have quite a logistical nightmare
doing this stuff with years or even centuries
of travel time and comm lag, and if you even
have multiple star systems involved in the
effort, it probably isn’t many and they’re
not likely to be terribly well coordinated.
Which is an understatement, as a multi-year
time lag on exchanging information and orders
would probably literally qualify as the least
coordinated military offensive in history.
For me it summons the image of someone with
a Ouija Board claiming to have instant communications
to home fleet, and probably producing better
strategic results than anyone waiting for
actual orders from home, which is why you
really only have the slow and super-colonized
Oort-to-Oort cloud crawl attack option, as
there lag is more normal, hours or days of
lag between major theaters, maybe weeks, not
decades.
So, the point is that your civilizations here
have to have come to terms with exponential
growth in some fashion at this point.
It’s not that they won’t want more resources,
they just aren’t likely to think the locust
approach is a good one, as you’re essentially
in a situation where everybody has insecticide.
It doesn’t take much more technology than
we already have to say to an incoming invader,
“We have laced every asteroid and other
celestial body with large pockets of self-replicators.
If we trigger them it’s going to set off
as Scorched Earth strategy where they will
begin to just make guns and battleships and
more of themselves until we say stop, you
go away, or every last bit of resources is
used up, meaning you will come out in the
red on this ploy even if you win.”
In which case your options switch over to
the diplomatic or reasoned ones – which
is not to say benevolent or fair – just
that the actors in this scenario are not able
to operate on a ravenous, mindless hungry
approach but have to be more nuanced.
And yes, they do have the option of saying
they don’t care and attacking anyway but
that doesn’t seem a great strategic position
to be in and since you can only move so fast
all your neighbors are hearing of your behavior
long before you can get to them, meaning each
successive target has more time to react and
more examples of your behavior to motivate
them.
And since space is 3D, your war front is also
expanding with the square of distance while
your homeworld and supply chains are also
getting longer.
I don’t know about you, but that’s not
a hand of cards I personally would envy being
dealt.
Just generally speaking it is so much easier
to blow stuff up than to build it and everything
in space is so slow that every enemy ship
is going to be able to fight till it’s goose
is cooked and still ram you or blow itself
up so you get nothing out of it but a big
ammo and repair bill.
And you’re just repeating that at every
step of your engagements over trillions and
trillions of miles.
Also, we have to keep in mind that this civilization,
in an alien context, has been having its own
divergent worlds as the most likely targets
for expansionism and conquest for many, many
centuries before it ever bumps into another
intelligent civilization that originated on
another planet.
It is pretty hard to imagine that they wouldn’t
have burned out on this tactic by then…
unless I’m wrong about its ineffectiveness,
in which case they presumably have perfected
this strategy by now.
That does leave a hunger for things other
than food or pure raw resources and energy,
and that can alter the equation.
I’m still on a Warhammer 40k kick from writing
Hive Worlds last week, and the voracious Tyranids
from there could definitely qualify as hungry
aliens, but the example that comes to mind
here is the Cult Mechanicus of Mars from that
setting.
If you don’t know it, think of a bunch of
crazy cyborg priests in red robes worshiping
the lost knowledge of a prior golden age and
hunting for relics and lost schematics and
textbooks.
They’re quite willing to sacrifice legions
of troops and entire worlds to get those blueprints
and also really, really, really touchy about
Intellectual Property Rights.
They are hungry for those things and you don’t
really benefit from a Scorched Earth defense
there because they only need to capture that
one priceless relic, and thus don’t really
care if you vaporize everything else in the
process, and can threaten to vaporize you
if vaporize the relic.
You could still tell them to take a hike but
the desire to flip on the Doomsday Devices
and Paperclip Maximizer equivalents for ordinance
is a little attenuated there.
It would seem like you could just give them
the knowledge or technology, but we could
have a case where either you are willing to
die to keep it out of their hands or they
are very firm on the idea that only they should
have it, and that they might be planning to
wipe you out for daring to look into those
secrets forbidden outside their order.
Which again makes for some great fiction but
there’s no realism to losing valuable knowledge
in a digital civilization, plus in spite of
how popular it is to say otherwise in fiction,
it is stupidly easy to reinvent technologies
and sciences from any existing examples, even
really damaged ones.
Knowledge need not be the only hunger, as
we can certainly have quest for the holy grail
scenarios or to use another scifi example,
from the Babylon 5 spinoff series Crusade,
where they are in a desperate rush to search
all sorts of abandoned and extinct worlds
for a cure to a bioweapon deployed against
Earth by a vicious and ancient civilization,
the Drakh.
And again this has some realism problems as
we have to consider why deserted and wrecked
worlds weren’t long since re-colonized and
all their secrets either recovered or wrecked
in the process, and why any of them would
have superior technology to what was already
around…there is actually a good in-Universe
reason for that in Babylon 5 though not one
that holds up to scrupulous realism either.
Nonetheless we can imagine lots of cases of
this sort of ‘hunger’, from a simple desire
of a colony world’s citizen to pilgrimage
back to the homeworld – possibly militantly
so - to a desire for sharing art and entertainment
or history or knowledge of astronomical observations.
Each case is entirely different and we risk
watering the concept down to simply be interchangeable
with the term ‘motivation’.
The Drakh though are a good example of an
old and evil civilization with an almost supernatural
need to be vicious parasites, as are the Dark
Eldar from 40k, who actually have a supernatural
need to be vicious parasites, and arguably
the Reapers from Mass Effect, a franchise
that seems to have drawn inspiration off Babylon
5.
For other 90’s sci-fi references, we also
have the Goa’uld from Stargate and the Wraith
from its own spin off show, Stargate Atlantis.
Ancient nasty parasites, in their case literally,
and as we’ve noted in other Alien Civilization
series episodes, this is very popular in any
scifi with a Lovecraftian Cthulhu-flavored
theme, and pushes more against our notion
of terrifying predators waiting to eat us
or steal our souls for fun and profit…
there’s not ours, it's usually implied to
be a fate worse than death.
As in the other case of literal cannibalism
at the beginning, or whatever we want to call
eating intelligent aliens, it makes one wonder
how these folks haven’t gotten themselves
ganged up on and obliterated.
We don’t need to repeat the arguments there,
beyond noting that they can have a supernatural
or metaphysical component that might make
this more viable, and that also can’t rule
out some of the nastier Matrix-like scenarios
we discussed a couple months back in Hacking
the Simulation, where the actual rules of
reality aren’t what we think, and the fake
reality we see has been setup so as to make
it seem like these strategies don’t work,
so you don’t bother to prepare to defend
against them.
When in the true reality they do work, thus
we never suspect they’re parasitizing us
from that higher reality… or lower one given
the implied infernal conduct.
Basically that you have something like a soul
and it is tasty and useful, and they’ve
dumped you into a reality where you can’t
easily detect such things and doubt they exist,
so that you don’t suspect they’re robbing
you or eating you.
Obviously this being at odds with the apparent
way our Universe is setup, it doesn’t really
work for realism unless reality isn’t the
real reality… but it’s a healthy reminder
as we close out that it doesn’t pay to take
anything for granted with alien civilizations
and their drives and motivations or capabilities,
since our knowledge of how the universe works
and how life evolves or sapience and conscious
work is still pretty new and limited and could
be flat out wrong on many things.
That might be seen as a bit of a cop out if
aliens do arrive and want to invite us to
dinner, but honestly I’m not really worried
about anyone accusing me of hedging my bets
if that happens.
That’s the advantage of being a techno-optimist
about humanity’s future, if you’re wrong,
nobody’s really around and in a position
to point out your errors.
In this case, everyone, including myself,
would presumably be too focused on staying
off the dessert menu.
As I was mentioning a few days back in Hive
Worlds, this episode and that one are companion
pieces and yet there was still more to discuss,
in terms of whether or not you could realistically
be trucking food or other bulk cargo between
planets or solar systems.
So I decided to do a third short episode on
the topic of space freighters examining the
logistics and numbers involved in trying to
haul bulk cargo around, if that could ever
be profitable, or event reasonable, and what
those ships might look like.
It’s a popular topic in scifi but doesn’t
get a lot of serious scientific contemplation
and the results were actually rather surprising
as we delved into it.
That’s out now exclusively on Nebula, our
streaming service, where all our content comes
out early and ad free, and we often have bonus
content, from extended editions to entire
exclusive short or even full length episodes,
like last month’s Colonizing Binary Stars
and many more.
So if you want to catch exclusive content
like that, along with seeing all our episodes
a few days early and ad free, including no
sponsors reads, you can click the link in
the episode description, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
That lets you see all those exclusives like
Colonizing Binary Stars and Space Freighters,
or full length episodes like Planets vs Megastructures
or our entire Coexistence with Alien series.
And again it’s all early and uninterrupted
by ads, so you can enjoy the episodes as intended.
Nebula is a streaming service started by creators
for creators and their audiences, and has
grown to be the largest creator owned streaming
service, with tons of great content from an
ever-growing community of creators.
Using my link and discount it’s available
now for just over $2.50 a month, less than
the price of the drink or snack you might
have been enjoying during the episode, and
it goes to supporting new content from myself
and other creators, like our new feature,
Nebula Classes, so its 2 for the price of
1.
When you sign up at my link, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only
get access to all of the great stuff Nebula
offers plus now Classes, you’ll also be
directly supporting this show.
Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, and with
all the exclusive content, go https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
As a general headsup, I was scheduled for
surgery yesterday - obviously I’m writing
this well before then - so I might not be
too chatty in the comments for a bit, or in
general, the plan is to operate on my nose
and tongue to hopefully correct some breathing
and speaking issues and has some recovery
time, hopefully before our livestream this
weekend.
I suspect so but would reschedule it anyway
to be on the safe side except I already rescheduled
it once, to free myself up for the International
Space Development Conference next weekend.
For those curious, don’t expect any rapid
change in my voice, I record episodes a couple
months in advance and will also still need
to retrain those muscles.
Either way, please wish me well and forgive
me if I have to cancel that livestream.
Though again I don’t expect to.
Speaking of upcoming material, next week we’ll
be heading back to the general notion of Clarketech,
super-advanced technologies indistinguishable
from magic, to contemplate all the ways we
might warp reality and the applications of
those as technologies.
Then it’s into June to look at Colonizing
the Kuiper Belt, followed by a look at how
we can build enormously tall and strong structures,
like Hive Citadels, in Space Towers.
Then it will be time for our scifi Sunday
episode, and a return to the Alien Civilization
Series, for a look at Higher Dimensional Aliens.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
