This episode is brought to you by Audible
We estimate there are trillions of planets
in this galaxy alone.
On those worlds and their moons, across countless
galaxies, a near infinite number of environments
might exist.
What strange lands might we see under alien
suns?
Welcome back to another Sci Fi Sunday here
on SFIA, where we take a concept from science
fiction and look at it through the lens of
science to see if it works or how it would
work.
And today we will be looking at the concept
of alien environments, a topic that is probably
too big for a single episode but that’s
a good starting place and maybe we will expand
on it in future episodes.
This episode itself got its origins in our
Alien refugees episode from back in the Summer,
where we looked at the idea of aliens coming
to us for aid and for new homes, and I realized
that I didn’t spend much time talking about
how we would simulate their living conditions.
I ended up doing a Nebula Extended Edition
of that episode, exploring the idea for another
10 minutes or so, but even as I started working
on that, I knew we needed a whole episode
for it, or maybe even a series.
Of course, that’s true of every topic we
do.
My usual joke when folks ask me if I’m ever
worried about running out of topics for episodes
is that the cool thing about science and the
future is that there are just so many topics
to explore that I wouldn’t even come close
to covering them all, and we have whole libraries
devoted to just one tiny period of time on
our planet, itself a small pale blue dot in
the vast cosmos.
I and a thousand of my clones could work ten
thousand years and we would barely scratch
the surface of these topics.
It is hard enough to get a weekly episode
done with just myself and my seven current
clones after all.
Nonetheless, we’re going to try to make
a good start today, and I thought we should
generally classify various traits that worlds
might have, then how we could replicate them
ourselves.
We will skip alternate dimensions and virtual
worlds, for today at least, and limit ourselves
to places which might exist in our Universe
with its known laws.
Otherwise, any environment we might imagine,
even a twisted fever dream or hallucination,
would be on the table.
As we’ll see, the available options are
already surreal enough.
Speaking of that, it's also worth noting that
while we might find planets entirely covered
in forests of mushrooms, the human body often
reacts to toxic and alien substances with
hallucination and might react the same to
exotic physical conditions, not just native
biology, so, firsthand accounts of strange
new worlds might be rather dubious, especially
if they had eaten something there.
As the joke goes, when randomly sampling unknown
plants, it is even odds it will nourish you,
kill you, or make you see God for a week.
So, an explorer coming back from a distant
world, reporting crazy surreal conditions
and conversations with strange talking fish
or rocks might be on the level, or might have
been knocked askew by the weird terrain or
ecology.
Or both.
A key notion though is that while you might
find yourself on a planet with Quicksilver
seas or five moons or three suns, even on
some world that looks like a clone of Earth
from orbit, there’s a lot of room for strange
stuff.
Afterall, Earth itself is ancient and immense
and has no shortage of environments that seem
bizarre and alien to newcomers, and include
lots of things which are dangerous and toxic
to us too.
And that’s only speaking about naturally
occurring worlds.
As I’ve said, we’ll leave out virtual
worlds and alternate dimensions for now, but
odds are good that most places that alien
civilizations will live, once they become
space faring, are worlds they’ve forged
themselves, their own space habitats or carefully
terraformed and tailored planets.
Those could be very strange and in truth they
are also likely to be laden with virtual realms
and augmented realities.
Some alien’s house might be a mix of classic
but alien architecture, arcology-style natural
themes, with holodecks and modular moving
room elements, and the same could easily be
true for someone coming back to visit Earth
or any of its colonies in a few thousand years.
And again, disorienting, like someone transported
out of the past and into some neon-lighting
covered road through a market district in
a place where the sun sets early behind a
forest of steel and glass, all to the thunder
of engines and a thousand voices chatting
or hawking bizarre products and foods.
An alien painting might look like something
Jackson Pollock threw together while actually
having layers of augmented reality built into
it, as well as paints that reacted to frequencies
of light we couldn’t see.
There is artwork and music which can inspire
vertigo or disorientation and it's possible
mundane work would do that to an alien, or
to us when looking at theirs.
So they might have the same response to ours,
or reactions like seizures to lighting or
noise as some humans can get, even if they
originated on a world so like ours that we
might have a problem telling a difference.
Walking into a heavy metal concert taking
place on Earth isn’t alien but it can still
be stunning.
Such being the case even a lost colony of
humanity that traveled so far off to find
their world that by the time the main colonization
waves reached them, they had a hundred thousand
years of divergence and memory loss, that
might be a very alien place and they might
find modern or future Earth crazier than any
alien world we’ve seen in scifi.
And that’s a key notion for today because
a common objection to very surreal alien landscapes
is that they wouldn’t be likely to naturally
occur or spawn life.
So it is important to remember that the color
of our sea and sky and rock and their particular
makeup are only some parts of what makes bits
of our world interesting or strange to us.
It is also true that a Quicksilver sea isn’t
likely to naturally occur, that’s a rare
element and unlikely to exist in such a quantity
anyplace that wouldn’t have vastly greater
amounts of other lighter elements in place
as seas and sky above.
But we must remember that the nature of a
creature who can create technology is likely
to be much like our own; clever, curious,
and creative.
Douglas Adams jokes of advanced aliens making
planets entirely of gold, in the Hithchiker’s
Guide to the Galaxy, but there’s 20 times
as much Mercury as Gold in the Universe and
85 grams out of every billion in our Universe
is this.
Our ocean masses just under a billionth what
our sun does, and so there’s enough Quicksilver
or Mercury in a star like ours or an equal
amount of random matter in the Universe to
cover a hundred planets in oceans of Quicksilver,
where a lead brick would float on the waves
as easily as a piece of wood would in our
oceans, and since rock would float, so would
a mountain, making for some very interesting,
if a little unstable, floating landscapes.
One common notion we tend to have about galactic
colonization is that, as a star system or
region of space gets colonized they will tend
to want to harvest all their materials, particularly
the abundant ones in their star that shorten
stellar lifetime, which they would do via
starlifting.
Billions of years tends to erode away asteroid
stockpiles of rocky matter and gasses and
volatiles would dissipate even more quickly,
so they probably want to harvest them, then
store them where they are easy to access and
not prone to leaking on geological timelines.
Planets are pretty decent for that and it
isn’t hard to imagine interstellar empires
deciding to get a bit creative with their
stockpiles.
Gold was popular because it was pretty, easy
to work, and didn’t corrode, so a lot of
people literally wore their wealth in an era
where locks were a rarity.
So, precious metals as wealth, stored as jewelry,
might see a future equivalent.
Why leave your gold ingots sitting in a vault
no one can reach, when you can melt it into
a cool statue that people will pay money to
come visit?
Tourism is around 10% of the global economy,
and even at the height of COVID, it remained
above 5%.
A high-tech post-scarcity civilization can
probably do better, and a rock of resources
designed to wait till you need it, that, turned
into a tourist resort, is at least generating
some revenue in the meantime seems like a
pretty good deal, so long as you have the
means to defend it.
But then you have to protect and secure your
treasure vaults or unharvested resources too,
so folks don’t steal them.
At least this way you’re getting some admissions
money from the thieves when they come to case
the place out.
Same for space habitats, I don’t doubt that
a cylinder habitat mimicking a nice chunk
of Earth-like garden park and tamed forest
is going to be a popular build, but figure
on 1% of space habitats in a Kardashev 2 civilization
being built with the intent of being abnormal,
and at least 1% of those aiming for very alien
or surreal.
And 1 in 10,000 might not be much, but a K2
civilization would be expected to have something
like a quadrillion county-sized space habs,
each a micro-earth, for a billion Earths worth
of living space, and that 1% of 1% of habs
being crazy and surreal in design would mean
there were perhaps 100 billion of them containing
a hundred thousand planet’s worth of weird
stuff.
And we have every reason to think aliens would
be prone to the same thing.
So, you come to an alien environment and there’s
no one answering the phone and it turns out
it's their equivalent to Jurassic Park, contained
inside an O’Neill Cylinder, and you find
dinosaurs inside, not smart aliens.
Or maybe both and they sell you dino-burgers
and t-shirts to help support the preserve.
Or you land on the world they made of precious
metals and a lake or sea of mercury, then
created a totally artificial ecology, designed
around those elements from the ground up,
and intentionally made dangerous predators
to keep thieves away.
A depleted uranium-skinned shark that swum
in seas of mercury.
You could get some weird stuff too, like a
planet with mountains made out of rubies and
sapphires, those are mostly just aluminum
and oxygen, and we can lab-forge those these
days very cheaply.
An advanced civilization really shouldn’t
have much problem making a landscape out of
gems and weird critters with diamond exoskeletons.
Those are the artificial cases, but keep in
mind we might find natural life on worlds
that are pretty weird too.
Ocean of quicksilver might be ultra-rare,
but oceans of liquid hydrogen or helium won’t
be.
Neither will diamond, which is merely carbon
and which we think is hyperabundant in some
gas giants, where you might have regions of
their atmosphere where it literally rained
diamonds.
You need a very sturdy umbrella to go out
singing in the rain there.
Let’s take an example, for all that Mars
is usually the most popular terraforming candidate,
Venus is probably easier to make Earth-like.
At 82% of Earth’s Mass, it has a surface
gravity of 90% of Earth’s and the three
big notes on it are that it gets too much
sunlight, it spins backward very slowly, with
daytime lasting months, and that it has a
horrendously thick atmosphere, which all help
make it a superhot suburb of hell, not a place
with great real estate values or tourist attractions.
It's not terribly plausible life, particularly
complex life, is anywhere on Venus, at best
we might have microbes in the sky.
We could engineer life that could live there
though, and such types of planets shouldn’t
be terribly rare in the cosmos, so I suspect
that even if we changed Venus to better accommodate
Earth-based life, that we would eventually
have some Venusian worlds we decided to try
to craft life for, bioforming as opposed to
Terraforming.
Which might go far beyond genetic tweaking
to rebuilding the very concept of life from
entirely different key chemistries and elements.
Aliens might do the same, and of course post-biological
life can adapt itself to live wherever it
pleases, maybe even on top of neutron stars.
As we discussed in Winter on Venus though,
deployment of cheap solar shades to orbit
Venus, could block its light and cool it,
and we could later introduce some solar mirrors
to stabilize the temperature where we wanted
it and give it a more Earth-like environment.
The thing is, most of Venus’s atmosphere
is carbon dioxide, and that’s a substance
most folks know of as a gas released by breathing
creatures or burning by organic material or
fossil fuels, and that it is also what dry
ice is made of, and when you heat dry ice
up, it doesn’t melt into water but turns
from a solid, directly into a gas, what we
call sublimation as opposed to melting a solid
into a liquid or boiling a liquid into a gas,
or condensing a gas into a liquid or freezing
a liquid into a solid.
Dry Ice goes directly from solid to gas with
no liquid phase.
Well, not on Venus, the pressure is too high.
Fundamentally, liquid states of matter are
only able to exist under pressure, solids
hold themselves together by static bonds,
and gases are just loose molecules floating
around, but a liquid is being kept together
by being shoved on by outside materials, or
pressure, while being held together by intermolecular
bonds, and shoved about by their own heat
energy, which tries to break them apart.
And thus liquids basically don’t exist in
a vacuum environment.
There’s usually a range of temperatures
a liquid can exist at, 0 to 100 Celsius for
water for instance, and generally speaking,
that range expands as the pressure rises.
Water, for instance, can be kept liquid at
much higher temperatures by raising pressure
and also will need to be cooler to freeze.
However, as pressure drops, that range decreases
and there’s also usually a pressure at which
a given material won’t be liquid anymore,
typically right below the material’s triple
point, the temperature and pressure combination
where it can be solid, liquid and gas all
at once.
Boiling temperature and freezing temperature
are double-points, as ice cubes in a glass
of water or a pan of boiling water are examples
of.
For water, that triple point is just over
normal freezing temperature, at about a hundredth
of a degree Celsius, and 0.006 atmospheres,
or a bit over half a percent of normal earth
pressure.
No liquid water on any planet whose atmosphere
is below this, .6% of sea-level pressure.
Of course, water would be evaporating easier
as that pressure dropped to replenish it and
achieve an equilibrium.
Blow Earth’s atmosphere off and some of
our ocean will boil up to replace it and you’d
end up with an oxygen only atmosphere as the
hydrogen slowly leaked into space, though
there’s enough nitrogen in the dirt to replenish
much of that in the atmosphere too.
Keep doing that though and the oceans will
leak away.
That concludes our chemistry and meteorology
lecture for today, as always don’t worry,
no pop quiz is coming.
But the key point is, every substance has
a pressure at which no liquid can exist, though
some are so low that even trace atmospheres
on larger moons would work, like Mercury,
the substance not the planet, while other
materials like Carbon Dioxide need several
times normal Earth air pressure to be a liquid.
Venus has a surface pressure about 95 times
higher than Earth and thus can have liquid
carbon dioxide, but the temperature is too
hot for it not to boil.
Venus may have had oceans of carbon dioxide
in the past, if we assume it used to be colder
and have lower atmospheric pressure in the
past and underwent some period of rising temperature
and pressure till it reached its current state.
This might have helped shape its current surface,
and indeed, as it became supercritical carbon
dioxide, having gas and fluid properties simultaneously,
may have caused the rift valleys and riverlike
beds we see there.
Though there is also a theory that Venus is
completely resurfaced with lava every few
million years.
Either way, as we begin cooling Venus down
its temperature will reach a point where liquid
carbon dioxide can exist in those conditions,
and it will begin to rain down on the surface
and puddle up to form lakes.
As it does this, the atmospheric pressure
will begin dropping too, as carbon dioxide
is leaving air to become sea, and thus it’s
quite plausible you could have worlds that
were naturally stable at 7 times normal Earth
pressure between the temperatures of -56 Celsius
to 31 Celsius, or -69 to +88 Fahrenheit.
And liquid water still exists here just fine
too, though, as it is slightly less dense
than liquid carbon dioxide in some temperature
regimes, you would have a layer of water above
carbon dioxide.
Indeed, we get something like this in some
deep mountain lakes here on Earth, though
the CO2 gets turned into Carbonic Acid, which
when saturated causes bursts of CO2 to spill
over the lake and down the mountain, which
as devastated some places and killed many
people, and it's likely this is common throughout
the cosmos.
If you’re curious, dry ice is denser than
water, liquid CO2, and water ice, so, a volcanically
active planet that was about room temperature
could have a high pressure and strange mixes
of CO2 into water and soil and sky.
Though it should be noted that we would generally
expect much slower changes in temperature
and a lower variation in temperature on the
surface of planets or moons with higher air
pressure.
Thicker air absorbs and loses temperature
slower.
And of course, some materials retain heat
better than others.
Needless to say this sort of effect is hardly
limited to carbon dioxide and includes many
substances that are a lot more common than
mercury and some are pretty dense in liquid
form, Carbon dioxide comes in at 1.1 grams
per cubic centimeter, or a specific gravity
of 1.1, while water is 1 and water ice is
.9 which is why ice floats on water and would
float even better on liquid carbon dioxide.
A lot of rock is between 2 and 3, and there
are some rocks below this and liquids that
go above this but not many of either.
However, we have a lot of liquids that are
lower density than water and in which ice
would sink, permitting some alien environments
where you had a solid layer between two liquid
layers or submerged islands floating in a
band between those layers.
Throw in biology and things can shift, as
many of those liquids are biology-related
and might be produced by an organism or consumed
by them and a given floating island might
be an environment evolved to carefully adjust
its buoyancy, much as many organisms do.
Imagine a coral reef equivalent that clung
to an iceberg that snapped off some ice sheet
on a planet that had a thin layer of oil,
maybe just a few tens of meters that sunlight
could still penetrate, floating above an ocean
of water, and some organism clung to that
and produced gas bubbles at some rate adapted
to adjust with ratios of water to oil or pressure
and depth.
Now, oil photooxidizes on Earth in oil spills
in the ocean, tar is an example of photoxidized
oil, but there are other substances besides
oil that are lighter than water and you can’t
oxidize without abundant oxygen, and you also
have substances that are plastic or resin
and see-through.
Worlds with lower free oxygen or with less
sunlight or just with little UV might allow
some very long dwell time of things like oil
or alcohol.
I don’t think you’d find a planet with
seas of vodka but we have to remember that
any substance that gets produced by a geological
or biological process faster than it dissipates
or changes into something else is going to
accumulate.
That’s what we think happened with oxygen
in our own atmosphere, back when it was a
toxic waste product to the life here.
We’ve other scenarios for strange environments
too.
Earth is thought to have previously had natural
fission reactors when the planet was younger
and natural uranium was more plentiful and
some of its more radioactive isotopes more
abundant too.
We can not only imagine life evolving around
such places, but potentially having an ecosystem
designed around importing more uranium to
the spot to keep it going.
Those might produce huge fountains of gas
and steam off them that caused waterfalls
from great heights on some mountain they were
inside.
Continental plates can potentially be very
badly mangled so that you got something like
the rock of Gibraltar scaled up or a natural
Panama canal but with a much larger flow rate
and change of height, for a mega waterfall.
It is likely that before Earth had its enormous
Moon our world spun around about twice as
fast as now, having a day closer to that of
Jupiter or Saturn, and most asteroids spin
far faster, usually several times a day.
On such worlds, not only is the day shorter
but the weather and erosion effects are far
more severe.
Imagine a world racked by almost constant
thunderstorms.
Such worlds might be low on light and have
found a way for biology to harvest wind or
even lightning strikes for life giving energy
without sunlight.
Alternatively, we believe lightning was less
common on Early Earth, for all its faster
spin, because of the different atmosphere
young Earth had.
Electrons don’t act the same in an atmosphere
of carbon dioxide and nitrogen, like Venus
has and early Earth may have had, compared
to methane, ammonia, water vapor and neon,
another likely option for our Early Earth
atmosphere, and indeed we might have had multiple
ones.
And Yes, we probably had a lot of neon, that
element is fifth in abundance in the Universe
after hydrogen, helium, oxygen, and carbon
respectively.
Neon is a noble gas and thus chemically inert,
which also makes it odorless.
It also has the smallest temperature range
it can exist as a liquid, just 2.6 Celsius,
but it has an interesting property when exposed
to electric current that we take advantage
of for neon lighting.
Different atmosphere mixes can result in very
different coloring and lighting there too.
The sun might rise in the west and into a
green sky and there might be strange colored
clouds which might be made of acid not water.
You might have multiple sunrises too, in binary
systems, and many moons.
A planet that’s got more nitrogen and carbon
dioxide in its atmosphere, has more of a problem
getting lightning strikes.
And while I speculated a moment ago about
life running off of lightning, in one regard
it already does here.
We believe lightning discharges were responsible
for making those prebiotic molecules like
amino acids that needed to be so plentiful
to give life a good chance of arising.
That’s a good example of an unexpected but
possible major Fermi Paradox Filter, a planet
whose atmosphere isn’t allowing those prebiotic
molecules to form and remain and accumulate
enough to allow a realistic chance of life
starting is far more likely than one like
ours is to remain dead, even when all other
conditions for life are great.
When thinking of wondrous and natural alien
environments, we do need to keep such things
in mind.
Very tiny changes to conditions might drastically
diminish or even entirely eliminate any plausibility
of life arising or sustaining itself, and
while all we know for sure from the Fermi
Paradox is that the Universe as we see it
does not appear to be full of tons of talkative,
loud, extra terrestrial alien civilizations,
one of the more popular reasons offered why
that may be the case is that life in general
is very rare, versus life being common but
intelligence and technology being rare or
short-lived.
If life in general is rare, then it would
tend to imply it takes very little to make
a world uninhabitable.
My own guess, and it's only that, is that
intelligence is rare, and complex life isn’t
super-common, but I wouldn’t be surprised
if the odds turned out to be that life rarely
evolved more than once per galaxy or that
it typically arose on every hunk of ice and
rock in a given solar system, that was big
enough to allow some local gravity or for
it not to be evaporated away by sunlight quickly.
That’s a difference factor of over a trillion
so I could be accused of spreading my arms
very wide for my argument.
I really wouldn’t be surprised if we found
simple life in several places in this solar
system, or if the new generation of telescopes
start picking up atmospheric biosignature
on exoplanets, and if we do, then we really
need to contemplate that life can arise in
all sorts of weird places.
And once it has arisen, it tends to be good
at finding ways to stick around, we’ve got
some extremophiles on this planet that might
be able to thrive on other worlds in this
system and we could also argue modern life
is an extremophile survivor of that more ancient
world where oxygen was a deadly poison.
So often we think of Earth as the logical
baseline world to look at, and with good cause,
but the conditions on Earth now are not what
they were when life arose here, and we still
don’t know how or where it arose here, or
even if it did, as opposed to germinating
in some comet or icy planetary rings like
Saturn and falling here to grow and diversify.
Or maybe even grown in alien labs to be seeded
around the galaxy as an experiment at galactic
gardening.
I’m curious what other alien environments
you think might be around the galaxy for us
to explore, so let us know in the comments
section of the episode, and we will also be
having a poll for future alien environments
episodes on five more specific cases.
Multi-Star planets, Terrestrial Moons around
gas giants, Lavatube Ecologies on Cthonian
Planets, Crystal forests, or Double Planets.
And you can head over to our community tab
and help me decide what environment to first
look at in detail.
There are lots of writers who do truly alien
worlds and cultures amazingly well, some personal
favorites are Peter Hamilton, Alastair Reynolds,
Frank Herbert, Ursula LeGuin, Stephen Baxter,
Stanislaw Lem, C.J. Cheryh, C.S.
Friedman, Arthur C. Clarke, Robert L. Forward,
and Larry Niven, but when it comes to the
truly fantastic, nothing beats the surreal
and often psychedelic 1960’s and 70’s
New Wave era of scifi, and nobody wrote it
better than Roger Zelazny, the author of so
many reality-twisting works that explore the
alien world and our own often alien psyches.
Zelazny wrote dozens of books that explore
surreal worlds, superhuman and transhuman
motifs, and the existential crises such people
would experience, and it is never better than
in his legendary 10-book classic, The Chronicles
of Amber, journeying through countless impossible
and maddening worlds all the way to the Courts
of Chaos.
So I’m glad to give the Audible audiobook
of the Month to that amazing series, and you
can find all 10 novels performed by the author
himself, over on audible.
I personally love the books narrated by the
author, though after he passed away we had
newer versions narrated by Allesandro Juliani
from Battlestar Galactica and Wil Wheaton
from Star Trek that are excellently performed,
and I was very glad to see many of his older
works like Creatures of Light and Darkness
finally get audiobooks, and you can find all
of those, along with audiobooks by so many
other scifi and fantasy greats, over on Audible.
Indeed, Audible has so many audiobooks available
that you could hit the play button and literally
listen for centuries before anything repeated,
and more being added every day faster than
you could listen to all of it.
But they don’t just have audiobooks, they
also have many excellent podcasts, such as
Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur, where
we have every single episode on Youtube, plus
several audio-only exclusives I’ve made
over the years.
That’s just some of the great content in
the Audible Plus Catalog, which also has sleep
& meditation tracks available, as well as
guided fitness programs, and Audible Original’s
like Roadkill, the newest work by my friend
Dennis E. Taylor, who many of you know from
his awesome Bobiverse novels, which are also
available on Audible, along with Zelazny’s
Chronicles of Amber.
The whole Audible Plus Catalog full of free
books and other content, comes as a bonus
when you join Audible, in addition to your
usual 1 free audiobook each month and big
member discounts on additional ones, and as
always, new members can try Audible for free
for the first month, just go to Audible.com/isaac,
or text isaac to 500-500.
We were discussing alien environments today
and the possibility of being stranded on such
a world came up, so next month’s Scifi Sunday
will focus on that option and what if you
got stranded on an alien planet.
Before that, while traveling to alien environments
may be an option in the future, a lot will
depend on how easy space travel turns out
to be, and this Thursday we’ll contemplate
if space travel might become so mundane you
could have Your Own Personal Spaceship, which
we’ll look at on October 20th.
Then we’ll ask what would happen if you
damaged that spaceship on October 27th, and
then close out the month on Halloween weekend
with our Livestream Q&A, on Sunday, October
30th, at 4 pm Eastern Time.
Join us live to get your questions into the
chat so they can be answered.
After that we’ll head into November to discuss
refueling the Sun, an option that could make
it possible for us to keep Earth going for
trillions of years to come.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like to help support future episodes,
please visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net,
for ways to donate, or become a show patron
over at Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
