This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
The greatest and mightiest of civilizations
will be around the larger stars, but the longest
lasting ones will be around the red dwarfs.
There are billions of galaxies, each containing
many billions of stars, with billions and
billions of worlds around them all, and around
3 in 4 of those alien suns are red dwarfs,
so we should assume an awful lot of folks
will live under a red sun in the future and
I thought we should explore some of the difficulties
and special challenges of colonizing such
red dwarf systems, with a particular focus
on tidally locked planets around such suns,
where one side exists in eternal daytime and
the other in perpetual darkness.
First we should start by recognizing that
regardless if it is a red dwarf or blue giant,
all stars are white, we just call them red
and yellow and blue as a means of categorizing
them simply.
White light sources that are generated by
heat, whether it’s a sun or incandescent
light bulb, have a temperature that controls
what the peak wavelength is for the light
emitted, but the peak is not the entirety
of the light.
For a glowing hot red metal rod, that peak
isn’t even red, it's somewhere in the infrared
and there’s just a little bit of red being
given off that we can see.
Most stars give off the majority of their
light in the infrared range of the spectrum,
but still give off a wide spectrum of visible
light too and the peaks and spectra can be
compared to a light bulb’s color temperature.
Our sun, called a yellow dwarf, has a surface
temperature of 5800 Kelvin, which makes for
a peak wavelength of green not yellow, and
on the blue end of green too, but it is a
white light source.
So too is an incandescent light bulb, like
the kind many of us grew up with, and those
had a color temperature of about 2400 Kelvin,
whereas ‘warm white’ bulbs are about 3000
Kelvin, and red dwarfs can be anywhere from
2300 to 3800 Kelvin, it is a pretty broad
range from that old cold incandescent light
up to the natural bright white LEDs we often
have now, but it’s all white light.
Probably one of the most common concerns I
hear about colonizing red dwarfs is that folks
wouldn’t like the lighting, but its lighting
you’re already very used to, both indoor
and out, not some deep red as folks tend to
imagine.
Red dwarfs not only have a wide spectrum of
color, they are a wide spectrum of star, too.
The vast majority of stars are smaller than
our yellow dwarf Sun, the term yellow dwarf
is a relic of when we could only see the biggest
and brightest stars, and so is the term red
dwarf.
We had no idea how common they were when we
started cataloguing them, and what a broad
range of characteristics they had.
For instance it is common to assume planets
around these stars would be tidally locked,
always showing the same side to their star,
so that one side was dark and the other perpetually
lit, and indeed these might be common and
we’ll spend a lot of time on them today,
but with the Luminosity of Red Dwarfs ranging
from 0.015% to 7.2% of the Sun’s light,
a factor of 500, that means their habitable
zones range in distance from their sun by
a factor of 22, making their habitable zones,
in terms of light for heating worlds, between
about 1% to 40% of what Earth’s distance
from our Sun is.
Alternatively K-Type Orange Dwarfs, the next
biggest star type, vary much less in brightness,
and G-Type yellow dwarfs like our sun, or
the slightly brighter and bigger F-Type yellow-white
dwarfs, also occupy a narrow band compared
to M-type red dwarfs.
The classes above that in brightness or mass
do vary more, but these represent around 1%
of stars and the shortest lived ones, either
being short lived giants or stars in their
end of life red giant phases and thus not
usually considered ideal for colonization.
That’s a point I’d dispute, but a topic
for another day.
The key notion though is that M-Type Red Dwarfs
are a wide class of stars that contain more
stars than all the other types combined, and
maybe should be broken into more types as
a result, but being the most common by far
they should make up the bulk of future colonized
systems.
They also live far longer than other stars
and are the most efficient with their fuel,
some able to live trillions of years, indeed
no red dwarf, even the oldest, has yet left
the main sequence let alone died.
This longevity might make them preferred colonies,
and also gives them far more time for life
to evolve naturally on the planets orbiting
them.
However this doesn’t mean they’d make
for the places where the majority of people
lived.
As an example, we often picture the final
state of colonization for most stars as a
Dyson Swarm, where all that star’s light
is being absorbed by various artificial constructs
and space habitats rather than just natural
planets, and one around our Sun would receive
14 to 7000 times more light than a red dwarf’s
Dyson swarms would have, again a very large
range, but it’s a good reminder that while
red dwarfs make up the majority of stars,
they do not make up the majority of starlight,
indeed they make up less than a percent of
it, so if that translated directly into population,
so many watts of sunlight equals so many people,
single-sun red dwarf systems would make up
the majority of systems but less than a percent
of the galactic population.
At least at any given moment, considering
they last longer and are more efficient with
their fuel, a red dwarf might be home to as
many people as a larger, brighter, but shorter
lived star over the entirety of their own
lifespans.
Now on the planet-colonization end of things,
our main interest for today, they are also
a little less likely to give us the worlds
we want for direct colonizing or terraforming.
The bigger a star is, the more planetary mass
it is likely to have, because it would have
had a bigger disc around it for those stars
to form from.
Furthermore, the larger the star, the larger
the habitable zone.
Habitable Zone size is debatable, Venus and
Mars might be considered in our Sun’s Goldilocks
Zone in spite of being a literal molten hellscape
and frozen desert respectively, so suns our
size might have room for two planets in their
habitable zone, but smaller ones do not.
Indeed those very smallest M-type red dwarfs
have habitable zones more on par with what
we’d think of as a moon’s distance rather
than interplanetary.
So while red dwarfs will have planets, they
will not likely be where the majority of Earth-analogues
for size and temperature can be found, and
many of these might be tidally locked, eternal
day on one side and night on the other.
Though let me add a big caveat on that, we
are less than 30 years out from the discovery
of the first exoplanet, and most of our basic
notions of planet formation and setup pre-date
that.
As our catalogue of worlds has grown, our
expectations and theories have been regularly
shattered.
Alan Boss, an exoplanet theorist, once quipped
back in 2007 in regard to our discoveries
not matching our theories “The score is
something like observers: 230, theorists:
0.”
And we’ve found dozens of times more planets
since that comment.
And sadly virtually none of those are planets
of roughly Earth Mass in a Habitable Zone,
and even fewer around red dwarfs.
This is not because we think they are rare,
but because planets are easier to see the
more light they are reflecting, and big gas
giants right next to their Suns, what we call
a hot Jupiter, are the easiest to see.
But it means we don’t have hard data yet
on what red dwarf habitable worlds would be
like, and as mentioned, our theories have
a less than ideal track record where exoplanets
are concerned.
So let's begin with this notion that planets
around red dwarfs are tidally locked.
There’s a few reasons why this was assumed
to be the norm for red dwarfs.
First, almost every moon is tidally locked
to its planet, and second, we had incorrectly
assumed that both Mercury and Venus were tidal
locked or near to it for quite a while.
But Mercury is in a 3:2 orbital resonance,
3 days for every 2 years exactly, not a 1:1
day equals year tidal locking.
Venus has a day and year of about the same
length, indeed the day is longer than the
year, but we are not inclined to think this
is strictly from the classic model of tidal
locking.
Objects orbiting something are not rigid,
even when rocky, and stretch a bit in the
direction of the gravity, as opposed to staying
a perfect sphere.
Since they spin, the bit stretched will begin
to fall back down once it spins past that
“Noon” position, but it takes a bit of
time to sag back so you get a moon that is
stretched a bit off-center.
As a result you have a little extra gravity
pulling on the side that just rotated past
the primary body and this acts as a slow brake.
Over a long enough time, any object orbiting
another body will slow in its rotation till
its day equals the same length as its year,
and eventually the main body will do the same.
Pluto for instance is locked to its largest
Moon Charon, and vice-versa, and we expect
Earth to eventually have a day as long as
its month too, but not for many billions of
years.
We have a formula for loosely calculating
this time for lockdown, and while it includes
the mass and size of the primary and the satellite,
the biggest factor by far is the radius the
object orbits at.
For instance we figure a star half our mass
would take 4 times longer to tidally lock
Earth, at the same distance, and one a tenth
our mass 100 times longer, as it goes with
the inverse square of mass.
However we estimate locking to go with the
sixth power of distance, so a planet half
the distance from a star would take a 64th
the time to lock, and a tenth the distance
would lock a million times faster.
Hence why moons are almost all locked, the
Earth may be 333,000 times less massive than
the Sun, to act as a locking mechanism for
our moon, but is 400 times closer to Earth
than Earth to the Sun.
So while the Sun’s mass exerts over a hundred
billion times the locking power that Earth’s
Mass does, 400^6 is over 4 quadrillion, making
the distance factor 40,000 times bigger than
that mass effect.
Red dwarfs have less mass than our Sun, so
a planet as far away as Earth would take longer
to lock, but it couldn’t be as far away
as Earth and be habitable.
A Red Dwarf a quarter of our mass would have
only about a hundredth of our sun’s luminosity,
so a planet would need to be ten times closer
to get the same lighting, as sunlight falls
off in strength with the inverse square of
distance.
All things being equal, a satellite would
tidally lock 10^6 or a million times faster
by being closer, though also 16 times slower
from the lower mass, or 62,500 times faster
accounting for both.
Such a star is fairly average for a red dwarf,
and indeed is on the edge of one of the most
important boundaries for red dwarfs, of being
fully convective.
Red dwarfs below a quarter our Sun’s Mass
are expected to use almost all their hydrogen
fuel before burning out, it just mixes together,
but larger stars are much less fuel efficient
and often burn only a fraction of the hydrogen
before dying because the core is where most
of the burning goes on and in larger stars
it doesn’t mix with the upper layers very
well.
Stars below this quarter-solar-mass level
are not expected to ever turn into red giants,
and are doubly long-lived as stars go, as
they burn their fuel slowest and burn it all.
I’d also tend to guess that above this mass
you would not see tidally locked habitable
zone planets.
We still don’t know where the cutoff would
be in terms of distance and mass for tidal
locking, and again it is a function of time,
but newer modeling with better computers has
led us to believe that atmospheres act a bit
like a lubricant against tidal locking.
There’s a major concern that the more volatile
solar activity of smaller stars might blast
the atmospheres off of their planets, but
it seems likely with the larger red dwarfs
that any planet that has retained a reasonable
atmosphere would not be tidally locked.
Where that cutoff is, time will tell as our
modeling and observations improve, but as
I said earlier, M-type red dwarfs are such
a broad category of stars they really deserve
sub-classification, and I would bet two of
the common ones in the future will be which
side of fully convective they are, and if
they can have non-tidally locked habitable
zone planets with atmospheres.
That is age dependent too, as the older a
red dwarf is the more likely planets around
it will have lost their atmosphere, and the
more likely they are too have tidally locked,
and even more so if they have lost their atmospheres.
That’s fairly important considering how
long they can live.
By which I mean natural atmospheres, though
for colonization purposes we would include
worlds we could add an atmosphere onto and
expect it to last geological periods, not
mere centuries.
There may be naturally occurring tidally locked
worlds with atmospheres in habitable zones
of red dwarfs, but this staple of fiction
now seems a lot less likely, with the caveat
that much of this is still guesswork, and
probably would have to be on either younger
systems or the least massive of red-dwarfs.
Or on terraformed planets.
A planet might be tidally locked with no atmosphere,
but that is not a strong bar to adding air
and sea.
What are these worlds like?
Well we often call them Twilight Worlds, which
can seem like a bit of a misnomer given that
on such planets most areas never experience
twilight.
The Sun is either never in sight, on roughly
half of it, or always in sight and in about
the same place.
There is a band of twilight between these
two hemispheres where it is assumed most folks
would choose to live, and indeed on most of
them there would be spots where the sun might
rise and set occasionally, just not rise much
or set much.
For all that we say the Moon always shows
us the same face, 59% of the moon’s surface
is visible from Earth, not 50%.
And this is due to Libration, or wagging and
wobbling, which comes in a few types.
First we have Diurnal Libration, which means
as Earth spins you can see the Moon from slightly
different angles, and is probably the easiest
to visualize but only accounts for a tiny
portion of that extra visible surface of the
Moon and doesn’t really apply to lighting,
both sides of a star are equally bright, and
thus light the tidally locked planet, but
from that planet there might be sunspots near
the edge of the Sun visible from one part
of the planet but not others.
The effect is minimal but would vary by how
big the Sun was in terms of angular size,
and it is worth noting that red dwarfs appear
far larger in the sky of the planets they
warm than our Sun would, which in turn would
be larger than a giant star, for the same
planetary temperatures, you need to be closer
to smaller stars to stay warm and they will
look bigger in the sky over all.
This effect though, that the star and planet
both have real width and are not point-like,
contributes to this band of twilight.
Libration from Latitude is our next one, and
is the same concept as seasonal variation.
Earth is tilted relative to its orbit around
the Sun, and a tidally locked world can be
too.
In this context it means the polar regions
will alternate in level of lighting over the
course of the year.
Now it is worth noting that years can be short
around red dwarfs, anywhere from a few days
for hotter worlds around the smallest red
dwarfs to a few months for worlds at the cold
edge of the habitable zone of the largest
of red dwarfs, though I’d doubt these last
kind would be tidally locked.
That is earth days incidentally, again the
day on a tidally locked world is identical
to its year.
Of course a planet could have had some event
push that tidal locking ahead quicker than
schedule, again Venus’s own day and year
are nearly the same and these days we guess
it was from a large collision event, much
like what we suspect created our own Moon
or flipped Uranus on its side.
Some planets far from its sun could be tidally
locked, simply because planets don’t seem
to circle their stars for eons without major
events happening to them, and it would not
be that improbable one got slammed by another
planet in a way that accelerated that tidal
locking.
Of course planets rarely circle stars, not
in perfect circles anyway, but rather in ellipses,
and this results in our third type of Libration,
wobbling in Longitude.
An object orbiting a star in an ellipse will
have two interesting effects.
First and easiest to understand, the planet
is sometimes closer to its star, and sometimes
further, and so will be brighter or dimmer.
Indeed, the Earth gets about 7% more light
when it’s at perihelion, closest to the
sun, then when it’s at aphelion, furthest
from the sun.
Amusingly, at least for those of us living
in the Northern Hemisphere, perihelion occurs
in early January.
Our seasonal variation from axial tilting
is much more potent than our planet’s orbital
eccentricity, but Earth has a fairly low eccentricity,
or nearly circular orbit, compared to most
planets.
Pluto and Mercury have the highest eccentricity,
and planets on such very elliptical orbits
would get larger seasonal effects from that
eccentricity.
Given that years on these planets might last
days to weeks, such seasonal variation from
eccentricity might more closely approximate
our day than our season.
The other aspect of Libration from elliptical
orbits is a bit trickier to picture, but what
has to be remembered is that tidally locked
planets still rotate, they just do it once
a year.
However they spin at the same rate all day
long, they do not orbit at the same speed
all year long though.
Satellites orbit fastest near a star – they
are falling and picking up speed as they do
it – and slowest when furthest from the
star.
As a result the actual angle the star is relative
to a fixed place on that planet is changing
over the course of the year, and the more
the more eccentric the orbit is.
For this reason the sun can rise and set over
the course of that year, though even for the
most eccentric orbits it is probably only
going to seem to bounce up and down on the
horizon a bit.
One other thing about red dwarfs and eccentric
orbits.
Because the orbital period is so short, far
more elliptical orbits can exist and permit
habitability.
Planets take a while to warm and cool, there
is a reason why the longest and shortest days
of the year, the solstices, are not considered
the middle of summer and winter, but more
like their beginning.
If a planet orbits its sun every 30 earth
days, it probably can get away with getting
much closer and further from its star without
boiling or freezing those on it, and this
eccentricity might cause quite a weather cycle,
as the intensity would vary a lot and the
regions over which the Sun actually rose and
set would be pretty large.
We’ve got a few extremes for each of these
variables incidentally.
On the extreme side of Mass, the least massive
red dwarf offers day and year lengths to planets
of only a few days while the most massive
could have years as long as 90 days, and can
have regular days too, large red dwarfs probably
don’t have tidally locked habitable planets
but still aren’t likely to have Earth-like
seasons because even though they are as likely
to have axial tilting as Earth, they just
don’t have the year length to allow a large
rise or dip in temperature.
On the other end of that spectrum, the smaller
red dwarfs can have seasonal variations simply
from highly elliptical orbits, if the planet
is eccentric, simply because the orbit is
so short in duration, and would see strong
weather.
Tidally locked worlds with highly circular
orbits though might be quite stagnant weather-wise,
one eternally shining sun with little variation
in position or strength in the sky would just
blow all the moisture slowly to the dark side,
so that you might get a dead barren sun side,
a glacial dark side, and a twilight band full
of meltwater and icebergs.
This is one example of what we call an Eyeball
Earth, and they can also come in the hot eyeball
and icy eyeball varieties.
It depends on how deep in the habitable zone
a planet is, as for instance one barely inside
the outer edge might be a big frozen iceball
whose center region under the eternal noon
is melted out ocean and islands, or the reverse
where the sun side is totally unlivable but
the dark side is cool enough for liquid water,
and it just doesn’t have photosynthesis
running its ecology.
You could have separate ecologies too, same
as we have many biomes, including those which
are in utter darkness like the ocean depths.
You could have some effect like marine snow
too, where photosynthetic plants and organisms
growing in the twilight band are pushed by
winds from the sunny band feeding a weaker
detritivore ecology on the night side.
It might not always be dark there too, even
ignoring the twilight bands, such planets
can have their own moons, though we would
expect them to be less likely to tidally lock
if they had a large moon.
They also could be pretty tightly packed planets,
much like the Galilean Moons around Jupiter,
nearly planets in their own right, and they’d
make for pretty bright objects in the night
sky of each other if Jupiter were a Second
Sun, something we discussed more in our Summer
on Jupiter Episode.
You can also have binary star systems, where
the planets might orbit a red dwarf which
was a smaller and distant companion of another
larger star, or planets in orbit around a
pair of close binary red dwarfs.
For that matter though, speaking of binaries
and moons of gas giants, you could have habitable
moons of a gas giant or brown dwarf that was
orbiting a red dwarf.
Jupiter mass compared to the smallest of red
dwarfs is comparable to the Moon’s Mass
to Earth, and there’s a broad range for
satellite options between a near binary star
of a brown dwarf and a smaller red dwarf to
a larger red dwarf and something more in the
Neptune Mass or Super-Earth category, but
all permit plausible scenarios for Earth-sized
moons stably orbiting a giant planet itself
orbiting that star.
Such a moon is likely to be tidally locked
to its gas giant planet but still gets regular
sunlight, and thus would have a day in the
sense of the sun rising and setting, anywhere
from a few days to a few months, while it
orbits its planet, which it would not necessarily
need to do more often.
We have some weird options for distant moons
and Lagrange point objects.
We usually hold that a moon needs to be no
more than a ninth as far from its planet as
that planet is from its sun to be stable.
Our Moon orbits every month, at about a 400th
the Earth-Sun distance, but should theoretically
be stable at that distance even if Earth moved
to say 0.025 AU, 10 moon orbital distances
from the Sun, where the Sunlight would be
1600 times brighter.
A star a 1600th as bright would only have
about 9% of our Sun’s mass, and Earth, at
that distance from that mass of star, and
would orbit it about every five days, while
our own moon would still orbit us every 29
days.
So you could have habitable moons orbiting
their planet much faster than the planet orbited
that star, as we’d expect, tidally locked
to the planet but getting a day and night
as they rotated relative to the star, and
you could get some rather peculiar examples
where that lunar orbital period was longer
than the planetary one.
But a fairly critical concept to settling
red dwarf systems in the first place is that
things will be tighter packed than our own
solar system.
Their habitable sphere will be between 3000
to 300 billion times smaller in volume than
our solar system’s, space is still pretty
empty, but not as empty as it is here.
That matters a lot for a Dyson swarm for instance.
One thing we often comment on is that it’s
easy to find enough raw materials for a simple
solar collector Dyson Swarm around our Sun
but resources get pretty scarce as you try
to replace all of that with artificial rotating
habitats for people to live in.
We also point out that even though a Dyson
swarm englobes an entire star, it’s still
composed of individual components distanced
from each other by enormous spaces that make
collisions unlikely and the whole thing less
dense than air, even pretty thin air.
This is less true of a Red Dwarf.
For instance, while we’d expect red dwarf
systems to have less building material orbiting
around them in the forms of planets, moons,
and asteroids, they also need way less of
that material for a complete Dyson, between
0.01% and 7% of our Sun’s, given that is
the range of red dwarf luminosity.
It does need to be a great deal denser though,
the smallest M9 Red Dwarfs might need ten-thousand
times less building material, but they have
300 billion times less volume to stick them
in, making them 30 million times denser than
a Dyson around our own Sun.
That happens to be ideal for connectivity,
if you’re building a civilization mostly
focused on short light speed internal communication,
like a giant digital brain or a vast uploaded
civilization.
They are very easy to Dyson Swarm up, whether
it's for such digital architecture or for
more classic space habitats.
Indeed, given that hybrid Dyson approaches
are likely to be common, you might get around
the redder light spectra, if that bothered
you, by filtering it into your habitats, letting
mirrors with selective reflectivity to certain
wavelengths send in light so more of the blue
got into the habitats and more of the red
and infrared went into power generation.
You can do that same trick with orbital mirrors
to heat up the light spectrum hitting the
planet, and to get light onto the dark side
of tidally locked worlds too.
This is the other reason the twilight-banded
tidally locked worlds might be less common
too.
We might find a lot of them where they were
initially airless, and we could comet bombard
them to get that atmosphere, red dwarfs should
have plenty of cometary bodies too, but it
takes a lot less effort to setup orbital mirrors
and shades to patch the eternal day and night
side issue than it takes to bring in even
a very modest amount of air and water to permit
shallow lakes.
Planets already having air and water are not
likely to be tidally locked, as we explained
earlier, and the airless ones are just so
easy to fix the lighting on with mirrors and
shades compared to adding in that air and
water that you’d assume if they terraformed
them to have that air and water they would
have fixed the lighting issue too.
So what is the lure to colonize red dwarfs
in the end?
Well, they are likely to be more the equivalent
of a tight and fertile archipelago in comparison
to the more desolate but large continents
of bigger stars.
Everything is tight packed and easily gotten.
There’s less of it, but it will be around
a lot longer, and more to the point, the people
who colonized lands across our own seas didn’t
skip islands in favor of larger landmasses,
indeed in terms of land value, area for area
islands tend to be more valuable than continents
by a wide margin.
Someone will want a claim on the red dwarfs
because they are valuable, less valuable than
a yellow dwarf, but still immensely valuable,
and far more numerous, and far longer lived.
The greatest and mightiest of civilizations
will be around the larger stars, but the longest
lasting ones will endure around the red dwarfs,
long after those mighty civilizations around
the larger stars are nothing but distant memories.
As a heads up, our sponsor for this episode,
curiositystream, has extended their holiday
promotional deal till the end of the month
of January, and they’re currently offering
41% off subscriptions to their streaming service.
Curiosity Stream has thousands of fun and
educational videos, including awesome science
content like their Exoplanets Documentary
discussing some of the worlds we might find
around stars like those we looked at today.
However, they’ve also partnered up with
us at Nebula, our Streamy-Award Nominated
streaming service, to offer Nebula’s content
along with their own, if you sign up at the
link in the episode description.
That means you will not only get Curiosity
Stream, and at a 41% discount, but also lets
you catch SFIA episodes early and without
ads, and help support our show while you’re
doing it, as well as see our Exclusive Coexistence
with Alien Series and other great content
from our sibling shows.
Again you can get a year of both Curiositystream
and Nebula for less than $15, get to support
the show and see our episodes early, and get
all that for less than $15 by using the link
in the episode’s description.
Some of you might have noted we had previously
had today’s episode listed as airing at
the start of January, and we moved it forward
a week, swapping it with our episode Zero
Gravity Civilizations which will now be coming
out next Thursday, and we will be following
our look at colonizing dwarfs stars up by
looking at colonizing Giant Stars at the end
of February.
Before we finish January though, we do have
our Monthly Livestream Q&A coming out this
Sunday, January 31st, at 4 pm Eastern Time,
and as usual we will be answering your questions
as you submit them to the livestream chat.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
