One day our civilization may settle our whole 
galaxy, with mighty star empires consisting of  
millions if not billions of worlds, but what 
would the centers of such empires be like?
Way back in Isaac Asimov’s epic Foundation series 
we encounter the planet of Trantor, capital of the  
Galactic empire of 25 million planets, and 
home itself to a planet-wide-metropolis of  
40 billion people. Ever since I first read 
about it, the idea was captivating to me,  
but so were some of the problems. Today, as 
we look at what the capitals of great cosmos  
spanning nations might be like, I thought we might 
start by considering Asimov’s classic example. 
It is an immense discussion appropriate for such 
immense empires, so we’ll be here for a bit,  
and you might want to grab a drink and snack, 
and don’t forget to hit those like and subscribe  
buttons if you enjoy learning science along with a 
fun dose of science fiction and imagination fuel. 
Trantor’s 40 billion people are on a planet 
described as being all towers and buildings across  
the whole planet. As we’ve noted in other episodes 
like Hive Worlds, it is a very lowball figure for  
such a planet wide city or ecumenopolis, 
and we see better but still low estimates  
in other fiction like Star Wars where they push 
it up to more like a trillion, but the density  
of the population isn’t the key issue there.
Let’s imagine a population of 40 billion implies  
25 billion people in the workforce, which is a 
bit high, for instance, the US runs at 50% of  
the population in the workforce, give or take. 
Many others being children, retired, stay at  
home parents, or temporarily unemployed. But that 
would mean 1000 people on that capital world for  
every planet in that empire. Even assuming none 
of those folks worked outside administration,  
and administered nothing but those planets - 
no pentagon or department of agriculture - that  
would still seem rather thin on the ground.
Of course those planets have their own governments  
and probably you have some hierarchy between 
planet and galactic capital, sectors, segments,  
quadrants, or so on, but just under 1% of the US 
population, or just under 2% of our workforce,  
are federal employees, not state or local, 
specifically federal, and while not all live in  
the capital itself by any means, quite a lot do.
Even if we assumed all those extra layers shifted  
that and we had a much leaner bureaucracy and 
one much more spread throughout the empire, if  
only one in a thousand people worked at the cosmic 
federal level, and only 1% of those were back at  
the main capital, that still means a planet like 
Earth, population 8 billion, would be expecting to  
have almost 80,000 people at that capital in some 
governmental office relating to us. And that’s  
very tiny. Even just the tourist population, if we 
assume 1 in a thousand people visited the capital  
in their life and for just one week, would still 
imply 2000 tourists from Earth at that capital  
at any given moment, and from 25 million worlds, 
that would be 50 billion tourists at any moment.  
And around 2% of our population is involved in 
the tourist industry too, and a lot more than  
that in the places where tourism actually occurs.
There’s 23,000 people working in the Pentagon,  
would an empire of 25 million planets need 25 
million times that? Or even more considering  
the US military is not the whole planet’s 
military. But even if a planet only needed  
one pentagon of our size, that would imply 
575 billion people working in the supreme  
command center of a galactic empire. How 
many billions work next door at the Great  
Hall of Justice or Mega-Chamber of Commerce?
It depends a lot of course on if you have  
faster than light travel, FTL, and if so, at what 
sort of rate. We can have a giant military office  
building and bunker in the capital because we have 
telephones, you presumably do more administrating  
closer to the local level when communication 
is slower. And yet, 25 million is also a very  
small number of planets, and so is assuming 
Earth-like planets are where most folks live. 
We do not have to assume FTL travel to allow 
empires far larger in number than Asimov  
contemplated, a single Kardashev-2 civilization 
might be home to a hundred times the population  
of the entire galactic empire Trantor ruled over, 
and in just one star system, and indeed we might  
imagine that it was that K2 civilization around 
a single star that was the capital for a wider  
galactic empire, not an individual planet in it.
We also shouldn’t assume a civilization with  
casual FTL space travel only has 25 million 
planets. There’s probably at least 10,000  
times as many planets in the galaxy that would 
be plausible terraforming targets. A quarter of  
trillion planets and no reason to think any were 
less populous than modern Earth, especially as  
that’s implying about one planet per star system 
in the galaxy, and even in a setup like that,  
we would expect thousands of smaller spaceports, 
asteroid mines, refineries, and habitats, even  
if planets accounted for most of the population.
It also might be more believable that a capital  
planet of an empire was literally just the 
capital, one giant palace and garden for the  
emperor, vital functionaries, servants, and 
visiting heavyweights. In something like the  
Stargate-style space empire we discussed 
in last month’s Sci-fi Sunday episode,  
where planets might have direct gate links 
from their surface to another hundred planets,  
you might have a billion planets in your 
empire and the top 100 at that second highest  
layer were all government, not even connected to 
your hundred regional galactic state capitals but  
just the Senate Planet, the Supreme Court Planet 
with the Galactic Legal Library, and so on. 
Scale really matters on things like this, and I 
remember a toss-away line in Futurama where they  
introduce Zap Brannigan as a 25-star general of 
the Democratic Order of Planets, but that might  
not be too far off. Typically for any given step 
up in the military, there’s 2-6 of the unit size  
below it under that person, and a US army division 
of 10-15,000 soldiers is typically under a 2-star  
major general, who might have a 1-star brigadier 
general as their deputy commander along with 3  
full-bird colonels just running division command, 
and 5 or 6 more brigade or regimental full-bird  
colonels running the 5 or 6 brigades or regiments 
the division is subdivided into. Brigades and  
regiments are relatively interchangeable for size.
The next step up above that is a Corp,  
which would be at least 2 divisions, and often 
would have 2 full or active divisions and some  
more ghost-like reserve divisions that can be 
buffed up during major war time recruitment.  
That has a three-star running it, and there’s only 
9 active Corps in the US right now. We keep about  
1 general or flag officer for every 1400 personnel 
these days, and that’s a fair amount of rank creep  
from the more like 2000 to 1 ratio it was back in 
the World War 2 era, though you tend to have rank  
creep in more peaceful times as you have a lot 
more focus on administration and preparation,  
and if a war breaks out you rapidly spread your 
trained folks over newly formed or re-activated  
units that you stuff with fresh recruits. 
Every corporal and junior sergeant gets  
shoved in charge of a squad, every junior captain 
suddenly becomes a company commander, and so on. 
There’s 132 3-star and 45 4 star officers in 
the US right now, which I think is generally  
acknowledged as being very top heavy, with the 
Air Force usually being considered the worst  
offender in that regard, but it means that 
we have a 4-star and three 2-stars for on an  
order of every hundred thousands service 
personnel, or less, and that includes reserve,  
guard, and non-obvious groups like NOAA, the 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
Everytime you go up an order of magnitude in 
troop numbers, assume you need at least another  
double-jump in ranks like that.
So if you are up a million-fold,  
you probably need 12 more stars to take you to 
16. And we see similar things with non-military  
departments in terms of under-deputy-secretaries 
and second vice-ministers and so on, and in  
private sector larger companies too. And even 
when over-staffed and ranked, these folks rarely  
include many thumb-twirlers doing nothing useful.
From another perspective of crazy scale,  
you also have 1.2 million people with top secret 
clearance in the US, about 0.4% of the population,  
and even if 99.99% of those are reliable, which is 
probably optimistic, your careless folks or spies  
would number 120, and in a population a million 
times bigger, that’s not just a legion of spies,  
or even city of spies, but a whole nation 
worth. All named Alpharius probably. 
Now your mileage may vary on how heavy 
up top a lot of organizations are or if  
an organization could get away with being 
half the size with a tenth the leadership,  
and sometimes it is bloat and other times folks 
are getting a mostly symbolic higher title and  
modest pay increase in order to keep them from 
going to another place or retiring. That’s not  
really our topic for today beyond noting that 
if you do have a top-heavy capital and rank  
structure, it’s going to concentrate toward your 
capital and massively change its demography. 
So too, we do need to be mindful that in a space 
opera sci fi setting where folks can live a couple  
centuries or more, and come from a nation that's 
got as many inhabited planets as most modern  
nations have people, your upper echelons start 
getting very Olympian indeed. Some K2 civilization  
that’s actually quite peaceful might easily 
field a standing military of just one-thousandth  
its population, and still have 10 quadrillion 
soldiers, and 5-7 trillion generals and admirals. 
If that place happens to be a meritocracy, then 
presumably you need to be over Einstein-ian skill  
even to slide into the lower rungs of that upper 
echelon with a healthy dose of nepotism to aid  
the way, so I would guess the tendency of scifi 
to portray the top bureaucracy of such empires  
as idiotic benchwarmers is probably off.
If we’re assuming we need two more rank  
stars for each order of magnitude, then by the 
time we get down to the top few dozen chiefs,  
you might be up in the mid twenties and have you 
that 25-star general, and if you push that up  
to a full Kardashev-3 civilization, you might 
need to find a place to cram 40 or more stars  
onto your supreme high arch grand admiral who 
commands a fleet of 10-mile long battlecruisers  
outnumbering every human alive now or in prior 
history. The Kardashev-4 Supercluster scale,  
or Grabby Aliens scale, would add on another 
16 stars or so, 56-star Mega-Supreme-Grand-Arch  
General, whose forces require an entire galaxy 
just for their billets in garrison. And the  
equivalent of a congressman or parliament member 
might need a staff of a billion just to handle  
their mail and routine requests to their office 
and might need a modest personal security force  
the size of a single modern army division.
You also have to figure out how big you’re  
willing to make each level of government. In 
Star Wars: The Phantom Menace, they show us  
this massive galactic senate seemingly composed 
of thousands of delegations, and Palpatine is  
the senator for the planet of Naboo, and in the 
old Legends canon for the setting, they tend to  
go back and forth on if that was one planet per 
senator or a subsector he represented of which  
Naboo was the best known or most influential 
member, since they had a million worlds in the  
Republic and even that huge senate hall didn’t 
have a million floating platform-thingies. 
You could potentially have a million-person 
legislature, there’s no hard cutoff on size, but  
you're probably more likely to go for smaller ones 
with more subdivisions or bigger staffs, and you  
could hypothetically have even a mega-legislature 
representing quadrillions that still had ratio of  
citizens to representatives in the thousands. On 
the flip side, a lot of folks tend to feel even  
parliamentary bodies of a hundred or so folks 
are too many to be timely in terms of crafting  
regulation and law or budgets, and that you want 
something more of the cabinet scale where everyone  
fits around a big table, and not one large 
enough to need multiple trucks to carry it. 
We also shouldn’t be assuming you run on 
representative democracy by location, you  
might not be democracy at all, and if you are, you 
might be voting for individuals nationwide where,  
say, the top 100 vote getters all got put on the 
supreme council and had a voting strength based  
on how many votes they got, so #1 might have 
gotten 10% of the votes while #100 might have  
gotten a thousandth, and the other guy at #1 might 
have 100 times as much voting power as a result. 
Or you might have a monarch or autarch, or someone 
elected by your senate who just keeps getting  
re-elected, like Rome’s first emperor Augustus[a] 
did, or how George Washington probably would have  
been if he hadn’t embraced voluntary term limits. 
And if we imagine a civilization with impressive  
life extension technology, or able to do 
tricks like copy a brain onto a new body,  
you could end up with someone who was popular as 
a leader and then just kept getting re-elected  
until it was a formality, because even those 
who didn’t particularly like that person didn’t  
wanted to rock the boat or gamble on a devil 
they didn’t know. That person might be mostly  
a figurehead or they might be all-powerful.
A capital might not be a traditional government  
either, we could imagine sector capitals of 
a larger empire and we could also imagine  
quasi-capitals the way the Vatican has frequently 
been for large portions of the Christian world,  
varying in official political influence but 
often acting much like a government - or even  
being one - and a place where folks pilgrimage 
to. So too, it wouldn’t be hard to imagine a  
world that served as a meeting place of a 
large mercantile guild or trade federation.  
And places like Wall Street, Davos, Silicon 
Valley, or even Cannes or Hollywood,  
act as a de facto capital for a large sector 
of the economy or culture or a given ideology. 
There’s also the question of just how big places 
like this can get, and even in a No-FTL universe,  
the answer is pretty big. Indeed the answer is 
mostly about how to get rid of heat and minimize  
its usage, rather than actual size. In a casual 
FTL scenario like those with planet to planet  
stargates, you not only could have a given city 
on Earth connected directly to some planet halfway  
across the Universe, so that’s you’re essentially 
circumventing three-dimensional limits on density  
and packing, but you could also be pushing your 
heat out so that your planet-wide metropolis,  
an ecumenopolis, can have ten thousand floors, 
or more, without everyone burning to death in  
their own waste heat because you radiate 
it out to other icy spots in the universe  
by pumping it through pipes into stargates 
like a vehicle radiator at a planetary scale. 
Or bigger than a planet. As we noted a couple 
months back in multi-planetary empires, black  
holes will often be found in denser star clusters 
and are an amazing way to slow a spaceship down,  
thus might be the place where colonists first 
arrive in any new region of the galaxy. That  
black hole is amazingly valuable real estate 
we can generate huge amounts of power from,  
so can very easily become a local hub. But they 
can also protect that black hole by building a  
shell around it. They can then make a thick and 
sturdy shell by means of active support powered by  
that black hole, and place that shell at whatever 
distance it would have normal Earth-gravity at. 
For your typical black hole of about 3 solar 
masses, 1 million times Earth mass, that radius  
would be about a thousand times what Earth’s is, 
or about 4 million miles, and with a million times  
the living area Earth has. And if heat isn’t 
an issue, you could run day time lighting on  
multiple concentric spherical shells, say each 
100 miles above the last, so that a thousand such  
layers stretching from 4 million to 4.1 million 
miles from that black hole would give you the  
same living area as a billion Earths or an 
entire classic Dyson Sphere. It is sometimes  
suggested you could dump heat into a black 
hole to get around thermodynamic maximums too. 
Otherwise your maximum population density depends 
on how much power each person uses and how much  
radiating surface area you have, which means 
your density drops inverse to your population.  
A civilization with 100 times the population 
needs 100 times the radiating surface area,  
or a sphere ten times wider to pack into, and 
which would have a thousand times the volume,  
so 100 times the people but 1000 times the 
volume, and thus a tenth the density of people. 
For Dyson Swarms, which can have multiple stars 
in their center or distributed throughout,  
this can get pretty big. Your default dyson 
is as wide as Earth's orbit around the Sun,  
or maybe a bit wider, since Earth's temperature is 
based on distance from the Sun, and could support  
2 billion Earth’s worth in terms of lighting. 
Stars range from less than a thousandth our Sun’s  
brightness to more than a million times brighter, 
so even a 1-star dyson can range from being a  
couple light minutes across to several light days.
You could potentially pack 10 billion copies of  
our Sun together into a Dyson configuration that 
was 100,000 AU in radius, a modest galaxy worth  
of them, and that’s only about 3 light years in 
diameter. Which makes a plausible interstellar  
empire that’s still centralized even in a 
no-FTL Universe and which should be able to  
support somewhere between 10^30 to maybe even 
10^33 people in various degrees of comfort,  
or 100 billion-billion times our current 
population to 100 billion-trillion. That could  
be denser toward the core and cram a lot of folks 
into some regions light day across that was the de  
facto capital region. Nor should we assume this is 
all baseline humans, you could have digital minds  
or post-humans who could exist on far smaller 
amounts of energy. Those folks might also be  
so augmented, old, and mentally impressive that 
them being a 25-star general seemed well-merited. 
So too, that black hole shell world can 
keep going up in size, and we think most  
galaxies have a big black hole in their center 
of millions of solar masses, rather than 3 or 4,  
or somewhere in between. We think the one 
in our core is 4 million solar masses,  
and one just 3 million solar masses would allow 
a shellworld around it that had a trillion times  
Earth’s living area in each layer, and potentially 
thousands of layers. We call this a Birch Planet,  
in honor of Paul Birch, who first suggested the 
idea, and we classify this as any planetary shell  
built around a black hole of the supermassive 
variety in the million plus solar mass region. You  
can feed this up to about a trillion solar masses, 
a galactic mass, before the event horizon of that  
black hole would reach low enough gravity that it 
would be less than Earth’s surface,and thus not a  
good place to terraform. Something like this, a 
full galactic mass Birch Planet, would seem like  
a place truly worthy of the name ‘cosmic capital’.
But in the words of the late, great Carl Sagan,  
the cosmos is all that is, or ever was, or ever 
will be, and we tend to suspect that’s a lot  
bigger than our observable Universe, potentially 
going trillions of times further away from us than  
the cosmological event horizon, or even out 
to infinity. So too, we do not know that this  
is the only universe and there are many different 
possible types of parallel realities, multiverses,  
and so on, which we discussed in other episodes.
Even if FTL travel around this Universe is not  
possible, that still leaves us some potential 
options like hyperspace or sprawling out into  
the multiverse and colonizing copies of 
Earth where the planet never produced  
humans or never produced any life at all. Or even 
alternate Universes with which we do not share  
an original timeline that’s been branching out 
or which has different physical laws entirely. 
Much like in a stargate scenario, your 
homeworld may become a hub of these new worlds,  
or you might place your true cosmopolitan capital 
in some new place, one where gravity functioned  
different or space was locally 3D but curved 
strangely or stacked like the equivalent of  
2D sheets of paper in an atlas book of 
maps, to allow easier motion around it. 
One can easily imagine a city that sprawled for a 
billion miles in every direction, or even curved  
back in on itself, in which large percentages 
of it were nothing but gates or tunnel to other  
lands, from those a single person might step 
through to those whole armies could march through  
a thousand abreast and into unimaginably large 
theaters of war where a thousand soldiers entering  
it per second still barely managed to keep up 
with the need for reinforcement. Or even portals  
hanging in the sky to mimic sunlight or so large 
they could change out the atmosphere to remove  
heat and carbon dioxide and pump in fresh air.
I remember in the earlier computer days  
how there was always talk of paperless 
societies and while we laugh about it now,  
we have gone much more digital in that regard, 
we just also generate way more overall paperwork,  
be it traditional or digital, so there’s still a 
lot of paper. The US government prints an average  
of 7200 pages of paper per employee per year, 
which again is around 1% of the population. 
Let us imagine we have some huge capital world 
that just had to shuffle a single sheet of  
paper per citizen per year around that capital.
That’s just one birth certificate or marriage  
license or draft register level document, and 
maybe keep 100 sheets of paper per citizen there  
in terms of their typical lifetime records. Such 
being the case, then some galactic empire of a  
billion earth-like planets has a billion-trillion 
sheets of paper there with citizen records and  
10-billion-billion sheets entering and exiting 
every year, or a quadrillion sheets an hour,  
which would be enough to cover the entire 
surface of Earth a few sheets deep a day,  
including the oceans and polar regions. And 
again that’s only assuming you’re keeping  
a hard copy of one modestly thick folder per 
person in your fairly modest empire composed  
only of Earth-like worlds around yellow suns.
Spread across Earth’s landmass evenly, it would  
be a few feet deep, depending on the thickness 
of your paper. And ironically if someone came  
by and sacked your concrete and steel capital 
and left a few survivors, they could return to  
an agrarian life without having to rip up all 
that concrete and steel just by composting all  
that paper into soil over top of it.
There’s novel called Dawn of Fire:  
Avenging Son, set on a future dystopian 
Earth that’s the capital of a galactic empire  
and Earth itself is home to untold trillions of 
people, most of whom work in the bureaucracy or  
support it in some fashion, and in which a lot 
of those positions are not only hereditary but  
often assigned to an entire tribe or community. 
And we see the underlevels of one particularly  
massive office-hive in which the disposal 
and recycling of old paper has turned into a  
constant militant feud between a clan tasked with 
burning them, and who run their engines on that,  
and one focused on recycling it or stealing it 
to sell to offices which don’t have enough paper,  
and both are effectively their own primitive 
cultures largely unaware of the world outside. 
A lot of bigger cosmopolitan cities have ethnic 
neighborhoods, there’s a lot of “Little Italies”  
in various American cities for instance, and in 
a capital world like this they might be entire  
planetary populations. Similarly, just for 
that relatively small billion-planet empire  
we discussed, if it was just someone’s job 
to take 10 seconds once in someone’s lifetime  
to manually check there Galactic ID or Social 
Security Number against their name and address,  
just 10 or 12 seconds, than that person over a 
normal work year might get half a million checks  
done, and perhaps 20 million in a long career.
Meaning for every 20 million citizens, there’s  
one of these people, and there are the folks who 
supervise them and maintain or clean the place,  
and so our billion planet-empire might have 
an office building on their capitol with 500  
billion employees whose only job was that simple 
and minimal check and audit. We usually advise  
about 200 square feet, or 20 square meters per 
person in modern office building guidelines. 
So that’s 100 trillion square feet, or 10 million 
square kilometers. That is the total land area  
of the United States, including Alaska. Or a 
building 100 kilometers or 60 miles square,  
a thousand stories tall. Just for 
the office whose sole job is to  
double check for innocent typos or misfiles on ID 
cards. Not to issue them or routinely audit them,  
that once in a lifetime check by a real human as 
opposed to the AI that probably does it normally,  
and whose existence probably cost galactic 
taxpayers less than a penny a year personally.  
Not some behemoth like the agricultural department 
or ministry of propaganda and moral hygiene. 
Even if it were split over a thousand offices 
across the capital, you would still have each  
of those offices employing more people than 
live in the US and supporting enough family  
members to fill China or India, and might go 
on vacation to the area that covers people  
with a name starting with the letters S-P-A-X 
through S-P-A-Y, because you always wanted to  
see the monument built there to commemorate 
the war between them and S-P-A-K sector that  
was fought over who controlled the files for 
those planets that had eliminated the letter  
X in favor of using a K, and resulted in 
several billion mid-life name changes. 
A person could live their whole life in a 
place like this and never meet anyone whose  
job wasn’t in that building doing that job or 
providing services for supporting those workers,  
families, and the building. They may 
have million person teams as small  
departments tasked with polishing the floors 
or repairing the robots who clean the windows. 
This could be entirely dystopian where some office 
has now turned into a cramped family dwelling with  
three generations living inside it, who have dwelt 
there for fifty generations, and humbly repair the  
walls with honored bones of their ancestors. Or, 
it could be something entirely more utopian where  
it’s a beautiful and spacious arcology full 
of parks and gardens and schools and stores  
and most of the work is done by AI and robots, 
and the people are just a backup and review,  
and yet even here the whole culture is likely 
to have entire local traditions, euphemisms,  
and prestige about who can most quickly and 
accurately run through files checking ID cards. 
Speaking of monuments, I mentioned a multiversal 
cosmic capital earlier where they could march  
soldiers a thousand abreast through various 
portals into various warzones 24 hours a day,  
but there’s someone whose job it is to re-pave 
that road, maybe with commemorative bricks  
with the names of heroes inscribed on them, 
and someone tasked with carving names into  
memorials. And again a lot of this is likely 
to be automated but you might have a lot of  
cases where we decided it was wrong to have 
a machine carve that name instead of a human,  
or lay that commemorative brick, and 
the sheer scope of any empire is bound  
to result in an equally impressive capital.
It really would not be historical unusual  
for about 1% of the population of a country 
to live in its capital city - indeed often  
higher - and funnel a similar amount of money 
in for administration and pomp, if not more,  
so it wouldn't be shocking for an empire of a 
million planets to cram 10,000 planets worth of  
population and wealth into their capital planet, 
or for a billion-planet empire to decide it needed  
a shellworld around a black hole for their 
capital, or even that conveniently centralized  
supermassive blackhole at the galactic center. And 
they could plausibly fund such an endeavor too. 
It is almost impossible to imagine the scope of 
the sorts of architecture we’d see when it came  
to grand projects and memorials, one could imagine 
equivalents to a statue of a great 25-star general  
being literally as tall as a mountain and having 
every inch of it inscribed with the names of the  
veterans of that war. Or a statue that tall of a 
great leader that was actually a massive apartment  
building home to tens of millions.
Or even a not so great leader,  
like the previous head of the personal 
identification audit sub-department,  
having a statute of them as the new office 
building for checking letters A-B-E through  
A-B-I and employing 100 million ID auditors, who 
go through 100 billion cups of coffee a year,  
and a sub-sub-sub-department of coffee machine 
maintenance who director oversees the repair,  
replacement, and upkeep of 10 million coffee pots, 
and has a staff of 10,000 who report to him, and  
who in turn reports to the exalted coffeemaster 
lieutenant general of the entire letter A of the  
ID number auditing department and once even 
met the Coffee-Marshal of the entire Galactic  
Social Security Office, second in status to none 
except the grand admiral of snack and beverages. 
And again that’s just are more realistic space 
opera type empires, not big old Kardashev 3  
civilizations let alone some incomprehensibly 
large civilization permitted by FTL or  
inter-universal travel sprawling over an entire 
supercluster or several quadrillion colonized  
copies of Earth connected by interdimensional 
gates. By now though you have likely finished your  
own drink and snack, so thanks for joining us, and 
before you go make sure to file the appropriate  
form with the office of Snacks and Beverages, 
right next to those like and subscribe buttons.
For a lot of our audience, this episode 
is coming out right at the end of final’s  
week for the semester and I hope it gives you 
something fun and stimulating to enjoy as you  
head into summer break, or out of college 
entirely to start your career. It’s also a  
great time to start a habit of daily learning. 
Taking breaks from learning is a great way to  
lose what you worked so hard to gain, while 
setting aside just a little time every day to  
learn will move you forward instead, and help 
with both personal and professional growth. 
That’s something our friends over at Brilliant can 
help with. Brilliant’s first-principles approach  
helps you build understanding from the ground 
up. Each lesson is filled with hands-on problem  
solving that lets you play with concepts—a 
method proven to be 6x more effective than  
watching lecture videos. All their content is 
crafted by an award-winning team of teachers,  
researchers, and professionals from MIT, Caltech, 
Duke, Microsoft, Google, and more. Brilliant helps  
you build real knowledge in minutes a day—with 
fun lessons you can do whenever you have time.  
Learn through problem solving and doing, 
with hands on interactive content that’s fun,  
immersive, effective, and intuitive.
You can try everything Brilliant has  
to offer for free for a full 30 days, just 
visit brilliant.org/isaacarthur or click  
on the link in the description. You’ll also 
get 20% off an annual premium subscription. 
We talked a lot about aliens these 
last couple weeks, but next week,  
we’ll look at a different kind of alien mind, 
one much closer to hand, such as animal brains,  
as we examine Alternative Intelligence, the 
other AI. Then we’ll take an extended look at  
Space Freighters, what they’ll carry and who will 
crew them, on Sunday May 26th, before wrapping the  
month up with a trip to Ganymede, the largest 
of the moons of Jupiter and indeed the largest  
moon in our solar system, and we’ll ask if 
perhaps humanity might settle this moon. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can 
also help support the show by becoming a member  
here on Youtube or Patreon, or checkout 
other ways to help at IsaacArthur.net.  
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes 
early and ad free on our streaming service,  
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content like 
Machine Monitors, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week! 
[a]My point of comparison for interstellar empires 
is usually ancient Rome and Persia, or European  
overseas empires, rather than modern day USA, they 
just come to my mind faster. A rationale is also  
that communication in those empires was slower 
due to the technology of their times, so the local  
governors or satraps had to have more freedom to 
act - which with no FTL would be the case as well.
Moreover, in these empires there was a rather 
peaceful and culturally sophisticated imperial  
capital (such as Rome, Paris, London, Ottoman 
Istanbul) while the borderlands and colonies  
were quite messy. Again maybe something that 
would have analogies in multiplanet empires.
Will think if a sentence on this can be aded 
somewhere (or if it already is later in the text).
