Albert Einstein once said: “Reality is merely
an illusion - albeit a very persistent one.”
One of the topics we discuss a lot on this
channel is simulation, be it virtual or augmented
reality, uploading human minds to computers,
or simulating whole worlds.
Indeed in terms of the Fermi Paradox we often
kick around the notion that we might be living
in a simulation, the Simulation Hypothesis
or Argument.
In regard to that people often debate whether
we live in one or not, but here we usually
say that’s the wrong question, not “do
we live in one?” but “If so, does it actually
matter?”
As we see with the Fermi Paradox, the apparent
contradiction between our ancient and vast
Universe and its seeming absence of any other
civilizations inhabiting it, the answer is
basically no.
If you’re talented enough to make a simulation
that can fool us into thinking it’s real,
you won’t leave glaring holes in the basic
structure of that Universe.
Which is to say, the physical laws of that
simulation should have been crafted without
blatantly obvious contradictions that allow
no explanation for the state of affairs inside
it other than to conclude it’s fake.
You don’t include an entire universe in
a simulation rather than just a planet unless
the rest of the Universe serves some important
purpose.
Since any such purpose could only be achieved
by a civilization that has taken a heavy interest
in science, it messes things up if they keep
encountering paradoxes.
So whatever the answer to the Fermi Paradox
is, it is going to make sense in terms of
the known physical laws of the Universe and
those emergent laws of chemistry, biology,
and psychology, this will be true whether
it is a simulation or not, unless the purpose
of that simulation is specifically to have
folks find those contradictions.
That’s a pretty probable case actually,
one that I usually dub a Nursery Universe,
and we’ll discuss that later today.
Debating whether or not we live in reality
is not our main interest for today, even in
the episode on the Simulation Hypothesis that
wasn’t something we focused on as it’s
essentially a question you can only answer
if the simulators are either idiots, which
is unlikely if they can make such simulations,
or actually tell you, directly or indirectly
that it’s fake.
In both cases, it’s outside your own control,
you cannot determine you are inside a simulation
by any experiment you can perform inside one.
Rather our interest today is more about who
might make such simulations, which is inevitably
either a post-scarcity civilization or entity.
Creating such a thing is intensely resource
expensive and there’s almost always an easier
way to achieve a goal without investing that
much, so it’s pretty much limited to folks
who have those kind of super-abundant resources.
More to the point though, if you can do it,
you are post-scarcity.
At least as we’ve previously defined that,
rather than the absolute sense of having no
scarcity of resources at all.
A common solution to the Fermi Paradox is
to suggest that maybe nobody ventures out
into the galaxy because they have everything
at their fingertips at home.
Even where normal reality might draw some
limits, they can simulate almost anything
they’d ever want in virtual reality.
The flaw in this line of reasoning is that
if you can decently simulate people well enough
not to set off an Uncanny Valley reaction
in people interacting with them for hours
or even years at a time, it means your computing
is so good you could easily assemble a robot
to go out and explore the Universe.
A probe smart enough to build more copies
of itself, a von Neumann probe, and able to
do exploring or even resource extraction is
simply child’s play to any civilization
able to simulate people well enough that most
folks prefer virtual reality to regular reality.
Complexity-wise, it’s like wondering if
Intel or AMD can build an Abacus.
And they only have to do it once.
That’s the point of a self-replicating machine.
They are also automatically post-scarcity
if they have that because it means they have
automation good enough to do virtually all
the mining, farming, manufacturing, and maintenance.
This is why we dismiss it as a Fermi Paradox
solution, such a civilization still has a
value for raw materials, energy, and information
about the Universe, and even if they’re
terribly lazy, it requires virtually no effort
for them to do this.
Also, such laziness is always assumed to come
after they create their Utopia, which relies
on that technology to exist.
They may well turn into lazy vegetables, though
it seems unlikely everyone would, but even
so it wouldn’t matter if they do if they
already launched those probes.
Our focus being more on post-scarcity civilizations
though, we should address this habit of assuming
virtually unlimited wealth and luxury universally
breeds lazy, spoiled idiots.
We already have a lot of people with virtually
unlimited wealth and luxury who are not lazy,
spoiled, or idiotic.
However, a lot of these scenarios for civilizations
collapsing under their own gluttony typically
only work if the folks who designed the system
were pretty incompetent, which as with the
aforementioned probes runs into a causality
issue.
The lazy, spoiled idiocy comes after the technology
and system exist, and would not affect the
designers.
For this reason we can safely assume that
potential problems any ten-year old could
spot will be spotted by those designers who
will try to rectify them.
One of the useful things about science fiction
is that it can help us foresee these problems
and think of solutions, to become ‘genre-savvy’.
As an example, we have a lot of science fiction
discussing how a technology-based Utopia might
collapse after a few generations when the
civilization forgets how to maintain the equipment.
Regardless of whether or not you can solve
that concern, you were certainly aware of
it in advance and would have sought out a
solution and implemented it if you could.
Such being the case, some rather obvious ones
spring to mind.
Which ones you can use depends on your technology
of course.
First, many of us would decline to enter something
like that, a virtual utopia, just on general
principle, and there’s no particular reason
to think such groups would die off, since
they may very well have access to life extension
technology and even if they decline to use
that, they can just pass their preferences
on to their children.
Second, those who do still take their skills
with them, and it would seem unlikely they’d
just magically warp into utterly selfish entities,
but even if they did it is clearly in their
best interest to make sure the system is maintained.
Third, if you’ve got amazingly good virtual
reality you also have every teacher’s dream
educational system and it’s very easy to
set the system up to force an education and
basic ethics on youngsters before letting
them do whatever they please inside it.
Fourth, it would be very plausible those folks
were not entirely classically human anymore,
and had enhanced intelligence to make learning
and remembering skills easier, or even directly
downloadable as in the Matrix.
Indeed the very existence of technology good
enough to simulate people plausibly enough
for comfortable interaction strongly implies
you can also upload minds to run on a computer
or otherwise create AI, which either way now
represent an effectively immortal entity who
should not be forgetting things.
As well as saved earlier states that could
be automatically awoken even if such entities
were prone to turning lazy or stupid, you
just wake up the earlier version that still
retains the necessary skills and dedication.
Fifth, you could create a guardian caste,
people or AI who had the specific maintenance
job for the system and were programmed or
conditioned to resist any temptation which
might make them suck at their job.
Now in that vein, and of educating people,
we do get a pathway to those Nursery Universes
I mentioned earlier.
One concern often expressed about high-tech
civilizations is they might under-breed and
die off for lack of numbers.
Regardless of whether this concern is justified
and scientific, and in my own opinion it is
neither, one has to consider that if people
are turning into lazy spoiled brats they probably
would not make good parents, even assuming
one would be interested in devoting the time
to that.
Such a civilization probably doesn’t need
a lot of new people to maintain population
levels as its population is likely to be functionally
immortal, but they can always resort to growing
kids in vats.
It offends sensibilities to suggest a machine
could raise a healthy child, though considering
that a lot of bright and well-adjusted kids
have emerged from families that are beyond
dysfunctional, I don’t think the bar is
necessarily that high.
This is another example of causality issues
with these Utopias though, as the effect,
lazy spoiled people, comes after they have
invented the relevant technology.
They are lazy and spoiled because they have
access to virtual realities and automation
so good you can craft simulations of people
that are good enough to make them more attractive
to interact with than other real people.
If it can trick an adult it can trick a two-year
old.
So before you’ve got people totally cutting
themselves off from civilization, and we’ll
talk about this more in a moment, you’ve
got machines that can raise kids.
As mentioned, the notion tends to be fairly
offensive to our sensibilities, and personally
I’d object to using such a pathway, but
there’s no real logical reason to think
it wouldn’t work, and it’s certainly preferable
to extinction, unless the programming is botched
and produces legions of little sociopaths.
But then again if that’s the alternative
considered attractive enough people are willing
to employ it as an alternative to extinction,
it means it is better than normal parents,
either because it genuinely is or because
the available parents are content to use it
in spite of its obvious flaws, implying they
probably would make awful parents.
Essentially, if you’re willing to let a
machine raise your kids, it’s probably the
right move.
If you do have that, then you have your population
issue licked, along with your colonization
issue since it means you can send probes off
to terraform planets or build habitats and
then just grow and raise people when the time
comes, a von Neumann colony, if you would.
If you can’t lick the problem though, you
don’t actually have to use machines or virtual
people, you can just use digital people instead,
full blown mind emulations.
I’d imagine you could find plenty of folks
with a proven track record of child-rearing
you could copy as much as necessary and keep
that state preserved for future copying too.
You can make as many copies as you want, so
a volunteer could raise hundreds of kids at
once and do that for centuries, if the pool
of decent and willing parents was too low.
We’ll bypass any argument of whether or
not a digital copy of a human mind can be
an android parent as well as a regular modern
person can.
I’m not being dismissive of the argument
that only flesh and blood people are real,
we’ve talked about that before, but folks
who feel that way are unlikely to be inclined
to go live in a virtual reality anyway.
As to the Nursery Universe approach, this
comes down to the big difference between the
Simulation Argument and other more classic
false reality scenarios like life just being
a dream.
The Simulation Argument is specific to what
are called ‘Ancestor Simulations’, cases
where someone is simulating a past version
of Earth, namely modern times.
This does not necessarily mean it’s identical
to their own past, just that it represents
a plausible alternative history.
The original might have had totally different
individual people for instance.
It should also be noted that not every person
inside one has to be fully sentient, technically
it just means that you have to be since you
know you’re sentient but can’t be sure
about anyone else, especially folks living
far away from any place you’ve ever visited.
Such a simulation could have started billions
of years ago or the year you were born, or
even sooner, though that last rather eliminated
the need for the specific teaching-style Nursery
Universe.
Now the Simulation Argument says we have 3
reasonable scenarios to consider.
Option 1, such simulations simply aren’t
possible, either because they genuinely are
not for reasons unclear to us, or they’re
freakishly impractical, or there’s nobody
alive in any civilization advanced enough
to do one, like they’ve nuked themselves
out of existence before getting the simulation
tech.
Option 2 is that they do have that tech but
simply have no motivation to use it for simulations.
So they do it rarely or not at all.
They might consider it unethical, pretty impractical,
or simply have no interest.
A Strong AI like Skynet taking over the planet
probably has no desire to invest the resources
to run a simulation, the whole premise for
that in The Matrix, using people for batteries,
is simply ludicrous.
Good movie, silly plot.
The ethics one is pretty plausible though
as it’s pretty hard to justify creating
whole planets of essentially real people for
fun or experimentation, when a virtual reality
running pretty good approximations is likely
to be good enough.
If you want to visit the medieval era and
go jousting, your opponent doesn’t need
to have hopes and dreams and emotions to try
to stick a lance through you.
Option 3 is that civilizations can do simulations
and do them pretty often.
Now we don’t have a clue which of these
is true yet or how likely each option is,
so we usually apply what’s called “The
Principle of Indifference”, which is where
you assume that various scenarios that seem
plausible are all equally likely till you
have data indicating otherwise.
3 options, and each one is one third as likely.
In option 3, where they might have made millions
of simulated Universes, there is still a non-zero
chance you live in the original real one,
so the odds you live in a simulated Universe,
if those assumptions are true, would be about
33%.
One in three that option 3 is right, minus
a tiny probability that it is but you are
the original reality.
You or your descendants will later make simulated
Universes.
Obviously this is very simplified, and even
if you can do this you have to have some motive
for doing so, one that justifies the huge
cost compared to alternatives and which your
society, or at least the simulator, considers
ethical.
That tends to be a short list and one of those
is the Nursery Universe approach.
You want to raise kids who are reasonably
ethical and social and normal, and also won’t
have a total nervous breakdown when plucked
out of the simulation into the ‘real world’,
so you pick an ancestor period close enough
to your own time that they share a lot of
your basic principles and familiarity with
technology, but not one quite far enough along
so that fake realities are obvious options
to them.
Similarly a period like now still has a lot
of hardships and need for human social interaction,
but not so much you’d feel guilty about
it, like if you dumped people off in ancient
Rome or Egypt to live as a slave.
The common objection to this is that an awful
lot of people nowadays lead very bad lives,
but keep in mind you can only use your own
personal existence as a gauge for that hardship,
as you don’t know that any of those people
are real.
Not everyone in a simulated Universe has to
be sentient, just good enough to pass inspection
if you meet them, and only while you’re
actually talking to them.
After all, if you make a virtual paradise
planet to live in, you aren’t going to waste
the processing power to make someone even
match a modern chatbot when you’ve never
met them, and they can be boosted up if you
do.
In such a Nursery Universe you can just yank
people out as they graduate, but you might
do whole batches or classes, as it were, stick
a hundred thousand people in one with 7 billion
virtual folks, beginning, say, 1984, all of
whom are 34 right now, and just end and reset
the thing when all or most have gotten to
the necessary mental development.
If you want them to be mentally ready for
realizing their reality isn’t the real deal,
you might then include some clear signs of
that being the case, subtle paradoxes that
make them wonder but probably not overt enough
to make it certain.
I sincerely doubt it would be the Fermi Paradox,
but that would be one example of how your
simulated Universe might have things going
on inside it that weren’t explainable under
the apparent physical laws governing it.
Now if you do happen to have a civilization
where people are prone to turning into lazy
self-absorbed jerks after a while, no matter
how well you prepare them, these ancestor
simulations give you a good replacement option,
as once you raise a batch you can use them
to do all the maintenance on the system and
grow the next batch as a way of paying their
dues before entering their own personal Utopia.
I don’t happen to find this scenario particularly
plausible or ethical, but people propose this
line of reasoning a lot, about post-scarcity
civilizations collapsing under their own bliss
and divorcing themselves from their civilization,
so it is worth pursuing the concept and seeing
that there’s a lot of steps you can take
to circumvent that.
The collapse that is, the divorcing themselves
from society is a bit harder.
An awful lot of our civilization revolves
around our inter-dependency for basic survival,
and to be blunt that’s out the window for
a post-scarcity civilization.
Once technology hits a certain point, you
don’t need anyone else to live.
Not for basic survival needs anyway.
Not a new concern there, Isaac Asimov played
around with this idea with the Solarians,
a planet full of people who lived in near
isolation from each other, enjoying total
luxury granted by their armies of robots.
The planet wasn’t particularly full either,
as I recall they considered their world fully
populated with 20,000 people when first introduced
in The Naked Sun, and had less when we see
them again tens of thousands of years later,
as a sub-race of hermaphrodites in Foundation
and Earth.
Incidentally, the former is a great book while
the latter is not.
This doesn’t mean you don’t need those
other people for basic social interaction
and sanity though, humans need that and our
whole existence as a technological species
almost certainly derives from that basic family
and tribal system.
The same would also likely be true of alien
civilizations, though in spite of us talking
about the Fermi Paradox, this is not an episode
about that.
It does highlight though that while you might
be able to remove that dependency through
technology you’d expect it to be the norm
throughout the Universe, though not necessarily
universal.
That dependency on social interaction to be
happy and stable does provide a limited safeguard
though.
Much as it is possible nowadays to live without
even talking to anyone face to face, few of
us voluntarily do that, at least exclusively.
We can at least assume people will want to
interact with other real people at least until
the available sims and chatbots get so good
that they let most folks achieve a comfortable
suspension of disbelief.
The downside is that this almost certainly
does not require those virtual people be fully
sentient and sapient, and our relationships
with our pets pretty much prove that, though
we are likely to be far more sensitive to
inhuman quirks in virtual humans than we are
in pets, hence the Uncanny Valley.
It doesn’t even have to seem fully human
though, for many interactions this hardly
matters anyway, but the thing about a real
person is that they can get on your nerves,
they do have rights and feelings, they won’t
be in the mood to go on a trip or play a game
or whatever just as you want and when you
want.
So a lot of times that slight inhumanity would
be preferable to the real deal who is essentially
unavailable, and a person’s own mind is
going to gloss over a lot of flaws and inconsistencies
if they want it to be very real.
This represents a real problem for post-scarcity
civilizations as it probably takes far less
processing power to simulate a whole civilization
to a comfortable level of human interaction
then it takes to emulate a single human mind.
Nothing is fully rendering where the person
experiencing it isn’t at, and everything
just downgrades to minimum upkeep.
I don’t care if the forest I just left ceases
to exist when I walk out or if on returning
the trees no longer perfectly match their
prior layout and leaf count, let alone if
the anthills have the same number of occupants
or the chemical composition of some rock I
sat on has slightly changed.
If I did, such specifics could be saved, and
you just run these at a level necessary for
most people to be comfortable and kick up
those aspects of the virtual reality and its
continuity a given individual is more sensitive
to.
A geologist or botanist would be more likely
to notice such things and be bothered by them,
after all.
In other words, everybody probably has these
in their house, and this very same level of
computational power means everything in their
house is being easily cleaned and maintained
by robots as are all the farms and factories.
They can easily connect to other people if
they want, assuming those other people want
to talk to them, but you could live your life
quite comfortably as king or queen or God-Emperor
of some realm where everyone acts plausibly
enough.
What’s more, it would be very likely that
one of the first things folks would start
working on was some drug or hypnosis method
or implant that made people tend to ignore
flaws or forget they were in a simulation.
Not to trick people, but at their own request,
so they could better enjoy these vacations
or retirements.
You either don’t remember that you’re
from Earth, not Westeros, or you actively
don’t care, your brain just kind of ignores
it.
Again, this doesn’t prevent you colonizing
other solar systems or anything, because that
can be done through automation, but it does
tend to mean society would start falling apart.
More technology is always better but when
you get to this kind of level you don’t
really need more so you might not care that
everyone has stopped doing new research or
even maintenance.
That said, you would tend to think a lot of
folks would keep up the system as it was their
passion, and those folks would probably be
the best of your researchers since passion
for a topic is pretty much the biggest prerequisite
to excelling at it.
And you can always go that paying your dues
route we discussed a little while ago, where
new folks are expected to help maintain things
for a while until they get to escape to a
virtual Utopia.
And you can always require everyone wake up
and be useful every so often.
As mentioned, these tends to be flaws and
problems everyone would notice long before
you did this, so you’d expect them to prepare
things to handle it.
It does tend to strongly imply though that
the way most of them would handle it would
be to try to raise new members to a certain
degree of ethics and responsibility in advance,
rather than raising some kid in a pure virtual
utopia where they are effectively a god and
your whole species is composed of kids who
never grew up and are used to being able to
wish people away to the cornfield, like in
that classic Twilight Zone episode, “It’s
a Good Life”.
This remains one of the big issues facing
any post-scarcity civilization though, that
each of its members can probably exist entirely
on their own because they have all the data
and automation needed to see to all their
needs, and a vast archive of entertainment,
classic or virtual reality, to entertain them.
Such a civilization has a risk of collapsing
not because its members might all die, but
simply because none of them have any sense
of dependency on each other.
If faced with a threat they can probably just
board a spaceship they owned or had made and
take off with all the information and production
capacity they need to live happily on that
ship or whatever destination, if any, it has.
They don’t even have to feel guilty about
the species potentially ceasing because they
are a seed quite capable of germinating a
branch of us elsewhere.
They can just tell their ship to stop somewhere
at some point to refuel and take some extra
time to set up a von Neumann colony.
This requires no effort on their part after
all and was probably part of the template
for such a ship they yanked out of an archive
before fleeing.
Not the prettiest portrait of the future,
in some ways, though keep in mind that while
it sounds rather horrifying in many ways,
these folks are all enjoying very happy lives
and there’s also no reason to think that
divorcing yourself from the rest of humanity
is inevitable or universal.
Some folks might, some might not, I wouldn’t
expect everyone to go the same path.
A lot of it is likely to depend on how these
folks regard reality, for many folks a simulation,
no matter how good, isn’t an acceptable
substitute, and you could make a good case
that a civilization getting better at making
believable realities would tend to naturally
stop getting better as they lose folks to
those personal paradises.
Those not in them grow to dislike the idea
more and more and aren’t interested in further
funding their improvement and you’d expect
that to happen before they reached a point
where virtually everyone joined in.
The same applies to regular reality too, again
virtual reality is not the only aspect of
this, a simple rise in automation catering
to your every need can make folks grow divorced
from reality but as it improves and more folks
do that, you’d expect to lose both your
research pool for improving it as they enjoy
it themselves and the support of those still
not using it as they dislike where its taking
people.
You could have 99.99% of a civilization in
such circumstances and that still leaves you
70,000 people who aren’t, by modern populations,
and trillions if you’re looking at a Kardashev
2 civilization.
The former is more than enough to rebuild
with, especially since they have all that
technology still, and the latter is thousands
of planets worth of people to serve as wardens
and safeguards for everyone else.
So again we see a post-scarcity civilization
that clearly has a lot of things going for
it, but also some serious challenges too.
Okay, next week we’ll be returning to the
Fermi Paradox to discuss some of the solutions
that revolve around aliens having actually
visited us, particularly the notion of aliens
visiting our ancestors in the distant past,
in Ancient Aliens.
The week after that we’ll be discussing
Mind Uploading and some of the more interesting
implications of that which often get skipped
in fiction, along with our June Book of the
Month, the Singularity Trap, the newest novel
from Dennis E. Taylor, author of the excellent
Bobiverse trilogy.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And if you’d like to help support future
content, you can donate to SFIA on Patreon
or purchase some fun SFIA merchandise, and
I’ll link those below.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
