Diplomats definitely don’t get enough credit 
for averting galactic wars. Serving as an  
ambassador on an alien world is much like a 
foreigner trying to understand local slang:  
just when you think you've got it, you 
inadvertently insult someone's mother.  
Which is a really bad idea when 
dealing with insectoid hive races.
Welcome back to another Sci Fi Sunday 
here on SFIA, where we examine concepts  
popular in science fiction and ask if 
they could one day become science fact,  
and what that might look like. Today’s topic is 
about Alien Ambassadors, both aliens who might  
visit us as diplomats and our ambassadors to 
them, and even entire worlds devoted to serving  
as meeting grounds for many alien civilizations 
to meet, trade, and work together. Or possibly  
meet to debate how they’ll conquer the galaxy. 
We’ll also deep dive into the embassy aspect  
from a couple well known sci-fi settings like 
Babylon 5, the Citadel of Mass Effect, and  
settings like Star Trek, Star Wars, and Stargate.
Almost as soon as we started dreaming up alien  
civilizations we imagined meeting with them, and 
wondered what a sustained interaction with those  
civilizations might look like. These tended to 
draw on embassies and consulates from past and  
present along with various analogies to the 
United Nations or other multi-state bodies  
and confederacies we’ve seen in our history. In 
our last episode, Fermi Paradox: Interdiction,  
we looked at aliens who stay far from each 
other purposefully and interact little,  
with huge buffer zones of depleted 
space around them, and today we’ll go  
the other direction, tons of aliens everywhere.
While we see plenty of multi-species empires in  
well known franchises like Star Trek and Star 
Wars, and indeed once did an episode on it,  
embassies tend to get less focus. They really 
should be given more attention, not merely because  
the bureaucracy in such empires is a nightmare 
because of paperwork, but more so because deciding  
who gets the bigger office is a delicate matter of 
interstellar importance, one that could seriously  
result in a diplomatic galactic-wide incident.
In fiction, either establishing an embassy is  
another job for an exploratory crew encountering 
aliens in their journeys, or its a one-episode  
plot device where the alien ambassador is 
just there to introduce a new crew member,  
get a crew member in trouble, or give some 
vague and foreboding information about some  
other mysterious civilization or region of space.
Deep dives on the concept itself, of an alien  
embassy or ambassador, are fairly uncommon, but 
it is a fascinating concept and essentially the  
reverse case of this week’s earlier look at 
Interdiction Hypothesis, again where alien  
civilizations interact minimally. So I thought 
we’d look at 3 cases for today, one where we have  
a big United Nations in Space where all sorts 
of aliens come and meet, a singular embassy on  
our one world from an alien civilization, and the 
idea of us having an embassy on some alien world. 
Probably the best known example of that first 
case is Babylon 5, the space station in the  
series of the same name from the 1990s. 
It was an O’Neill Cylinder where tons of  
aliens had their embassies, and the Citadel 
from the Mass Effect video games, which seems  
to have drawn on Babylon 5 for inspiration.
Alternatively, we see an alien civilization  
with an embassy here on Earth in another 1990s 
sci fi TV series, Gene Roddenberry’s Earth:  
Final Conflict, where an advanced and seemingly 
peaceful and friendly alien civilization arrives  
and offers us a hand and sets up a few 
embassies to assist in integrating their  
technologies and ideas into our civilization.
I don’t think we see too many cases of life as  
an ambassador to a single alien civilization too 
often, usually the writers want to move onto to  
other strange new places after an episode or two 
on one alien world, but Star Trek: Deep Space 9,  
also from the 1990s, while focused mostly on a 
space station next to wormhole from which many new  
aliens are met, has seven seasons and during that 
gives us a very deep look at the life of Benjamin  
Sisko, the station’s commander, who is essentially 
the ambassador to the Bajoran civilization the  
station is located in the territory of, 
and the Cardassian Empire, who previously  
ruled over the Bajorans and border the station.
That series centers on life on a space station  
next to the only known stable wormhole in the 
galaxy and allows travel to the other side of that  
galaxy in mere minutes where their normal warp 
drive would take decades. It is very rare we see  
any sort of alien embassies where we don’t have 
fairly casual FTL - Faster Than Light Travel, and  
yet we tend to assume on this show that it isn’t 
very likely we’d ever have that, though to be  
fair we tend to assume we’ll probably never find 
another alien civilization in our galaxy either. 
So for today, while we will discuss some 
no-FTL scenarios for lots of aliens sending  
ambassadors or merchants, such as in Alastair 
Reynolds’ Revenger series, we are going to relax  
our usual no-FTL rule, it is, after all, 
Sci Fi sunday, and speaking of relaxing,  
don’t forget grab a drink and snack, and hit those 
like and subscribe buttons while you’re at it.
Now an awful lot depends on how close everyone is 
and how common, and in your classic space opera  
setting, whatever the actual spacing of the stars, 
you can usually get around the region of space  
everyone is from in something like days to 
weeks, and it has dozens if not hundreds of  
alien civilizations in it, as much as the special 
effects and costume and makeup budgets permit. You  
may or may not have instant communication like 
we do now, which very much alters the dynamics  
of what sort of powers your ambassador needs to 
have to be useful, as well as what their job is.  
An ambassador's job description would likely be so 
varied that you half expect 'interstellar barista'  
to be in there, because somehow, making a perfect 
Glorfnakian espresso is key to maintaining peace.  
A lot of times nowadays, especially if the two 
civilizations are on relatively friendly terms,  
this is one part envoy, one part spy, one part 
tourism spokesman, one party party host, and  
several more parts for handling visas, visiting 
citizens in trouble, public relations in general,  
and a lot of law and contract oversight.
How much of these you are doing is also  
very dependent on your means of travel. For 
instance, in a classic spherical expansion model  
of colonization, if we simplified by assuming 
everybody had been roughly evenly distributed in  
homeworlds and all got started about the same time 
and rate - which is very unlikely of course - you  
would have 12 neighboring alien spheres touching 
you because you have three dimensions to  
work with. Not many countries have 12 nations 
bordering them and those are usually ones much  
larger than their neighbors and not very compact.
Russia and China share the record at 14 neighbors  
each, including each other, and are the first and 
third largest country by land mass, whereas Canada  
and the United States, at second and fourth 
largest, don’t have very many neighbors… of  
course it gets more confusing if we talk about 
overlapping sphere of influence out in the ocean  
or some colony somewhere on another continent, and 
France comes in 3rd for borders at 12 because it  
includes Brazil and Suriname in South America. 
Brazil itself is 4th, at 10 land neighbors. If  
you start including practical borders of shared 
seas, then that number would jump a lot and I  
would imagine the British Empire at its height 
would have had dozens of neighbors, especially  
as countries tended to be smaller in the past.
In space, that ocean analogy is a lot more  
appropriate, as while we can draw a big blob of 
a map with all of a civilization's stars in it,  
the conceptual spacing there would be like 
an archipelago whose dozen or so islands were  
scattered across the whole Pacific Ocean. They’re 
not really in a position to meaningfully claim  
that ocean or prevent others from moving through 
it. And indeed space is far worse, as even some  
system populated way out to the edge of is Kuiper 
Belt bordering 12 other systems that did the same  
is inhabiting something like a trillionth of that 
territory, and someone passing through on there  
way elsewhere probably wouldn’t come within 
a thousand times the distance from a system  
that it’s inhabited zone was wide. Space borders 
are very much like trying to fence in the ocean:  
a bold statement of ownership with practical 
implications that are, at best, philosophical. 
Even ignoring that it would be very unlikely 
civilizations would all start spreading at the  
same time, given the age of the galaxy and 
timeline involved in evolution, it is also  
very unlikely an actual civilization 
would end up very spherical either,  
as it would have more room to spread in some 
directions than others and spread towards valuable  
real estate like star clusters more energetically.
The other aspect is that we wouldn’t really expect  
a single ambassador from a single species to be 
the norm. Expecting a single representative for  
an entire sprawling civilization is like expecting 
one waiter to handle a restaurant during lunch  
hour: overly optimistic and a recipe for disaster. 
I think, even with FTL, it would be pretty hard  
to get a single representative from just one 
planet, let alone one developed star system.  
Spreading that out to some civilization sprawled 
over a million systems for a few hundred light  
years all around and it gets really dubious 
that one nation per species would be common. 
And this is assuming the classic warp drive that 
takes you through normal space, but just way  
faster than light travels. The dynamic changes 
a lot if we’ve got stargate-style wormholes  
in play, where everyone in that gate network has 
the equivalent of a phone number you can dial,  
and even other distant networks for other galaxies 
might just be adding on a long distance area code  
and cost. Nobody is really your neighbor in 
a situation like that, especially as it is  
planet-to-planet direct travel, so you don’t 
necessarily have much of a presence in space. 
Your spaceships exist for taking stargates 
to other planets you’ve identified as either  
good places to terraform or particularly handy for 
resources or trade. As we discussed in our episode  
on Stargates last month, depending on how big 
you can make and operate a portal like that,  
it might be something where you have one per 
planet for moving at most a few thousand people  
and a parallel amount of cargo around a day to 
various places in the galaxy, like we might see  
in Stargate SG-1, to where you can pop open a mile 
wide portal for dumping oceans from oceanic worlds  
to arid planets to get two more livable planets 
out of both. That’s two very different ends of a  
wide spectrum of options for how much throughput 
you can get through your portals and it very  
much alters what those civilizations and their 
relations with other civilizations looks like. 
How you make your portals matters a lot too, 
as in the case of the portals from Stargate  
or the wormhole from Deep Space 9, those are 
easily defended and static locations that make  
an invasion through them well-nigh impossible 
by brute force. Massive technology advantages,  
treachery, and trojan horses are another story 
of course. Alternatively, if you can pop open  
a portal wherever you please on someone else’s 
planet, you can dump a few divisions of shock  
troops or just a variety of nukes, chemical 
weapons, or robotic killamajigs through.  
Strategies for defense tend to rely on mutually 
assured destruction coming in retaliation from  
secret bases full of doomsday devices, and is 
actually the situation in the fictional setting  
of Frank Herbert’s Dune that the various film 
adaptations tend to leave out to explain why  
they use relatively small and elite infantry 
units, they all have huge nuclear stockpiles  
hidden around space, so the militaries are a 
personal bodyguard, police force, and pack of  
assassins and commandos. The additional factor of 
the Spacing Guild further limits major battles,  
and so their empire’s ten-thousand year history 
is punctuated by long vendettas and wars of  
assassins, and their equivalent to a UN is the 
Landsraad and CHOAM, their league of nobles  
and merchant association respectively. Lots of 
maneuvering, very few open wars, especially at  
the grand scale or using scorched earth tactics.
And we see similar scenarios where you are  
comparing warp travel, where you can attack from 
anywhere in huge 3D volumes of space, and have  
to guard all approaches, to those where you are 
limited by some equivalent to the trade winds,  
like the hyperspace lanes we see in Star Wars, 
that make travel along them much easier and safer  
and give you a place to focus your defenses.
Given that an awful lot of diplomacy is based  
around loose and opportunistic agreements not to 
beat your neighbor up and take their stuff, the  
diplomatic landscape shifts a lot based on what 
travel around the galactic landscape looks like. 
In Mass Effect for instance, everything is based 
around the Mass Effect relays that let them toss  
spaceships around the galaxy very quickly. They 
have regular FTL they can use to travel many  
times the speed of light in whatever direction 
they wish, but the ancient and enormous relay  
network lets you move between any of those 
relays in the galaxy nearly instantly where  
the FTL systems they have only permit you to 
travel several light years per day, meaning you  
could get to Alpha Centauri or other neighboring 
stars in a day or less, but crossing the galaxy  
by FTL rather than relay might take decades, 
and intergalactic travel several centuries. 
Needless to say those rare relays are incredibly 
prized and because travel between them dumps you  
out at random at an unpredictable location and 
vector in a zone near them many thousands of  
kilometers wide, they become impractical 
to robustly mine and fortify. The nominal  
central hub of the relay system is a giant space 
space station called the Citadel that’s become  
a hub for diplomacy and trade. For various 
plot reasons I won’t spoil, none of these  
civilizations are very old or developed - 
by the standards of this channel anyway,  
where a Kardashev-2 civilization is considered 
unimpressive and yet could single handedly have  
wiped the floor with every faction in that 
game simultaneously including the big-bads. 
In that setting humanity ends up on the 
galactic stage after an unintentional war  
with one of the big 3 powers in the galaxy 
and on the Citadel, and eventually manages  
to make its way into joining them to be the Big 4, 
forming the equivalent to the UN security council,  
with dozens of other minor powers who have 
been on the galactic stage themselves for  
some centuries, but nobody’s been around for 
many millennia, though the galaxy is covered  
in lots of habitable planets and alien ruins.
The same is the case for Babylon 5, or B5,  
where we have the big 5 instead, of which humanity 
is basically the tough new kid on the block,  
and a league of unaligned civilizations that 
are the various UN equivalents. They have a  
giant space station there too, which provides 
gravity by spin, just like the Citadel does,  
and thus has higher and lower layers with 
differing gravity that they can pump different  
atmosphere mixes into for various alien biologies. 
Though for budget constraints, we hear about  
most of those more often then we see them.
The realism of that is of course a handwave  
so that a humanity not too far in the future 
can realistically be a significant player on  
the galactic stage, so none of the other 
empires are too old or big and the ones  
that are have strange and mysterious motives. The 
Vorlons, one of the Big 5 on B5, play that role,  
as do the Minbari to a lesser extent, and the 
station got built after humanity got into a very  
one-sided war with the Minbari and technically 
won after the Minbari mysteriously surrendered  
after winning basically every engagement.
The war was found to be over a regrettable  
misunderstanding and humanity decided that 
to avoid future such incidents, they would  
help build a giant space station around a neutral 
and apparently uninhabited planet and administer  
it to be a place of diplomacy and trade, and the 
show is about the principally human command staff  
trying to run a mix of the UN and a pioneer 
outpost, with the ambassador and aids of the  
other 4 major powers being major characters too.
It’s an excellent show and they try hard to  
keep the aliens very alien in appearance 
and behavior rather than the traditional  
new-forehead-of-the-week we see in Star Trek, but 
they have the same budget and writing limitations.  
That war for instance gets started because the 
Minbari encounter a human expedition and initially  
we’re just told vaguely that their way of showing 
peaceful intent is to have their gunports open on  
ships encountering other spaceships and 
an equivalent to the empty-hand extended  
for a handshake, to show no weapon in hand.
Unfortunately the human crew interpreted it as a  
hostile act and fired, and the Minbari’s supreme 
leader was there and got killed in the damage  
to the ship, so they declared war and refused to 
negotiate. Great show but the writing on this part  
of the story got more confused and weird as the 
show progressed until we see the actual event and  
the war that followed and essentially the huge and 
advanced Minbari ships encounter the small human  
exploration squadron and scan them so hard they 
screw up their sensors and controls, so that it  
seems like an attack, and they fire back, damaging 
the sensors, and flee as soon as they as that  
happens. The Minbari ignore all communications 
from humanity after that and murder everyone.  
And the scene comes off like an alien ambassador 
arriving on Earth and walking down the ramp of his  
ship firing a machine gun off wildly in the air 
and then acting the aggrieved party because we  
thought it was a hostile act and shot him. Taking 
disproportionate vengeance by then blowing up  
several of our cities or even the whole planet.
This is a problem with writing scenes like that  
and very common in a lot of scifi, because you 
want alien-acting aliens but also relatable ones,  
and a lot of time the alien stuff comes off as 
irrational to us, which is good, but then as  
it gets explored more, it just comes of as truly 
irrational rather than operating under an alien  
morality we didn’t understand yet. That’s why 
alien diplomats will get training on how to  
handle being offered a cup of Earth coffee or tea 
without triggering an intergalactic incident over  
caffeine tolerance, or passed what to them was 
the equivalent of molten lava in a crucible. 
Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle explore that idea 
in their classic novel the Mote in God’s Eye where  
they encounter an alien ship for the first time 
and it fires on them and damages them badly,  
and the human ship’s commander fires right back 
and methodically takes the alien ship apart.  
When the slightly-strawman scientists yell at him 
afterward for firing on what they assume was an  
automated anti-collision system, the rebuttal is 
that if you are going to send exploration vessels  
and probes out into the galaxy, the burden is 
on you to make sure they have at least some  
safeguards in place to avoid firing on a ship 
that clearly is an artificial construct, not a  
meteor, or not to ram into planets and so on.
That still leaves a lot of room for error and  
misunderstanding of course, so it definitely makes 
sense to approach other civilizations cautiously  
and with protocols built around de-escalation 
rather than escalation. There’s obviously no  
guarantee they would view it the same way.
This also isn’t one of those things  
we can handwave to math and science being 
a universal language. It is very likely any  
place where complex life has evolved will 
have a clear idea of what aggression is,  
along with escalation and de-escalation, I 
wouldn’t go so far as to say those are all  
inevitable under evolution but they would seem 
right up their with things like curiosity where  
it would be hard to imagine any planet producing 
a civilization without these. Nonetheless it is  
going to be an abstract and variable concept 
that might not paste well onto other species. 
For instance, eyeballs are likely to be common 
in the universe, given how many separate times  
they’ve apparently evolved on Earth, and how 
useful they are, but while on Earth staring  
at someone is mostly a sign of interest and 
frequently of aggression, it might be viewed as no  
such thing by another species, which might also be 
fine getting one foot from you and staring at you,  
or glaring at you, which might not even vaguely 
imply a lack of respect or menace by them.  
Interacting with an alien species with completely 
different social cues is like trying to understand  
modern internet slang as a Victorian: baffling, 
slightly horrifying, but profoundly educational. 
Alternatively they might be mortally offended 
at you constantly exhaling near them or dropping  
dead skin cells everywhere. We’re also all 
still animals for most of our thinking,  
and even if you’re expecting a given behavior 
and know it is innocent, you might feel constant  
anxiety just being in the room with a two-ton 
alien monster with fangs as long as your hand,  
and whose hamster cage by their desk 
is their equivalent of a snack drawer. 
On the flipside, you walk into see another of 
your colleagues and show off your new pair of  
leather boots and they go into shock or flee to 
corner, even if you tell them its vat-grown or  
synthetic leather, because hanging out with 
a species that wears other animals skins is  
to them like having Pinhead from the Hellraiser 
franchise as an officemate. Again even if they’re  
not off a once-living animal, it might be 
like a creepy coworker keeping a jar full  
of glass eyes on their desk and assuring 
you they don’t use real eyes anymore[a]. 
The reality is that a human and an alien from 
an entirely different evolutionary origin might  
find each other’s presence in the same room 
almost unbearable, and minor differences in  
temperature and oxygen composition, assuming they 
even operated in an atmosphere like ours, might be  
very uncomfortable. So it isn’t very likely many 
aliens would want to share a home or workspace  
with other aliens or us. That doesn’t mean they’re 
any less capable than we of consciously stepping  
back and setting aside evolutionary behavioral 
differences and biologically unsettling traits,  
but that’s a lot easier to do with some distance.
This also doesn't mean you have to go to the  
Interdiction Hypothesis level of things, where 
you only maintain the loosest diplomatic ties,  
but it might mean pretty much all contact 
is conducted virtually rather than face to  
face. Or that we might use filter layers where AI 
translates your appearance and reactions into the  
alien equivalent for them, and vice-versa. Or 
that a lot of business might be conducted with  
everyone in space suits. After all, a spacefaring 
civilization with more lightweight garb than we  
have nowadays might already lean in pretty heavily 
on wearing full body suits when traveling to other  
locations just to minimize spread of germs.
On the other hand, humans might be an anomaly  
at wearing lots of clothing. I’ve heard 
clothing presented as a Fermi Paradox filter  
before but have never found it very compelling, 
even if I would expect a lot of aliens to wear  
pouches and belts around. Thus they might find 
wearing masks or other gear near their breathing  
orifices or sensory organs even more upsetting 
than we tend to. Spacesuits are not actually a  
necessity for space exploration, you can use 
a travel pod like a landing module or diving  
bell and just use remote control robot hands for 
interacting. Indeed as we’ve discussed elsewhere,  
an android ambassador remote controlled from 
back at the ship and set to mimic basic human  
appearance and behavior is entirely plausible.
So a human-looking alien stepping out of UFO  
to greet us and ask to be taken to our leaders 
doesn’t imply improbably convergent evolution,  
just that they’ve seen our movies and decided 
it’s best to avoid mass panic by revealing  
their true Lovecraftian Cthulhu tentacled form.
This is also exactly when space habitats are  
preferable, as the moment an alien steps 
out unprotected into a planet’s ecology,  
there’s a high probability they’ve both been 
dangerously contaminated. Especially if they  
can actually survive in that environment, as 
it implies the microbes they’ve got can too,  
and vice-versa. Viruses are less of a 
concern, those tend to have problems  
jumping species let alone biological kingdoms, but 
a bacteria might do just fine, and a few decades  
later have saturated that planet with itself. 
Green gooing a place as opposed to Gray Goo. 
High-tech civilizations will tend to have a lot of 
options for managing and containing such problems,  
but opting to make your diplomatic city on a 
space habitat instead of someone’s planet makes  
a lot more sense, and it also is very easy for 
them to bring their own smaller space habitat  
to connect to the big one so that they can just 
live and work there mostly, interacting remotely,  
and only show up to formal and special events in 
the flesh, or in their ceremonial environmental  
suit or android. That might be preferable, 
because diplomacy with aliens is a delicate dance,  
where stepping on toes might not just be a 
faux pas, but an actual diplomatic incident. 
But getting back to the ship opening here 
on Earth that lands on the white house lawn  
or in the UN’s Gardens, again there’d be nothing 
surprising about that critter strolling down the  
ramp looking entirely human, and indeed it would 
be surprising if it didn’t speak English or the  
primary language of whatever land it set down in. 
It probably blinks and breaths like one of us too.  
But it probably didn’t learn that language much, 
unless it was fairly heavy on cybernetic mind  
augmentation that made picking up languages as 
easy as opening a file. Rather a team of experts  
will have pieced the languages together and 
created an AI to do the translating. We shouldn’t  
take for given that every spacefaring civilization 
has several hundred different languages like we do  
but it probably wouldn’t be unusual either.
An ambassador coming to a planet might take  
the time to learn their Lingua Franca or main 
trade language if they’ve got it but probably  
more as an attempt at a better understanding, and 
would likely use an AI translator for speaking and  
hearing anyway. And that’s a good idea. There’s 
a classic Twilight Zone episode, “To Serve Man”,  
that when they find out how to translate the 
alien language makes them realize the giant  
and seemingly benevolent, if creepy, aliens 
who came to Earth are migrating humans off  
Earth with the intent of eating them, the 
title being the name of a book the humans  
find and eventually realize is a cookbook.
The problem is, with an alien, that might  
actually be a regular set of euphemisms in their 
language, much as “Eat me” was pretty common when  
I was growing up. But if you encounter a race 
of shark-people or something, they might be  
entirely civilized and sincerely friendly and 
eat only synthetic meat and not understand or  
care that we were disturbed they’d added human 
to the menu and freely joke about it and hand  
off a case of synthetic shark-people steaks to our 
ambassador with a quip about how it was his turn  
now since he’d been on the menu last week, after 
they’d grabbed some of his DNA before dinner. 
And honestly, that’s on the non-grisly side, 
there’s no reason to assume cannibalism is rare  
out in the universe given that it isn’t rare here 
and there’s no special reason to think it would  
always carry health downsides either. So they 
might think it weird we don’t eat our dead or that  
we keep pets. And it's realizing that something 
like that gets baked into the language at a very  
deep level, as does everyone’s base psychology, 
even those bits they think of themselves as having  
outgrown and become too civilized to really do. 
So you really want an AI able to translate the  
right way, not literally or even just switching 
in the euphemisms for the alien equivalent. 
Nor would you likely have a shared language aliens 
in a region of the galaxy all agreed to speak.  
Expecting aliens to agree on a common language or 
system of measurement is optimistic. Humans can't  
even agree on metric versus imperial. Imagine 
negotiating that with a species that uses random  
quantum fluctuations as a unit of measure. There’s 
no real need to do this, though. A computer can  
easily translate back and forth between thousands 
of different systems of measurement or calendars  
and expressions like ‘1 in a million odds’ might 
sound weirdly specific to an alien the way them  
saying ‘1 in 16,777,216’ would to us, when if 
you have a base-8 system because you’ve only  
got four fingers on each hand, is 8 to 8th power 
and likely a significant number in your language. 
There’s also ulterior motives for folks moving to 
embassy-town, so to speak. Much as we wonder what  
the Kanamits want of humans in that twilight zone 
episode, or what ulterior motive the Taelons have  
for visiting us in Earth: Final Conflict, 
and helping us out, you have to wonder who  
agrees to live on an alien planet, or a literally 
cosmopolitan city full of folks from all over the  
cosmos. Curiosity can be weird, and while we can 
contemplate eating alien food out of curiosity,  
in most cases you’d likely need a major overhaul 
to your biology or massive doses of medications  
so as not to get sick from it, let alone enjoy its 
flavor or derive nutrition from it. Especially if  
it were full of microbes like yogurt or beer 
might be, and now those are in your gut. Not  
to say lots of folks might not do it anyway, as we 
like to say on the show, alien beer is to die for… 
Or to write a whole extra spontaneous episode for, 
that actually came out two months before this one. 
But without even venturing into the headspace of 
someone who would get themselves augmented to be  
able to eat and drink and enjoy alien cuisine, 
or the terrifying implications of Rule 34 of the  
internet moved into the alien arena, xenophiles 
might be as mentally disturbed as xenophobes.  
The embassy motto might be that you don’t have 
to be crazy to work here but it sure does help. 
Now to close out, we should shift this 
into what we would think of as the most  
probable scientific case, and that is the 
absence of FTL travel or communication,  
and a scenario in which aliens evolved on another 
planet are pretty rare, none within at least  
several thousand light years of us, which still 
allows hundred of civilizations in this galaxy  
alone. I would be surprised if alien civilizations 
were even that numerous in an entire supercluster. 
But it still means huge territories of tens of 
millions of star systems. In cases like this,  
where a civilization is constantly mutating 
as it spreads out into the galaxy, when it  
bumps into aliens, it’s on the leading edge 
of two expanding spheres so that your borders  
are two-dimensional surfaces with some depth, and 
one between two civilizations 10,000 light years  
apart might have several, which could include 
a million star systems that counted as border  
or near-border systems. Yet these may be 
founded by chunks of your civilization,  
and were tens of thousands of years divergent 
from their homeworld or those cousins of theirs  
off on the other side of that border region. 
Very occasionally you’d have smaller volumes  
where three or four alien civilizations met 
too. And there’s no communication back and  
forth to the homeworld here, nobody is waiting 
10,000 years on a message to get home and back. 
Civilizations expanding and bumping into each 
other makes for a cosmic game of 'I call dibs!'  
with the added challenge of no one having a 
universal rulebook. So what you really have  
is ten thousand local interstellar empires, each 
of which has some friendships and rivalries with  
its lateral neighbors, and relationships with 
a handful of alien empires of common descent  
to each other nearby. It’s a big and diverse 
enough volume that you could be mostly at peace  
while across that border surface a thousand 
different wars raged between this and that  
alien empire and a local human one, or two 
humans fighting one alien, or an alien and  
a human realm fighting as allies against a few 
alien kingdoms, or every combination imaginable. 
Which goes up when you keep in mind that the 
nominal ‘human factions’ might include entire star  
empires founded by uplifted dolphins, chimpanzees, 
cyborgs, AI, and so on, and the same for the  
aliens. And all of these are likely to have border 
stations, with both the actual aliens and each  
other, that are meant to serve as neutral ground, 
or even third-party controlled monitors, not too  
mention there own seedy-undersides for smugglers, 
contraband, refugees, mercenaries, and all the  
other dystopian window dressing of your typical 
sci fi setting near a border or neutral zone. 
Now the good news for space opera fans is that it 
is exactly the sort of environment where you have  
tons of aliens nearby even if you all trace your 
origins back to a shared homeworld. You could have  
some local star clusters like the Pleiades where 
you’ve got around a thousand stars packed into a  
40-light year radius, and even denser near the 
core, which might easily be some sprawling and  
overlapping collection of Dyson swarms by the year 
12,000 A.D., ten-thousand years from now, settled  
by any number of human clades, both direct genetic 
descendants and our various spiritual children and  
accidental monster-babies exiled to deep space.
In that volume where communication everywhere  
takes less than a century and you’ve 
got potentially a trillion times our  
current population there, you could easily 
support a trillion different civilizations  
at least as unique as anything we’re used to 
seeing in Star Trek, all of whom should have at  
least a million neighbors within a few months 
of signal lag, and often a lot closer. So you  
really will end up with entire artificial worlds 
given over to being neutral meeting grounds,  
and more of them than most space opera empires 
have regular worlds. Choosing a location for  
diplomacy is like picking a restaurant for a 
first date: neutral territory, but everyone's  
still judging based on the ambiance.
This will be even more true of Earth,  
as a lot of civilizations that left here long 
back have lots of plausible motivations to keep  
or re-establish ties with us, and the good news is 
that you probably could eat the alien cuisine in  
these cases or date the blue or green-skinned 
alien gal from Orion, or the guy with two  
heads and three arms who likes to hitchhike 
around the galaxy. With potentially millions  
of civilizations, the galaxy might just be the 
ultimate definition of 'It's complicated' when it  
comes to interstellar relationship status, be it 
individuals or neighboring interstellar nations.
Our topic today being Alien Embassies, there 
is that big question of how you find those  
other civilizations and let them know where 
to meet, especially in a no-FTL Universe,  
and that’s something we discussed more in last 
month’s Nebula Exclusive, Galactic Beacons,  
along with other uses you might have for 
such beacons, how you might make one,  
and how we might find any that currently exist.
One of the big questions there though was how you  
keep one operating for potentially millions of 
years, and we have that same problem for if some  
interstellar civilization or group of them 
was seeking to protect a primitive world  
from interference, Prime Directive Style, and we 
explore that in this month’s Nebula Exclusive,  
Machine Monitors. Where we also look at 
other purposes you might need them for,  
how smart you want your machine mind to 
be, and how you keep it on task and loyal  
even when your own civilization might have 
changed its own mind or even gone extinct. 
Machine Monitors is out now exclusively on Nebula, 
our streaming service, where you can also see  
every regular episode of SFIA a few days early 
and ad free, as well as our other bonus content,  
including extended editions of many episodes, 
and more Nebula Exclusives like last month’s  
episode Galactic Beacons, Crystal Aliens from 
March, February’s Topopolis: The Eternal River,  
January’s Giant Space Monsters, December’s episode 
The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis,  
Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark Stars at the 
Beginning of Time, Life As An Asteroid Miner,  
Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters, 
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will, and more. 
Nebula has tons of great content from an 
ever-growing community of creators, and we now  
have news and classes content. Using my link and 
discount it’s available now for just over $2.50 a  
month, less than the price of the drink or snack 
you might have been enjoying during the episode. 
I’m also glad to announce that lifetime 
memberships for Nebula are again for sale,  
for $300, and gets you access to Nebula 
for as long as you and Nebula both exist,  
while helping support further 
improvement to the platform and  
more original content..
When you sign up at my  
link, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use 
my code, isaacarthur, you not only get access to  
all of the great stuff Nebula offers, like 
Machine Monitors, you’ll also be directly  
supporting this show. Again, 
to see SFIA early, ad free,  
and with all the exclusive bonus content, 
go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur 
We’ll be continuing our look at massive galactic 
civilizations and empires this Thursday, May 26,  
as we consider the enormous cosmic capitals that 
might oversee them. We were also considering alien  
minds a lot today, and on May 26th we’ll 
look at a different kind of alien mind,  
one much closer to hand, such as animal 
brains, as we examine Alternative Intelligence,  
the other AI. Then we’ll take an extended look 
at Space Freighters, what they’ll carry and  
who will crew them, on Sunday May 26th, before 
wrapping the month up with a trip to Ganymede,  
the largest of the moons of Jupiter and indeed 
the largest moon in our solar system, and we’ll  
ask if perhaps humanity might settle this moon.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can also  
help support the show by becoming a member 
here on Youtube or Patreon, or checkout other  
ways to help at IsaacArthur.net.
As always, thanks for watching,  
and have a Great Week!
[a]This is awesome :)
