This episode is brought to you by Brilliant!
It becomes ever clearer that humanity’s future  
is among the stars, a journey to trillions of new 
worlds. But every journey has to start somewhere,  
and to reach the heavens we must first 
sail from starports here on Earth.
 
A little over a century ago, in 1909, Wilbur 
Wright established College Park Airport in  
Maryland, the oldest continuously operating 
airfield, the first commercial airliner arrived  
in 1914, and the first airport with scheduled 
international commercial services opened in London  
in 1919. It was only 16 years from that first 1903 
Wright brothers flight to regular international  
commercial passenger traffic, permitting people 
to travel almost anywhere in the world in a mere  
day or two, something we now take for granted.
The first manned launch to orbit was 60 years ago,  
and we are only now starting to see a real 
stage up to commercial manned space flight.  
There are quite a few launch pads but 
there’s no place right now where you can go,  
buy a ticket, get a seat, and fly to space. 
That time is coming though and today we’ll be  
asking what those will be like, these groundside 
facilities that will take us up to the heavens.
 
And that will be one point we’ll be 
looking at today, will they be groundside?  
Or will they be out on the sea on ships or small 
islands, or even up in the air. For a discussion  
of those facilities up in space, see our episode 
The Next Space Station from a few months back  
or Spaceports from a few years back. Which does 
raise a question as to what a spaceport is,  
is it a space station in space or is it a facility 
not in space for traveling to space or from space.  
And that’s not something we can define just yet 
so for today we’ll say that any facility on land,  
sea, or air meant principally for getting up 
into space is a spaceport. So an airport with  
a sideline launching spaceships 
is still an airport, even if it  
has a spaceport terminal in it, I suppose.
So they might be on the ground, or in the sea,  
or in the air, but the nature of the launch 
system helps control where they are too,  
for instance space elevators are tricky 
to have away from the equator while most  
conventional rockets are so powerful and loud 
that we can’t have them anywhere near a city,  
not even as close as airports on the outskirts 
tend to be. With that in mind we’ll be considering  
a lot of the launch systems discussed in our 
Upward Bound series and what their facilities  
might look like. Those will include Conventional, 
Reusable, and Nuclear Rockets, Space Elevators,  
Space Towers, Mass Drivers, Launch Loops, Orbital 
Rings, Spaceplanes, Floating Platforms on Sea  
or in the Air, and even more scifi scenarios like 
wormhole gateways such as we see in Stargate.
 
Speaking of scifi, while we are principally 
focused on spaceports on Earth today,  
we also want to consider a more distant future 
and spaceports elsewhere. So we do want to look  
at putting them on other worlds, as for instance 
a cheap & dirty nuclear rocket is probably just  
fine on some airless radiation blasted moon 
everyone lives a hundred meters underground on.
 
Speaking of other worlds though, we need to 
acknowledge that for us to have a need for  
big spaceports that folks and cargo move 
through in large quantities, there needs  
to be destinations for people to visit, and 
those will influence those spaceports too.  
If the vast majority of travel to space is to 
Earth Orbit, as it will be for the near future  
and likely will be in a future where more space 
habitats are built in orbit of Earth than any  
other place, we’re talking a very different 
sort of travel – hours – than traveling to  
distant worlds orbiting further from the Sun 
or even around another Sun. Alternatively in  
some scifi-wormhole-gate case, your spaceports 
might entirely circumvent space from the equation  
and not need any special facilities far from 
urban centers where they can be as loud as heck.
 
That option is also available to space elevators, 
orbital rings, mass drivers, and space towers,  
as none of them have a big loud rocket engine 
going on, and of some types of spaceplanes which  
fly like normal planes till getting far from their 
launch location then turn on the big engines.
 
For anything using a rocket, be 
it a chemical rocket or atomic,  
and this currently includes essentially all 
of our current and near-term launch vehicles,  
sound is a big issue. Fundamentally sound is 
random excess energy vibrating into the local  
landscape and turning into pressure and heat, and 
it doesn’t really matter if it’s a big flaming jet  
or a some hyper-accelerated ions, all that 
stuff coming out the back is hitting other  
stuff and making noise and heat. Only something 
very outside the loop like a neutrino rocket  
would get around that, and that’s something 
we don’t even have on the drawing board.
 
If you didn’t know, the decibel scale for 
measuring sound and how loud something is starts  
at 0 decibels being the quietest audible sound a 
human can detect, or a perceived total silence.  
10 times more powerful than that is 10 decibels, 
ten times more powerful than that is 20 decibels,  
ten times above that is 30 decibels. It is a very 
stupid unit of measure, in that the original unit  
is the Bel – B-E-L, named for Alexander Graham 
Bell whose name has two L’s. And in that scale  
2 Bel is twice as loud as 1 Bel and a tenth as 
loud as 3 bel, but a decibel, a tenth of a bel,  
conveniently makes the decibel system more 
confusing by using a logarithmic scale.  
Critical notion though is that something 
100 decibels loud is a million times louder  
than something which is 40 decibels, 
130 is a billion, 160 a trillion. 
 
The Shuttle launch was 194 Decibels, very nearly 
the loudest thing on Earth which isn’t hyperbole,  
194 decibels is the theoretical limit for 
undistorted sound in Earth’s atmosphere  
and it gets real debatable if its sound if louder 
than that. The Saturn V rocket did 204 decibels.  
At this sort of scale sound is essentially 
shockwaves of a blast, they aren’t moving  
through the air, they are moving the air, and over 
194 decibels you have an actual vacuum between  
pressurized shockwaves. Krakatoa was so loud that 
it still measured 172 decibels 100 miles away.  
In general sound falls off 6 decibels 
every time the distance doubles,  
so Krakatoa would have been 178 decibels at 50 
miles, and still 148 decibels at 1600 miles, which  
is well above the pain threshold of 140 decibels.
This is a thing we want to be keeping in mind when  
talking about spaceports and picturing ones from 
scifi, because it’s not the rocket being chemical  
that makes it loud, it’s the sheer power of the 
engine interacting with everything around it.  
The shuttle launch was 12 billion watts, a billion 
times more powerful than your typical speaker,  
even 3 miles away from the launch pad, or 5 
kilometers, the shuttle was still 120 decibels,  
which is also the volume of thunder from right 
near a lightning strike, and a thousand times  
louder than your lawnmower or the headphones 
you’re playing on max to hear over it,  
which are themselves a thousand time louder 
than the typical conversational voice level. The  
ambient urban noise level is usually around 60 or 
70, and as high as 80. If you’re trying to avoid  
hearing the shuttle blast off from your local 
spaceport at above 90 decibels, it would need  
to be 32 times further away than what would make 
it 120 decibels, or 160 kilometers, or 100 miles.
 
Bigger and more powerful engines, like to launch 
something like the USS Enterprise-D, are even  
louder. Sound is critical to citing spaceports and 
why we spent this time discussing how it works,  
and its not something that you fix without 
having engines running on different physics,  
like antigravity or magnets 
pushing right off the atmosphere,  
or something shooting weakly interacting particles 
like neutrinos or dark matter out the back.
 
So how do we get around this? Well if you want to 
have a spaceport near your city it can’t operate  
on those rockets and thrust approaches, and 
we’ll get to those options. You can also do  
sound dampening, which we did at the shuttle 
launch site, but it's hard to dampen a rocket  
already in the air and we’re worried about 
the entire launch area not just the pad,  
as that rocket hardly stops making noise just 
because it’s a mile high, though a launch tower,  
well padded against vibration, and empty of 
air in its launch tunnel, also works – this is  
essentially what a mass driver is. They probably 
would not be utterly quiet but vastly quieter.
 
The alternative is just to have your spaceports 
far from your cities. That’s why when folks start  
talking about building artificial islands for 
launches or putting them in the middle of nowhere  
it makes sense, even when it effectively requires 
building decent sized towns just to operate the  
things. On the other hand, when talking about 
seasteading, the notion of building artificial  
islands that are micro-nations in their own 
right, folks talk about making a rocket launch  
site and using that as the kickstarter for 
some combination of port, resort, casino,  
and independent nation state and I’m not sure a 
rocket launch so loud it shattered every glass on  
the island would make for a good place to visit.
This works much better for alternate launch forms,  
like the space elevator which is much easier 
to build at the equator of a planet, and which  
means you either need an artificial island as its 
base or some deal with one of the few countries  
on the equator. That equatorial advantage 
applies to more than the space elevator too,  
but to virtually every launch option. It takes a 
certain velocity to orbit Earth, and since Earth  
spins, launch with that spin gives you a small 
free boost of speed, and that’s biggest at the  
equator where the world spins 460 meters per 
second, versus, say, New York City, at about  
350 meters per second or the North Pole, at 0.
Equatorial Spaceports then have the advantage of  
cheaper launch costs – mostly – and better weather 
– mostly. Indeed the ideal site for a mass driver,  
a big cannon we shoot craft down to get into 
space, is running up the side of a tall mountain  
on the equator, making Mount Chimborazo in 
Ecuador, at 6.3 kilometers tall, the furthest  
point from earth’s center, and the one moving 
fastest too, and the thinner air doesn’t hurt  
either. Mount Chimborazo probably holds the 
status of most ideal site for a spaceport.  
Equatorial mountains on other worlds likely will 
be early settlement sites for the same reason.
 
Now speaking of Mass Drivers, this is a system 
that can be placed in a city because the ship  
is not being rocket propelled 
and is not moving through air.  
The general notion is to have a long vacuum tube 
ramp that a ship is propelled down magnetically  
till it exits at a very high speed 
and altitude, and low air pressure.  
You can have this begin inside a city as a result, 
indeed underground like a subway if you want,  
but it will exit thousands of miles away 
and that’s a lot of right of way issues  
through a lot of valuable real estate, including 
building a pipe as wide as your ship, hanging over  
the landscape for that whole distance. 
I could imagine many cities in a region  
using a single long mass driver 
that had multiple connecting tubes  
that curved and joined together before the 
ship was going too fast for such maneuvers,  
which certainly saves on costs given how much 
time a ship spends in any given piece of the tube.  
It would also be nice to have multiple ships 
able to move through the mass driver at once.
 
You also would tend to put this out on the 
sea anyway, coming from classic coastal ports,  
not because it needs to but because it cuts 
down on the right of way issues for building it,  
a feature the mass drivers sibling, the launch 
loop has, that we’ll get to in a minute.
 
Now I mentioned only one ship going through 
a mass driver tunnel as a cost issue,  
ideally you want many going through at once, and 
we have a parallel concern with space elevators.  
Space Elevators are often seen as the 
ideal form of ground to space travel,  
because once one is built it takes very 
little energy to go into orbit by climbing it,  
but they’re not quite the wonder-method 
often implied even ignoring that they require  
material strengths we haven’t got yet. 
Now technically they do not have to be on  
the equator, there’s a trick around that which 
essentially involves placing a single station up  
at geostationary orbit then having 3 or more 
elevators come down from it like guy wires,  
so that their forces balance out, and this 
allows you to use one station in space for  
multiple groundside spaceports as well as letting 
you put those spaceports anywhere so long as the  
forces balance out to keep it at the equator, 
so at least one on each side of the equator.  
This also presumably lets cities 
team up to operate and maintain one  
and represents another often neglected use 
of space ports, which is rapid transit off  
the planet and right back on it again. 
One might imagine a pyramid of several  
space elevator tethers ascending to that 
geostationary space hub but with secondary  
stations part way up that and secondary 
tethers running right to neighboring lines,  
allowing you to get just out of the atmosphere 
than pour on the juice to another tether  
and drop to another spaceport, shaving hours off 
of trips made at subsonic air travel speeds.
 
This of course requires even stronger materials 
than a normal single line equatorial elevator  
does, but if you can do it you probably would 
because the thing folks tend to miss about space  
elevators is how long they are, comparable to 
the circumference of the planet at the equator,  
not the couple hundred kilometers it is to low 
orbit. And while you could climb one up part way  
then drop and coast in on wings like a plane to 
a location, after building lots of speed on the  
drop, you would have to drop because you’re not 
at orbital speed on a space elevator until you  
get all the way to geostationary orbit 36,000 
kilometers up. Orbital speed of earth drops  
the further away from Earth you go, and your own 
speed from spinning with the earth rises as you  
go up – which is why Mount Chimborazo is also the 
fastest moving place on Earth. On a space elevator  
your rotational speed around Earth’s center 
rises as you rise, while the necessary orbital  
speed drops, until they match up way out at 
geostationary at a mere 3 kilometers per second,  
not the 8 km/s it normally is to low orbit. 
When you’re 400 kilometers up, which is how high  
the international space station is, and you’ve 
gotten there by climbing up a space elevator  
or space tower, you’re only going 492 meter per 
second, just 32 meters per second or 72 mile per  
hour faster than the speed at the equator’s 
surface below. Not really a big speed bump,  
though it would rise as you got higher. It would 
also rise as you dropped though, in terms of  
vertical speed not lateral speed, but that’s a 
long drop through a lot of very thin air that  
lets you use any wings you might extend to convert 
that speed into a direction of your choosing. 
 
That would seem to indicate that these would 
be great ports for getting around Earth too  
but they have a bottleneck, that space elevator is 
holding itself up, all 36,000 kilometers and more,  
and every pod traveling up it at any moment, 
which also gain speed to climb by shoving down  
on the elevator, straining ti further. And they 
exert the most force and breaking force on that  
tether down low, where the most tether is 
hanging and where gravity is strongest. 
 
So pragmatically, unless you’ve got a very cheap 
material that’s quite strong even compared to  
graphene, that lets you do tons of pods on a 
space elevator tether at once and place them  
at angles off the equator, space elevators 
don’t make for ideal spaceports from cities,  
though are handy for being quiet. I could imagine 
cities sprouting dozens of these tether cables  
though and have airports just outside the city 
that personal wingeds aerospace ships could  
fly through to get to the airport, climb the 
tether, then drop and glide to another spot,  
though I suspect this would simply 
save fuel, not time, in most cases. 
 
Space Towers are the alternate way of building 
tall and they have the advantage that you only  
build as high as you need, the problem is like 
all active support, you need to keep the power  
running and you really benefit from having 
cheap energy and/or superconductors and/or  
materials that shield well against magnetics.
Now for a discussion of how active support works,  
see either our Launch Loops, Space Towers, 
or Orbital Rings episode, but in summary form  
you’re keeping something from falling by 
constantly pushing on it. This is easiest done  
with tiny streams of objects subject to magnetic 
attraction or repulsion but doesn’t require  
electricity in and of itself. A piece of paper 
hanging over an air vent is actively supported,  
so is an object orbiting Earth. For safety, 
we also have batteries – which superconductors  
are amazing for too - for uninterruptible power 
supplies, and also parachutes for slowing large  
objects that might be hanging in the sky and 
suddenly begin falling. So things like launch  
loops, orbital rings, and space elevators 
are not nearly as dangerous as they sound.  
They also don’t drop at re-entry speeds, 
they just fall down like any other object,  
and a space elevator if cut just 
flies off into space above the cut  
and the segment below the cut just plops down 
from above. And given that space elevators rely  
on super strong materials to operate, well those 
also make for ridiculously light parachutes.
 
Now when it comes to seasteading and small 
nation states that act as spaceports,  
active support makes this a bit better as an 
option and the launch loop is a great example  
of an active support system that does best at 
sea. Conceptually imagine you were to shoot a  
big cannon and its shell moves so fast and high 
it landed a couple thousand kilometers away,  
then upping that to a machine gun sending a 
constant stream of them, then keeping a big  
magnet hanging over the stream of iron slugs. 
Instead we do this with a big tube and a stream of  
magnetic materials being pushed by electromagnets, 
but it results in an aborted orbital path that  
you can use as a big launch platform turning 
electricity directly into spaceship velocity,  
letting you plug it into a a big nuclear 
power plant or whatever on the ground,  
or floating in the sea, and running it. You can 
also lower and drop it to avoid weather issues.  
A space elevator getting hit by a 
hurricane is problematic for instance.  
Not nearly as bad though as the notion of a super 
long cord of super strong material whipping around  
in a hurricane probably sounds but one advantage 
of a Lofstrom Launch Loop is that if you cut the  
power it slowly descends and you can speed that 
descent up by tapping it for power. Indeed, most  
of our active support systems make for very good 
energy storage systems in that sense too, much  
like a flywheel but without the friction losses.
A Space Elevator can actually be detached and  
reeled up above the atmosphere if needed, 
though reconnecting it might be quite a pain.  
Similarly the Orbital Ring, which makes use of 
tethers too, can just pull in any threatened  
by the weather though it’s also a lot sturdier 
against that. We’ll come back to those though.
 
Now I suspect we’ll have our first commercial 
spaceports before we have Orbital Rings and those  
early ones will probably be a mixture of airport 
and launchpad, one to each side as it were,  
decently far from any city or existing built up 
area and close to an eastern coast so the launch  
is over the ocean. Expect the facility itself to 
just be very buffered against sound and vibration,  
and possibly have any hotels and 
hospitality along a tram line  
running perpendicular to the direction of launch, 
so north or south of the facility and launch pad.  
Deserts work for this too incidentally and 
for something like a mass driver or launch  
loop offer the option of solar power, as would 
floating solar panels on the water in the ocean,  
or, in the air. So also potentially on a big 
helium balloon a kilometer across that your  
launch vehicle can basically fly off the side 
of and ignite its rockets as it heads off,  
see our Sky Platforms or Cloud Cities episodes 
for more discussion of that approach. 
 
I would expect that to be the rough 
setup, whether its on land or sea,  
coast or desert or mountains, for any spaceport 
built if and until we have another big shift  
in space launch method away from rocketry. 
That combination of airport and spaceport,  
located in the middle of nowhere, with 
the spaceport on the east side of things  
and everything highly insulated against 
sound and connected to the north or south.
 
Spaceplanes though might get around lot of these 
issues, but as we noted in that episode, it's very  
hard for us to make an airbreathing vehicle 
get to orbital velocities if it has to carry  
its own fuel, so the approach of having personal 
vehicles you could fly from your airport - our  
even your home garage – right into space, relies 
on either a compact high power to weight ratio  
nuclear drive – fission or fusion – or power 
beaming… which as we noted in our spaceplanes  
episode is actually very simple, you just build a 
pair of SCRAMjet stovepipes which are particularly  
microwave receptive and let them take the place 
of the normal reckless fuel burn of SCRAM jets. 
 
A SCRAM jet itself, or stovepipe, is a mostly 
non-mechanical device whose purpose is to let  
you suck in air and superheat it and shove it 
right out the back, its geometry is doing all  
the heavy lifting so long as you supply heat. In 
such a setup your spaceport is just an airport  
and your spaceship is similar to a personal 
or commercial airliner modified to receive  
microwave energy beaming. If the beam is lost 
the vessel just glides till it is re-acquired  
and unauthorized vessels can just have their 
beam shut off. In that episode I referred to  
it as probably the only plausible pathway 
under known science for people to own their  
own personal spaceship they could fly to orbit 
in. Partially because big improvements to nuclear  
options still means someone personally owning and 
piloting something nuclear, whereas a beam powered  
ship with some batteries or a small conventional 
engine for backup or takeoff avoids your neighbor  
having a super powerful device in their garage 
they could Kamikaze into a city at Mach 10.
 
That’s another reason you probably want 
your spaceports far from urban centers,  
accidents and malice, and even small spaceships 
carry all the destructive potential of a  
trainwreck or even a small nuke in a tiny package. 
I haven’t mentioned it as much but spaceships  
have to land too, not just take off, and they 
have to pass overhead at hypersonics speeds,  
so it pays to be keeping crash scenarios 
in mind and what to do if someone does  
decide to do a suicide run, or crash one by 
remote control. The good news about landing  
ships is that it can be done at conventional 
landing strips, they just aerobrake and head  
on in like a plane at that point, or come 
down as a reusable booster rocket does.
 
Now this one advantage of Space Towers, they get 
around that whole atmospheric drag thing that  
cost a lot of fuel on launch, and while trying to 
land on one is a bit trickier than aerobraking,  
you might do that to recover energy rather than 
burn it all off in the atmosphere – indeed a  
developed spacefaring world might have bans on 
aerobraking outside of emergencies to keep the  
heat down and minimize sky noise and the 
distraction of giant fireballs constantly  
raining on the planet as thousands of giant ships 
take off and land in any given day, or minute. 
 
A spaceport on a space tower might be a big 
pad high above the planet or it might be a full  
launch tube extending kilometers below ground 
and hundreds or even thousands of kilometers  
above ground. You don’t necessarily have to 
follow straight lines either. A spaceship can  
only turn so fast without pancaking its crew 
but the tiny electrically charged particles  
or metal beads or whatever that you use for 
your active support’s working fluid can turn  
at pretty high g’s permitting you to do a pair of 
towers leading to a long flat runway between them  
hanging right over the atmosphere. The ships 
using that still need to accelerate but they  
can leach energy off the active support 
structures for speeding ships up though,  
avoiding carrying lots of fuel or needing a 
giant loud and bright rocket flame out the back.
 
Big thing to remember for both space towers and 
orbital rings though is that when you get above  
the atmosphere on one you are not in orbit. Step 
off the side of a space tower roof or orbital ring  
and you will fall down to the ground – and 
I assume people will do this constantly  
given that a pressurized skin suit and wings or a 
parachute would let you glide down safely for the  
sport of spacediving, the ultra high-octane 
version of skydiving and cliff jumping.
 
Fundamentally a Space Tower really is just a 
very tall building, though I’d imagine a very  
tall cellphone tower might be a better analogy, 
even if it might be a tube kept vacuum tight to  
serve as a launch tube. You could also have many 
along the path of a mass driver to allow one to  
exit well above the atmosphere and operate with 
much thicker components and bigger payloads than  
the kind we tend to contemplate now using balloons 
or similar as part of the ramp support structure.
 
Now in the long term the Orbital Ring would 
probably come to dominate space launches  
and essentially eliminate groundside spaceports 
to be replaced with something like a local train  
terminal. One problem with Space Elevators 
is that need to have a superstrong material  
you can make a 40,000 kilometer long cord out 
of able to hold up its own weight plus others,  
and we do have some that can barely doing this 
on paper using tapered designs and Earth’s  
lowering gravity as you get farther away, see the 
Space Elevators episode for discussion of that
 
However, those same materials do just fine for 
a tether only a hundred kilometers or so long  
and that same active support method 
works much easier for an orbital ring.  
Which is fundamentally just two hoops 
around the planet, one inside the other,  
one spinning faster than orbital speed and 
one spinning just as fast as the planet below,  
whose combined momentum equals 
what’s needed for a regular orbit.  
This gives you an apparently stationary ring 
hanging in the sky, to which you can drop tethers  
or even just fly up to with a plane modified for 
high altitude – though a ring could be way above  
the atmosphere or even hanging just above mountain 
heights, though it’s not too handy for launching  
spaceships that deep in the atmosphere.
What’s more, while orbital rings not above  
the equator will precess and wobble left to 
themselves, those same superstrong tethers  
can counteract that and pin it to a path circling 
Earth not along the equator, cocked at an angle,  
and you can also connect up to it with space 
towers which can serve as additional support  
or backup, and you can then run electricity up 
those or the tethers. Though you might let it  
roll instead and leave your tether hanging like 
skyhooks for planes to link up to on whatever  
schedule brought the precessing ring near their 
service area. In such a case, any sort of cable  
evenly vaguely in the space elevator strength 
region ought to be able to hang a small spaceport  
at the end of that – with parachutes built 
in just in case of catastrophic failure – for  
planes to link up to which I suspect would make 
for some very popular resorts or mansions too.
 
Now classically we assume the shortest 
possible tether to require the least strength,  
which would be straight down, but if you’re 
trying to stabilize one from precessing you  
want those tethers out at an angle like a guy 
wire. Which also means you could run a cable  
car up one carrying people and cargo back and 
forth. And given that one that runs out wide at  
a 60 degree angle from one 400 kilometers up would 
represent a 800 kilometer long tether stretching  
sideways 700 kilometers to either side of our 
orbital ring, makes for a very large service area  
especially given that none of the tethers need 
to be as long as each other or at the same angle.  
Meaning some orbital ring of that type could 
have a big long wire reaching out from atop  
a tall building in a city to the orbital ring 
from any city within a 1400 kilometer wide band.  
That’s a pretty big service area. And if 
you have multiple rings around a planet  
at different angles and slightly different 
altitudes you could drop a tether between  
any two at any of the two points of overlap. 
This both eliminates groundside spaceports and  
vastly increases their number, because they go 
from a handful of big ones far from habitation  
to thousands of them stretching up from every city 
to every orbital ring they can run a tether too,  
like a train station or exit ramp truck 
stop. There’s no big noise or disruption  
going on here either, they’re just a cable 
car moving at whatever speed we feel like,  
probably speeding up to a few hundred 
kilometers an hour till out of the atmosphere  
and maybe not speeding up much more then either. 
Up to space from any city that can afford one in  
an hour or less for an energy cost comparable 
to driving your car to the neighboring town.
 
If you felt like making very big rings 
and very robust tethers you might see  
those become train station 
equivalents of spaceports,  
with huge strings of cars running that tether 
like trains on its rails. You can hypothetically  
even scale something like that up to being a 
physical highway cars could drive on, to space,  
though they’d need a pressurized tunnel 
or to be modified for vacuum presumably.
 
Its always hard to guess how space development 
will take place but I tend to think this is the  
best candidate for how the situation will look on 
Earth in a couple centuries as we develop orbital  
space, get millions working and living there, 
and head out to colonize our moons, our planets,  
the moons around other planets, and all those 
asteroids. And probably how it would remain for an  
extended period unless we did get some technology 
like gate-syle wormholes, which might circumvent  
space travel entirely. Now if you’ve seen 
Stargate you know the wormhole type in question,  
and kudos to Peter Hamilton for being the first 
author I know who considered the idea that you’d  
pretty much leave these on all the time and not 
have folks walk through them or fly through them  
in favor of running trains, electric cables, and 
fiber optic data cables through them to the other  
world. These, if we could ever make 
them, would probably replace all  
spaceports and arguably aren’t spaceports 
since they circumvent it entirely.
 
One other farther-tech option is spaceports by 
teleportation, you just beam yourself to space  
stations, and for a digital civilization 
of AI or folks living as uploaded minds,  
this sort of teleportation is vastly 
easier, your spaceport becomes a radio dish.  
Though even then high-bandwidth cables running 
up to orbital rings probably works better.
 
Atmospheres aren’t any kinder to signals than 
to spaceships trying to plow through them,  
but those aren’t the norm in the Universe let 
alone our solar system, and to close out for  
the day, lets quickly contemplate spaceports on 
other worlds. Now we’ve got two big factors here.  
First, any spaceport we build off Earth is our 
keystone to settling that world, the entry port,  
not the exit, so you want one you can quickly 
assemble and easily too, and initially landing  
is more important than taking off. Second, each 
world has different conditions making landing  
or leaving by different methods preferred. 
On any airless world like the Moon, your Mass  
Driver is your pay dirt because there’s no need 
to elevate one above the atmosphere, you can just  
run a track of magnets right along the ground, 
until the ship speeds up enough to leave it,  
and usually need not speed up too much since 
airless worlds tend to have low gravity.  
Landing is a whole different story, you need 
fuel for that because you can’t aerobrake  
and trying to connect to some landing strip to 
slow you down at thousands of meters per second  
sounds like a recipe for disaster, maybe even 
with computer pilots reacting in nanoseconds.  
Here you might prefer a space elevator - which 
are much easier to build around faster turning  
and lower gravity worlds, that you could have 
whirling around your planetoid for a ship moving  
at about the same tangential speed to connect 
up with then be slowly winched down on, like  
big tentacles extending out form an asteroid to 
catch spaceships and eat them, Spaceport Kraken. 
 
Works just fine for taking off too, and offers a 
longer takeoff track to speed up on, as smaller  
moons and asteroids don’t offer a lot of diameter 
or circumference for a track. Getting off those  
requires virtually no fuel but speeding up 
more would, and so if you want to leave at a  
good speed without blowing tons of propellant, 
from some world with a tiny escape velocity,  
tentacle-like space elevators and tethers might 
be very handy. Indeed I could imagine a number of  
circular rails wrapping such a planetoid with long 
tethers swinging around them just to allow you  
to have your tentacles extending and spinning at 
directions the spin of the object wouldn’t permit.  
This works on orbital rings around planets too but 
strikes me as one of those things like skyhooks  
that represents dangerous clutter if you have 
a lot of traffic. Alternatively space is huge  
and asteroids small, so the Asteroid Kraken 
Spaceport does not have those clutter issues
 
Places like Venus easily allow aerobraking, ditto 
Titan, and any fast ship heading to the moons of  
a gas giant can slow to better orbital speed 
by skimming that gas giants atmosphere before  
winging off to whichever Moon they were destined 
for. On such worlds though your spaceports might  
be floating sky platforms, hanging over Venus or 
Jupiter by buoyancy, mining the clouds for gases,  
volatiles or fusion fuels, and for 
the latter might skip buoyancy for  
electric engines or fusion candles. 
There’s a virtually unlimited number of  
possible options for which types and variants 
of spaceports and launch systems we might use  
on other worlds, for us to imagine and 
discuss and hopefully one day build.  
I’d make a joke about the sky being the limit on 
space port options but it obviously is not.
 
Whenever we find ourselves discussing space 
launch methods and megastructure concepts like  
orbital rings and active support techniques, 
there’s often an urge to go into the math a  
bit deeper and I avoid doing that because our 
episodes are meant to be accessible to everyone.  
At the same time though, I really can’t 
encourage everyone enough to look into a  
deeper mathematical and scientific level on a 
lot of these concepts because it does open up  
a whole new level of understanding and wonder. 
Math and science can be pretty intimidating but  
with the right learning path they will unfold to 
be clear, intuitive, and horizon-broadening. 
 
The key is to find that right learning path 
and our friends over at Brilliant have,  
by embracing interactivity and feedback for 
handson and intuitive learning. Brilliant has  
always focused on interactivity, but earlier 
this year, Brilliant upped the interactivity  
on their platform to a whole new level, like with 
their newly updated Geometry Fundamentals Course,  
and they continue adding in more and 
more interactivity to all their courses.
 
It's never too late to start learning something 
new, and Brilliant is a great place to start.  
Brilliant is an interactive STEM-learning platform 
that helps you learn concepts by visualizing them  
and interacting with them, which is 
hands-down, the best way to learn.
 
On Brilliant, it's not about memorizing 
or regurgitating facts for a test — you  
can just pick a course you’re interested in 
and get started, be it the basics or advanced.  
If you get stuck or make a mistake you can read 
the explanations to find out more and learn at  
your own pace. Knowing and understanding Math, 
Science, and Computer Science unlocks whole new  
worlds, and if you’d like to start your journey 
to them, you can try out Brilliant for free and  
get 20% off a year of STEM learning, click the 
link in the description down below or visit:  
brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
So we were looking at how to get  
from ground to space today and next week we’ll 
look past getting into space to the colonization  
strategies we might employ for settling the solar 
system. Then we’ll have our mid-month Scifi Sunday  
episode to take a look at one potential method 
of getting out of the solar system, by folding  
space to travel instantly to new stars. Then in 
two weeks we’ll return to our Alien Civilization  
series to contemplate aliens with tempers and 
aggressive tendencies in Belligerent Aliens.
 
Now if you want to make sure you get 
notified when those episodes come out,  
make sure subscribe to the channel, and if you 
enjoyed the episode, don’t forget to hit the like  
button and share it with others. If you’d like to 
help support future episodes, you can donate to us  
on Patreon, or our website, IsaacArthur.net, and 
patreon and our website are linked in the episode  
description below, along with all of our various 
social media forums where you can get updates and  
chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
