In the future we will travel to 
strange new worlds, 
but who will  pilot the spaceships that take us there?
 
Possibly one of the most dreamed of jobs  
in modern times and in science fiction is 
to be an astronaut and to crew a spaceship,  
and today we’ll be looking at various selection 
criteria and discussing them. I should emphasize  
we won’t be trying to say what is best or right 
today as it’s likely to be highly dependent on  
both your technology and cultural or physiological 
aspects that we can’t anticipate well right now. 
We know what the big ones are for nowadays, 
every astronaut is expected to have a degree  
in something relevant, typically STEM fields, and 
a lot of professional experience in that field.  
Extensive background as a pilot is appreciated, 
especially on experimental vehicles as a test  
pilot, but that’s likely to drop away as a major 
consideration. Nowadays every spaceship flight,  
even a reusable spacecraft that’s flown before, 
is essentially an experimental one, and your crew  
is rarely more than a handful of people. Down 
the road a crew of dozens, or hundreds, or even  
hundreds of thousands, is not going to require 
piloting skill as a major criteria for astronauts  
in general anymore than a chef’s background 
would matter for roles beyond ship’s cook. 
When you only have a crew of 3 or 4 or maybe a 
bit more everyone has to wear a bunch of different  
hats and so one thing you’re looking for is a 
knack for quickly picking up some skills but the  
reality is if you’re picking smart folks who are 
decently diligent and you have a ton of resources,  
you can bring in a good instructor, and see which 
astronaut might be interested in obtaining that  
skill who also isn’t completely overloaded with 
other hats yet. That goes away after a while too,  
when your ship’s commander, doctor, and 
pilot don’t all have to check 50 other job  
boxes between them. And many of those boxes 
need to be checked twice, for redundancy,  
a primary and their backup or ‘relief’.
In the short term, if you’re looking to  
be an astronaut, get a degree in STEM, hit 
the gym daily, get your pilot’s license,  
and max out your basic life skills catalog 
like it was merit badges in the scouts. Also,  
join the Scouts, 20 of the men who flew to 
the Moon, landing or not, were boy scouts,  
and as of 2022, forty-one of those selected 
as NASA career astronauts were Eagle Scouts. 
I cited that statistic to my wife when making the 
case that my sons and daughter should join the cub  
scouts. I remember looking over the expanded merit 
badge list they have nowadays since I was kid and  
at first thinking it was spilling out a bit beyond 
scout skills to more general life skills, and I  
could make a case for and against a lot of that 
expansion, but it definitely does apply to space. 
Space is big, a lot bigger than Earth, and down 
here we need all those life skills and more,  
and there’s more of space, so we’ll need all 
those in space. Eventually, down the road,  
if it happens here, unless AI or other technology 
might eliminate it, we will need it up there too. 
That’s a bit broad for our purposes today though, 
so I thought we might narrow in on some classic  
examples, and one of those is the notion that 
crews should be all one gender, typically male  
though the reverse has been suggested too, and the 
main reason given being that on average women use  
less food and oxygen then men do, so that you 
could generally send 4 gals for every 3 guys on  
the same supplies. One of the flip side arguments 
on that or using people of low weight is muscle  
requirements. A spacesuit is a lot of weight, low 
gravity or not, those typically mass as much as a  
person and retain that inertial mass. For my part 
I do not expect food, water, air, or spaceship  
mass to be real limiting factors on space travel 
and the same reasoning then applies to suggestions  
like picking a crew who were all the same height 
and chest and inseam so they need less redundant  
gear, same spacesuit for each of them and you 
only need one backup, not one for each crewmember. 
Almost from the outset though space has been 
desired to be inclusive, famously for all mankind,  
so while you can make cases for this or that 
parameter that might genuinely work better by  
excluding or standardizing, the working principle 
has been to seek to work around that not toward  
that. Ultimately there’s also the practical long 
term need that pushes for mix-gendered crews and  
that is that unless you’re planning to colonize 
space with clones, you need to be putting families  
or potential families on board those ships.
This is less the case for short-term exploration  
missions, but Robert Heinlein tackles the idea 
in his 1961 novel Stranger in a Strange Land, and  
for the story it proposes that the first mission 
to Mars, with an 8-man crew, should instead be 4  
men and 4 women and concludes they should all be 
married… to one other member of the crew, though  
the novel definitely explores non-traditional 
relationships. I don’t think Heinlein is proposing  
this as the best option considering the fate 
of the crew but the idea generally goes that  
married men are more stable anyway and that 
two years on a cramped spaceship is going to  
be rough on folks if they’re married and left 
their partner behind, especially if there are  
people on board they’re potentially attracted to.
In that book’s case, the space agency that sends  
the first Mars mission on board the ship Envoy 
is selecting crew and Michael Brant wants to be  
selected, gets the inside scoop from a friend 
that it is going to be married couples who  
get preferences and get’s the name of the single 
female astronaut topping the candidate list, Dr.  
Winifred Coburn, 46, and catches the first flight 
out to see her and propose marriage on the spot,  
to which she agrees, and they both land a slot 
with him serving as Commander, pilot, astrogator,  
relief cook, relief photographer, rocketry 
engineer, and she gets the role of Semantician,  
practical nurse, stores officer, and historian.
The other six in order were: Mr. Francis X.  
Seeney, twenty-eight, executive officer, second 
pilot, astrogator, astrophysicist, photographer; 
Dr. Olga Kvalic Seeney, twenty-nine, 
cook, biochemist, hydroponicist; 
Dr. Ward Smith, forty-five, 
physician and surgeon, biologist; 
Dr. Mary Jane Lyle Smith, twenty-six, atomics 
engineer, electronics and power technician; 
Mr. Sergei Rimsky, thirty-five, electronics 
engineer, chemical engineer, practical  
machinist and instrumentation man, cryologist;
Mrs. Eleanora Alvarez Rimsky, thirty-two,  
geologist and selenologist, hydroponicist.
We can certainly debate how important each of  
those roles are and if any are missing. Heinlein 
wrote the book almost a decade before the Moon  
Landings and in the context of a long duration 
mission, not a three day stay. How practical 4  
married couples on a spaceship would be is hard 
to say but he shows the design flaw that finishes  
up the prologue to start the book, insofar as 
at least two of astronauts were not truly a  
couple and we soon see at least one other couple 
was either similarly assembled or on the rocks.  
One of the crew, Dr Mary Jane Lyle Smith, gets 
pregnant on the voyage and everyone seems to  
know it is not her husband’s child, but Captain 
Brant’s – not much privacy on a spaceship. Very  
few reports come from the Envoy after landing 
but Dr Ward Smith attempted to deliver the child,  
but had to perform a Cesarean and she died on 
the table from complications. Dr Smith then  
used the same scalpel he operated on her with 
to cut Captain Brant’s throat and then his own. 
In the story World War 3 breaks out not long 
after so it’s quite a while before a second  
mission can be sent to investigate, that on 
board the Champion – which is explicitly an  
all-male crew with the prior incident in mind – 
and they find to no surprise that the Envoy left  
no survivors. Then they find out to their surprise 
that there actually was one survivor, that baby,  
and that Mars was thoroughly inhabited already.
Needless to say, it’s a fictional situation,  
not experimental evidence, but it raises a 
lot of the crew selection considerations. One  
of those that does come up is if crew should 
be on birth control while on a Mars mission  
or some other long journey where resupply and 
help is hard to offer. Families on ships is a  
tricky and touchy subject at a lot of levels.
For those who remember Star Trek: The Next  
Generation, one of the big differences from the 
original series is that the Starship Enterprise  
has not just married couples – which we do see in 
the original series including a wedding performed  
by Captain Kirk - but also families on board 
the next generation ship. Children on board a  
Federation starship is something that initially 
really irritates Captain Picard and it’s not  
hard to see why. Early on there’s a constant 
insistence that Starfleet isn’t a military,  
in spite of having all the trappings 
and rules of one plus ships and guns,  
and that its mission is exploration. If the 
Enterprise is anything to go by, any single season  
of its voyages makes it clear to me that having 
civilian bystanders on board, let alone children,  
is beyond criminally negligent. They seem to have 
caught on to that by the time Voyager came out,  
and Deep Space Nine, as a frontier outpost with 
families on board, made more sense having kids. 
The type of mission and its duration seem 
important in that sort of decision of course  
and one could see how for any short-term mission 
it wouldn’t matter as much, while for a longer  
term mission it is a bit of a big deal and in an 
even longer term mission it’s an even bigger deal  
as you might need kids to replace your crew. One 
can make the case that any mission that requires  
future crew members be children not yet born is 
on somewhat shaky ethical grounds, especially on a  
smaller ship where there might be just a few dozen 
crew and a child born to that group has fewer life  
options than in medieval villager, including 
the ability to run away. And while crew might  
have very impressive qualifications themselves, 
and likely pass a lot of those on to their kids,  
you do need to keep in mind that if your crew is 
barely up to the task and composed of the best of  
the best, generation 2 might really struggle, 
and simply adding a teacher and relief teacher  
to the crew slots is no guarantee that all 
those kids are gonna have ‘the right stuff’. 
The Right Stuff and the Cream of the Crop 
is, of course, our guiding policy these days,  
even if what that right stuff is can 
be very debatable, but those standards  
should loosen as we need more people in 
space and get more experience with space. 
How do we experiment with this? Common sense 
is key but this is science so we do like to  
test our hypotheses. The main method is with 
Analog Astronauts, a very underappreciated  
group of folks, and the criteria for them is 
pretty stringent too. Analog missions aim to  
be as analogous to the real one as practical, 
obviously we can’t simulate zero gravity on  
Earth but we could simulate a 10-minute signal 
lag for conversations with home or having an  
expert back home try to help with a theoretical 
problem, like explaining how to repair something. 
So, if we wanted to model and test the 
crew the Envoy used, 4 married couples,  
we could sequester 4 volunteer analog astronaut 
couples in a set of living quarters of similar  
dimensions to the possible ship and with those 
limited supplies and that signal lag and see  
what happens, and of course to do it right we’d 
need several such groups. And could then test  
how well that worked, what problems tended to 
emerge, and ditto for all male or female crews,  
and for various other parameters we 
might imagine. Even potentially minor  
things like dietary or hygiene considerations.
One of the more recent analog missions was CHAPEA,  
Crew Health and Performance Exploration Analog, 
and that got underway this summer and will run  
for a year at Johnson Space Center. If we’re 
looking for basic positions, it’s got a Commander,  
Kelly Haston, Flight Engineer Ross Brockwell, 
Medical Officer Nathan Jones, Science Officer Anca  
Selariu, and where the names might not be obvious 
to listeners or I’m garbling the pronunciation,  
that’s 2 guys and gals each and they’re 
getting crammed into a 1700 square foot  
Mars-style habitat together for a year.
So what makes for a good crewmember? What  
is a good analog? We do have a lot of ships that 
sail the oceans now for months at a time and  
only in recent years did those get telephones 
and internet and bandwidth isn’t impressive.  
Submarines and any ships before instant global 
communications can tell us a lot too, as can  
remote and hostile outposts like Antarctic ones.
What is the ideal crewmember, personality-wise?  
Can and should we test for that? Would 
something like the Meyer-Briggs or Big  
5 Aspects Personality Tests be useful and 
if so, which categories would be best. 
The Meyer-Briggs Type Indicator, or MBTI, is 
perhaps the best known personality test and  
you’ve likely taken it or some diluted online 
equivalent, it’s around a hundred questions  
long and is measuring you on a 4-axis chart, how 
extroverted or introverted you are, if you’re more  
intuitive or detail and fact focused, a thinker 
or a feeler, and if you’re a judger or perceiver  
which measurers if you’re more organized or 
spontaneous. There’s 16 categories and they  
are general and their utility is debatable, I’ve 
had the test a few times and decent facsimiles  
a few more and I generally got INTJ or ENTJ. I 
usually score right near the middle but tilted  
slightly to Introversion. These days I tend to be 
more extroverted, but I’m basically an Ambivert.  
I like socializing in crowds I fit in with but 
can spend whole days in my cave happily too. 
There’s a lot of debate how useful it is, and 
these days I’ve generally heard higher trust in  
the Big 5 Personality or Aspects tests, 
which measures Openness to Experience,  
Conscientiousness, Extraversion, Agreeableness, 
and Neuroticism, and it gets called the OCEAN  
test occasionally as an acronym as well as CANOE, 
and the categories are more detailed than their  
one-word description. They can have different 
names too, the Pentagon model Extroversion,  
Vigorous, Methodical, Emotional Stability, and 
Abstract. The HEXACO model uses Honesty-Humility  
as an additional factor and Jordan Peterson 
helped develop a version with the 5 categories  
each split into two groups for 10 variables.
Typically you get ranked on a scale of 10.  
Last time I took one was 4 years ago when my wife 
and I were dating and I came out 9 on Openness,  
9 on Conscientiousness, 6 on Extraversion, 8 on 
Agreeableness, and 4 on Neuroticism. I’d imagine  
regular viewers find none of that surprising, this 
test doesn’t usually produce shocking results for  
people we know. High scores are not necessarily 
positive things incidentally, and they can shift  
with time, I’d gone up on Extraversion just a 
hair and down on Neuroticism since the prior time  
I’d taken it and I would bet I would be a little 
less agreeable if I took it today, a byproduct of  
having 3 kids, though I’d doubt I’d have moved 
anything more than a point. Life experience,  
maturity, and effort can move the needle on these 
but they are fairly stable for the individual. 
Most folks in the field I know view this 
one as having better predictive capacity  
and unsurprisingly some of those traits 
are good for screening nearly any job,  
especially space. Conscientiousness is always a 
nice trait in an employee or crewmember. You don’t  
want someone who is too high in Neuroticism on 
your team if it's stressful and dangerous, on the  
flip side you might not want someone too casually 
relaxed and upbeat, especially as security chief,  
though a very negative and paranoid one isn’t 
ideal either. There are advantages to having  
leaders or team members who are agreeable or 
disagreeable. And the big take away would be that  
there might be an optimal score for one individual 
position but not for a team or crew overall,  
nor for an individual position for every different 
combination of accompanying crew personalities.  
This doesn’t necessarily mean on a crew of 16 
you want one of each MBTI personality type or  
that you want an even mix of folks on the Big 5.
You wouldn’t want the same mix for different  
mission types either. Some remote base in the 
Oort Cloud whose only job is watch for enemies  
and keep an eye on their Doomsday devices in the 
basement might have a crew of 6 and require 4 of  
them to turn the proverbial launch key, so that 
no lone member can veto or do so by killing a  
peer and refusing, removing 2 keys rapidly with 
no reaction time. This is very different from  
the environment of some freighter or trade 
vessel or the crew of a space cruise ship. 
Critically this is also a measure of Personality, 
not anything else, it’s not IQ or a measure of  
skills. But there might be occasions where a 
less skilled crew member with a better suited  
personality is handy. A very skilled and ambitious 
person might merely ruffle feathers on their brief  
stay before moving to the next job, and this 
is something that comes up in hiring in modern  
times too. A good resume sounds handy but a lot of 
folks follow the strategy that the best employee  
is the one who comfortably meets the minimum 
needed skills but does not much exceed them,  
thus isn’t bored to death or leaving as soon 
as they find a better job. It’s also something  
we discuss here a lot in terms of AI, never make 
one smarter than the job requires without a human  
operating it, your robot vacuum cleaner or lawn 
mower doesn’t need much brains, and always ask if  
that job can be broken into multiple more simple 
ones even dumber AI could do with just a little  
help from a human. Autonomous AI mostly shouldn’t 
be needed, especially when humans like to have  
things to do anyway and we have a lot of them.
Your ship’s medic really does not need to be the  
most elite and skilled doctor around either, as is 
implied in Star Trek with McCoy, Crusher, Polaski,  
or Bashir. You could argue the flagship of a 
federation devoted to exploration likes to put its  
best scientists on the front lines of course. Star 
Trek really takes liberties with crew positions,  
ranks, and terms like flagship – which usually 
implies an admiral is present on that ship,  
but they do show us fairly complete groups 
of main characters as the writers are trying  
to flush out a robust and interesting cast, and 
one’s without major flaws. Alternatively, a lot  
of shows like to show us more flawed characters 
on a crew – Firefly did that, so did Battlestar  
Galactica – and while I think it did often make 
for more interesting stories I’d argue it isn’t  
actually more realistic. Drama is something 
you want in a show, not a spaceship crew,  
and even on the big adventurers and dangerous 
prototypes 99.9% of your time is spent in  
prepwork and maintenance, a steady but quick pitch 
of preparation, and it’s the reason the unofficial  
motto of the US Army is “Hurry up and wait”.
This is even more extreme in space. Right now,  
every crewed mission is basically a prototype 
and a short one, except for modern stays on the  
International Space Station, where the crews are 
up long enough for some normality to kick in and  
where most of the equipment and station overall 
have transitioned into being known quantities.  
Ones where automation and simple AI have probably 
taken over a lot of it too. As space missions  
shift to yearlong voyages to other planets with 
tried and true technologies on the ship and making  
it up, your degree of boredom can rise a lot. It 
helps with stress of course, and so you might see  
a shift away from folks who can live and breathe 
stress and excitement for days on end to folks who  
are trained for a crisis but used to and content 
to twiddle their thumbs on the job and play  
Minecraft or scroll through their social media.
In my time in the Army, even when in the active  
warzone at the front lines, we spent most of our 
time on routine matters and even thumb twiddling  
or catching up on our reading, the same is often 
true of police and other first responders, and  
an ability for protracted times of calm patient 
readiness is just as vital as grace under fire  
when the brief moments of stress and chaos occur.
And since phone calls in real time aren’t an  
option much in space beyond Earth and 
the Moon, email and social media become  
a bigger deal. You’re leaving text, audio, or 
video messages for people, and seeing theirs. 
That does help a lot with loneliness and 
isolation. Old days, someone at a remote  
outpost or even solo only had their own head 
and maybe a few books they could re-read until  
the pages wore out. A good agreeableness score 
would be handy here if you had only a few people,  
and a high introversion score handy if you 
were it. But now we can fit a million books on  
a thumbdrive, and a few redundant harddrives on 
a spaceship could contain backups of all needed  
data and an extensive library of educational 
material, entertainment videos, video games,  
interactive virtual realities, and more.
In classic scifi, and in our oceanic  
traveling past too, we can see a young 
person fascinated with the world beyond  
or running from their old life getting to be 
crew on some ship even without much skills,  
and it seems absurd in a modern context. If some 
normie showed up on a spaceship, as a stowaway,  
maybe the crew would find a use for them and train 
them for the sake of efficiency, but never could  
you walk off the street with the right stuff.
And yet, in the future, the right stuff  
for a spaceship crew might become a willingness 
and desire to be on board, first and foremost,  
because those voyages will be long, and especially 
on something like an interstellar freighter or  
arkship, where your passengers might be frozen if 
the trip was too long for them to want to endure,  
the most important trait of a crewmember would 
just be able to willing be on that ship for years  
and able to remain sane and happy for that voyage, 
or at least stable and reasonably content. Imagine  
it’s your job to be the pilot a Gardener Ship, 
stopping every century to offload passengers at a  
new world and take on raw materials, or a space 
freighter hauling iron and aluminum from the  
mines of Epsilon Eridani back to the nascent and 
material-hungry Dyson Swarm emerging back here. 
You’ve got a lot of spare time to be jogging up 
and down the mile long corridors of the ship,  
or around its habitat ring, or writing that novel 
you always wanted to work on, or having a family,  
which is the basic idea behind generation ships 
and gardener fleets anyway. And if ships have  
long journeys like that, odds are you have 
kids on board who learn the family trade  
or have folks get off at every stop looking 
for a change and openings for that wide-eyed  
young person waiting to see the stars.
One of the neat things about the future  
is that the criteria to be on a spaceship 
crew will keep widening. You won’t need  
perfect vision but even if you did, we’ll 
have corrective surgery, you won’t need to  
be as fit as an athlete, but if you did, we’ll 
probably have procedures and protocols for that  
too. You may not need to be good at reading tech 
manuals because the future might have very good,  
augmented reality instructions that will rapidly 
and intuitively walk you through the piece of  
equipment better than a manual, and the process of 
maintaining and fixing it when needed. You learn  
it easier and don’t need to know it as much. 
As I like to say, the point of technology is  
to be able to have your cake and eat it too. Or 
in this case, serve on board a spaceship crew.
 
So today we were talking about selecting 
crew for spaceships, which had as much to  
do with interpersonal relationships as crew 
skill sets, and I found myself wondering how  
you would celebrate holidays on board them. What’s 
a Christmas tree look like in zero-gravity and  
what does a holiday calendar look like on 
board a spaceship moving relativistically  
between planets with different calendars?
Selecting gifts for others is likely to be  
just as tricky as now, but you can rarely go 
wrong with a gift meant to improve someone’s  
day and for a lot of us, that day includes 
listening to podcasts or audiobooks, and a nice  
set of Raycon Everyday Earbuds offer a top notch 
audio quality in a compact, wireless, and durable  
format. Raycon’s made a name for themselves by 
offering premium audio devices at a great price,  
and now offers other home technologies too; like 
their faucet filter or magic 180 charging cable,  
which has interchangeable magnetic tips 
to be compatible with your devices. 
Raycon’s everyday Earbuds have been 
my go-to for audio for years now,  
as they let me listen in crystal-clear comfort and 
without worrying they’ll fallout and get lost or  
run out of power. They are a must have for any 
audio lover. They make great gifts but why not  
treat yourself to some too? Their limited-time 
bundle deals let you get a discount buying  
some for gifts and one for yourself. They 
offer easy and free returns, free shipping,  
and Buy Now, Pay Later options. This holiday 
season, get premium audio and power tech at  
a great price—and save even more doing it! Go to 
BUYRAYCON.com/isaacarthur to get 15% off sitewide.
So that will wrap us up for today but 
we’re just getting started for December,  
and we have a lot of episodes this month. This 
weekend, December 10th, we return to our Alien  
Civilization series for Scifi Sunday and a look at 
Nihilistic Aliens. Next week we’ll talk about ways  
to warp and manipulate reality, on December 14th. 
In two weeks we’ll look at discussing Silicon  
based lifeforms on December 21st, followed by a 
bonus episode for the holidays where we’ll ask  
if we truly will colonize space. Then we will 
finish the month and year with clearing space  
debris on the 28th and our final Livestream Q&A 
on Sunday, December 31st. And if you missed it,  
don’t forget to catch this last weekend’s bonus 
episode, Orbital Defense Platforms. Along with  
December’s Nebula Exclusive, a look at the Fermi 
Paradox and the Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
