Today we’re going to be taking a look at
the Fermi Paradox, the apparent contradiction
between the sheer size and age of the Universe
and the seeming absence of any other intelligent
life in it besides what resides on our own
little blue dot.
As big and old as the Universe is, we’d
expect life to have popped up elsewhere many
times and frequently long before it did here
on Earth, yet we’ve never found a single
bit of evidence of it.
That’s the Fermi Paradox and down the years
a lot of explanations have been suggested.
This isn’t our first visit to the topic,
but I felt it was time to redo the original
video to look at some areas we skimmed over
in the original video.
Our goal today is to look at every solution
we know of that’s either considered pretty
logically consistent or popular and to look
at the strengths and weaknesses of each proposed
solution.
To do that, and to do that in anything approaching
a reasonable period of time even by the standards
of this channel, we will have to move through
material pretty quickly, which is why some
of these subjects have their own separate
videos and while you’ll often see little
white and yellow boxes popping up with video
links.
And since some folks find me hard to understand,
you may want to turn on the closed caption
subtitles for this video, which is usually
right down there by the subscribe button.
Also, while there are probably about a hundred
Fermi Paradox solutions I’m personally familiar
with, an awful lot of them resemble each other
greatly and share many or all of the same
strengths weaknesses, so I will be lumping
them together into categories and sub-categories.
As I said in the original video, any given
categorization system is going to be pretty
arbitrary, so I’ve gone ahead and changed
them up a little this time around.
Our 4 categories remain basically the same
even if the sub-categories have not.
Those were:
Category #1: Alien Civilizations are Rare,
so we haven’t detected them.
Life, or at least intelligent life, just isn’t
very common in the Universe.
We can’t see it because there just isn’t
much to see, maybe none at all.
This has quite a few variations including
everything from even simple life being incredibly
uncommon to technological civilizations self-destructing.
Category #2: Alien Civilizations aren’t
Rare, but we can’t detect them.
Now this is broad zone, and often touches
into category #1 too since many of the solutions
still assume Alien Civilizations aren’t
super common.
They don’t talk to us because they don’t
want to, they see it as a waste of time, they
don’t want to interfere in our culture,
they all talk using something better than
radio signals, they don’t even talk to each
other, and many others.
This is probably the broadest category in
terms of solutions.
Category #3: Alien Civilizations aren’t
rare, but we can’t recognize them.
I use the word recognize here in both of its
usual meanings.
First, we might mean something so alien we
can’t even tell it’s intelligent, or second,
we might not recognize them in terms of acknowledging
them officially.
This is the category for the very bizarre
aliens or for aliens walk among us but we
don’t believe it.
Category #4: Miscellaneous
Self-Explanatory.
Some of the stuff in this category just doesn’t
fit into the others, or maybe could but is
better off with its own separate mention.
Last time I spent most of it in Category 2
and 4 was the runner up, in this updated version
I want to spend more time on number Category
1, especially the first two sub-categories.
We’re gonna be here for a while so a snack
and a drink might be advisable, but with no
further ado, let’s talk category 1.
Category #1: Alien Civilizations are rare.
This is the broad category that rests on the
idea that our lack of evidence of aliens is
simply due to them just not being very common.
Quite a few of the solutions in other categories
assume they’re not very common too but that’s
a relative term and not their main argument.
For category #1, that is the main argument,
but it still breaks down into multiple sub-categories,
in this version of the video I’ve broken
it into 4.
Category 1A: Rare Earth
Life itself is incredibly rare, because planets
that can birth and support life long enough
for it to evolve are rare.
Category 1B: The Great Filter
This extends on the notion planets that can
support life are rare, but places bigger focus
on the improbabilities of intelligent life
evolving and developing technology.
Category 1C: Civilizations don’t last long
This category usually assumes technological
civilizations aren’t too common in the first
place, but that few if any will last long
before destroying themselves, and not long
enough to get out and colonize other stars.
Category 1D: Intelligent Life is not naturally
occurring
This tends to be the catch all area for solutions
that revolve around the notion that either
life itself or intelligent life specifically
is either astronomically improbable or outright
impossible to form on its own.
Now as we begin exploring these notions I’m
going bring in a counter.
Every time I bring up an item which might
plausibly be unlikely in the development of
technological civilizations that have gotten
themselves out into space to colonize it,
I’ll add one to a counter.
For instance, some stars may simply be inimical
to life ever forming there because they put
out a lard of hard radiation.
Now this counter we’ll use at the end for
our own hit on Drake’s Equation, not in
a rigorous fashion though because we’ll
just assume every hit on the counter is a
coin flip odds, 50/50 proposition.
Some of these probably are way less likely
than that, such as a solar system have an
Earth mass planet in the habitable zone, others
might be better than 50/50, like the evolution
of multi-cellular life which appears to have
happened several times independently on Earth.
We’ll just handwave them all as averaging
out to 50/50 since this is only to illustrate
a point.
And we’ll talk a bit more about Drake’s
Equation at the end of category #1 as well.
Unfortunately we’ll really going to have
speed through these because I got up 12 pages
or thirty minutes of video on them just giving
brief descriptions so we’ll be bypassing
that in favor of me just stating the obvious
ones.
But I want to emphasize, while I don’t always
agree with the reasoning or probability for
some of these, nothing went on this list unless
without a good reason, and I’ll add more
details on the slides but you’d likely need
to pause the video unless you’re a speed
reader.
Also, while some of these massively drop the
odds, acting as an actual hurdle you can’t
pass, whereas other fundamentally put a time
on things.
If you don’t develop it in time, your planet
burns up.
The Sun has five billion years left before
it goes red giant, but stars get progressively
hotter as they age and we’d estimate Earth
will be uninhabitable in as little as three
hundred million more years.
Keep in mind that while the world has been
around for 4.5 billion years and life for
all but maybe the first 4-500 hundred million
of that, the first land life and first simple
brains only developed about that long ago.
If our sun was just 5% more massive, it’s
lifetime would have shrunk enough to render
Earth uninhabitable by now.
So time’s a factor, and since in the long
term evolution can be thought of as a statistical
process where X number of mutations need to
occur, anything that makes an organism take
longer between generations, or decreases the
number of those organisms and therefore increases
the timeline for those mutations to occur
on average has to be considered a filter itself.
Colder worlds, or smaller worlds, would probably
have this problem, and while plenty of stars
live longer than our own, in fact most do,
besides having their own unique problems supporting
life, might not have developed complex life
yet.
Okay let’s get started.
Category 1A: Rare Earth
Life itself is incredibly rare, because planets
that can birth and support life long enough
for it to evolve are rare.
Earth is quite different from its neighboring
planets, and our solar system differs from
its neighbors, likely every solar system in
the Universe is unique to some degree.
But over the years we’ve noted a lot of
features of our planet and solar system and
even our area of the galaxy which might make
life easier here than most places.
Now a lot of these individual points are debated,
and it’s very hard to apply a genuine probability
to many of them which is why we’ll be using
our handwave of 50/50.
Now I don’t always agree with the odds on
these, but as mentioned I usually won’t
add one unless someone has written a pretty
convincing treatment on it and usually one
making it was worse than 50/50
The Rare Earth Hypothesis holds that all of
these add up to an improbability that is very
high.
Now as I mentioned, all categories are somewhat
arbitrary, so it isn’t like our second sub-category,
great filters, doesn’t include these more
physical barriers to life or that Rare Earth
bypasses the evolutionary ones, nor do other
categories ignore them, but its more about
the key focus.
So what could make Earth abnormally hospitable
to life, well let’s zoom in from universe
scale.
1.
Old enough galaxies – Many early galaxies
are very active, with stuff like quasars,
that would make life anywhere in it tough
at best, and they take different time to settle
down.
2.
No metals – Build up of heavy elements from
Supernovae takes a while and is lower in the
outer rims of galaxies.
3.
Too much galactic radiation – The places
near the center, with the most metals, are
saturated with hard radiation.
4.
Galactic Dead Zones – The core isn’t the
only place with too much radiation, or too
high a density of stars for stable solar systems
to be likely.
5.
Stable Galactic orbit – Lots of solar systems
wander the galaxy in much more elliptical
orbits than us, popping in and out of those
danger zones.
6.
Wrong sun – Big stars don’t live long
enough, small ones have their own problems,
especially much smaller red dwarfs as we looked
at in the Habitbale Planets Series.
7.
Sun fluctuates too much – A big one, our
sun is freakishly stable in its power output
compared to most stars.
8.
Solo sun – Life around binary stars is plausible
but it does have problems.
9.
Habitable Zone – Loosely defined as where
it’s not too hot and not too cold for liquid
water, unsurprisingly known as the Goldilocks
Zone, needless to most planets aren’t in
it.
10.
Stable Habitable Zone – As I mentioned,
stars get hotter with time, and the habitable
zone moves, a planet needs to be in it the
whole time.
11.
Eccentric Orbit – Planets orbit in ellipses,
not circles, if you’re too elliptical you
freeze at aphelion and burn at perihelion.
12.
Vacuum Cleaner Jupiter – Solar Systems have
a lot of debris, getting hit by it can sterilize
a planet, big gas giant out beyond your planet
can minimize this by sucking them up.
13.
No Hot Jupiters - If you’ve got a big planet
close to the Sun it can seriously screw with
the orbits of other planets nearby in the
habitable zone.
We’ve found tons of these, so they’re
not rare.
14.
Asteroid strikes – Plenty gets past your
Jovian Vacuum Cleaner, if its big enough it
can sterilize a planet, not just kill off
a lot of stuff, and we think one considerably
bigger did hit us to make the moon.
15.
Large Moons – Traditionally a popular Great
Filter, we now have reason to believe rocky
planets with large moons might be as common
as 1 in 10, but its value to life remains
unchanged, especially the effect on tides
and tectonics.
16.
Making Large Moons – That collision theory
for the moon being created and the huge heat
pulse involved, along with the stripping of
the primordial crust being tossed into orbit,
is also a fairly popular new Great Filter.
We might be nothing but a water covered planet
otherwise with no real plate tectonics.
17.
Not Enough Plate Tectonics
18.
Too much Tectonics
19.
Planet too massive – High gravity, thick
atmosphere, probably deeper oceans, sunlight
might not get through for photosynthesis and
there may be little or no land.
20.
Planet not massive enough - In the Terraforming
video we discussed the problems with keeping
an atmosphere on lighter worlds, and while
Venus has a way thicker atmosphere than Earth
doesn’t make it easier for complex life
to dwell there, and there’s very little
hydrogen and water on Venus compared to Earth.
Too little gravity means less water, or a
colder planet to keep that hydrogen, like
Mars.
21.
Magnetic Field - Planets needs these both
to protect from radiation and to keep their
atmospheres, or at least their hydrogen.
Ours is produced by a large and molten core.
It need not be a lot weaker to make life a
lot harder.
22.
Rotation rate - Our planet used to spin about
twice as fast, with twelve hour days, and
we have the moon to thank for slowing that
down.
If a planet spins too fast it will have much
more violent weather and subsequently erosion.
Too much erosion, land disappears, and maybe
more importantly topsoil does.
23.
Oxygen absorption – Oxygen is highly reactive,
and early on, when it was poisonous to life,
it got sequestered into rock and water.
A change in a planet’s crustal composition
and turnover could prevent oxygen being absorbed
fast enough to prevent life from being poisoned
to death or keep being absorbed so there’s
never enough oxygen to serve as a fuel to
aerobic life.
So that’s Rare Earth.
If you’re curious we’re up to 23 coin
flips, and the odds of getting heads 23 times
in a row is about one in 8 million, that would
happen about 50,000 times in a galaxy of 400
billion star like our own.
Now those favoring planetary conditions as
the main bar for life developing will, quite
fairly, point out that my 50/50 standard here
is overall way too kind.
Many of these would be more like 1 in 100,
worth 6 or 7 coin flips on their own.
If we said these were more like 1 in 6, the
odds on dice, not 50/50 coin flips, well 6^23
is about 800 quadrillion, which is about three
times as many stars as are within a billion
light years of us, or from which we’ve received
light less than a billion years old.
So this camp is hardly without its merits.
Now as I mentioned there’s no cut off between
Rare earth and our next category, the Great
Filter, so those who feel physical conditions
aren’t quite enough just keep going into
those.
Category 1B, the Great Filter, often actually
refers to a single specific hurdle that is
the biggest problem for life developing, but
just as often means many of them.
One of those previously mentioned conditions
might be 1 in 1000 while 10 other were 50/50
and that lone filter, 1 in 1000, would knock
out just as many competitors as those other
10 combined.
Sometimes someone will mean a great filter,
one of these filters thought to be especially
low odds, but usually it is just meant as
the sum total, and today I’m using it mostly
to describe evolutionary hurdles, biological
or maybe more sociological near the end.
Okay, We left off at 23, let’s continue.
24.
Abiogenesis – We still aren’t sure how
it happened or where, popular candidates are
tidal pools, underwater thermal vents, and
even outer space.
We know it ought to take a decent chemical
soup with some sort of energy flux through
it, and probably many concentrations and mixtures
can do it but not likely all with similar
odds.
It might be some mixtures are way less likely,
astronomically so, then very similar ones,
to produce life.
I’ve seen some attempts to calculate this,
but they’re pretty weak one often cited
write-up used the entire volume of the ocean,
not tidal pools or the volume near underwater
vents, then still had the ocean volume 1000x
times higher than it was then or now, one
of the reasons why peer-review is so important.
25.
Staying alive, from what we can tell the conditions
on Earth when abiogenesis happened were nothing
like now, and life has to make that conversion
or die, the way the earth was back then would
not be hospitable to complex life.
26.
Simplest cells - Protocells, the boundary
in many eyes between living and non-living
material, revolves around the cell wall or
membrane, and it is now thought to be the
first step, with lots of interesting research
on the subject in the last decade even showing
how the assembly of these membranes would
logically act in a Darwinian manner.
27.
Prokaryotes - Cells with no nucleus or organelles,
these are still light years more advanced
then self-replicating molecules or even proto-cells,
and they took a long time to develop, so again
our slower generations or smaller population
concern of slowing things down is a concern.
28.
Photosynthesis.
Our planet, and our modern ecosystem, gets
virtually all its energy from the sun.
Until life learns to convert sunlight directly
into a power source it is going very small
and small.
It’s a lot easier to have a lottery winner
out of a million people who play every day
than a thousand people who play once a year.
And many worlds might never get there because
their atmospheres are too thick and cloudy
for sunlight to penetrate, or conversely because
their atmosphere is too thin and magnetic
field too weak, so that life gets blasted
by radiation if tries to exist where sunlight
reaches.
Photosynthesis is often viewed as a strong
filter not because it is an improbable mutation,
there are many routes to many different types
of photosynthesis, but rather because on many
worlds it will not be practical to develop.
29.
Eukaryotes.
It is a big step to go from a simple cell
to one with a nucleus and even more specialized
parts.
Eukaryotes in addition to that nucleus have
organelles, specialized machines that do jobs
that would not let them survive without being
part of that interdependent totality.
Indeed, mitochondria, a vital component of
modern cells, isn’t even a true part of
the cells they are in.
30.
Colony organism and Multi-cellular life.
Complex life is a pretty arbitrary concept,
but this is often the line drawn for it.
At some point you begin getting serious cooperation
between cells.
This is not a good Fermi Paradox filter though
since we believe this has happened independently
on Earth many times, but its still a good
inclusion because it adds a lot of time.
Even if it would probably be a common and
near inevitable route for life to take, it
will add many mutations and generations to
get there and introduces its own survival
problems like cancer.
31.
Oxygen crisis - As I mentioned earth didn’t
always have an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere,
and its initial emergence was as a poison,
a waste product of life mostly tied to photosynthesis.
32.
Oxygen breathing – Breathing oxygen is a
huge advantage, like photosynthesis, learning
to live with oxygen as an anaerobic organism
isn’t the same as learning to breathe it.
33.
Sexual Reproduction - This is a big one, and
still quite a mystery especially in the male
and female divergence, rather than just organisms
that were non-gendered but just reproduced
with others rather than sub-dividing.
When you share DNA you share mutations.
If a cell starts off subdividing, and 20 generations
there’s a million of them of which two have
developed a handy and non-mutually exclusive
mutation, they can’t share that mutation
without some way of stealing each other’s
genes.
34.
Food Chains - An often overlooked one, but
an important one since you need a certain
density of life for this to be advantageous.
Hard to live as a predator without a decent
amount of prey.
Our ability to eat other organisms for compact
high energy fuel is a major advantage, and
a double whammy to lower energy worlds since
they not only would have slower evolution
from smaller baseline populations and longer
generations but would have problems supporting
food chains.
There’s no advantage to eating others if
you have to expend more energy going and finding
them to eat them then you derive from eating
them.
35.
Land life - Life on land took quite a while,
and as mentioned, it happened about as long
ago as we have left before the world is uninhabitable.
No land life, no fire, no technology.
36.
Brains, brains, brains… as mentioned these
only started emerging about the same time
land life emerged, and even those very simple
brains were a big deal.
We’ll come back to brains again, but the
simplest forms of them are a huge advantage.
37.
Parents – Now obviously you’ve got this
the moment you’ve got sexual reproduction
and arguably before, but organisms that actually
care for their young and opt for a fewer children,
more investment per child route is a major
and non-obvious step in evolution.
38.
Families – Another big step for eventual
civilizations, not just parents who guard
their eggs or watch over their young for a
few days but actual families where the parent
or parents tend their young for a long while
and frequently stay together their whole life
as a cooperative pack.
39.
Tool use
40.
Language
41.
Fire – This is actually a big one since
there is NO TECHNOLOGY without it.
Yet fire on worlds with lower or higher oxygen
could be useless or horribly dangerous, and
many creatures gain little from it, and fire
is always dangerous.
42.
Caring for your elderly – Once you have
language actually feeding your elderly gives
you someone to watch and teach your children
who has a lifetime of skills but otherwise
might not be too useful for gathering food.
43.
Farming – You just can’t achieve the kind
of population densities associated to civilization
as hunter-gatherers and what’s more it lets
you be stationary, meaning you don’t have
to carry all your possessions around, like
your harvest.
Food stockpiles let you support more people
simply by having reserves for bad seasons
or years.
Of course some planets might not even have
noticeable seasons, which sounds good, no
hard winters, but necessity is the mother
of invention.
44.
Metal – Metal isn’t as initially useful
as people assume, a good stone blade is actually
sharper than anything but our best modern
steel, and you need some serious technology
to make steel.
We’ve been using fire to make pottery for
30,000 years, yet even copper wasn’t in
use till 3000 BC.
That’s 25,000 years of using fire to cook
food and clay vessels before figuring out
metal.
Remember these folks are us now, just as smart,
so if they needed that long to invent basic
metallurgy it can’t be an easy step.
45.
Writing – Unless these critters have near
perfect memories, which would require an even
more expensive brain, you need a recordable
language for complex civilizations.
46.
Law & Custom – A weird one, but once civilizations
arise you need rules for dealing with strangers
with some degree of trust normally afforded
only your lifelong tribe members.
I’m using this as a catch all for everything
from legal codes to money to etiquette, and
if that last seems silly, think how we often
react to those with bad or just foreign manners.
47.
Scholars and Philosophy – Having people
who devote their whole life to learning things
which have no immediate use, knowledge for
its own sake, is an expensive thing and a
big jump past the tribal elders and shamans,
one that’s often been rejected.
48.
Science – You almost have to be trained
formally in this to really appreciate how
counter-intuitive a thinking process this
is.
And how offensive it can be to authority.
People don’t appreciate when you tell them
their folk medicine is wrong when they also
have people who sincerely swear it saved their
life.
49.
Now we have two more that will give us an
even fifty, coincidentally but conveniently,
but they are for our last category.
49 is not destroying ourselves with nukes
and such and…
50.
We actually colonize space.
Most members of the Great Filter camp do include
those last two but I feel they merit their
own category.
Incidentally I don’t have an official camp
I’m in but I tilt heavily to the Great Filter,
1B, as do most scientists I know who have
spent time on the subject.
That mean I’m biased of course but here’s
why:
We came up with 50 coin flips, and with just
our 50/50 odds, that would mean to get to
the end of the list you’d have to get heads
50 times in a row.
The odds of that are less than 1 in a Quadrillion,
that’s about how many stars are within 150
million light years of us.
1 civ per every several thousand galaxies,
and if we kick that up to using dice again,
1 in 6, that is 10^39, trillions of time more
stars than in the entire known Universe.
Needless to say, even that 50/50 odds is pretty
high and makes intelligent life anywhere close
enough for us to see very unlikely.
Even my extension on this, the Companion Video
the Dyson Dilemma, which lets us hunt for
galaxy-spanning civilizations a billion light
years away, only requires that lower-end coin-flip
odds to be right to be justified.
The flaw of course, for both our first two
sub-categories, is that we don’t know what
those odds are.
Drake’s equation, the loose and arguably
outdated formula for calculating the odds
of detecting intelligent life, operates by
plugging in all the probabilities, squished
up into more broad categories, but one flaw
of it, from a perception standpoint, is that
we do have good guesses for many of these
variables in Drake’s equation and we tend
to assume the one’s we don’t are equivalent.
That’s a thinking flaw along the lines of
calculating the odds someone will have, let’s
say, a nice plaque on the wall.
If I tell you the odds of them having that
Plaque depend on four factors, A, B, C, and
D, and I then tell you A, B and C are all
about 1 in 10 each, you will tend to think
D must be too, for about a 1 in 10,000 chance
and figure out of seven billion people there
must be hundreds of thousands with that plaque.
If I now tell you A is the odds of being an
athletically inclined male, B is living in
a colder hilly environment, and C is enjoying
the hobby of skiing, all seems well, but when
I next tell you that we’re solving for the
number of people who have a gold medal in
Men’s Alpine Skiing you now realize why
it isn’t hundreds of thousands, and why
D, getting into and winning the Winter Olympics,
is not a 1 in 10 option.
One of the reason we went through that long
list was to emphasize why you need to distrust
your intuition when looking at Drake’s Equation.
Rare Earth and Great Filter approaches both
argue some of these variables are much, much
lower than others.
Moving on to Category 1C, civilizations don’t
last long, is often better phrased as including
the notion that they don’t go out and take
an interest in the galaxy, as the Fermi Paradox
is about spotting these guys, which is hard
to do if they blow themselves up and much
easier to do if they expand out into the galaxy
or like to talk to others, or shoot missiles
at them.
I separate this from the prior 2 sub-categories
because steps 49 and 50, not blowing ourselves
up and colonizing the galaxy, are steps ahead
of us, not behind.
A lot of folks like this camp because it lets
us assume getting where we are now isn’t
very uncommon.
I don’t, and honestly probably a third of
the videos on this channel examine the notion.
I consider it needlessly pessimistic and actually
quite unreasonably so.
I wouldn’t be surprised if quite a few civilizations
did blow themselves up or did decide interstellar
colonization wasn’t for them, but I would
be surprised if virtually all did and its
hard for me to imagine that if intelligent
civilizations are so common that they pop
up around only even 1 in a million stars,
meaning there’d be nearly half a million
in the galaxy, that not a single one of them
managed to both not kill themselves off and
stay at home.
We talked about this more in the Dyson Dilemma
but we spent a good half hour discussing #49,
self-obliteration, in the Apocalypse How video
and we’ll be looking at that more in the
Carter Doomsday Argument where we’ll also
look at some of the more strange ways civilizations
could take themselves out.
For #50, colonizing space, we have a whole
series on this channel that looks at how you
could do it, looking at everything from Moonbases
to Terraforming and Interstellar Colonization,
and we talked about why you would, and why
it would be very hard not to, in the Dyson
Dilemma.
But the fundamental argument of this camp
is that technological civilizations find ever
more potent ways to blow themselves up, get
ever-better at making those easier for smaller
groups or even individuals to get their hands
on, and tend to have more and more people
out of which lunatics for instance might pop
up who would cheerfully kill everyone.
Needless to say this was a very popular camp
on the Fermi Paradox during the Cold War,
especially before we landed on the Moon, and
even though the Cold War is over, we have
figured out more way to kill ourselves and
we haven’t been back to the Moon, let alone
established colonies on it or other planets,
in nearly 50 years.
You can check out the aforementioned videos
if you want the various counter arguments.
Category 1D will finish out our first category,
and it is the notion that life, or intelligent
life, just doesn’t even occur naturally.
That it can only happen through events so
implausible it is less likely than not to
occur during the entire existence of the Universe
and the entire extent of the Universe.
Obvious inclusions would be God did it, or
Aliens from some prior Universe or external
reality did it, or that we are living in a
computer simulation, from a practical standpoint
these are all equivalent statements.
We look at this more in the Simulation Hypothesis
video so I’ll gloss over it now to save
us time.
The big weakness of them is not the obvious
one, lack of evidence, every Fermi Paradox
solutions suffers from that.
Their weakness is that they’re not internally
provable.
God or the great programmer in the Lab Above
can pop in and tell us they made us, we can’t
force them to tell us and in fact they could
easily just upload the last stable version
of the Universe if they did drop the ball
and accidentally give away the show.
As to life just being astronomically improbable
anywhere in the universe, we have only the
Anthropic principle, the reminder that only
universes where we won the tiny freak odds
to exist will actually include anyone who
can notice that.
Doesn’t matter if the odds of life anywhere
in the universe are 1 in 2 or 1 in a gajillion,
only Universes where someone won the lotto
will have anyone around to notice it.
And there’s always a finite chance for life,
no mater what else there’s a chance of particles
randomly assembling into not just self-replicating
molecules but a full-blown intelligent creature,
called a Boltzmann Brain.
Now the strength of 1D is the same as its
weakness, it hard to disprove.
Even arguments like ‘Why would God, or the
Great Programmer, make a giant Universe for
one species?’
don’t hold up very well for the same reason
a few bacteria in the middle of a Petri Dish
would be wrong to assume there must be more
bacteria elsewhere in the Petri Dish.
We put them in for them to grow, we don’t
care that it will take a few hours or days
for them to fill it up.
So that’s category 1, we haven’t seen
aliens because they are terribly uncommon.
The shared strength is that its logically
consistent, there’s no huge gaps in it,
it’s big weakness is that lack of evidence
weighed against the sheer size of the Universe
and the Mediocrity Principle, the notion that
when you have only one example of something
you should assume it’s a pretty normal or
mediocre case.
Category 1 can rub people the wrong way exactly
for that reason, the other name of the mediocrity
principle is the Copernican Principle, and
Copernicus is the guy who got us thinking
we weren’t the center of the Universe, that
we can’t think that way when trying to be
rational and objective, and so Category 1
seems to fly in the face of this core and
founding principle of science.
Okay, let’s finally advance to our second
category, the notion that aliens aren’t
that uncommon we just can’t see them.
Now as I said with category 1, it isn’t
that people in one category camp think life
is necessarily super-common, many category
2 folks do subscribe to category 1 thinking
but it isn’t the focus of their Fermi Paradox
solution.
I divide Category 2 also into 4 sub-categories,
though quite a few of the special cases we’ll
look at in the Miscellanous category arguably
fit in here too.
Category 2A: They Talk, but we can’t hear
them
Category 2B: There hasn’t been enough time
for us to hear them
Category 2C: They don’t talk, because they
have no reason to, and
Category 2D: They don’t talk, and they actively
hide also
Category 2A, that they talk but we can’t
hear them, can be looked at both from the
SETI Institute perspective, that we need bigger
ears and patience to pick up their signals,
and also the general notion that they talk
using a means we can’t listen to.
This would include both mundane methods like
using directional lasers rather than omnidirectional
signals, and that they use some faster-than-light
method we can’t pickup, same as how guys
in the 18th century wouldn’t know we talked
by radio waves.
Now this is a very popular Fermi Paradox camp,
and quite probably the largest amongst those
who are just giving the matter casual thought.
Unfortunately it has a couple big weaknesses
on examination.
The big one is the absence of what we call
teaching beacons, or sometimes Benford Beacons
for James and Gregory Benford.
Basically the notion that any civilization
that wants to be heard can be heard.
A friendly civilization that wants to broadcast
so that radio-capable civilizations can hear
them can yell loudly enough to be heard galaxies
away even using an omnidirectional old fashioned
radio signal.
And even if for some reason not every civilization
develops radio on their path to the stars
most will, its pretty much impossible not
to figure out how radio works and use it for
astronomy if nothing else and still get yourself
up to Space Flight technology.
So most civilizations will know it’s a common
method of sending signals.
That’s an example of exclusivity, another
thing we’ll bring up a lot in category 2.
It is maybe possible someone could become
spacefaring without understanding either electromagnetism
or math, but it’s not very likely, spacefaring
can be considered a trait exclusive to species
that understand those two things.
Alternatively we couldn’t say you need to
be Capitalist or Communist, Oligarchic or
Democratic, Religious or Atheist, to get into
space since on Earth the first two groups
that did it were the US and Soviet Union.
So we’d say that the trait of spacefaring
is NOT exclusive to any given political, religious,
or economic system.
That will come up a lot, this non-exclusivity
concept, in many of the Fermi Paradox solutions
after category 1 because many of those solutions
rightfully look at means and motive for expansion
or communication, and if you can’t argue
that spacefaring is exclusive to that behavior
it doesn’t hold up well.
We’re never interested in how one single
species would act, where that action would
leave them undetected, if we can assume others
won’t act that way and be detected.
Now for radio signaling this also assumes
they haven’t got something better, but again
would only work if they only want to talk
to those who also have it, akin to the Prime
Directive form Star Trek.
That sort of notion we’ll address in the
Miscellaneous section, that they don’t talk
to primitives on principle.
If that ethical issue isn’t in play, waiting
doesn’t make much sense when you can just
send them blueprints for a way to talk.
This of course assumes they have something
better than radio.
And by better again we could mean directed
lasers, but what people usually mean is Faster
Than Light communication.
Now we’ve got a series focusing on that
subject, and there are some ways it might
maybe be possible, but the current thinking
is that it is not, and it really only makes
thing worse if it is.
Faster than Light Travel or communication
comes up a lot with the Fermi Paradox and
it pretty much only ever makes it worse.
If you can leap from star to star in days
not years, or instantly, besides being able
to visit or colonize places very easily you
can also just dump local satellites near inhabited
planets chirping out a hello and instructions
for how to contact them if you want to.
And you might think deploying a satellite
around every star in the galaxy, or just the
ones you’ve noticed have advanced life on
them, is a hard task, but when we’re talking
advanced civilizations it would barely count
as a minor budgetary item.
I haven’t mentioned the Kardashev Scale
yet, I don’t actually likely it as scale
because it very narrow spectrum and all about
energy, but it’s a popular term for describing
high tech civilizations.
We would rate as about a .8 or .9 on the scale,
if we used all our planets energy we’d be
a 1, if we used our whole sun’s energy,
like with a Dyson Sphere, we’d be 2, and
using a whole galaxy’s power output gets
you a 3.
A Kardashev 2, or K2, civilization, even with
just our level of tech, could easily build
a transmitter that you could pick up on your
car radio and could churn out a trillion satellites
like a G20 country could produce a box of
pencils.
A K2 civilization is usually assumed to have
about a billion to a trillion times as many
people as us, and a K3 about the same to them.
Meaning a K2 civilization could also devote
a hundred astronomers to watching each and
every star in their own galaxy and still only
use about one millionth of their population
doing it.
The United states, population 320 million,
employs more than 320 astronomers, it’s
actually about 20 times higher, at 7000.
We usually assume advanced civilizations can
devote more people proportionally to scholastic
pursuits too.
That’s worth remembering when we get to
Category 2D, aliens hide, when we contemplate
that anyone trying to hide from a K2+ civilization
knows that not even including any technological
advantage they have, they’re trying to hide
from people who can casually devote several
thousand times the entire human population
to full time searching and still have such
a small portion of their population performing
this task that most of their own people will
never have met someone who does that job.
So the strength of category 2A is basically
that it plays to our ignorance.
We don’t know much about the Universe yet
so it isn’t outrageous to think we don’t
know how the grown ups like to talk and they
can’t be bothered to talk to us, and again
it doesn’t exclude that life might still
be pretty uncommon too.
The weakness is just that, we’re not that
ignorant, and we do actually like to talk
to people who are, exactly because we do not
think ignorance on a given subject equates
to stupidity.
We highly value knowledge and talking with
others, that could easily be a pair of traits
which are exclusive for space faring since
a value for knowledge and sharing and conversation
would seem pretty important to developing
technology.
Again we’ll discuss the notion that they
feel morally obliged not to talk to us in
the Miscellaneous category but the notion
that they wouldn’t find us interesting enough
to talk to when it would be at most a miniscule
inconvenience just doesn’t hold water, though
we’ll look at it a bit more in 2C.
Before that we’ve got 2B, there just hasn’t
been enough time for us to hear them yet.
Now fundamentally this is the SETI Institute
line of reasoning.
Aliens aren’t very common, probably not
expansionist into space, and probably don’t
go to huge efforts to talk loudly.
This is a very strong line of reasoning especially
if you tend to tilt toward category 1C, that
civilizations don’t last long or expand.
It also assumes Faster Than Light travel isn’t
very likely.
Light takes a long to get anywhere and signal
strength falls of with the inverse square
of distance, double the distance, quarter
the signal strength, ten times the distance,
a hundredth the strength.
It’s also temporary, only on while transmitting
plus light lag.
It’s like detecting wave from dropping pebbles
on the far side of a large pond.
You need to be looking closely at the right
place at the right time to spot them.
I said a couple minutes ago that anyone who
wanted to be heard could be heard galaxies
away, but I’m assuming someone who has past
the Kardashev-1 stage of things.
A transmitter that can be easily heard across
an entire galaxy takes absurd amounts of power,
tiny for a K2 civilization and infinitesimal
for a K3 but a lot compared to what we use
nowadays.
You have to be around long enough to have
an established infrastructure in outer space
to do stuff like this.
If everyone is only transmitting at the megawatt
scale and only for a few centuries each you
could easily have millions of species popping
up to our tech level, transmitting for a few
centuries then dying off before building anything
bigger or talking long enough for someone
else nearby to pop up and hear them.
The Hart Conjecture, and Hart-Tipler Conjecture,
which we talked about more in the Dyson Dilemma,
thud into this by arguing that it should be
possible to expand out into space and that
aliens will generally want to.
If both are true Category 2B gets blown out
of the water.
Civilizations last a long time, indefinitely,
and can absolutely talk loudly enough to be
heard.
So 2B is a good solution if you tilt toward
the category 1C line of thinking but want
to add on.
Now there’s a non-scientific but valid argument
against SETI out of this too, which basically
argues that if every civilization ends up
sitting around its own world till it dies,
why would we even want to hear from them?
That’s not an argument against it being
true, but it is an argument against operating
as though it was, since not only can they
not give you any useful information on avoiding
your own self-destruction if it inevitably
happens to everyone, but listening to them
could easily bring it about that much sooner
when we pick up from them how to make some
sort of really great technology, on the surface,
that results in inevitable destruction when
employed.
Often called Honeypot or Suicide Pact technology
I discussed this in the Apocalypse How Video
in more detail.
Now category 2C is the idea that aliens can
talk to us, have no moral objection to doing
so, but simply don’t want to.
They have no reason to so don’t go to the
effort.
I’d argue this doesn’t work too well because
it would seem weird any alien civilization,
let alone every member of every civilization,
don’t feel like talking to us.
The usual analogy is that they look down on
us like we do to ants.
But that’s bad analogy considering we spend
tons of money and research time studying ants
and would talk to them if we could, and we
talk to our pets all the time.
And why would anyone stop someone who wanted
to talk to technological primitives anyway?
I mean we don’t encourage people to talk
to their goldfish but we never ban it, since
there’s no threat to us from them doing
so.
We are not afraid of goldfish, and advanced
civilizations couldn’t plausibly be afraid
of us.
Now the other line of reasoning is that they
just don’t value anything we have.
That’s plausible from a purely rational
line of reasoning, we can’t offer them better
technology after all, but again it’s hard
to imagine curiosity is a rare trait in spacefaring
cultures.
It might not be exclusive, no high technology
without curiosity, but uncommon?
Not likely, and again with such things it
doesn’t matter if some do it, it matters
that some don’t.
A race, even most alien races, might be incredibly
indifferent to primitive alien art and culture,
but it’s hard to imagine there’s no anthropologists
except the ones who live on earth.
So I usually consider 2C a very weak Fermi
Paradox Solution, and it’s not a popular
one in terms of being vocally defended but
it makes the list because it’s a common
kneejerk suggestion, they just don’t have
any reason to talk to us so they don’t.
And again the idea that they are morally opposed
to it, and therefore might stop anyone from
doing it, from talking to us, we’ll look
at in Category 4.
Here we mean simple indifference as a motive,
too much effort, not enough gain, no conversation,
and the weakness is that curiosity ought to
be a common trait in technological civilizations,
so a massive lack of it would be strange.
It also has the issue that it ignores that
active communication isn’t our only way
to detect people, technological civilizations
leave a lot of fingerprints lying around too,
which is very important to the next category.
Category 2D is the idea that they do have
a very strong reason for hiding from us and
everyone else too.
This is a very strong argument from a strictly
biological standpoint but breakdown strategically.
The reasoning goes like this.
Nothing, nothing, not one single thing that
claws its way up Darwin’s ladder is a wimp
or idiot or indifferent to their own survival.
If you’re walking around a dangerous park
late at night the last thing you want to do
is yell out “Hello, I’m weak and vulnerable,
is anybody here?”, and the last thing you
want to hear is “Yes, I’ll be right there”.
Space is a big dark forest, and we tend to
be worried about walking around being seen
and heard because something big and scary
might attack us.
And it doesn’t help that we also know that
one lone human walking around a forest at
night can walk with confidence knowing they
are the scariest, most dangerous thing in
those woods.
Our minds, combined with our technology from
having those minds, makes us super-predators
if we want to be, and that will be true for
every other species.
So it isn’t hard to imagine one that’s
older and nastier might be hanging around
listening and waiting to pounce.
Maybe they hate all other aliens on principle,
maybe they just don’t want to share and
are ruthless.
Maybe they’ve racked up so many acts of
genocide that they feel they have to keep
doing it just to make sure no one ever gets
powerful enough to find out about their prior
crimes and hold them accountable.
Extrapolating from that, its not hard to reason
that whatever benefits you might get from
shouting out to the Universe hoping someone
will reply, when all appears silent, don’t
outweigh the risks of exposure.
This is the main argument against METI, also
called Active SETI, or Messaging Extraterrestrial
Intelligences.
Now what’s wrong with it?
Well basically that technological species
aren’t wimps or idiots, they will understand
strategy and silence isn’t a great one in
the long term.
Ask yourself what you would do if you were
a species hellbent on wiping out everyone
else.
I know what I’d do, I’d expand my civilization
like crazy to maximize my resources, infrastructure,
manpower, and research pool.
I’d push for a K2 civilization as fast as
possible because as I mentioned earlier I
could devote hundreds or even thousands of
people to studying every single solar system
for signs of life.
Even if I didn’t expand outside of my own
solar system for some reason, there is no
such thing as a K2 civilization that could
not detect us, as we are now, anywhere in
the galaxy, and kill us from there.
Just as you can build a transmitter powerful
enough to be heard across the galaxy on people’s
car radios, you can build a detector that
can pick up our transmissions.
You can also build a directed energy weapon,
a Nicoll-Dyson Beam, able to blast whole planets
on the other side of the galaxy and keep flicking
that beam from world to world, hitting every
planet in the galaxy in less than geological
times.
Nor do you have to wait for radio, you just
burn any planet that looks like it might have
life.
This all assumes you aren’t just expanding
and taking those worlds as your own, which
would also seem the logical course of action.
It’s also very hard to hide if you decide
to do so.
You leave fingerprints, your heat signature
mostly, but without specifics the reasoning
would be like a bronze age civilization trying
to hide from us, they know they can’t, not
forever, and they know when we find them all
that effort they spent hiding could have been
better directed at building up their own size,
technology, and defenses.
Spreading out to be less vulnerable, that
sort of thing.
So when a civilization has been hiding and
not expanding when they could, spending uncountable
resources trying to hide better while doing
it, eventually someone will ask one of their
generals.
Probably a very good one too since such a
civilization would presumably value strategic
thinkers who could help them hide better.
And he will say ‘this is futile, it’s
been a million years we’ve been hiding and
we’ve seen and heard nothing, either no
one is out there or they are all cowering
like we are.
If someone wanted us dead they’d have had
us so by now.’
Only in fiction do technologically and numerically
superior enemies lose, especially if they
are passionately dedicated to killing their
enemy and don’t give a damn about collateral
damage.
So they stop hiding, and they get detected
by other people hiding, who make the same
decision and everyone starts talking.
But it wouldn’t take a million years, we
already know we’ve been detected by anyone
with the desire to see us and close enough
to care, and strong enough to hurt us, so
we will never operate with the intention of
hiding if it costs us anything, even just
missed opportunities, because its wasted effort.
That’s category 2D, aliens hide because
they’re afraid of bigger predators.
The big counterargument isn’t that they
shouldn’t be because no one might have malicious
intent, but rather that they shouldn’t bother
because if anyone does hiding won’t help
you.
And that closes out category 2.
The individual strengths vary but the key
weakness is the same, it relies too heavily
on people’s motivations and frequently breaks
down when those lines are shown to be either
logically flawed or violate the concept of
Exclusivity by requiring behavior we have
to reason to think would be present in all
technological civilizations.
Category 3 revolves around the notion that
aliens exist but we can’t recognize them.
And again I use the word recognize here in
multiple senses, and also again we have 4
sub-categories.
Category 3A: Aliens walk among us but hide
themselves
Category 3B: Aliens used to walk among us,
and helped us develop civilization
Category 3C: Aliens walk among us, don’t
hide, but are so alien we literally don’t
recognize them
Category 3D: Aliens walk among us because
we are aliens ourselves.
Category 3A requires little explanation, in
fact we’ll be flying through category 3
pretty fast compared to the last two.
There’s no way you’re alive today and
have access to Youube without having seen
a hundred fictional examples of this and many
people believe aliens walk among us.
I’ve better things to do with my time that
ridicule that belief, and it wouldn’t be
fair to either, since unlike the other categories
that so far have no proof or evidence either,
this one actually does.
The problem of course is that we don’t believe
that evidence is valid.
There’s tons of evidence for ghost and pixies
and goblins too.
But hard scientific evidence is lacking, and
while it also is for the other categories
they suffer from not being able to gather
much evidence yet, whereas evidence for 3A,
aliens among us, is lacking while it all takes
place on the one spot in the Universe we actually
can monitor and collect evidence from easily.
Proving there’s an elephant or 900 pound
gorilla in my living room is a lot easier
than proving there’s one somewhere on the
entire continent of Africa.
The usual line of reasoning though is that
government covers it up, and this was real
popular in the 90’s.
It’s kind of hard to imagine that every
government conspires together to do this especially
considering how crappy governments tend to
be at keeping secrets.
Now of course the conspiracy minded tend to
think otherwise, and I obviously won’t sway
them, but I also ask you to consider motive.
I could give you a laundry list of reasons
why no aliens need to hide among us if they
have malicious intent, beginning with the
simple fact that an interstellar capable species
could flatten us like a bug, but I can’t
think of any benign reason besides anthropology
that they’d hang out here secretly and I
wouldn’t think they’d chat with our government
about it or feel a need to abduct people and
perform proctology exams on them.
Category 3B is the notion that aliens used
to hang out here, usually pretending to be
gods and helping us get started.
Ancient Alien Astronauts, this was a concept
popularized by the 1968 book Chariot of the
Gods, and it’s a very popular notion.
Tons and tons of fiction, often very good
fiction too, revolves around this idea.
But the problem is the evidence presented
always involves things that we know our ancestors
could have built.
Contrary to popular belief we know and have
known for a long while how to build the pyramids
using that era of technology.
We never thought it was impossible and the
debate was over which of several possible
methods they would have used.
Great stuff too, it’s frankly amazing how
innovative our ancestors were with their ancient
monolith building and a subject I’d encourage
you to read up on.
That’s probably why this category rubs me
personally the wrong way too.
I dislike the notion of stealing away our
ancestor’s accomplishments and dismissing
them as stupid primitives by saying they needed
external help from aliens.
But that’s a matter of opinion and bias
I suppose.
Evidence-wise there’s two problems.
First is that none of those things require
advanced technology, there’s no lighthouse
kicking around from 2000 BC powered by a passive
nuclear reactor for instance.
Second you always have to wonder where they
went.
Now civilizations do often die out, but only
kind of, they get replaced.
Rome may have fallen, but the Roman Empire
trucked on in the East for centuries and fell
to another Empire when it did go down, and
in the meantime Rome rapidly recovered and
remained a political, cultural, and religious
influence of the highest degree all the way
up to today.
When we say a civilization falls, we don’t
mean its whole populace and influence disappeared.
Usually it just divided up, moved its capital,
dropped to second tier status, resurged later
with modified territory and culture, that
sort of thing.
So where are these ancient aliens now?
One possible answer, that they’ve ascended
to a higher plane of existence as it were,
we’ll look at in Category 4.
Category 3C takes a different direction.
It considers the possibility that the aliens
are so alien that we just don’t even realize
they exist, or exist as intelligent entities
anyway, and possibly they have the same problem
with us.
The very alien is an interesting line of reasoning,
and played with humorously in Terry Bisson’s
short story “They’re made out of meat”.
Giving serious examples of the ultra alien
is obviously tricky, and that’s one of the
weaknesses of this category.
When we posit, for example, an intelligent
tree, we can easily picture how we can’t
see it or it us, as intelligent creatures.
The problem is when we examine the notion
of an intelligent tree we not only have to
deal with how improbable an evolutionary development
that is but also how we probably would be
able to realize it was intelligent.
If its mobile, either able to pick up and
move or stays rooted but can swing its arms,
we ought to notice that and would certainly
notice physical structures inside the wood
indicating that.
If it isn’t, why would it evolve a brain?
Brains are expensive after all, and start
off as crude nervous systems to react and
move.
Evolution doesn’t encourage useless organs.
The strength of 3C is that is simply isn’t
disprovable, the weakness is that it’s pretty
much impossible to usefully discuss.
It’s one of those ‘how can we know for
sure?’ or ‘anything is possible’ arguments
that isn’t exactly wrong so much as just
sort of futile to discuss as anything more
than a thought experiment.
Category 3D is our last one before getting
into the miscellaneous material, and it raises
the idea that we ourselves might be alien
in origin.
In this context I’m not talking about Panspermia
in the sense of basic life originating in
comets or the Oort Cloud and raining down
on Early Earth, but the notion that intelligent
life actually made humans, either directly
or by starting life on Earth.
Very popular notion in fiction, and a fun
one, but it has some obvious problems.
Like Ancient Astronauts you have to wonder
where they went, and if we’re talking about
just humans, then you have to wonder why our
DNA is so like everything else’s.
Sometimes the reasoning will be that we’re
just an abandoned colony of a falling civilization
that turned primitive, sometimes they just
stopped by and gene-tweaked our ancestors
to be smarter.
As usual, there’s the whole lack of evidence
thing, but the notion has some strengths,
you could terraform a primitive world just
by sneezing or emptying your septic tank on
your space ship.
Even our bacteria are quite sophisticated
compared to primitive ones and would probably
get the upper hand there and replace things.
The specific weakness though is that it establishes
that aliens are prone to expansion and capable
of it, yet nobody is out doing it.
Most Fermi Paradox solutions that don’t
revolve around intelligent life being rare
to begin with usually need to explain why
aliens can’t or won’t expand and colonize
all over the place, this one begins by saying
they did.
So what changed?
Why did they stop and why hasn’t anyone
picked up where they left off since?
Summarizing Category 3 we see the big shared
weakness is fundamentally the lack of evidence,
and again the lack of evidence from the one
place in the Universe we can most easily gather
it.
Theories revolving around evidence that is
hard or impossible to get deserve a bit more
credence then one’s that make it easy to
get but still lacks it.
Now for those of you still here and awake
we get to move on to the Miscellaneous category.
I promised myself I’d keep this video shorter
than the original, especially with so many
supplemental videos I could forward people
onto for more detailed explanations thus letting
me skim some topics, but even though I repeatedly
and energetically trimmed material from the
script I see that is going to be a broken
promise.
So here they are:
Category 4A: The Zoo Hypothesis, Quarantine,
and the Prime Directive
They specifically hide from us or primitive
cultures in general, for various reasons,
as opposed to category 2D where they hide
from everyone.
Category 4B: Interdiction
A variation on 4B, where civilizations agree
not to expand or expand beyond a certain point.
Category 4C: Self-Quarantine
Species actively keep to themselves for fear
of contagion
Category 4D: Living Civilizations are very
recent
Living being the focus there, this is the
category for cyclical extinction or a very
recent galactic wide extinction.
Category 4E: Ascension
Aliens reach point where they just leave the
mortal coil behind
Category 4F: Civilizations reach Technological
Singularity
Civilizations convert totally to the post-biological
state and end as super-advanced and super-powerful
computers
Category 4G: Rim Migration
Civilizations eventually migrate to the colder
outer areas of the galaxy
Category 4H: Black Hole Farmers
Like Rim Migration, a notion that has to do
with concentrating your civilization where
you can get the most bang for your buck.
Those who have seen the original video will
notice some changes and removals, there’s
a couple add ons or modifications, and a couple
removals because I didn’t feel they really
had anything but humor value.
There’s also three general themes in category
4, one being that civilizations move on, another
that they have rules for dealing with each
other that prevent contact, and the third
being that they getting destroyed.
We’ll save the first for last, because I
feel like the concept of civilizations moving
on is a nice way to end the video.
Category 4A, generally known as the Zoo Hypothesis,
is very like Quarantine and the Prime Directive
in that it holds that alien civilizations
have a motive for keeping us in particular
or low-tech civilizations in general, in the
darkabout their existence.
Those motives can vary, for instance in Zoo
Hypothesis that can be anything from not wanting
to interfere in our natural development to
using us for entertainment, or both, there’s
no reason you can’t enjoy watching a primitive
culture just because you want to keep it safe.
Alternatively Quarantine holds that their
motive is that want they to keep everyone
safe from us.
The Prime Directive variant is that they aren’t
actively hiding they just refuse to show themselves
until we reach a certain level of technological
or cultural development.
Now Zoo Hypothesis is a bit hard to dismiss
when it holds to them faking us out with for
instance a big TV-screen around our planet
or solar system, but that’s much the same
as the Simulation Hypothesis I mentioned way
back in Category 1D and you can look at that
notion in more detail that video.
Specific to the Zoo Hypothesis though is the
criticism that since we derive the entire
Fermi Paradox in the first place from seeing
how big the Universe is, if that image is
fake it sorts of challenges the core concepts
of science we derive the Paradox from.
Quarantine, that they’re afraid of us, suffers
from just not making much sense.
Usually it means they’re afraid we’ll
infect their culture with our violent ways,
I’m not really sure how to argue that since
it implies advanced civilizations are made
up of a bunch of wimps with no moral backbone.
I’m not afraid teaching kids about some
of our nastier cultures that were into human
sacrifice or genocide is going to turn them
into ax crazy murderers, and I have problems
thinking any advanced civilization, let alone
all of them, would be afraid of inheriting
our violent ways.
Now the Prime Directive is a tricky one, mostly
because people are very passionate about the
subject.
It’s dead on arrival normally from Exclusivity,
we have no reason to think every civilization
would think you shouldn’t talk to primitives,
quite to the contrary, and we especially have
no reason to think every member of every species
would obey this, and it really only takes
one person to break the silence.
Category 4B: Interdiction
The notion here is very like the last category
in effect but different in motivation.
Expansion isn’t rampant because species
agree to large buffer zones, and they don’t
talk to other low-tech races because they’ve
agreed not to on the grounds that they don’t
want their potential rivals or enemies poisoning
the primitives’ minds about them, and they
generally think conflict is best avoided by
avoidance.
Stay away from aliens, you can never entirely
get them and its easier to get along with
minimal contact.
Everyone agree to keep themselves pretty small
so nobody has a motive nor ability to go to
war.
This one doesn’t assume any particularly
motivation besides caution, which doesn’t
violate Exclusivity since we can assume that
like curiosity caution is a trait probably
shared by all technological civilizations.
There’s also a good reason to enforce it,
and it’s easier to enforce it with all that
buffer space.
Now it still got its problems, same as the
others we just covered, but they aren’t
as strong.
You still have the issue of newly emerged
spacefarers getting angry nobody gave them
technology but the counterargument seems a
little bit less smug maybe.
We agreed to this treaty, its been around
for a very long time, before us, and even
if we didn’t think it was a good idea we
do want to suffer the consequences of violating
it.
This rubs some folks the wrong way because
they figure we ought to be able to talk to
anyone, be friends with everyone, but Interdict
doesn’t say you can’t chat a bit, just
that its kept distant and minimal, and realistically
getting along and tolerating other cultures
is one of our culture ideals that isn’t
too grounded in reality.
We share common culture and biology, but still
have a lot cultural traits and traditions
that infuriate or disgust each other.
And that’s not ne4cessarily wrong.
I don’t want to go to war with a civilization
that thinks you should deal with overpopulation
by killing off anyone who doesn’t get on
the honor roll as a kid, and a lot of aliens
that give birth to litters might have developed
that habit and kept to it long before some
form of birth control was invented.
I don’t really want to be good friends with
them either, and it’s much easier to stay
away from conflict by just staying far away.
I don’t think Interdiction stands up to
scrutiny but I think its on stronger footing
than the Zoo Hypothesis notion or Quarantine.
Now Category 4C is Self-Quarantine.
This is where you isolate yourself, and it’s
like 2D, hiding, except you’re not actually
hiding.
You keep to yourself, warn others to stay
away, and don’t permit much outward expansion
of your own civilization because you don’t
want mutant strains of your civilization popping
up as possible threats.
I talked in the Dyson Dilemma about all the
problems trying to keep your own people from
spreading out but it is fundamentally doable.
Spaceships by and large are not small or subtle,
it would tend to be pretty obvious when someone
was building one and very obvious when they
start flying off.
The Weakness here is the obvious one, Exclusivity.
We’ve no reason to think every civilization
would act like this.
But it also has another problem.
If you want to keep to yourself this doesn’t
mean you’re super-quiet.
If I want people to stay away from me I leave
No Trespassing signs around, animals mark
their territory too.
So you’d expect big beacons saying ‘Hi,
stay away from our stuff, we’re not hostile
but we like our privacy and are armed to the
teeth, for urgent or vital diplomatic matters
please contact us at 867-5309.’
Total silence isn’t a great idea if you
want to be left alone, because people will
blunder in unknowingly or out of curiosity,
and if you blow them up you haven’t got
much moral ground to stand on when your neighboring
civilizations find out you’ve killed their
citizens.
If you want to be left alone, it pays to very
loud about telling others that, not the other
way around.
4D is the notion that civilizations just popped
up recently, and not in the ‘life has only
been possible for the last billion years’
way.
Usually this implies either coincidentally
a major calamity or war just happened and
we missed it, or someone comes by killing
civilizations every so often.
Popular idea in fiction, they used in the
TV show Babylon 5, and they used it in the
video game series Mass Effect, and plenty
of others.
Unfortunately coming up with a motive for
why this is done never makes much sense, ask
a lot of Mass Effect fans how they feel about
the end of the third game for an example.
Great for fiction, the idea of an ancient
evil predator periodically arising to consume
us appeals to our natural fear of predators.
Bad for science.
If you just want to wipe out every single
life form in the galaxy, you can get it done
a lot easier and keep it done.
That implies someone is harvesting or culling
folks.
They obviously aren’t literally eating us
or enslaving us, and if they just want our
culture or memories that can be obtained without
genocide.
The other issue is that the Universe doesn’t
stop at the edge of our galaxy.
If ours had these, well let’s just call
them Reapers, show up first on the scene,
they are obviously not a true K3 civilization.
So a galaxy where a K3 did pop up could come
blasting in here and smear the galaxy with
them.
And while we tend to think of the gulf between
galaxies as vast and empty, galaxies are very
close to each other relatively speaking, more
like continents then tiny little islands separated
by thousands of miles of ocean like solar
systems are.
There’s tons of stars between galaxies,
possibly more than in galaxies, and while
they are spread out and probably don’t have
a lot rocky planets, they still make an easy
bridgehead between galaxies even if you don’t
have faster than light technology.
So at that point you hit Exclusivity, because
you wouldn’t expect every galaxy to develop
these Reapers with their bizarre and seemingly
illogical motives.
Category 4E, Ascension, is the first of what
I think of as the sort of Eschatological solutions.
A staple of science fiction is that we eventually
evolve into beings of pure energy or ascend
to higher planes of existence.
From a Fermi Paradox solution standpoint this
actually works just fine so long as it is
happening to every race and all its members
and before they spread out much.
That’s the strength of the next category
actually, which looks at it more from a technological
perspective.
Now ascension has two big problems.
First, we have no idea if such a thing is
possible, it basically requires tossing all
known science out the window, and honestly
it always smack was too much of New Age religion
to me.
Which if that’s your thing, hey, great,
but this also only works as a Fermi Paradox
solution if they divorce themselves from the
Universe, which also always seems weird to
me.
I mean from a fiction standpoint you kinda
have to have them do that, stories don’t
work well when demigods hang around constantly
able to fix all problems with a snap of their
fingers, but fiction isn’t science and that’s
why.
Writers, even excluding their own biases or
lack of expertise on a givensubject, have
to create a story that is interesting, we
don’t care if it sacrifices some realism
to achieve that.
But good stories don’t make for good science
just because they’re thoughtful or fascinating
tales.
Second we can’t be sure they’d all do
it, and in fact you’d expect they wouldn’t.
The Amish are one of many groups that generally
speaking aren’t too sanguine on technology,
and I doubt that will change overall down
the centuries.
I can’t see us ever pointing guns at our
splinter cultures that reject the main culture
or technology and forcing them to convert,
and you’d actually expect a lot of these
to be among the first to head out to colonize
other stars.
So civilizations prone to ascension might
just have a constant expanding wave of those
rejecting it and those accepting it.
Same problem with Category 4F, Technological
singularities, but these frequently are envisioned
as occurring very near term, not distant future.
We’ll examining the concept in the Transhumanism
and Immortality video but the strength is
that its not requiring any break with known
physics, it’s basically the idea of replacing
your civilization with technological supermen
or one super-massive mega-computer.
As we discussed in the Dyson Dilemma, so long
as it keeps a desire to survive and needs
resources present in this Universe to do it,
this whole category is basically irrelevant
to the Fermi Paradox.
Doesn’t matter if supermen replace us, anymore
than us replacing Neanderthals, as far as
the Fermi Paradox is concerned except that
they ought to be way better at expanding if
they want to, and again as we discussed in
the companion video, they probably would.
We also addressed the notion of people hiding
in virtual realities or digital existences
there and will look at that more in the Simulation
Hypothesis and Transhumanism videos
Category 4G: Rim Migration, is actually an
extension on technological singularities.
Once you’ve gone post-biological and basically
run on energy and data it helps to be somewhere
that is cold.
There’s an absolute minimum energy needed
to erase a digit, to perform the most basic
calculation, and it depends on the Temperature.
Space isn’t actually very cold, that’s
a source of confusion for a lot of people,
but the depths of interstellar space are a
lot colder than wherever you’re sitting
right now.
Yet it still isn’t as cold as intergalactic
space.
The coldest anywhere right now is 2.7 Kelvin,
about a hundredth of the temperature water
freezes at, because space is constantly saturated
by the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation.
Can’t get away from it.
But inside a galaxy it’s a lot hotter because
there’s all that ambient light and dust
and so on keeping it a bit warmer.
So we often figure giant computer minds move
themselves out to the galactic rim where they
can get plenty of hydrogen still to fuel themselves
but can run more efficiently.
The flaw is the obvious one, even if everyone
does this long before going interstellar,
becomes a huge computer I mean, group sharing
the computer or single overmind, you still
have to make the trip.
Now you can move a whole star, we talk about
that in the Megastructure video Shkadov Thrusters,
but that’s not a quiet process, and your
thrust is pointing in toward the galaxy so
you’re quite visible.
You’d also wonder why they are bothering
while there’s still a galaxy to harvest.
I mean sure, efficiency is great but which
is better, one star you get maximum efficiency
off of, once you spend all the time and energy
moving it out to the rim or getting out there
and using one already there, or several billion
stars each of which you get maybe half the
computation off of.
All much closer to hand too.
Category 4H: Black Hole Farmers, wow, last
category, okay, here we go.
We’ve talked before about using black holes
as power sources but we meant small artificial
ones.
This time we mean big ones, and its less of
a Fermi Paradox solution then a sort of final
scenario for when all the stars burn out.
This is sort of an extension off Rim Migration
in that it revolves around getting the most
computation you can off single drop of energy.
Not just computation either, thermodynamics
always involves getting your most efficiency
when you’re moving from hottest to coldest.
We talked in that video about how Black Holes
are thought to slowly evaporate by Hawking
Radiation, those we small black holes though,
ones vastly smaller than any we expect to
exist.
Naturally occurring ones are far too massive
to evaporate right now, they gain mass simply
by absorbing Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation
since they emit less Hawking Radiation then
they absorb by that.
Only black holes with a total mass less than
our moon actually radiate more energy then
they take in from the CMBR, and those are
several million times less massive then naturally
occurring black holes.
One day, a long long long time from now when
all the stars have burned out the Universe
will have cooled down enough that those big
natural black holes will emit more energy
than they take in, and that will probably
be the final and longest phase of life in
this universe.
Civilizations will huddle around these black
holes slowly drinking in the energy, which
is very small but super efficient, creeping
along very slowly but for a total duration
that would regard the entire history of our
universe like an eyeblink.
And if you’re digital, and you run on computer
power, who cares how long passes in real time
for you to have a conversation?
Only your subjective time matters.
These sorts of black hole are very easy to
find or make, and it would not be strange
for civilizations to stockpile resources by
dumping hydrogen right into black holes, you
could use the gravity pulling them in to power
your civilization pretty well too.
Now why this doesn’t make a great Fermi
Paradox solution is that it should be pretty
obvious someone is doing it, and even though
you’re planning for the ultra long term
patience is not a virtue here.
Every second suns burn on is energy wasted
for you, never to be recovered, its also whole
galaxies drifting away far beyond where you’ll
ever be able to reach them to harvest.
But I get asked a lot where I think civilization
will eventually go and I tend to figure its
probably this.
Eventually you can’t live on sunlight anymore
and you farm black holes instead.
It seems like a real dark and cold existence
but in reality it would probably be incredibly
vibrant.
We talk about that more down the road once
we’ve looked at some other subjects.
These kind of final civilizations can keep
existing for truly immense stretches of time,
but of course nothing lasts for ever and everything
eventually comes to an end.
And on that note I think that’s where we’ll
wrap up for now.
Wow.
New record for video length.
For those of you still here and awake, thanks
for tuning in.
Questions and comment are always welcome and
if you still have the energy for it, try out
some of these other videos.
If you enjoyed the video, hit the like button,
share this video with others, and subscribe
to the channel for alerts about new videos.
As always, thanks for watching, and we’ll
see you next time!
