We often fly through thin air to get to places 
faster, but in the future we might travel  
through no air at all, even here under the sky.
So today we’ll be looking at the concept of the  
vacuum train, which is a very large category 
of vehicles for use on and off planets,  
including one designed for getting off planets 
like a mass driver, and more recently a strangely  
controversial subject. I’m assuming some of 
this is because of Elon Musk’s Hyperloop, and  
all sorts of videos pointing out real or perceived 
engineering or economic issues with the design or  
its planned implementation along with rebuttals.
I’m going to preface this video by noting that  
the Hyperloop is one type of vacuum-train, 
indeed one running on very low-pressure  
rather than a full vacuum, and there 
are many designs for many purposes,  
both of hyperloops and of the wider category of 
vacuum trains, along with pneumatic options like  
scaled up versions of the message tube systems 
a lot of office buildings or banks have. Some,  
like the gravity train, aim to move objects 
around a large body with virtually no energy  
expended. Some are akin to the Hyperloop while 
others are meant to run around planetary-scale  
megastructures at near orbital speeds.
There are a lot of points of overlap  
in basic function with the Hyperloop so we will 
address some of the common concerns raised about  
that where it is relevant. And I should emphasize 
that some of those are quite legitimate concerns,  
though others are less so, and none of those 
criticisms or rebuttals gain or lose validity  
based on whether or not Elon Musk suggested 
building it. There’s around a dozen startups  
that were seriously looking at the Hyperloop, 
and it's back in the news because one of those,  
Hyperloop One, shut down recently, and until 
last year it was called Virgin Hyperloop and  
had Richard Branson as a backer rather than 
Musk, so a different space mogul entirely.  
Also the core concept of vacuum trains is over 
a century old, and atmospheric or pneumatically  
propelled railways even older, and it has 
collected many problems and concerns as a  
concept in that period along with many solutions.
The first and most obvious is in the name, vacuum,  
because the biggest limitation on speed and 
guzzler of fuel is shoving your transport  
through the air or water. In the absence of 
friction or drag, once you got your car up  
to speed on a freeway, other than slowing going 
uphill a bit and speeding up on the way down, it  
would stay the same speed the whole time and need 
no more fuel. An object in motion stays in motion,  
and at rest stays at rest, unless acted upon by 
an outward force. This is Newton’s first law of  
motion and the reason why you don’t need cruise 
control in space. You only burn fuel to speed up,  
slow down, or tweak your trajectory.
If Earth were airless, ignoring that  
your car’s combustion engine wouldn’t 
work or would need to carry an oxidizer,  
your mileage would more than double, as generally 
speaking you have a bit more drag than rolling  
resistance on a road. We can lower that ground 
resistance a lot too, especially on a rail system,  
where we aren’t worrying about the vehicle 
needing to rapidly stop or change lanes or  
skid on ice. Friction with a road surface costs 
fuel but adds safety in maneuvering and reaction. 
What’s more, air drag generally rises with the 
square of velocity, so if we try to go 10 times  
faster, we are getting 10-squared or 100 times 
the drag, and things are getting even worse as  
we hit the sound barrier, which is why we mostly 
try not to. We can cheat in a tunnel though,  
by lowering the air pressure or by moving 
that air the same direction we want to go,  
like being carried along by water in a 
pipe, in which case the dynamics change. 
Never try to think of any vacuum train as being 
in true vacuum – as we discussed in zero point and  
vacuum energy last year, that doesn’t exist and 
honestly even near-vacuum isn’t worth obtaining  
in general. Never think of them as zero energy 
either, you will always have some sort of friction  
and for this same reason, don’t assume one 
running around outside of a space megastructure  
like a Ringworld or Topopolis is going to be 
moving at near-light speeds or even close. 
Their functionality is a lot like that of better 
roads. We figure out the economics based on if the  
fuel savings from using an improved roadway 
exceed the cost to make and maintain it,  
and combine that with the time savings. Time 
cost or opportunity cost can’t be ignored,  
if I can get somewhere faster I can get more 
done. Though we don’t want to assume someone  
making forty dollars per hour driving an hour 
into work who can commute in one hour each way,  
and cuts that down to one hour for the round 
trip, is truly saving forty bucks a day or  
losing an hour by not doing so. Your transport 
time can be productive for work or relaxation,  
audiobooks come to mind, and all the more so 
as we move into an era of automated driving,  
though that’s been common with trains and planes 
for a long time. You relax and nap or read a book  
or the paper while stuffing yourself into a 
small seat and hoping that the toddler sitting  
in the row next to you is feeling sleepy.
This is not an episode on the merits of  
self-driving cars or mass transit, but we need to 
be mindful that the raw engineering numbers never  
tell the whole story and that as a result, that 
story can turn out to be very different depending  
on additional circumstances. Any minor new and 
seemingly unrelated invention or even cultural  
change in how transport or commuting is viewed 
can alter the future of any of these systems. 
Realistically, the basic notion of a 
lower-pressure or vacuum transport system is  
not to save fuel at lower speeds, though that can 
be a powerful tool for mass cargo transport. It's  
more about permitting high-speed point-to-point 
transport between hubs and at speeds near or in  
excess of the sound barrier at normal pressure, 
this is the same reason planes fly so high, with  
less air drag. In a more distant hyper-efficient 
society it might be used for fuel-saving freight  
and in a post-scarcity environment it could 
manifest as underground vacuum tubes running  
right to an individual home. Indeed pneumatic 
tubes, which use air-pressure differences to push  
cargo in a pod, have been considered as an option 
to install to houses or individual apartments as  
a means of mail and package delivery, much 
as we often consider automated drones for  
that nowadays. A vacuum tube big enough for a 
passenger vehicle is obviously a big step up. 
Strictly speaking a pressure vessel underground 
isn’t using any more material than a driveway. It  
is more sophisticated to build and maintain, but 
we must not assume that to be a barrier forever.  
The lower floor of my house has radiant heat 
and carpet in my studio where I’m writing this,  
a bunch of little tubes carrying around hot water, 
which is pretty sophisticated compared to the dirt  
floor my not too distant ancestors had, and 
indeed even carpet is pretty sophisticated  
stuff in the absence of modern machinery.
In the context of large future societies  
where our numbers might have grown and real estate 
gotten to such a premium we build mega-skyscraper  
arcologies or artificial space habitats for 
more living space, the idea that those might  
have lots of local hubs or even individual 
connections to vacuum tunnels is not too hard  
to fathom. It may be costly to go underground to 
build transportation, if the alternative is to  
stay on the surface, but if you are building the 
arcology from scratch, you are building it anyway,  
same as your elevator shafts. Same goes for 
air, if your arcology is designed to be built  
anywhere on the planet from tropics to arctic, it 
probably has air pumped into to maintain desired  
air pressure and composition. In which case it is 
quite easy just not to pump it into some tunnels. 
I should also note that one of the challenges I’ve 
heard about hyperloops is that we can’t build a  
tube that wide that has different pressure. 
As mentioned, there are legit hurdles and  
objections to these sorts of systems but this is 
not truly one of them. It is a serious engineering  
challenge to do it economically and we won’t dip 
into that today, as others have discussed it more,  
but I’ve seen a lot of folks on the internet imply 
it’s physically impossible. It is not, and for  
some current examples, for higher pressure within 
than without, we of course routinely do that with  
pipelines, though routine does not mean easy.
For the other way around, lower pressure inside  
than out, that’s called a submarine, and they’re 
a lot wider and deal with a much larger pressure  
differential than some transport tubes. And 
while saying we’re going to run a tube at a  
thousandth of Earth normal pressure might sound 
impressive, remember that a tube with that inside  
and normal air outside requires no more strength 
than a tube sitting 10 meters under water would,  
with normal air pressure inside and two 
atmospheres of pressure in the water outside,  
and we do have a lot of structures that exist 
in far deeper and higher pressures situations. 
Again, this doesn't mean there aren’t engineering 
challenges involved in trying to build a  
thousand mile long tube under pressure that pods 
will be moving down at very high speed, all while  
that tube gets rained on or hit with a wind gust 
and is undergoing constant temperature variation  
to expand or contract. That’s why an actual 
vacuum train in space or one buried underground  
where there’s no weather or temperature changes 
is much easier, especially if you have a cheaper  
way to dig tunnels than we currently do. But 
there’s solutions for all of those problems,  
it’s just trying to find which one is best 
overall in cost, safety, and simplicity. 
As an example, there are concerns about the 
individual segments expanding thermally and that  
being a hard problem to solve, and that likewise 
is a well-understood problem in engineering that  
we can handle with expansion joints. And which 
requires tweaking to use in the actual vacuum  
of space where heat comes and goes only by 
radiation rather than convection or conduction,  
except conduction along that tube of course.
I should also note that while folks tend to  
visualize these as some clear glass cylindrical 
tube running above ground, it could just as easily  
be a wide arched tunnel underground with several 
rail lines running down it just like any other  
transport tunnel we build nowadays. I don’t want 
to be too blasé about that, things like airlocks  
are tricky and costly additions and you also need 
to run pressurized vessels inside these evacuated  
tubes so people don’t die on the trip.
We need to know what our ideal speed is  
before we decide the pressure inside the tube 
though, because while any drop in air pressure,  
or more accurately air density, is going to lower 
your air drag, the speed of sound drops a bit as  
pressure does too. That’s for air though, and 
I should note that Heliox, a mix of helium with  
some oxygen, is a popular suggestion for filling 
such tubes and we should be mindful that helium  
is super-abundant in the universe and our solar 
system, it just doesn’t like to hang around Earth.  
Big tankers from Jupiter or Saturn might deliver 
it here or to various other human habitats for  
such uses in a future interplanetary economy.
A helium filled tube is obviously not a vacuum  
tube, and if you are wondering, the reasoning 
is that you can run a Heliox tube at the same  
pressure as a normal air tube and have way less 
air drag. Helium also is chemically inert so you  
don’t have to worry about it corroding things 
or minimal leakage of it into your travel pods  
having any other effect on people beyond making 
their voice a bit higher. And your voice is higher  
in helium because the speed of sound is about 
three times higher in helium too, raising that  
sound barrier limitation. The frequency of your 
voice, or any wave, times the wavelength, equals  
the speed of waves in that medium and you can 
calculate any of those if you know the other two. 
It's a debatable point but I lean toward 
near-vacuum as better than filling things  
with other gasses, and of course that’s only when 
on a big planet with an atmosphere. On places  
like the Moon, which is airless, or MArs, with 
its very low air pressure, your vacuum tube is  
only a tube to keep dust from getting on your 
track and either messing up your low friction  
rail or damaging your maglev equipment, as it’s 
already vacuum or nearly so. On some planet with  
stronger gravity you might have significant helium 
still in the atmosphere and then it's cheap to  
use too. So it just depends on the location.
We assume this is fairly standard equipment  
for any orbital megastructures, especially big 
conglomerations of them that we often imagine  
for collections of O’Neill Cylinders and their 
associated or ancillary facilities. This might  
be a simple tether you ran down or it might be a 
tube, even in vacuum it can be good to have some  
protective layer between you and the void. You 
also need some mass to be pushing and pulling on  
so even if you have super strong tensile materials 
that can handle a train’s mass on a hair-thick  
tether it makes things easier to go thicker or 
have a tube to shove on. Though the more contact  
points you have, the more friction, which is 
why a magnetic field is preferable for that. 
So they’re valid options for space applications 
but they’re also good for getting into space. We  
touched on that application more in our episodes 
on Mass Drivers and Interplanetary Infrastructure,  
but the basic notion is that you can build a 
giant launch ramp into space using an evacuated  
tunnel that exits over the atmosphere, as 
we see with Star Tram’s design. A lot of  
folks prefer the engineering of a platform 
that begins and ends above the atmosphere,  
that you reach by tether or elevator, and that’s 
the launch mechanism used in the Lofstrom Loop,  
the Tethered Ring, and the Orbital Ring. This 
is also our default approach to them on places  
like Venus or Titan with very thick and dense 
atmospheres where a tube might float on balloons. 
Needless to say, if I can launch something up into 
space without rocket fuel, that’s a huge savings,  
assuming I can put enough traffic through that to 
justify the construction and maintenance costs.  
You will never get things into space for the 
actual kinetic energy they need to orbit there,  
but you can get a lot closer with this method. 
As an example, a person with a suitcase whose  
combined mass is 100 kilograms needs about 
3.2 billion joules of kinetic energy to orbit  
Earth. Which sounds like a lot but it’s 
about the same energy as in a year worth  
of the typical human diet, or a couple tanks of 
gasoline or half a barrel of crude oil. Whereas  
those modern big rockets blow through a million 
pounds worth of fuel per launch to get a few  
folks into orbit and not much more cargo up there.
A mass driver or vacuum train isn’t going to let  
you get yourself into orbit for one barrel of oil, 
which is trading as I write this for $78 a barrel,  
but it’s able to get you into orbit for that order 
of magnitude, so that flying to space costs in  
the same sort of fuel ranges as driving or flying 
across country. Which is why we contemplate these  
for ground transit as it means getting from one 
side of a continent to another faster than any  
plane can get you there and for less fuel than we 
get from ultra-efficient but slow freight trains,  
which themselves tend to do as good as 500 
miles per ton of cargo per gallon of fuel,  
and are an order of magnitude more efficient 
than even modern cars. So our vacuum train aims  
to do even better than that for fuel efficiency 
while outpacing a supersonic jet. This is the  
fundamental appeal to them and why the idea 
tends to have a lot of momentum in spite of  
the engineering and right-of-way issues. 
And I would say the right of way issue is  
the bigger of those two problems currently.
Now that gets us to the notion of a gravity  
train and the simple conceptual notion is to cut 
a hole right through the center of the planet  
and evacuate it so that if you dropped down it 
you’d accelerate on the way to the core and then  
decelerate as you rose up to the surface on the 
other side, all from gravity and needing no more  
fuel or energy than whatever was lost to friction.
Ignoring the issues with driving a tunnel through  
the center of your planet, which we discussed 
more in our episode Accessing Earth’s Core,  
Earth is actually one of the best places to make 
such a tunnel as it is the densest object we know  
of in this solar system and density controls 
your acceleration in vertical tunnels. The time  
it takes to fall, assuming a sphere of uniform 
density, is a formula that dates all the way  
back to Sir Isaac Newton and his original work on 
gravity, physics, and calculus. Needless to say,  
worlds are rarely of uniform density but it tends 
to give a decent approximation, and for the Earth  
that trips is about 40 minutes each way, or 
about 80 minutes to fall through a tunnel to  
the otherside of the planet then back to where you 
left, and a peak speed of 8 kilometers per second. 
Non-coincidentally it’s a travel time similar 
to one orbit around Earth at low altitude  
and with a near-identical peak speed. You are 
essentially on a high-eccentricity elliptical  
orbit, though one in which the mass pulling on 
you diminishes with radius, so don’t try to plug  
that into Kepler’s orbital equation. Alternatively 
on the Moon, with a radius of 1.7 million meters,  
around a quarter of ours, and a surface gravity 
of 1.6 m/s², that gives us a time of 3250 seconds,  
or 54 minutes, and in our episode Moon, Mega-City, 
we discuss this technology in more depth,  
pardon the pun, since it is easier to dig there. I 
think you wouldn’t just drop though under gravity,  
but opt to accelerate and decelerate 
magnetically on the journey to boost  
the effect of gravity. You may also be using this 
as a launching device to space on smaller bodies. 
That said, while that can work on smaller bodies 
like asteroids or moons, we really mean these to  
run on tangents through the skin of a planet, not 
through magma and a molten core. You can build a  
lot of speed up by dropping a single kilometer in 
a vacuum tube to run along a low friction track  
buried underground. In a vacuum it will take 
you about 14 seconds to drop a kilometer and  
you would have a speed of 140 meters per second or 
313 miles per hour at the bottom, which is quite  
respectable for traveling around the planet.
We have dug tunnels and mines a lot lower than  
that too, and we may opt to make such tunnels 
deeper, allowing a longer fall and thus faster  
travel, but you have to fall four times further 
to get twice the speed and nine times further  
to get thrice the speed, so there’s going to be a 
practical cutoff and probably at a less depth than  
we can actually go. We also can still accelerate 
in such a vacuum tunnel, we’re not limited to  
gravitational freebies, they just make it cheaper.
I think digging tunnels that deep is not going to  
be cheap itself but it might circumvent a lot of 
right-of-way issues trying to build on or near the  
surface. It’s not hard to imagine us having such 
tunnels all through various lower-gravity bodies  
where less effort is needed to hold that tunnel 
up or keep a vacuum on it. But as we discussed  
in Domes of Mars, superstrong materials 
like Diamond and Graphene are just carbon,  
a very abundant substance and indeed one more 
abundant in our atmosphere than we’d prefer,  
and we can make them in the lab and have discussed 
sequestering carbon by making such materials. So,  
we could easily have costs on mass-manufacturing 
them drop the way they did on steel or aluminum  
in the past, and then your equation for 
a lot of building projects shifts hugely. 
As such, on Earth it’s a bit harder to say 
if such tubes would ever be practical enough  
that we’d dig them everywhere. Realistically 
I think if we were making underground vacuum  
tunnels on Earth our focus would be on putting 
them wherever the engineering worked best, which  
would vary on location. Much like with highways 
and railroads, we can bend around as needed  
but try to keep it straight. That’s a lot more 
important for high-speed vehicles too, as your  
safe turning radius rises sharply with velocity.
I think you would want to dig well under whatever  
the common building depths were, which might 
mean hubs in cities dipped down quite a bit,  
while we might even run them just under the soil 
in some places or even over ground. I don't think  
we would care as much about the free energy to 
speed up because on a normal track there will  
still be some friction and on something like 
a maglev train over superconducting magnets,  
you can still do regenerative braking 
to pull some of that energy back. 
So the gravity train only works in a vacuum 
train context, otherwise you are still dumping  
in tons of energy to maintain speed, but that same 
setup makes the gravity aspect rather secondary,  
at least on Earth and for transport of people and 
parcels, because the lack of friction and need to  
constantly apply energy to maintain speed just so 
overwhelms the free speed up from falling down. 
Still, I could see mass freight being done 
this way and by deeper tunnels and ones that  
made use of thermocouples and the large 
temperature increase at greater depths to  
provide your power for maintaining that tunnel.
We can also imagine it for very high acceleration  
rates to launch objects where even a minimal 
curvature such as a planetary surface represents  
too sharp a turning radius. You might run a tunnel 
underground in a near-straight line from LA to an  
opening in the Atlantic Ocean that rises above 
the atmosphere where after 10,000 kilometers  
and a 10-g acceleration rate you are hitting 
space at 44 kilometers per second after just  
over seven minutes. Very much a nice and usable 
interplanetary speed. And we have lots of cargo  
that could handle a 100-gee acceleration 
and come out of that tunnel into space at  
140 kilometers per second, while raw materials 
like metal ores might easily handle 1000-gees  
and emerge at 440 kilometers per second. 
That is sufficient for interstellar travel,  
albeit the really slow kind we only contemplate 
for shipping of raw metals or other substances  
that time doesn’t take much of a toll on.
So as we can see, these are handy everywhere and  
whether or not you build them just depends on how 
cheap and sturdy you can make your infrastructure.  
It’s a no-brainer on megastructures simply 
because those only exist if the answer to  
the cheap and sturdy question is ‘yes, very”, 
as stringing some tunnel along the outside of  
your massive county-size pressurized can sitting 
in the vacuum of space is about as big a feat as  
running an electrical wire through your home, 
compared to building and decorating it. And it  
lets you cut down on roads inside your habitat. 
This means most folks living in a cylinder  
habitat probably have basement access to various 
trains, though you still may run tethers up to the  
central axis too. And while we say trains, you 
don’t need to be that much more sophisticated  
to go for individual pods, or even something 
a person in a space suit could travel along. 
These are going to have a maximum speed though and 
I think we can say well short of relativistic. Any  
accident inside one, on the outside of a rotating 
habitat, is blowing most of that force out and  
away from the station but not all of it and some 
ten-ton cargo pod moving at 1% of light speed,  
even if only 10% of its energy is going into 
the walls, is still hitting like a megaton nuke.  
Which your hull might be designed to handle 
without catastrophic rupture with damaged or  
hijacked spacecraft in mind but probably is on 
the high end of what you’d even consider for any  
transport tube. I’m guessing by at least an order 
of magnitude, and moving at a thousandth of light  
speed instead is very sufficient for travel around 
even enormous megastructures like Banks Orbital,  
A Niven Ringworld, or even a Topopolis.
And a cool thing about them, as we discussed in  
Interplanetary Infrastructure, is that you might 
build your rail lines between planets themselves,  
which requires some additional 
engineering tricks but is doable  
under known science, see that episode for details.
So I don’t know when vacuum or low-pressure trains  
are going to emerge on Earth, probably before 
we build many off Earth, but I am confident the  
future of transportation will see lots of vacuum 
trains speeding along and carrying us around and  
off our pale blue dot into the galaxy beyond.
Today we were talking about how vacuum trains  
might be vital for moving around 
big megastructures, like Ringworlds,  
and one megastructure that would really 
need vacuum trains is a Topopolis,  
a rotating habitat that’s essentially a very 
long O’Neill Cylinder, many miles wide but  
potentially thousands or even millions of miles 
long. But you might also travel inside one more  
conventionally and the Topopolis seems like it 
would inevitably have one long river running  
down its whole length, like a giant fertile river 
valley civilization of incomprehensible length. 
In this month’s Nebula Exclusive Topopolis: The 
Eternal River, we explored these megastructures  
and what they’re like inside. Join 
us in journey down a river so long  
it traces out a thousand worlds as we explore 
a megastructure buildable with known science  
and materials but of unbelievable proportions.
And again, that’s out now exclusively on Nebula,  
our streaming service, where you can also see 
every regular episode of SFIA a few days early  
and ad free, as well as our other bonus content, 
including extended editions of many episodes,  
and more Nebula Exclusives like last month’s 
look at Giant Space Monsters, December’s  
episode The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter 
Hypothesis, Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships,  
Dark Stars at the Beginning of Time, Life As 
An Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon,  
Space Freighters, Retrocausality, Orch Or & 
Free Will, Colonizing Binary Stars, and more. 
Nebula has tons of great content 
from an ever-growing community of  
creators. Using my link and discount it’s 
available now for just over $2.50 a month,  
less than the price of the drink or snack you 
might have been enjoying during the episode. 
When you sign up at my link, 
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur  
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only get 
access to all of the great stuff Nebula offers,  
like Topopolis: The Eternal River, you’ll also 
be directly supporting this show. Again, to  
see SFIA early, ad free, and with 
all the exclusive bonus content,  
go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
Next week we’ll be finishing the month of  
February on the 29th with a journey to a colony 
ark ship that is itself journeying to new worlds,  
and yet in which entire cultures might exist 
for generations on board one, and we will ask  
what life on an ark ship is like. That will take 
us into March, where we’ll begin by heading to  
the beginning of time for a look at Primordial 
Planets. Then we’ll continue our discussion of  
terraforming from earlier this week when we looked 
at terraforming our own Moon by asking if and when  
terraforming in general is ethical, and what 
sorts of challenges future civilizations will  
face on deciding whether or not a planet should be 
terraformed and to what degree. Then we’ll travel  
toward Mars to look not at the Red Planet, but 
instead at its two tiny moons, Phobos and Deimos,  
and ask why and how we could settle them.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Topopolis: 
The Eternal River, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
