This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
Our future lies out among the stars, but to
get there, we are going to need gateways.
Space Stations are ubiquitous in science fiction
and almost all discussions of our future,
and yet with the ISS having already exceeded
its planned lifetime, and no successor yet
built, or even formally planned and funded,
I thought it might be nice to ask what we’re
looking for in our next space station and
what might accommodate those needs.
It's easy to forget that the ISS or International
Space Station is actually our ninth inhabited
space station, since only Mir operated for
a long time, for 15 years from 1986 to 2001.
Skylab and the various Salyut Space Stations
had mixed successes as long term orbital facilities
in the 1970s and 80s, and while we often discuss
bigger and bolder stations on this show, we
tend to skip over the gap between a successor
to ISS and truly massive affairs like the
Bernal Sphere, O’Neill Cylinder, or the
more modest Kalpana design, which we’ll
discuss toward the end of this episode, along
with the Lunar Gateway.
The eponymous “Brick Moon”, appearing
in Edward Everett Hale’s 1869 scifi novella
of the same name, is the first known depiction
of an inhabited artificial satellite, serving
in the role of a navigational aid long before
GPS had been imagined.
Since then, there have been hundreds of station
designs conceived, with some predating even
the famous von Braun wheel design.
We’ll be showing a lot of diagrams and animations
of them while we discuss space stations in
this episode, though today we’re less interested
in specific designs than critical purposes
and features.
We may devote future episodes to specific
space station designs.
Though truth be told, I would not expect any
of the current space station designs to become
a reality without a lot of modification.
One big thing to keep in mind is that the
next space station probably needs to be cheaper
than the ISS, which would cost a couple hundred
billion dollars in the currency of today.
I don’t think any countries, let alone corporations,
are interested in forking over that kind of
cash again in the near future, even if it
was for a bigger and cooler station.
As an upside though, the next space station
can get its components into space more cheaply,
especially if we can use material that can
be flown up in the existing rockets and essentially
plugged in or plugged together.
The ISS is around 400,000 kilograms, and the
old space shuttle used to run us about $55,000
per kilogram, by some estimates, meaning that
to get stuff into low earth orbit back then
was around 20 times more expensive than what
it would currently cost.
Though it’s worth noting that there’s
always some debate on calculating those figures,
projecting for new launch systems in terms
of optimal usage and production, and so on.
If we had to redo the ISS now, we could do
it better and for less, but we don’t actually
want to or need to redo the ISS.
We’re interested in what the future holds,
and what a station that might fit our eventual
needs for research, habitation, or expansion
might eventually look like.
As an example, we often assume that the next
station will need to be integrated into a
plan for returning to the Moon or going to
Mars, in which case a rotating section providing
simulated Martian or Lunar gravity might seem
handy.
And yet building a space station for a single
mission to either, probably isn’t an ideal
use of resources.
Nor do we really need to simulate lunar gravity,
since the Moon is only a few days of travel
away and we can skip that step in favor of
just building a lunar base and seeing how
folks fare.
Mars is a different matter though, since the
astronauts would be stuck there for many months.
Having both lunar and martian gravity simulated
on the same station might have some utility
though, since you could essentially acclimatize
folks in stages simply by spacing rings at
different distances outward from the centre
of a rotating wheel.
But in this case, you’re really getting
it as a bonus from making use of otherwise
empty construction space.
Rotating sections for stations and long duration
space travel might seem critical to avoiding
all the problems with zero-gravity, but that
rotation in itself presents some potential
issues.
Trying to match a space station’s rotating
wheel up to a non-rotating section is problematic,
and an entirely rotating space station has
one key problem – the whole thing has gravity,
even if it diminishes to next to nothing near
the axis of rotation.
The reason this poses a problem is that one
of the main purposes of space stations has
been to run zero-gravity experiments, and
having any form of simulated gravity would
skew your results.
Indeed, having multiple sources of gravity,
as would be the case for a station orbiting
the earth, could be the source of additional
errors.
We’re hardly done doing those experiments,
and they’re arguably a lot more important
as a whole than checking the effects of lower
Martian and Lunar gravity.
Trying to do it all with a rotating section
connected to a non-rotating one, would create
additional problems both in terms of cost
and technical challenges, which would likely
be solved by simply having separate stations
instead.
Now, the good news is that we do finally have
a new space station under construction, the
Chinese Tiangong space station has its first
module up there as of this spring, 2021, 23
years after the first module for the ISS was
sent up.
However due to geopolitical issues here on
Earth, this is a single-country effort, and
while I’d love to see several national space
stations, the one big upside of the ISS was
that it was international and collaborative,
even if it wasn’t in any way spread equally
in terms of cost or control.
So I’m not sure Tiangong would qualify as
a successor to the ISS, even if it’s successful,
and it’s also much smaller, closer to Mir
in size, when our nominal goal is for a bigger
and bolder successor.
Though that in itself might raise a valid
point: perhaps we should consider using many
smaller stations rather than one big one?
This also raises a few key points on the practical
side.
First, do we need an international station?
Second, who is paying for it?
Third, is there an ‘it’, and should we
really be thinking in a singular way?
And finally, what purpose or purposes might
such a platform serve?
On the international front, I’d argue that
we don’t necessarily need a multinational
station.
It would have upsides and downsides, as we
have found with the ISS, but we also don’t
really have international satellites, a given
nation or company owns them, and indeed the
actual modules for the ISS are the responsibilities
of the nation that launched them under the
Outer Space Treaty.
Personally I like Multinational efforts, but
they invariably create a lot of political
and bureaucratic issues.
Multi-decade programs require multi-decade
funding and interest, and multi-entity control
generates lots of problems including hurt
feelings at being asked to do more than your
fair share or being pushed out of control
or not benefiting as much as another party.
These are hard to avoid since they are at
least somewhat subjective.
The other half of that is asking if we even
want this to be government-owned at all, much
less multi-government-owned.
We have seen a lot of the renewed interest,
success, and innovation in space in recent
years from the private sector, with SpaceX
and its peers.
Traditional multinational efforts might be
done just as well or better on a station built
and owned by a corporation, which rents out
its facilities to others, and saves on a lot
of red tape.
On the flip side, one of the nice things about
the ISS is that nobody could be doing anything
very nefarious like secretly moving orbital
weapons platforms on board, because it was
internationally controlled and monitored from
multiple sources.
In the context of multiple stations, we might
also want to consider that we don’t actually
need to have modules which are physically
connected.
One station might be a docking and habitable
section, with a dozen interchangeable experiment
modules simply lashed on by tethers, and reachable
by spacewalk if something goes wrong.
By and large, as robotics and automation improve,
most of the internal operations for experiments
could be monitored, performed, and tinkered
with by one or more small robots.
The same goes for external repairs, especially
given how clunky spacesuits are, and how little
manual dexterity they offer.
In that case, your international or corporate
space station focused on scientific research
is really just a maintenance crew for handling
experimental modules and anomalies.
You launch the module and they attach it to
the hub, possibly with a tether that also
serves as a power and communication cable,
thus cutting out two of the big issues with
isolated experiments in space, namely running
out of fuel and needing to carry their own
power and communications.
The other side of this is space tourism, with
a space hotel essentially being manned by
definition, and requiring safe and easy transport
for humans around its interior, regardless
of how many modules might be involved.
Down on Earth, the idea of having a research
lab next to or inside of a resort would seem
absurd, and the only reason we even contemplate
it for space stations right now is this assumption
the station needs to be multi-purpose and
because so many folks interested in space
tourism are also geeks.
Your typical tech millionaire who might contemplate
travel to space would probably enjoy helping
out with an experiment as much as trying their
hand at zero-gravity sports, but beyond those
early days of space tourism, we should assume
there would be little to no overlap between
space-based R&D and tourism, and thus little
point in having them at the same facility.
Similarly, differing areas of research rarely
need the same kind of lab space, and indeed
for various reasons might require entirely
different environmental constraints.
Outside of fiction, there’s not a lot of
standardized lab gear, and you don’t have
beakers lying around every type of lab, let
alone every type of experiment.
Heck, even the trademark scientist lab coat
isn’t universal.
I’ve only worn one three times myself, once
just trying one on, once for a photo op, and
once for a visit to a biology lab with heavy
safety restrictions.
It’s not something the typical theoretical
physicist tends to wear, anymore than a mathematician
or a History professor would.
They are a cheap, and a fairly disposable
bit of easily donned clothing whose color
makes it clear when you’ve spilled junk
on it.
But even though they’re a commonly recognized
symbol of all science in the public sphere,
even something as simple and utilitarian as
a lab coat is just one example of how requirements
can differ in reality from what we might imagine.
I’ve never seen anyone wear one on the ISS
for instance.
In our episode discussing whether we should
first go to Mars or back to the Moon, we talked
about how even these two seemingly-similar
projects actually have very limited overlap
between them.
Labs are the same, so while we have a concept
in science fiction of more purpose-built space
stations, trade stations, fuel depots, research
facilities, and so on, we probably need to
acknowledge that an object in orbit that is
purpose-built for research isn’t likely
to be some sort of all purpose lab, but more
like the Hubble Space Telescope and its various
kindred, with each one dedicated to a particular
use.
An experiment-specific, or possibly lab-specific
environment, like a zero-g fish tank to see
how fish adapt to swimming around in a giant
tank of water with no gravity or pressure
difference, could be used to see how many
different marine organisms and even ecosystems
might operate in microgravity.
But while that’s great for fish, it’s
going to have specific design features for
those projects, and probably isn’t going
to be useful for seeing how birds live in
that environment, or how microgravity affects
early childhood development.
This isn’t to say that you can’t mix and
match.
A Space Hotel might be a good place to conduct
studies on how the environment of space impacts
human behavior, but I think in general we
want to move away from the assumption that
the successor to the ISS is going to be an
all-purpose multi-national affair, and more
toward the idea that the Next Space Station
is likely to be plural in some sense.
Such being the case, it's probably more logical
to ask which type of space station will be
built next: what’s most likely to be the
first of this hopeful constellation of new
space stations, and why.
Tiangong might then qualify as that next space
station, but in many ways it’s essentially
parallel to Mir, Skylab, and the ISS, as a
small, all-purpose station.
It's also currently in-progress so for now
we’ll turn our eye to other options.
There’s a controversial sentiment I’ve
heard fairly often, and partially agree with,
that says essentially that an all-purpose
space station can attempt any purpose but
excel at none, and there are similar comments
about this or that design for a new military
aircraft carrier, or naval cruiser, or any
number of other projects, including software
platforms.
Over-generalizing is often as bad an idea
as over-specializing, but generalizing and
specializing are often useful.
Since a manned station would be able to share
a lot of the same facilities, there’s a
lot to be said for a single big one that can
serve multiple purposes.
So which one will it be?
Specialized stations, or a big hub in which
many specialized tasks might occur?
Alternatively, might it be some sort of splitting
of the difference?
For instance, while a city is a generalized
hub, a University campus is a mix of general
and specialist, focusing into the broad category
of research and teaching, and of course over
time often adds things to the campus or its
periphery that’s more generalized.
Universities aren’t just labs or housing
complexes, and most of them manage to function
just fine with this type of multitasking,
it’s just that we don’t usually consider
it in that light.
There’s a time factor on any space station
too, in the sense that it can grow and evolve
in purpose, though such changes might incur
additional expenses depending on how extensively
that focus shifts.
But any station which specializes in mining
asteroids might mutate over time into a city
in which mining is minimal, even as many mining
settlements in our own past grew into something
else, and this applies to all sorts of different
examples, from logging camps to military outposts,
and thus we might expect it to apply to space
settlements too.
But that constitutes long-term growth, not
near-future.
What does the next space station need?
Some features seem obvious, like a docking
hub to allow people to move from ship to station,
though ironically this wasn’t a feature
on most of the early space stations, with
crew instead being transferred by spacewalk
from ship to station.
Improvements in spacesuits or airlocks might
negate or diminish the need for these.
It also might not be entirely necessary to
have a docking hub on every station, such
as with the tender station model we mentioned
earlier, where hundreds of modules might be
attached by tether, and mostly overseen and
visited either remotely or robotically.
Indeed, in such a case the hub might actually
be a spaceship that simply cycles out occasionally
by passing those tethers to the next manned
ship, like passing a cluster of balloons.
So, even this seemingly obvious feature of
a docking connection to allow unsuited travel
between ships and modules shouldn’t necessarily
be taken as a given.
Tied in with the other assumptions we often
make about space stations is the idea of how
we’ll recycle air and water.
Contrary to what science fiction might suggest,
it won’t necessarily be the case that all
long term facilities and ships will make use
of plants for recycling the air and water,
though I feel like this is going to be one
of the big characteristics of ships and stations
as we move from brief visits to space to actually
living there, since having actual plants on
board would allow us to recycle air, water,
and also produce some fresh food.
But just as we rarely see more than the occasional
houseplant in the typical workspace, we shouldn’t
necessarily assume that air and water recycling
will be done in this fashion on your typical
smaller station.
For most of those, carbon dioxide scrubbers
and filters for air and water are generally
going to take up less space and resources,
(and most importantly be more reliable) keeping
them more attractive for those smaller applications.
And it’s worth noting that while space is
huge, there’s a reason why spaceships and
stations are currently small and fairly light,
since as it stands mass is a bigger bottleneck
on all space construction than cost of materials.
It takes a lot of material to build walls
and hulls and shielding, and with our current
technology, that’s all very expensive to
bring up from the surface.
We might expect this to change as we start
developing real space infrastructure, and
get into mining resources from the moon and
asteroids, but right now we are still looking
at price tags of around a thousand dollars
a kilogram, and that’s down a lot from when
the ISS was being built.
But once we make that step toward obtaining
resources from space instead of Earth, and
building things off-planet, we can start talking
about making those big space habitats and
O’Neill Cylinders.
The issue of launch cost is also why we so
often saw space station designs that reuse
booster rockets during the era of the space
shuttle.
You’ve got a great big cylinder floating
around in orbit with about 2000 cubic meters
of internal volume, more than the entire ISS,
that presumably can be retrofitted into a
space station module to save a lot on fuel
and effort, while also managing some of our
space debris.
In truth this was a lot easier said than done,
hence why it hasn’t been done, but it was
always a temptation and one that probably
could have been made a reality.
However, with the new age of reusable rockets
moving to include even the upper stage booster
this is likely to end this option.
So we have four main concepts here, in terms
of recycling.
The first is that a shift in technology can
alter the dynamic of what provides discounts
for construction.
No empty booster rockets milling around orbit
means no easy access to empty ones to reuse.
In the same way, setting up cheap solar shade
production on the Moon a few decades from
now might allow us to reuse damaged ones as
hull components, wrapping them around a structure
like a protective cocoon.
Second, it reminds us that while one man’s
trash is another man’s treasure, sometimes
the process of repurposing is ultimately more
problematic than it might initially seem.
Third, it reminds us of the space debris issue,
and that as a consequence we also need to
be thinking of how to better protect astronauts
from the general hazards of space, everything
from radiation to micrometeorites, and even
bits of junk.
A thicker hull is probably the easiest way
to go here, but more weight means more money,
unless we’re making use of stuff we already
have up there.
Even then more weight means orbital correction
requiring more fuel.
And finally, recycling on board would be useful,
but probably only in cases where the equipment
is going to get enough use to justify the
mass and maintenance requirements of tools
for repair and reprocessing, so I’m not
expecting to see something like a large hydroponic
setup on the next station.
This might be less true if we get a big space
tourism industry going, and there’s a chance
that will take off soon.
A lot of recycling gear for any type of waste
does better at larger scales, so a facility
of 3 or 4 astronauts benefits less from having
these than one with 3 or 4 crew and 10 or
20 guests.
We don’t know what the price point for stable
space tourism would be, but we do know that
Virgin Galactic has already booked several
hundred people at a ticket price of around
a quarter of a million dollars a piece, and
there are over a million people who make more
than a million bucks annually and might look
seriously into doing that.
So as surprising as it might seem, we might
already be at or near the price point for
discussing larger stations.
If I can have a hotel with 10 folks at any
given time for say, a week at a time, that’s
just 520 people a year.
Would that be a separate station or separate
module, or something integrated into a larger
station?
Probably the latter, if for no other reason
than sharing all the costs and diversifying
the investment.
The other big business case for the relatively
near term is going to be manufacturing in
space.
We don’t know where the space industry will
take off to the point where we actually manufacture
stuff there, though we’ve examined several
plausible options in our episode on Kickstarting
Space Industry.
There’s something of a Catch-22 to space-based
production, where often the demand that justifies
a new economic sector focused in space can’t
exist until after other space-based infrastructure
exists, which themselves rely on other demands.
But if we’re confident we’re going back
to the Moon or Mars, or the main intent is
to cheaply gather metals for power satellites
or solar shades, then a factory and port for
that in orbit is a justifiable expense, and
just represents an early investment to prove
and prototype the process for future development.
Which brings us to the Lunar Gateway, or simply
the Gateway.
This is an upgrade and adaptation of the Deep
Space Habitat design from about a decade back
which is being proposed as part of the New
Artemis Program to return to the Moon.
The basic notion is to place a space station
around the Moon, and there’s a lot going
for that.
I’ve heard folks object to the idea on the
grounds that we should be returning to the
Moon itself, not building a space station
there, but there's a reason why all those
Apollo Missions involved orbiting the Moon
and sending down a vehicle.
I think it makes a lot more sense to have
some waypoints established first, and the
same applies for Mars.
If you have a sort of relay system where folks
can train, resupply, or have assistance along
the way, it decreases the amount of stuff
you have to bring with you for the longer
journey, which ultimately translates to lower
costs over time.
A semi-permanent presence in orbit of the
Moon would ultimately make doing missions
there and getting established on the surface
a lot easier in the future.
Plus, after waiting 50 years to go back, a
short delay to establish a station seems a
minor wait.
We also aren’t interested in just landing
and poking around, we want to be back there
forever.
We’d want to set up real industry there,
and a space station orbiting the Moon is good
for that.
I think the Gateway has a lot going for it,
starting with being rather modest, but also
committing us to going back to the Moon and
in a big way.
For less modest options, we have options like
the Kalpana One Station.
This obviously isn’t going to be our next
space station, but it’s a reminder of what
we’re aiming for, and what we can achieve
if we get a moon or asteroid mining operation
on the go, or build up a space-tourism and
orbital-construction industry.
It’s a stepping stone not just to the Moon,
but toward larger settlements like the Stanford
Torus, Bernal Sphere, or O’Neill Cylinder.
But where the ISS is around 400 tons, Kalpana
is around 10,000 times that, with some estimates
putting it as much as 7 megatons.
With launch costs of 1000 dollars per kilogram,
or a million dollars per ton, you’d still
be looking at 7 trillion dollars in launch
costs, more than 30 times what the ISS cost.
With an intended 3000 residents, you’d have
to charge more than 2 billion dollars per
resident just to get the thing off the ground.
I imagine this is probably off the table for
most folks, so a project like this definitely
needs to be one where you’re sourcing that
mass from somewhere else, or else finding
a way to vastly decrease launch costs from
what they are today.
But that being said, it’s not as far off
as it might seem, and may well be something
that could happen in this century.
The good news is that we’re really moving
forward again with space.
The ISS may be past its original expiration
date, but it’s still running strong.
China’s busy building a new one, not just
planning it, and the Artemis Program and Gateway
Station look like they are likely going to
happen.
Fundamentally though, as I said near the start,
it's not about what the next space station
will be in a singular sense, but what the
future of space stations looks like as a whole
in the coming decades.
In the next ten years or so, we’re likely
to see multiple space stations functioning
at the same time, and it won’t be long before
folks can’t just say “The Space Station”
like we do today, without getting a lot of
confused looks.
The future will likely be one of an increasing
number of increasingly specialized structures
in space.
That time is coming sooner than many might
believe, and with it getting launched this
decade, it’s definitely going to be fun
to live through.
We were talking about space hotels in passing
today and folks often ask me to do an episode
on space food, and we might do one, one day,
but in the meantime there’s a great discussion
of the challenges of cooking in space with
famous chef Heston Blumenthal over on Curiosity
Stream.
Now we do have an extended edition today available
on Nebula, where we’ll spend a few minutes
discussing the Stanford Torus design & the
Bernal Sphere as alternatives to the O’Neill
Cylinder or Kalpana.
I think we will end up giving each their own
episode at some point but I keep not getting
around to it and wanted to in this episode
but the reality is neither is a legit candidate
for our next space station.
The nice thing about the extended editions
on Nebula is I don’t have to worry as much
if my rabbit trails or tangents get a bit
off topic.
If you didn’t already know, Nebula is our
new streaming service full of awesome content
from STEM creators like Real Engineering,
Mustard, Answers with Joe, MKBHD, Rene Ritchie,
and a bunch of others including lots of awesome
non-STEM content like Devin from Legal Eagle,
and the notion of having extended editions
replacing sponsor reads in our episodes was
Devin’s idea as I recall.
Our episodes of this show appear early and
ad free on Nebula, and some have extended
editions too, plus we have some Nebula Exclusives
like our Coexistence with Aliens Series.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos, to offer Nebula for free as a bonus
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using the
link in our episode description.
That lets you see content like “Heston’s
Dinner in Space”, and watch all the other
amazing content on Curiositystream, and also
all the great content over on Nebula from
myself and many others.
And you can get all that for less than $15
by using the link in the episode’s description.
So this wraps us up for today but not for
the week, as we have our mid-month Scifi Sunday
episode: Alien Artifacts & Xenoarcheology,
this weekend on August 15th.
Then next week we’ll look at Fusion Propulsion
designs and concepts for Spaceships before
closing the Month out by heading all the way
out to the Edge of the Universe, on Thursday,
August 26th, then we’ll have our Monthly
Livestream Q&A on Sunday, August 29th at 4
pm Eastern Time.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
