Skyhooks are an ingenious device for fishing
planetary atmospheres and catching spaceships.
Today, we are going to look at skyhooks, a
type of tether system used in orbit to help
get ships up into space with a lot less fuel.
We are going to look at several different
varieties, explain how they each work, how
ready the technology is for deployment, and
look at the cost and safety issues of this
method.
We will also discuss their uses far from Earth,
everywhere from low gravity airless moons
to deep-gravity well gas giants.
We’ll be at this for a while today
so you might want to grab a drink and snack.
Also, a quick note before we begin while you’re
doing that.
We have looked at skyhooks before.
It was one of the oldest episodes I did and
during a short phase where I took some well-meant
but bad advice to keep the videos brief.
As a result the original Skyhooks episode
holds the channel’s record for the shortest
episode to date.
That episode has always nagged at me because
this topic, skyhooks, is one of the most useful
and clever concepts out there for getting
into space, as we will see today.
I think when we’re done today you will be
wondering why they don’t get more coverage,
in science or science fiction, something that
has puzzled me for years, because they are
incredibly useful.
Okay, introduction complete, explanation
complete, drinks and snacks acquired, let’s
dig in.
Skyhooks come in a variety of forms
and we will cover all of them, but the simplest
one to explain, and thus for us to cover first,
is the non-rotating kind.
This is a lot like the Space Elevator we covered
previously, only instead of running from the
ground all the way up past geostationary orbit,
the basic skyhook just runs from the upper
atmosphere to Low Earth Orbit or even higher.
How far up depends on how strong your material
is, like space elevators you’d ideally used
carbon nanotubes and taper the tether to be
wider at the top than the bottom, to get the
tether as long as you can without it snapping
under its own weight.
Let’s consider the motion of this tether.
Unlike the space elevator it is not holding
a fixed position over the ground.
It is orbiting, but the orbit is a bit weird.
You see, how far away an object is from Earth
controls its orbital speed, at least for totally
circular orbits, which is what we’re contemplating
at the moment.
The higher up you are, the slower the necessary
orbital speed to avoid falling down.
Just above the atmosphere things orbit about
once every 90 minutes, or one and half hours,
at a speed of about 7.8 kilometers a second.
If we went up about 4000 kilometers higher,
things orbit about once every 3 hours, taking
twice as long, and moving at about 6.1 kilometers
per second.
A difference of 1700 meters per second, and
a big difference, since that speed would get
you from the West to East Coast of America
in under an hour.
Again, the higher object is moving much slower
and takes double the time to orbit.
Now let’s say I took a super-long and strong
tether and connected those two orbiting bodies.
What happens?
They have to move together now but their orbital
speeds are a lot different.
To be in a stable orbit now they’d need
a period somewhere in between the 90 minutes
and three hours each previously had.
Because gravity is not uniform we can’t
assume it would be right in the middle at
the center of mass, also because the tether
is wider near the top to make it stronger,
more of the weight is nearer the top.
So we will say now that the whole thing wants
to orbit every two and a half hours.
And that is what it will do, but that means
the top and bottom both are also doing so.
So now the top is not moving 6.1 kilometer
per second anymore.
It is moving 6.8 kilometers per second instead,
a lot faster.
Down at the bottom tip, the reverse applies,
before it moved 7.8 kilometers per second
but now it isn’t orbiting every 90 minutes
but every 150, it is only moving 4.7 kilometers
per second, about 60% of its original speed.
If a rocket or shuttle could get itself up
to 4.7 kilometers per second, instead of the
normal 7.8 needed for orbit at low altitudes,
it could get hooked by that tether, climb
up it, and exit anywhere along the way having
transfered momentum from the tether, the ‘sky’
hook, and enter a normal orbit anywhere along
the way or even higher, since the top of the
skyhook is moving faster than is necessary
to orbit at that height.
A longer and stronger skyhook could match
up at an even lower speed at the bottom tip
and an even higher one at the top.
Sounds good, but how good is 60% slower for
orbit?
Doesn’t really seem that much of a game
changer for space flight.
But consider, your typical liquid hydrogen
and oxygen rocket has an exhaust velocity
of 4.4 kilometers per second, just a bit less
than the 4.7 our bottom tip, the hook, is
doing.
To get up to normal orbital velocities that
rocket would need to be about 83% fuel, under
ideal conditions, 5 kilograms of fuel for
every 1 kilogram of payload and ship.
To get up to 4.7 kilometers per second it
only needs to be 2 kilograms of fuel for every
kilogram of ship and payload.
Just 40% of the fuel.
And that was without including the equatorial
spin launch bonus that both rockets would
receive but which benefits the slower rocket
even more proportionally, or the extra drag
higher speeds impose.
What’s more, for those lower speeds we have
a lot more options available to help something
get to that speed without rockets.
Though we will contemplate hybrid systems
like shooting our shuttle down a massive railgun
later in the series.
But you can see the benefit.
That is a lot of fuel saved.
A longer cable can do even better, but we’ve
already massively cut down on the fuel per
launch.
It still isn’t ideal though.
I mean 4.7 kilometers a second is still insanely
fast, that’s Mach 14, more than double the
record for jets.
Also you are probably wondering what happens
to the skyhook, if it is giving the spaceship
it hooks a lot of its momentum, why doesn’t
it fall down?
The answer is that left to itself it would,
making the skyhook essentially a disposable
device and thus less beneficial since you
need to spend fuel getting it up there, and
more to put it back into place after each
lift if you want to re-use it, otherwise after
a few uses it will sink into the atmosphere
and burn up.
There are ways to regenerate that momentum
for re-use without using tons of rocket fuel
though and we’ll discuss those later.
Let’s consider a couple alternatives to
our basic skyhook, one that just hangs over
the ground doing a slow circular orbit, probably
over the equator to maximize the equatorial
spin bonus but it can orbit at any angle and
you can arrange to have it go over any specific
spot on the ground at regular intervals.
The first to consider is another identical
tether hanging higher up over the first one.
It has the same basic dynamic, the bottom
is moving slower than it should and the top
faster, so you could arrange for your ship
on the lower tether to jump over to the higher
one and gain more speed.
Which is very handy, especially since you
can make tether longer the further they are
from the Earth and its gravity yanking on
the tether trying to rip it apart.
This also means that you can always use a
ladder of these tethers with any material,
just one after the other, even if your materials
only let you make tether a hundred kilometers
long, and we can do way better than that with
existing materials we can already mass produce.
But the problem is it doesn’t help with
that initial hook, which is the important
part.
Such a ladder is great for getting higher
up without more fuel but doesn’t help much
getting into orbit in the first place.
We want the bottom tip of that hook to be
going as slow as possible relative to the
ground.
So we have a solution, we spin the tether
so it cartwheels in space around the planet.
If our previous tether was 4000 kilometers
long and naturally gave us 4.7 kilometers
per second at the tip, if we spun it backwards
when the tip dropped to the bottom of its
spin it would be going slower than that.
Let’s assume it spun around three times
every orbit, which was every two and a half
hours or 150 minutes, so it spins once every
50 minutes.
Now that tip is drawing a circle with a diameter
of 4000 kilometers, or a circumference of
that times Pi, 12,600 kilometers, once every
50 minutes for a speed of 4.2 kilometers per
second.
Well the tether was already down to 4.7, so
as it swings down backwards into our upper
atmosphere that tether tip at the bottom of
its course is just 500 meters per second.
That’s pretty fast, but it’s only Mach
1.5, faster than most commercial jets but
slower than the Concord used to cruise at
and way slower than the top speed we can make
an air-breathing jet fly.
In fact, since the equator is spinning at
just under 500 meters per second itself, on
the equator, this hook would spin down there
at the speed of normal car.
And a hook just a tad longer could actually
snatch a stationary object.
Pretty handy, on paper anyway, this degree
of performance is a bit trickier to achieve
than it sounds like.
For one thing you have air drag to worry about,
but on an airless or nearly airless place
like Mars or the moon, where you can also
have longer tethers from the weaker gravity,
this rotating method can be combined with
a slightly elliptical orbit to have the tether
dip down and snatch something right off the
ground and swing it up into orbit.
Also,this rotating skyhook, commonly known
as a rotovator, is spinning forwards at the
top of its spin in the direction of the orbit,
meaning it can launch whatever it grabbed
from the surface into high orbit at tremendous
speeds.
With ideal materials such a rotating skyhook,
a rotovator, could pick a man right off the
ground on Mars and chuck him straight back
to Earth.
I doubt he’d survive that trip but it would
work with cargo containers or spaceships on
the landing pad just fine.
But it has some problems, especially if you
have air, since that hook would experience
a lot of drag swinging down through the air.
The other problem though is the tether.
Doing a 4000 kilometer long tether is already
kind of pushing it if we’re not using perfectly
manufactured carbon nanotubes and tapering
the tether, but that tapering is designed
to make something wider at the top then the
bottom and thus stronger, as we discussed
in the Space Elevators episode.
That goes a bit out the window when the thing
is spinning, so that the top isn’t always
the top or the bottom the bottom.
We can still benefit from that partially but
mostly by allowing the weight of the ship
to be included on the bottom when the bottom
is actually down near the planet.
It doesn’t really let you make a vastly
longer tether than an untapered one.
That’s okay, we use a shorter tether but
we spin it faster right?
Well, no, because when you start spinning
something around it has centrifugal force
trying to rip it apart.
A tether spinning around far from any gravity
well can still only spin so fast, same as
when we discuss rotating habitats producing
spin gravity we can only make them so wide
or they’d tear themselves apart.
So our rotating tether, our rotovator, can
not be as long as our non-rotating tether
because we can’t take as much advantage
of tapering it, and we can’t make up too
much of that loss by spinning it faster because
it will tear apart.
At the bottom of that hook when it is spun
down near Earth it has all of Earth’s gravity
yanking on it plus the centrifugal force is
pulling that tether down the same direction,
adding to the force.
The rotovator design still has a lot of net
advantages, especially when you’ve got much
stronger materials or are working in a weaker
gravity well, but it isn’t too likely to
let us snatch regular planes out of the sky.
But it should be able to grab some hypersonic
spaceplane designs that have been proposed,
and we’ll talk about those later too.
We still have a couple more types using more
clever tricks, but I’m going to skim past
the Cardio-rotavator design.
Same basic concept as the rotovator, another
long tapered tether that rotates, but does
so on an elliptical orbit, rotating twice
every orbit.
The trajectory of the tip is roughly heart-shaped
so we call it a cardio-rotovator.
It has a few minor advantages over the normal
rotovator and a few disadvantages too, but
is essentially taking advantage of how elliptical
orbits don’t have the same speed all the
time.
In a circular orbit an object stays at the
same speed, in an elliptical one they are
fastest when closest to the object they orbit,
called perigee when that object is Earth,
and slowest when furthest away, called apogee
for Earth.
If we use a long tether that can reach down
from apogee, it will be going slower there
than normal, and so the rotating tip will
also be going slower.
Because of this it has to do exactly two spins
for every orbit, so that the long tether doesn’t
smack the planet when it is at perigee, the
system isn’t as flexible but still slightly
outperforms the basic rotovator in some key
ways.
The last variation I want to discuss quickly
is called the T4 or Tillotson Two-Tier Tether,
this is a spinning tether with another spinning
tether on the end of it, called the first
and second stage respectively.
As mentioned one of the issues with spinning
a tether is the centrifugal force trying to
rip it apart, and that rises linearly with
how long it is and with the square of how
fast it is spinning, its angular velocity.
So the longer it is or the faster we spin
it, the more force acting to shred our tether.
But if we use a shorter or slower spinning
tether with another tether on the end spinning
too, the dynamics change a bit.
You arrange the rotation so both are sweeping
backwards when it goes to hook, same basic
concept, but this system lets you use a shorter
tether under higher acceleration.
I’ve noticed both the Cardio Rotovator and
T4 can confuse folks a little and they don’t
really alter the basic dynamics of the concept
much, which is part of why I skipped them
entirely in the first skyhook episode, but
I did want to give them a quick mention this
time and I should note there are some other
variations on this concept, I’ll attach
some links in the video description for any
of you want to explore those and who feel
more comfortable with the math and orbital
dynamics.
Now I mentioned earlier that one of
the problems with a skyhook is that once you
hook something and begin lifting it up, Newton
says the skyhook has to go down.
It is sharing its momentum with the thing
it is lifting up, so if you don’t do something
to regenerate that momentum your skyhook will
have a limited number of uses before it falls
down into the atmosphere, goodbye skyhook.
Even disposable hooks have some advantages
but we want to keep ours for many uses, but
if you want to do that, you have to restore
its momentum after each lift.
Now, the obvious way to do that is with a
rocket, but that somewhat defeats the point
of having these things to assist rocket launches.
However, we do have some better options.
First, there are drives you can use in space
that are too weak for launching, but much
more efficient overall, like the ion drive.
We discussed ion drives at greater length
in the Spaceship Propulsion Compendium but
in short form Ion Drives, especially if they
can get external power from solar panels,
can use a tiny amount of propellant to achieve
much higher final velocities than rocket fuel
allows.
Unfortunately they do this very slowly so
are totally useless for getting into space.
However a skyhook with solar panels
on it to power an ion drive can use that to
slowly restore momentum between hooks, and
you just need to make sure ships getting hooked
occasionally bring up some propellant, preferably
Xenon but many other more abundant fuels like
Argon do the job almost as well and it is
less important which you use for an essentially
stationary tether as opposed to a spaceship
going to Mars, you can refuel as needed so
you just use whatever works well and is easy
to get, especially if you don’t need to
get it from the Earth.
And you can also source those from places
other than Earth.
There’s nothing particularly complex about
getting Argon from the Moon for instance,
thus avoiding Earth’s gravity well entirely,
and skyhooks work quite well on the Moon too,
no air drag.
More on that in a minute, but it’s worth
noting that the propellant wouldn’t have
to come from Earth.
Solar panels ionize that propellant and slam
it out the drive, restoring momentum to the
hook without needing to bring rocket fuel
up from Earth.
Now we don’t actually need propellant
here on Earth.
The handy thing about Earth is that it has
a giant magnetic field, probably the major
reason we have a breathable atmosphere.
The nice thing about a giant magnetic field
is that if you have a long tether of some
conductive substance inside one, you have
a large electrical potential between the top
and bottom of that tether.
This allows us to use Lorentz Force to push
on our tether.
By apply electricity, presumably from solar
panels, we can basically push off the planet’s
magnetosphere to restore momentum, using a
trick known as Electrodynamic Tethering.
This is also potentially handy for station-keeping
of satellites, but one has to weigh the ups
and downs of including some mass for a tether
versus some fuel for a rocket, and tethers
are also a bit of a navigational hazard, especially
if you’re using tons of them.
Since we already have a tether anyway, waste
not, want not.
You can also use this trick backwards to generate
power by removing momentum, but we’ll skip
that for today.
Now Electrodynamic tethering would certainly
seem preferable to ion drives, no fuel or
propellant at all, but as I mentioned, skyhooks
can be used in more places than just Earth,
and not all of those would have a nice big
magnetic field to use.
By the way while we are speaking of magnets,
I should probably mention that the hook itself,
the thing that grabs the payload down at the
bottom tip, doesn’t have to be anything
mechanical, a nice big electromagnet that
can slam onto the metal frame of whatever
you’re hooking minimizes some of the problems
matching up speeds.
If you’ve ever seen a mid-air refueling
you can kinda guess this is not exactly a
simple operation especially when everything
is moving supersonic.
But we have the option for electrodynamic
tethering or ion drives or some others for
regenerating momentum.
Which of those you do might depend on where
you are doing it.
On an airless rock like our moon a skyhook
could flat out swing down to just over the
ground and grab something, the rotavator version
using conventional materials could pick stuff
right off the ground because there’s no
air drag.
Of course our moon and most airless places
do not have very strong magnetic fields so
odds are good you’d want to go the ion thruster
route instead.
But skyhooks would work great for the moon,
though, since we already have materials strong
enough for building a space elevator there
it might seem a bit redundant, but remember
that a skyhook doesn’t just pick you off
the ground, the rotating kind accelerate you
very quickly and fling you away at high speeds,
and don’t require as long a tether length,
compared to a space elevator.
Mars would be an ideal case since it has very
little air but still has strong enough gravity
to make a space elevator a dubious proposition.
Skyhooks are also handy for de-orbiting on
airless planets too, where we have no drag
to help us slow down, since we can arrange
for them to lower a ship’s speeds as easily
as increase it.
They also have applications in places where
a space elevator is unlikely to ever be practical,
like a gas giant.
Those typically have huge magnetospheres to
help recover momentum and they also have huge
amounts of gravity that would snap an elevator,
plus no ground or sea to tether anything to
at the bottom.
Bases on gas giants either need to be super-light
to float in low-density hydrogen and helium
gas those are made of, or constantly flying
to generate lift, also a topic for another
time, but skyhooks might be advantageous there
too, or even for working near the Sun, and
we used some similar tricks to electrodynamic
tethering when we discussed harvesting material
from the Sun in the Starlifting episode.
Of course one of the problems with
tethers is they can only be so long before
they’d break, same as a space elevator,
these things rely on tensile strength.
As I mentioned earlier we could essentially
build a ladder out of multiple skyhooks, rotating
or non-rotating.
Transferring between them is a bit of an exercise
in good timing but nothing even the simplest
modern computer couldn’t handle.
Your ladder, composed of rotating or
non-rotating hooks, or a combination of both,
can include as many components as you like,
and each one as long as the material will
comfortably permit based on its strength,
the gravity at that distance, and the centrifugal
force it experiences if spinning.
This sort of skyhook ladder, combined
with electrodynamic tether momentum regeneration,
ensures that you can get off any planet relatively
cheaply, even ones more massive than Earth,
and even if you never figure out how to mass
manufacture super-strong materials like Graphene,
as good old Zylon or Kevlar will do the trick.
And you can have multiple hooks in the same
orbit, even at a different orbital angle,
to ensure you can do a lot of pickups and
cut down on time delays of waiting for higher
hooks to come back around for a transfer.
However these are long cables and even the
non-rotating ones are a bit of hazard, so
you don’t want to clutter space up with
too many of them without doing some very careful
coordination of orbits.
This does raise safety issues though.
Skyhooks are also probably the safest
of the launch systems we will look at in this
series.
These move around the planet quite quickly,
so if they drop into that atmosphere they
just burn up.
As with the space elevator we have the option
to include the occasional explosive charge
to break the hooks into smaller bits.
It shouldn’t really be necessary to do so
but something I forgot to mention in the Space
Elevator episode is that proper spacing and
timing of explosives on tethers, skyhooks
or space elevators, can help you control where
they drop, which is handy since most of the
planet is ocean and even most land is sparsely
populated.
Better the ocean than land, but better a wheat
field in Kansas than New York City.
Again, though, these will reliably burn up
in the atmosphere so there’s little need
to worry, nor would they do much damage if
they hit.
The big safety issue is the hook and the plane
not matching up or it snapping when the hook
was made, but that is one of the reasons why
a plane carrying a payload is preferable.
A plane can more safely and easily maneuver
to an airport to land.
So if you miss a hook the plane just diverts
to an airport or loops around to return to
its launch site.
They are a bit of hazard to space navigation
and also vulnerable to space debris hanging
around orbit, but not too much of one for
the former and we’ll talk about the latter
soon but not today.
Overall skyhooks are quite safe, safer than
rockets I suspect, particularly once they’ve
had as much service time for us to learn their
quirks and hazards as we have with rockets.
But even more than the safety, the
nice thing about skyhooks is that they are
cheap.
They don’t offer the same super-low launch
costs a space elevator does but they come
close and are way cheaper to deploy.
This is a technology we already have and which
wouldn’t need a lot of prototyping.
It is just an immense cord, and though the
momentum regeneration angle is a bit trickier
that is also on very solid and old scientific
footing.
R&D is needed but more in the way a new car
design needs it, as opposed to trying to build
a hover car or something.
Also while neither Kevlar or Zylon are cheap,
compared to steel, they are in the dollars
per kilogram range.
So if we imagined a cable of it 200 kilometers
long, massing, say, a 100 grams a meter, or
100 kilograms a kilometer, that cable would
only mass 20,000 kilograms, which is on the
heavy end of a normal single launch but quite
doable, and would only cost you a couple hundred
thousand bucks to manufacture though presumably
several hundred million bucks to launch.
Since they would instantly save you a big
chunk on launch costs of every future flight,
it pays for itself after just a handful of
launches.
If you were pretty confident that your electrodynamic
tethering would work first try, you could
even use the hook to snatch up all solar panels
and equipment needed for regenerating the
hooks momentum on your second launch.
So unlike the Space Elevator and most of the
other systems we will look at, it does not
have the huge initial capital investments
of R&D, prototyping, and construction.
It doesn’t offer you quite the same super-low
costs per kilogram launched some of the other
options have, or the ability to move truly
huge amounts of cargo back and forth to space,
nor can you can use these right next to your
big cities, sonic booms and all, but it is
a strong candidate for near-term use.
Safe, cheap and relatively low tech.
In fact your biggest R&D cost would probably
be those hypersonic planes meant to connect
to the hook, though there are some alternatives
we will discuss for getting spaceships up
to the necessary hooking speed besides hypersonic
jets.
Back at the turn of the century, when we were
thinking about replacing our space shuttles
with space planes, Boeing worked out a system
using skyhooks called HASTOL, the Hypersonic
Airplane Space Tether Orbital Launch System,
in a partnership with Tethers Unlimited.
It used a hypersonic airplane to get up to
the highest speed an air-breathing jet could
pull off, then link to a spinning tether.
Typically releasing a payload to attach to
the tether since the plane is then useless
mass, which can then go land elsewhere, refuel
and reload and do it again.
The idea didn’t go much past the drawing
board, but not because the tech wasn’t promising
or was too blue sky, we never did replac the
space shuttles with spaceplanes as was the
general assumption we would do at the time,
and this was one of the stronger candidates.
You don’t necessarily need to use hypersonic
planes either, it can be adapted to work with
conventional rockets it’s just that the
planes would tend to be cheaper once you got
done with the R&D.
I’m not sure which companies are looking
at skyhooks right now, a lot of folks are
mostly focused on reusable rockets at the
moment and that is very promising technology
we’ll be looking at soon too.
Also, again, you can adapt skyhooks to work
with those too, so I think as that technology
progresses skyhooks will get a second look
for possible use with them.
If not, they will likely make an appearance
to work in tandem with some of the other systems
we will discuss in future episodes, they’re
very much a launch-assist option, meant to
be used as a hybrid with something else that
helps them get up to that necessary hooking
speed.
I think we will stop there for today, hopefully
by now you see why I felt this system deserved
longer coverage than I gave it in the original
episode, and it remains my personal favorite
in terms of near-term technology to make space
cheaper.
As we’ve seen, the skyhook is cheap to construct
and launch, the main costs being related to
the development and production of a fleet
of hypersonic airplanes.
While the launch cost reductions are not on
par with, say, the space elevator or the orbital
ring, it still offers considerable reductions
in launch costs.
We will look at the orbital ring later in
the series.
Next week, though we will take a look at Life
Support, and look not at ways of getting into
space, but ways of staying alive in space,
and we will look at a lot of the options available
and try to give some solidity to them.
After that we will return to this series to
look at Mass Drivers and similar concepts
for getting into space, or at least up to
high speeds, by accelerating a ship down a
long tunnel like a cannon shot.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode, please like it
and share it with others.
Until next time,
thanks for watching, and have a great week!
