For us to live and build communities in space 
we will need law and order, but who will make  
the rules, what should they be, and what 
sheriff will see that the law is enforced?
To discuss the future of space law and regulation 
we need to begin with Existing Space Law and that  
mostly hinges on whatever country you live 
in and the Outer Space Treaty of 1967 and  
the Liability Convention of 1972, and arguably 
the Moon Agreement of 1984. I should state from  
the outset that I don’t personally give the 
OST any ethical validity. You can view it as  
a reasonable first attempt by nations to amicably 
manage emerging efforts in space or less kindly,  
but either way it’s a placeholder until 
something else emerges, and hopefully better. 
Some oversights have been addressed, 
for instance the OST doesn’t handle  
Space Debris but the Liability Convention 
from 5 years later does. We could chop at  
it all day long but I do view it as a mostly 
well-intentioned document. Nonetheless, there’s  
some key flaws or concerns raised about it.
First and foremost, it’s often just vague and  
ambiguous. The OST sets broad principles but lacks 
specific details on many issues. For instance,  
it states that space and celestial bodies are 
the "province of all mankind" but does not define  
what that means in practical terms, particularly 
regarding resource utilization. In some ways that  
vagueness is good, it recognizes that they didn’t 
know how to handle a lot of problems or even what  
those problems will be and punts to a future 
generation or a judge who can create some case  
law, which can then be ignored or overruled by 
new legals statutes if it’s really bad precedent. 
The OST is also from a period where only 
the government launched stuff. With the  
rise of private space companies, the treaty's 
provisions that hold countries responsible  
for both governmental and non-governmental 
activities in space may be challenging to enforce. 
Those companies can’t really rise much if 
they can’t own things or exploit resources  
in space and the big glaring flaw of the OST 
is that it prohibits national appropriation  
of celestial bodies but does not clarify the 
rights and framework for exploiting resources,  
like asteroid mining. You can argue that even 
taking a sample from the Moon or an Asteroid  
is illegal, though this at least seems academic, 
as nobody seems to support that being the case,  
that the OST or future treaties should ban even 
taking samples, merely that it could be argued to  
be the case. Though it does have some relevance to 
contamination concerns which we’ll get to later.  
This ambiguity has led to varying interpretations 
by different countries too, but that ambiguity  
doesn’t alter that it bans space colonization and 
arguably even interstellar space colonization. 
There’s also no real enforcement mechanism 
or clear method for reasonable updates and  
evolutions, and I tend to be in the camp that 
reasons that if a law exists that no one really  
thinks makes sense, outright bans things we all 
want to do – like space settlement - and is not  
enforced or setup to be improved, then 
it isn’t worth discussing in great depth. 
For all those reasons I don’t really spend much 
time referencing the OST in other videos and we  
won’t be referencing much for the rest 
of today too, but since existing rules  
are likely to influence near-term future 
ones, I think we must be aware of it. 
Current Issues
In addition to existing treaties and law, in order  
to discuss future space law and regulation we also 
need to consider the current issues in play or on  
the near horizon. In no particular order those 
are Commercial, Space Debris, Asteroid Defense,  
Asteroid Mining, militarization & weaponization 
of space, contamination of worlds, ours or the new  
ones, by our explorations, and territorial rights.
We’ll cover those in order, but territory breaks  
both into who owns distant worlds beyond our 
moon, and who owns orbital space. However,  
it goes beyond the strictly physical, because who 
owns space isn’t like saying who owns the Moon or  
who owns Antarctica. There’s a volume around 
earth things can orbit in and the crisscross  
based on angle of orbit, altitude or semi-major 
axis of orbit, and eccentricity of orbit. So  
who owns a given orbit? Does the passage of an 
orbit over a given nation give partial ownership  
or a stake over that orbit? We would usually say 
so about the airspace above a land, so does the  
altitude of that orbit matter? Or percentage 
of time, so that things in a geostationary  
orbit over a place are in its territory.
What about a power satellite or solar shade  
or mirror? These are enormous constructs 
potentially thinner than tin foil,  
so that even a few tons of material might cover 
entire square miles or kilometers. Who owns  
those photons it’s collecting or reflecting?
In the past people or country’s owned land  
and that was their main wealth, but we need to 
widen that in modern times and further in the  
future in orbital space. There’s a long-running 
military science fiction series by David Weber,  
often nicknamed the Honorverse for its main 
protagonist, Honor Harrington, that features  
her native star kingdom’s approach to land grants 
like we give the aristocrats of old. We’re told it  
can include things like owning a certain band of 
wavelength around the planet, so that you would  
be able to rent out the radio channels in it.
Who owns a wavelength? Nowadays we say the country  
where it’s at, but this might need to shift up 
into space and as we contemplate options like  
space-based microwave power transmission. 
And again, our goal here is not to say what  
is in great detail, as our rules currently our 
essentially a patchwork quilt of handling these as  
unrelated problems as they arose, nor can I really 
say what these rules should be in the future,  
but instead we merely note these problems for 
consideration. They extend to many other things  
as well, as we have the geostationary orbit, 
plus the lunar and solar LaGrange points with  
Earth to represent some analogy to a fixed 
volume of space in a more classical sense. 
Who has priority? And in what regard? For 
instance, those solar shades and mirrors  
might be critical to weather and climate control 
on Earth and future terraforming on other planets,  
but they represent a particularly troublesome 
matter for regulation, as they are essentially  
solar sails and examples of what I dubbed a lagite 
some years back. This is an object in between  
normal orbiting bodies and the static satellites 
or statites proposed by Robert Forward. These  
statites can have a precise surface density to let 
them hover over a star rather than orbiting it,  
with gravity pulling them and light pushing them 
away with equal force, and both falling off in  
strength inverse square to distance. The lagite 
dwells between, able to combine normal orbital  
mechanics with solar radiant pressure to achieve 
normally impossible orbits. It might also do this  
in conjunction with solar wind or even some beam 
it was emitting that had momentum, like an energy  
beam to a planet, or potentially even cargo 
pods of matter it was receiving or firing off. 
I suspect we’ll see a lot of these in the future, 
inevitably for thin sail-like structures, but they  
offer us a conflicting case as one might orbit 
at the same period but a higher or lower altitude  
than a typical satellite. Hence you might have a 
transmitting satellite trying to send or receive  
to earth with one of these lagites stuck right 
between them all of the time. Needless to say,  
even if no one is trying to be obstructive 
in this use, these sorts of ultra-thin  
and large orbitals are going to represent 
protracted blockages in signal and visibility,  
and are also very vulnerable to space debris.
This is a good segue into Commercialization  
though because a future in space doesn’t exist 
unless it can support itself and indeed will  
always be slow to grow unless it’s profitable. 
Profitability can be a bit vague of course,  
and even in a hypothetical moneyless society 
the projects need to be viewed as worthy to  
be continued. We did not make any money off the 
Moon Landings. We in this case being US taxpayers,  
but not many regret that, and so you can make 
the case that space does not, at least for now,  
need to be directly profitable, as people are 
willing to buy tickets to the show, so to speak,  
and the efforts can have secondary benefits, 
like technologies with terrestrial usage. 
However, most of us feel commercial ventures 
in space will rapidly accelerate that growth  
in space and improve our efforts there in 
many ways. The question then becomes, how  
do we regulate so as to encourage those commercial 
ventures while not endangering other operations,  
creating long-term costly problems like space 
debris, or ceding rights over something the  
public has claim to. As an example of that 
last, we could imagine creating a planetary  
wifi internet on that 2.4 GHz band we use now. 
We could imagine a company having that contract  
for maintaining the satellites, software, 
and customer service, but we wouldn’t like  
to just give them that 2.4 GHz band or sell 
it. We might lease it to them for 25 years. 
Incidentally that’s not a prediction 
or recommendation, merely an example. 
Nonetheless, I could imagine that something like 
this was done by settlers on a new planet. We talk  
about getting investors for interstellar journeys 
that might take a century to get to a new planet  
and centuries more to become a real civilization, 
and that’s a hard sell even inside a long-lived  
civilization with radical life-extension. But 
I could absolutely imagine getting investors  
by auctioning off the rights to a few bands of 
frequency, say 2.4, 4.8 and 9.6 GHz and so on.  
So long as they only monopolize that frequency 
and you build in a few obvious safeguards for  
monitoring and special access, the commercial 
value of that is huge but no threat to the colony. 
As an example of regulation, you might have 
price caps or eminent domain options for it,  
but it also might be something built right into 
your colonial charter that you worry might have  
major long term negative consequences if you 
back out of it. Time lag in space travel and  
communication at the interstellar scale tend to 
encourage stability and trust in your promises,  
and these will then be major coins a 
given star system would guard like a hawk. 
That’s a little further future, and indeed 
so is a lot of space commercialization I  
think would be fun for today but a bit off 
topic and we’ll carry it over into next  
week’s episode on Lagrange Point Space Settlement.
In the near term, a lot of space commercialization  
regulations are going to be about who owns 
something, and that’s not necessarily who launched  
it. Much of that is just establishing precedents 
and mining current case law, in space or on Earth,  
for suggestions on how to adapt it. As a quick 
clarification, statute law is what legislative  
bodies like congress or your parliament actually 
create, verbatim, whereas case law – which is the  
bigger chunk of it – is all those gray area 
cases that some judge has had to rule on,  
particularly when two laws overlapped on something 
and a real world case has two parties each making  
entirely reasonable, or at least logically 
coherent, claims based on the law but opposed.
The one that most recently comes to mind 
from personal use, over in my other job  
doing election adjudication, was a law that 
vaguely stated that something would happen  
but didn’t say whose job it was to actually 
do it, and sometimes it might state it but  
the position responsible was divided into 
two or three other jobs as time went on  
and that minor duty got missed when assigning 
them. And that happens all the time in law and  
sometimes because no one thought to add 
it or because the answer seemed obvious,  
and sometimes probably with the intent of just 
punting that problem to the next generation.  
Examples we might expect would be companies 
or countries who signed on to an agreement  
suddenly ceasing to exist or merging with other 
entities. The dissolving of the Soviet Union  
at the end of the Cold War would be an example 
and one that was quite pertinent to space law.
This can also include groups being placed in 
limbo. Commercially-speaking, uncertainties  
in the law are usually a bad thing, as 
while some can exploit them and profit,  
it generally scares off development when 
a body isn’t sure they’re on solid legal  
ground where their ownership or investment 
is or will be down the road. For instance,  
at the moment there’s a big gray area on if you 
can actually own any object in space and if you  
could mine an asteroid and sell the metal or fuel 
you made from it. You could probably get away with  
ignoring that, no one with any real capability to 
object has much motive to currently, but anyone  
wanting to invest in an asteroid development 
company needs to factor in the additional risk  
that if they’re successful they might get their 
assets seized or some unknown new tax will be  
applied. You can probably get an insurance policy 
to cover that, but then that’s an extra cost too. 
A lot of times though we come up with a law 
or decision and everyone quietly ignores it a  
generation later because it’s kind of embarrassing 
in retrospect. I suspect anything we do involving  
property rights in space now, including doing 
nothing, will get viewed as mistakes down the  
road. That doesn’t mean we should do nothing 
of course, and many are hard to predict. As an  
example, we have a lot of laws still that 
specifically and casually say man where  
depending on the usage maybe they should say 
man, or maybe they really should say human,  
or just adult human of sound mind, and in 
the future we might need to consider what  
those would need to say if we’re talking about 
a fully-sentient AI or super-intelligent dolphin  
or chimp or a collective human hive mind.
As a general FYI I usually just use the  
term ‘person’ for any of those cases, and 
‘crewed’ for any spacecraft one of those  
entities might be running, and used ‘manned’ 
for typical humans. Context will probably make  
it clearer in other episodes, but for today’s 
context we are going to assume property rights,  
and that the term ‘persons’ is only assuming a 
normal modern human or an incorporated entity  
like a government, foundation, or corporation 
as is already well understood in modern law. 
When do you stop owning something? Beyond selling 
or giving it? If your satellite breaks up, do you  
still own the fragments? If so, can someone 
still claim them under salvage, and if not,  
can they still whack you with a lawsuit when 
a fragment hits their property? What if two  
satellites impacted and we now have no possible 
way to determine which bit came from which bird? 
Can X sue Y for blocking the sunlight that 
their satellite should get? Can the owner  
of that satellite be sued for blocking sunlight 
that should hit a country or reflecting sunlight  
down on them in excess of the normal amount?
Sounds absurd but when we move from talking  
about a few square meters of panel 
to several thousand square kilometers  
of panels, the game changes a ton.
It also matters a lot when we contemplate  
Space Debris. Now, thankfully something like a 
thin mesh shade or mirror takes very little damage  
when struck by a hypervelocity piece of shrapnel, 
the same as a machine gun isn’t terribly effective  
against a billboard or ship sail. It gets a hole 
poked in it, and if you have enough tiny debris,  
it can effectively get eroded and need repaired 
or recycled. Very thick armor on bigger ships  
and stations can help against the problem too 
but obviously you have a lot of applications  
where being thin and low value, or armored 
like a main battle tank, is not efficient. 
Currently under the 1972 Liability Convention 
the launching state is liable for damage caused  
by their space objects on the Earth's surface 
or in space. This treaty encourages states to  
prevent the creation of debris since they could 
be held accountable for resulting damages. They  
presumably then have jurisdiction over how 
they regulate launches and debris control on  
those things being launched, which is handy 
as jurisdiction over a given region of space  
doesn’t seem too likely. Though in the long 
term one could assume that an independent  
Moon colony or Lagrange Point Settlement might 
declare that they have physical jurisdiction. 
What’s more, there’s obviously the issue of if 
someone blows up your satellite and causes it  
to damage others, and who arbitrates on country 
X saying country Y zapped their bird and Y saying  
they did not or they did but only because it was 
off trajectory and dangerously likely to intersect  
one of their space stations, or was leaking 
debris from the damage that knocked it off  
course and they zapped it for safety’s sake while 
the owner’s still thought it was salvageable. 
Now last month we discussed how to clear space 
debris and there are a lot of possible methods  
but the big one is just to minimize how much you 
generate in the first place and this is area where  
regulation is probably critical, and where doing 
it badly could either strangle space development  
if too heavy-handed or badly targeted, or leave 
us vulnerable to Kessler Syndrome, where cascading  
damage floods low orbital space with trillions of 
dollars of once valuable satellites and facilities  
now turned into hyper-destructive shrapnel.
Asteroids & Space Mining 
It is worth remembering that Space Debris 
represents not just a potential hazard but also  
a potential gold mine. Recycling old satellites 
while getting paid to pick them up could represent  
a significant sector of the space economy, but 
moreover, not all space debris is our junk.  
Indeed, outside of our orbital space virtually all 
the debris we need to worry about is micrometeors  
and asteroids. We have multiple episodes dedicated 
to both asteroid mining and asteroid defense,  
that get into the how-to of doing either, but 
here our main concern is how we would regulate  
that. Ignoring that the OST doesn’t really allow 
asteroid mining, which I assume everyone will  
simply ignore in the future anyway, the 
regulatory issues are mostly three-fold. 
First, how do we decide who owns what? And 
that might be a process for letting nations  
claim bits and pieces then sell them off as 
they please, or it might be some global action  
where the purchaser is buying it from the UN 
and then they divide up the cash and assign  
jurisdiction using some internal formula, 
probably one that after careful negotiation  
everybody agrees to and absolutely hates.
Second is the debris and alteration issue,  
as mining an object with no significant gravity 
is by default going to blow huge amounts of debris  
into space around it. It is a real concern but 
thankfully, especially for the next few centuries,  
a lesser one. There are a number of ways to 
mitigate debris coming out and it’s not initially  
much of a concern when we’re contemplating the 
asteroid belt, which is huge and empty even  
compared to Cis-lunar orbital space, let alone 
low orbit, where debris is the main concern. 
Third is transport home. Several tons of 
metal winging its way back to Earth space  
from hundreds of millions of miles away 
leaves a lot of room for error and a lot  
of reason for regulations on how to do it. And 
it likely won’t just be tons, but kilotons or  
even megatons of metals coming back in, or even 
smaller asteroids being maneuvered into orbit to  
allow them to be turned into space habitats.
Do you need to announce what your cargo is  
and what its trajectory will be? Do you need 
to put beacons on it? What do we do about the  
company that was worried about piracy and so was 
labeling their shipments as iron even when they  
were platinum, and so when one went off course 
and had to be shot down before it hit a French  
space station, all the numbers were wrong for the 
intercept and scatter calculations and a hundred  
ton slab of platinum crashed into the suburbs of 
London, after crashing through that space station,  
and now England is claiming the 4 billion 
dollar meteorite, which is also now the  
only remaining asset of that mining company 
as it gets seized and sued into oblivion. 
That incidentally is implying someone had a way to 
blow that rogue spacecraft up, or some dangerous  
asteroid that might get near us undetected, 
which leads us to Weaponization of space. 
Mining large near-asteroids strikes me as a 
better way to handle dangerous asteroids than  
simply blowing them up, but we need that 
capability too and it raises the sticky  
issue of weaponizing spacecraft and putting 
weapons in orbit. Now as channel regulars know,  
there is no such thing as an unarmed spaceship, so 
long as it’s got some guidance and fuel available.  
This is for the same reason a car can be used very 
destructively even without mounting weapons on it,  
but there is a big difference between a regular 
car and a military jeep or Humvee with some armor  
and a heavy machine gun on it. Needless to say, 
there’s an even bigger difference between these  
and a main battle tank or self-propelled howitzer.
There are no nuclear weapons or WMDs allowed in  
space but small arms are allowed and 
at the moment not with the intent of  
repelling aliens or boarding parties. Some 
Russian missions had pistols on board, which  
really had nothing to do with space, but rather 
to safeguard the Astronaut if they came down  
in unsafe territory. The usual example is Alexei 
Leonov, who did the first spacewalk back in 1965,  
and who landed in arctic tundra after a spacewalk 
with his crewmate Pavel or Pasha Belyayev,  
and it was a couple days before they could get 
picked up so they were very glad for a weapon  
against wolves and bears, rather than aliens.
There are no wolves or bears in space and thus  
far no aliens, but part of traffic and 
debris management in space is deciding  
who has authority to fire and what they can have 
up there. What do you do if a piece of debris or  
small asteroid is approaching your station? What 
about a ship, possibly a damaged one, heading your  
way? And very fast too, time is minimal when the 
speeds involved aren’t tens of meters per second,  
like with vehicles on the road, but tens of 
kilometers per second. We may have no choice  
but to allow not just powerful weapons in space 
but automated fire control, with robots deciding  
when to engage and with inherently lethal force.
Trying to draw the line on where we can have  
weapons and what types are tricky, as we are 
mostly worried about people using orbital weapons  
against Earth, but the need for protection 
against asteroids or for clearance is real. 
Asteroids aren’t the only threat from afar, 
and Planetary Contamination is a concern and  
a two-way street. Right now, we have no verifiable 
extraterrestrial lifeforms, and thus don’t have a  
clear danger of contamination, but we don’t 
know if there are microbes on Mars yet and  
if we might wipe out some fragile ecosystem 
there by introducing terrestrial life or if  
we might bring a probe home covered in virulent 
extraterrestrial viruses. As we journey out to  
Mars and Venus and Europa and Titan, all of whom 
have plausible arguments for possibly housing  
life, we need to update and improve policy and 
rules on this concern. As well as enforcement,  
and it is not allowed under the OST but by and 
large it's given lip service and often not really  
taken very seriously outside of science fiction.
Long before we get to some distant exoplanet which  
might house significant amounts of life, or 
even intelligent life, we need to decide what  
the rules will be on contamination and what 
the enforcement mechanism would be. After all,  
once a ship leaves on an interstellar flight, 
it becomes rather difficult to enforce rules or  
even monitor what they’re up to. Interstellar 
trips and inhabited exoplanets are beyond our  
scope for today but that discussion needs to be 
had before those trips occur. I would guess that  
until we find some solid sign of extraterrestrial 
life in this solar system though, or elsewhere,  
we won’t see any significant increase in concerns 
over planetary contamination. We should discuss  
it before then but until then that conversation 
isn’t likely to result in any new firm rules. 
The same probably applies to Bioforming & 
Terraforming, and we’ve discussed both before  
in their own episodes if you want to learn 
more about the techniques but in short form,  
bioforming is where you adapt an organism to 
a planet’s environment, like modifying lungs  
to breathe a lower oxygen mix, and terraforming 
is where you are modifying a planet to be more  
Earth-like, in this case, giving it an atmospheric 
mix and density of oxygen matching Earth’s own. 
This raises a host of concerns, especially 
on inspection. No one entity is going to get  
to own Mars, short of massive war here or there, 
so what happens when the hundred different bases  
from fifty different countries of origin settle 
in and grow there and have different attitudes  
about terraforming, and some may utterly ban 
bioforming. Fifty of them want to terraform,  
ten don’t want to mess with pristine Mars, 
and forty others preferred Domes as they can  
mass-manufacture and dump waste gas all over the 
terrain as long as it’s a barren red rock. Who  
decides who does what? Do the asteroid miners 
on some larger asteroid have to vote to decide  
if they’re going to mine it out and transform the 
empty tunnels into space habitats or disassemble  
it into a bigger protective sphere around future 
habitats or even move that asteroid to an orbit  
that’s more favorable, such as Earth-distance 
or transforming it into an Aldrin Cycler. 
And in centuries to come, as interstellar 
colonies journey out, will their charters  
have to include their intentions for 
terraforming and bioforming before they go? 
A colonial charter also raises Colonial Rights, 
and I just mentioned terraforming and bioforming  
as a concern to those colonists but there will 
be many more, and I suspect as we colonize the  
galaxy the number of strange new laws and special 
cases that strange new planets add will need a  
planetary sized legal library to house them all.
Are the colonists who arrive at a new world after  
a century of travel still bound by whatever 
colonial charter they signed, or perhaps their  
ancestors signed, when they left dock above 
Earth? Do those colonists have a claim on an  
entire solar system or just one planet? Or even 
one planet? Can a colony of ten thousand really  
claim an entire planet from Day 0, when it would 
take a million times their number to fill it? Who  
owns the spaceship they came on and who decides 
who owns what part of their claim? Again, is it  
the whole system? And if so, where does a system 
end? The heliopause? Those vary by the Sun and for  
mid range binaries might get tricky to define. One 
light-day from the biggest Sun’s center? Or Light  
week? Light Month? A whole Light year? Half the 
distance to the nearest star in that direction?  
Do they have a right to defend themselves, or 
their territory, if some other colony ship from  
another group or nation arrives planning to settle 
another planet, or even just another continent? 
Odds are decent that long before we send out the 
first true interstellar colony, we’ll have worked  
out some basics for what the rights of those 
colonies are, but in this solar system those are  
likely to be small offshoots of existing nations. 
There probably won’t be a unified Mars or Moon,  
but rather hundreds of smaller settlements 
who all are territories of some Earth-based  
nation and want to remain that way. They may 
see their path forward as becoming another  
American State or Member of the EU, or even more 
modestly, just a county inside an existing state. 
Or possibly a mostly on-paper member of a smaller 
nation here on Earth in a client relationship,  
like if several hundred larger space hotels 
and casinos were to ask some island nation on  
Earth to be their official nation for legal 
matters and to whom they pay some minimal  
member fee or to some bigger nation with 
military might who agrees to handle defense  
for them for a kickback from their combine.
A path for actual sovereignty as a free nation  
is likely to be further off and ironically might 
occur at the interstellar scale sooner. There’s  
not a lot of historical precedent for nations 
having an exit clause and one that the territory  
in question gets sole authority to exercise, plus 
inside this solar system everyone is within a day  
of communication time, not the months or weeks 
that tended to delay communications and often  
were critical factors in why regions to wanted 
to leave the nation they were part of and what  
allowed relations to degenerate to that point.
However, as long as light speed limits our travel  
and communication, an interstellar colony must be 
independent from Day 1, and indeed unless they are  
frozen for the voyage must exercise governmental 
powers for many years if not centuries before the  
new land is reached. Those interstellar ships may 
be the basis for much of our interstellar law and  
regulation long before the colonies they found, 
and indeed the exchanges between those system by  
interstellar ships, bringing trade or migrants, 
trying to conduct business and sign contracts  
over the vast gulf of space and time separating 
those new worlds, may be where we see some form  
of galactic law and regulation begin, rather 
than any interstellar federation of planets. 
As we reach out to heavens and try to transplant 
our civilization there, so too will spread  
our need for stability and binding rules and 
agreements. I expect no uniformity in those,  
anymore than on Earth, but as we’ve seen today, 
while our future in space will hopefully offer us  
great freedom to build new lives among the stars, 
it will still need some rules and regulations.
One of things I love about doing this 
show is that one day we can be talking  
about a topic like space law and regulation 
and the next about giant space monsters,  
and in this month’s Nebula Exclusive we’ll be 
examining everything from huge space kraken  
to kaiju and the sandworms of Dune to ask what 
science tells about their biology and if we might  
end up encountering, or even engineering, 
enormous space creatures… and of course,  
if and how some explorers or pioneers 
might survive encountering or fighting one. 
That’s out now exclusively on Nebula, our 
streaming service, where you can see every  
regular episode of SFIA a few days early and 
ad free, and all our other bonus content,  
including extended editions of many episodes, and 
more Nebula Exclusives like, Giant Space Monsters,  
The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter 
Hypothesis, Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships,  
Dark Stars at the Beginning of Time, Life As 
An Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon,  
Space Freighters, Retrocausality, Orch Or & 
Free Will, Colonizing Binary Stars, and more. 
Nebula has tons of great content 
from an ever-growing community of  
creators. Using my link and discount it’s 
available now for just over $2.50 a month,  
less than the price of the drink or snack you 
might have been enjoying during the episode. 
When you sign up at my link, 
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur  
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only get 
access to all of the great stuff Nebula offers,  
like Giant Space Monsters, you’ll also be directly 
supporting this show. Again, to see SFIA early,  
ad free, and with all the exclusive bonus 
content, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
This week we looked at regulating space and 
next week we’ll be looking at real estate  
in space as we ask what Lagrange points 
are, why they’re so valuable as locations,  
and what settling them might be like. Then 
we’ll explore Conformal Cyclic Cosmology and  
the possibility that a previous universe may have 
existed over which ours is layered on top, before  
we head into February to look at Death Worlds 
and surviving on ultra-dangerous planets. Then on  
February 8th we’ll examine homesteading in space, 
and what might draw pioneers to new colonies and  
what sorts of life and challenges they’d face.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Giant 
Space Monsters, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
