Our topic for today is Asteroids, not just
mining them but the vital role they could
play in spreading ourselves out around the
solar system.
Now chances are you have already heard or
read about the idea of mining asteroids.
I have noticed that there is a lot of talk
about the idea but as is often the case not
much beyond surface detail.
One is left with an impression that asteroids
are rocks in space with metal in them, presumably
some of it quite valuable like platinum or
gold, and that we would like to have those
precious metals brought home to Earth.
So far so good.
But while platinum and gold are quite valuable,
and useful too, not only does much of that
value come from scarcity, which means hauling
back megatons of the stuff would not be nearly
as profitable as it sounds like, but it occasionally
occurs to people that Earth, out-massing every
asteroid in the solar system combined, actually
has considerably more of these metals than
they do.
Indeed before we finish today we will pretty
much kill the fictional notion that anyone
will be exporting iron or other bulky metals
back to Earth, even while we see how incredibly
useful mining these things will be.
And to do that we might as well begin with
what an asteroid is, because it often misunderstood
and vague.
Asteroid is a loose term, and not a great
one either since it means star-like, which
they certainly are not.
The first one we discovered, back in 1801,
Ceres, is generally not even considered an
asteroid anymore, but a dwarf planet like
Pluto, making it Dwarf Planet #1 or planet
#5, between Mars and Jupiter, depending on
how you view Pluto.
It’s about 4 times more massive than the
next most massive asteroid, Vesta, and masses
about half of what the rest of the asteroid
belt combined masses, which number tens of
millions of objects, many thousands of which
could do double duty as mountains or kill
off the dinosaurs.
So Ceres, and the other famous asteroids,
are not particularly representative of what
we mean we talk about asteroids.
And when it comes to mining them, it’s actually
the small ones that interest us more than
the big ones.
And it’s not just about size.
Asteroid composition is anything but monolithic,
as it were, but loosely falls into 3 categories,
C, M, and S type.
Those are easy to remember since they are
short for carbon, metal, and silicate, or
stony. C-type, carbon rich asteroids, are
the most common, making up 75% of asteroids,
while S-type, silicate or stony asteroids,
comes in a distant second at 17% , M-type
Metallic asteroids are much less numerous.
Now when it comes to mining that hardly tells
the whole story, M-types are mostly nickel
and iron, neither of which we’d particularly
want to bring home to Earth, but which would
be valuable for building stuff in space.
For that matter there are also several sub-types
of asteroids and two different classifications
systems, and the asteroid belt is anything
but the only place you can find asteroids
nor the nearest place to find them.
It also is not unusual for two asteroids of
different types to blunder into each other
and merge or to be somewhere in between these
types.
C-types, the most common asteroid and also
the ones that gets ignored a lot in asteroid
mining conversations focused on impressing
folks with the idea of mountains of gold,
are quite valuable themselves.
They contain lots of water, which is never
a bad thing to find in outer space.
But they also contain plenty of life-useful
elements and particularly noteworthy is phosphorus.
Something that is quite hard to find on Earth
in concentration and a major bottleneck on
agriculture, so if asteroid mining ever gets
heavily developed and cheap, that is the sort
of thing we might bring home since it is valuable.
Not as valuable as gold or platinum of course,
nowhere near, and these big space boulders
have a lot of those.
We’d estimate that the usual S-type asteroid,
not even the less common metallic m-types,
are full of tons of metals, many valuable.
One as big as your house would be expected
to contain hundreds of tons of metal, and
about your weight in gold and other precious
metals.
It is worth remembering that back when Earth
formed as a big ball of molten rock most of
the metals sank to the core.
This did not happen with these small asteroid
of course, and wouldn’t matter if it did
since most asteroids are not big and are incredibly
easy to mine, at least if you ignore them
being millions of miles away in the radiation
blasted airless void of space.
Which I think we would have to classify as
a bit of an inconvenience.
Still your average asteroid is a loosely held
together ball of gravel and even the big ones
have such low gravity you could bench press
a truck on them.
Generally speaking those house-sized asteroids
have such low gravity that if two of them
were touching you could squeeze in between
them and shove them apart.
Of course the odds of two touching, or even
near each other, is quite small.
Even in the asteroid belt which is quite dense
with them, the distance between any two asteroids
is large.
Unlike fictional representations where asteroids
are shown maybe a few hundred feet apart,
the ones in the belt tend to be a few hundred
miles apart, and a lot more if we’re only
considering asteroids bigger than a mile across.
There may be around half a million of them
but the belt is so large that the spacing
would be more like a million miles between
them.
If we’re talking smaller objects, that amount
would drop a lot, but we wouldn’t be mining
small boulders.
You don’t need to ram into something the
size of a house though, honestly even a fist
sized chunk of rock can mess up your whole
day if you blunder into it at thousands of
miles per hour, but there is not much reason
to go that fast when meandering around the
belt to visit the nearest other big asteroid.
So asteroid miners in a well developed belt,
should it become a major industry, carrying
ore from wherever they have been prospecting
back to some central base, might just cruise
around at subsonic speeds where anything they
cannot see and dodge would just bounce off
a well-armored hull.
We tend to think of all collisions in space
as fatal and radiation as dangerous but that
is mostly because our modern ships are built
tissue paper thin to save mass or we are thinking
of the ships as plowing around full speed
ahead, but in many cases a ship would be better
off saving fuel at a nice slow pace and going
for thick armor.
Potentially temporary armor just made of its
freight, you might strap your mineral wealth
to your outside so it takes the collisions
instead.
You could glue cargo to your ship with ice
for instance.
If we saw a big buildup of Belt Mining operations
you’d be likely to see spheres of operation
near some decently large C-type asteroid where
food and fuel could be made and without gravity
playing much of a role large ships could burn
around that region quite easily.
Indeed once you are up in space, ships do
not require much sophistication.
An airtight metal can with some simple chemical
rockets, or even pressurized gas, would get
the job done.
You do not need much delta-v, or fuel as a
result, to cover a few thousand miles of empty
space.
A lot less than you would need to drive that
distance on Earth, and you’d make the trip
in less time.
No gravity slowing you down, no air friction
or drag doing the same.
Of course the Asteroid belt is also not the
only place that has asteroids, and most planets
including our own have collections of them
meandering about tagging along our orbital
path.
These are called Near-Earth Asteroids, and
we’ve identified thousands of them ranging
from man-sized to 20 miles across.
Now we also have a sub-type of near-Earth
asteroid called EROs, or easily recoverable
objects, ones that would take very little
fuel to bring home.
Or to bring bits of home.
Which is probably worth addressing.
I have often heard it suggested we might tow
asteroids back to Earth orbit…
I have no idea why we would do that.
We’ve got plenty of rock down here on Earth
and plenty more on the moon and way too much
junk kicking around in orbit already without
adding more.
Why send home a megaton asteroid, the super-majority
of which has no value down here, when you
can extract what you want there and just send
that home, saving a lot of fuel?
You might also wonder if the cost of fuel,
which is very expensive, eliminates asteroids
as a good candidate for mineral extraction.
And the answer is no, for one thing it takes
weigh less fuel to move a ton of matter from
an asteroid to Earth then a ton of Earth to
an asteroid.
A ton of gold, in a literal sense, is worth
about 40 million dollars, and is about the
size of a basketball.
A million bucks in gold weighs about 50 pounds.
I always find it amusing when a chest of gold
is described in fiction brimming with coins
and big enough you could probably squeeze
a person into one.
You’d need a forklift to budge such a thing.
And yes, even as expensive as getting a ton
of matter into space is, it is still significantly
less than value of gold and again it’s a
lot cheaper to bring the stuff home.
If your mining operation were running you,
say, 20 million bucks a ton to get to the
asteroid and you needed a hundred tons of
crew and equipment, that’s a two billion
dollar operation on the fuel side, call it
double that, 4 billion for the lesser amount
of return fuel and all the equipment itself.
You’d need to dig out an equal mass, about
a hundred tons, to break even.
But what’s actually entailed in such an
operation?
Let’s say we wanted to setup shop on one
about a mile across.
We’d expect several thousand tons of precious
metals in an S or M type asteroid of this
scale, maybe a hundred thousand tons total,
hypothetically several trillion bucks worth
of precious metals.
Of course you wouldn’t want to bring that
all home at once, even if you could, that’s
how you crash markets.
But something like that would need to be a
long term operation.
So more like a permanent base.
The first few trips might be to small ones
you could bring home and maybe dissect in
low orbit, but eventually you would want to
settle in for some serious mining.
But also some serious construction too.
And some serious manpower.
We need to keep in mind that Near Earth asteroid
doesn’t mean it is actually near-Earth,
just that it occasionally passes near us.
So belt or near-Earth, it does not behoove
potential mining companies to go dragging
these things back to Earth.
Just the refined metal, and even then mostly
just the precious ones.
That does not make the other metals useless
though, quite to the contrary, in many cases
once you have the industry in place it might
actually be cheaper to haul even common metals
like steel back to Earth orbit for construction
of things in orbit then to lift them up from
the surface of Earth.
Even though in one case you are going a couple
hundred million miles and in the other only
a couple hundred miles.
But in all probability the moon would be a
better source, and a bigger one, since it
out masses the entire asteroid belt by a factor
of at least twenty-fold.
The true value of asteroid belt is building
away from earth, the precious metals are just
the cash crop, as it were, like tobacco or
tea were in colonial days.
You take the precious metals home to Earth
and keep everything else in space, probably
pretty close to hand.
These places are distant from Earth, and the
mining is likely to be a time consuming process
as you to refine it all on the spot too.
So these are likely to be bases designed for
independent operation, or interdependent operation
with neighbors, as more gets built up and
each can develop its own cottage industries
to specialize in something.
The guys on asteroid Alpha have extra hydroponics
they use to make clothes for instance while
the guys on Asteroid Beta can make microchips,
classic trade situation depending on scarcity
and difficulty locally manufacturing something
versus the hassle and time and fuel of importing
it.
Scarcity by the way, or a lack of it, is our
topic for next week.
Post-Scarcity civilizations won last week’s
audience poll, and the two biggest lynchpins
of that sort of civilization would probably
be access to nuclear fusion and very elaborate
3D printing or even self-replicating nanomachines.
If you have got those then the dynamic for
mining changes, as you might not even need
to send people to oversee this stuff.
It takes some brains on site though.
We could remote mine the moon, it is only
two light seconds away so smart automation
is not an absolute necessity, but asteroids
will be many minutes away in communications
lag.
So you need a brain on site, be it human or
sophisticated machine, which we will look
at more next-next week in the video on Technological
Singularities, which came in second place
in the poll.
But we are talking about yearlong missions
if not more, so being able to grow your own
food and recycle your water and air are not
absolute necessities but they certainly would
help.
Especially since only for the smallest asteroids
would you be likely to exhaust the thing’s
resources in a year.
Everything you can make on the spot, or repair
on the spot to cut down on spares, cuts down
on your initial mass and total costs.
So we will assume someone is planning to set
up shop there for the long term.
Not necessarily as individuals, people might
cycle back and forth every launch window,
which is about once a year.
Yes launch windows to the asteroid belt come
up more often than for Mars.
Mars is too close and fast for us to have
a window very often.
We get launch windows to Mars every 26 months.
For things further out we get one just a bit
less often than once a year, every 15 months
for Ceres and that is about the norm for the
belt.
The further away, the more often they come.
In most cases you could not unload the ship
arriving from Earth and reload it for immediate
launch home, since the window home might be
many months off, but for the belt, especially
if you can get away with using a bit more
than the minimum thrust, in many cases you
could pack up on that same ship after a fairly
short stayover.
We won’t go into Hohmann transfers, beyond
saying they are the ideal minimum fuel cost
way of shipping things, so you might not use
them for people but you probably would for
cargo.
Of course if you are just shipping home people
and gold and platinum fuel costs are not all
that big a deal for you shiny cargo.
We will get to profitability and legality
issues in a moment.
Let’s say we spotted a nice merged asteroid,
say C-type and S-type had crunched into each
other at some point to give us the best of
both worlds.
And a lot of asteroids are a bit of a mix
too which is why there are so many sub-divisions.
Some big hulking mountain sized thing several
miles wide, of which there are thousands,
would mass about 100 billion tons.
We can comfortably estimate that thing has
at least a few million tons of precious metals
in it with a market value of around a hundred
trillion or more bucks.
And again we can expect to be sending cargo
home a little over once a year and receiving
new equipment and personnel on the same time
table.
This means we don’t need to manufacture
anything small in mass that is hard to do,
like computer chips.
But even stuff like solar panels would be
better made on site.
And indeed they do look well inside the realm
of 3D printing, and the main component being
silicon, an S-type or Silicon-type Asteroid
is going to have plenty on hand.
If you’ve got nuclear fusion, and a mobile
and portable version of it, great, that lets
you ignore the need for launch windows probably
too, but lets assume solar power only.
What does our base need?
We need power, so we need to bring solar panels
with us to cover our basic needs and the ability
to scale up on site, in situ.
We need to refine the metal and power the
equipment too, so we would need a lot of power.
We need to grow food, we need to stay safe
from radiation and micro-meteors, and we need
gravity.
We probably need it on the way there too,
because it is a long trip, longer than to
Mars.
This means you probably want your ship to
spin to generate artificial gravity, something
we’ve talked about tons of times before
on this channel.
But it also means you can just bury your first
ship there with a hollow shell around it and
cover that in rock and now you have gravity
and protection.
Expanding on that by digging down further,
or shaft mining at another site, would probably
be a good idea too.
Take all that iron that is useless for export
and turn it into small spinning habitats for
your people and plants.
We already talked about a long term expansion
of such a thing into a giant rotating habitat
bigger than the original asteroid back in
the rotating habitats video, but now we see
the early stages and the motivation for expansion
to one.
There is tons of money to be made, and you
just ship home the precious metals, probably
to pay for things you cannot make there and
passage fair for newcomers to get to your
growing settlement.
You use the other material to expand that
settlement.
To extract your air and water and fertilizers
for plants and make your homes and solar panels.
I think if I were doing this, and I generally
like to aim huge which biases me, I’d start
with Dunbar’s number worth of people, generally
thought to be about 150-160 people and generally
considered your good minimum size for a long
term isolated outpost.
That means you can get away with a lot of
support personnel and specialists.
So talking profit, how much do they need to
send home each year?
First let me note that world gold production
is a few thousand tons a year right now, at
all time historic highs and the price has
stayed quite high, so we can assume you could
ship in a comparable amount at least before
it would start screwing with the market too
much, and we could safely assume if you were
matching that level of production you could
expect a revenue of a hundred billion dollars
a year.
That is actually the kind of cash that would
let us send hundred man crews off to these
spots.
It is also the sort of money that lets you
start building the kinds of things we discussed
in the early megastructures episodes, like
mass drivers and skyhooks, that are quite
expensive to build but let you do launches
much cheaper.
We don’t do these now because they cost
a lot to build and only save you money if
you are doing way more launches then we currently
need to do for our satellite grid and scientific
missions.
When you are shipping in thousands of tons
precious metals a year and shipping out thousands
of tons of personnel and equipment, they suddenly
get a lot more attractive and I would say
you could get launch costs all the way out
to the belt for a million bucks a ton.
And shipping home is a lot cheaper, no gravity
or air to fight on the way back.
If we spotted a hundred tons of gold just
sitting on the moon, it would not be worth
the money right now to go get that, it is
only worth about 4 billion bucks, but if it
were a thousand tons, 40 billion dollars worth,
then it probably would be since getting that
home wouldn’t take nearly as much fuel per
ton as the getting the equipment there.
The question then becomes, in terms of asteroids,
can they dig out and process more of the material
per year then the cost of getting them there?
If the answer is yes then it is definitely
a go.
And while science fiction loves to show the
poor asteroid miner, abused by governments
or companies back home, with ample historical
precedent to be sure, keep in mind that if
they are only getting to keep just 1% of what
they mined as compensation they would be millionaires
many times over again, so history is probably
not a great guide to this.
So I could easily see shipping home at a profit
anything you could expect to get more than
hundred thousand bucks a ton for, which not
only widens the market to include stuff like
silver and Germanium but also means the market
for gold and platinum and such can take a
huge dive, down to just a percent or two of
its current value, before it wouldn’t be
profitable to mine.
So while hauling home one huge million tons
gold asteroid would probably crash the market
for it worse than when aluminum became cheap
a century back, asteroid mining would probably
be an industry that could scale up a lot,
with production costs dropping as we got more
people out there and developed our infrastructure
and experience.
Whether or not we can do this profitably now,
or in the near future, is certainly up for
debate, and it might be we would discover
tricks for mining on Earth that were just
cheaper and the Earth’s crust alone is a
good deal more massive than the entire Asteroid
belt, albeit it probably doesn’t have as
much of some things as the asteroids do and
that would probably be fairly destructive
mining.
But the indicators are good for this option
as a way of getting us into space in a big
way and much better than Mars to be honest
in virtually every way.
I do not think asteroid mining is going to
become the new boom industry of the next couple
decades but I do think we might well go that
route in the not too distant future and while
I think over-enthusiasm for asteroid mining
certainly exists, I think dismissal of it
as an option is even less grounded in reality.
Naysaying is not the same thing as healthy
skepticism, though some folks confuse it for
just that.
In the long term though there is so much construction
material out in the asteroids, and so conveniently
distributed, that it perfect for the construction
of large numbers of rotating habitats or other
megastructures we have discussed on the channel,
and the asteroid belt is well suited to serves
as the beginning of a modest dyson sphere,
or dyson swarm, something we have talked about
a lot on this channel too.
These sort of habitats could house literally
quadrillions of people just by hollowing out
asteroids and reshaping them into rotating
habitats, and they do not have the heat bottleneck
we discussed in the video on Ecumenopolises.
Now let’s briefly mention the legal end
of things.
A common point brought up about asteroid mining,
or mining the moon, is that it is arguably
banned by treaty and currently anything you
do up in space requires you to be represented
by a nation.
The US did legalize asteroid mining in 2015
and the UN treaty on the matter is fairly
irrelevant anyway.
All the big powers are very pro-space development
and I cannot think of any nation that is opposed
to it either.
Not that there wouldn’t be legal battles,
but I wouldn’t expect them to interfere
much.
We’ve got centuries of precedent for mining
here on Earth to deal with people trying to
exert ridiculous claims on stakes, and doubtless
things like that will be tried in space too.
Laws can be changed and our current or recent
ones on this have always been more of a placeholder
than intended to be permanent.
As a rule, legal bodies and legislatures generally
prefer a wait and see approach with at most
loose guidelines, which is a generally a good
attitude on such things.
That said there is more to that especially
when we get into things like heritage sites
on the moon, for instance if someone decided
they wanted to mine the Apollo landing sites
that would obviously be a big issue, those
are considered historical treasures by all
of humanity not just the US just like the
pyramids or Stonehenge for instance.
If you want more information on that it was
a subject on the first episode of Spark Vizla’s
podcast, Monday Moonday’s, that came out
last week.
He’s a long time member of this channel’s
audience and he discussed the notion of doing
a Monday Moonday’s with me a while back
and I was quite impressed with episode one,
good detailed discussion of the subject and
what appears to be a promising podcast keeping
up on developments with space exploration.
I always get a kick out of plugging and promoting
any of the creative works that this channel
influenced and again I was impressed so I
am including a link to him over at soundcloud
down in the video description.
And I hope some of you will got there and
give it a listen and maybe some of you will
likewise consider trying your hand at podcasts,
art, or even videos on these subjects and
please let me know if you do.
You can also find me over on soundcloud, where
these episodes and some exclusive material
can be found to listen to or download, and
you can find all the videos on youtube or
at my website, IsaacArthur.net.
That will finish out for this week, hopefully
you have a clearer idea what asteroid mining
is all about.
For my part, I’m quite optimistic, in a
cautious way, about it being a path forward
for major development of space.
As mentioned, next week’s episode is going
to be on Post-Scarcity Civilizations, and
we will dig into the concept of what that
is, if it is even possible, and what speculations
folks have had about what that sort of society
might be like in terms of both positive and
negative aspects.
That’s next week and the week after that
we will take a deeper look at the notion of
a Technological Singularity.
To get alerts when those and other videos
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and don’t forget to hit the like button
if you enjoyed this video and share it with
others.
Questions and comments are always welcome,
the channel has being growing considerably
of late but I still manage to reply to most
comments, I certainly read them all, and hopefully
someone else will reply if I don’t get a
chance to.
So next week, Post-scarcity civilizations,
until then, thanks for watching, and have
a great day!
