Life is incredibly complicated, but for most 
of Earth’s history it was much simpler. Is  
it possible the Universe is full of planets with 
very simple life, and complex organisms are rare?
There are billions and billions of stars in this 
galaxy alone and billions of galaxies with their  
own seas of stars, and likely most of those 
stars have planets. Even if only 1% of those  
had a planet reasonably akin to Earth and in a 
warm orbit around its own star, there should be  
at least a billion places like Earth out there 
where life could have arisen. And this is the  
crux of the Fermi Paradox, the big question 
about where all the alien civilizations are,  
because the sheer volume of worlds out there life 
might have arisen on seems to demand that examples  
be so numerous that surely some made it to our 
level or higher and went on to settle the galaxy. 
This gives us what we call the filters of the 
Fermi Paradox, or the Great Filters. These  
are hurdles on the way to that goal of being 
visible galaxy-wide, and specifically by us,  
that presumably exist between a solar system 
forming and the day it sends out its own colony  
ships to claim new worlds. Some of those we 
call the Late Filters, problems civilizations  
like our own might still need to face on our 
road ahead, like finding out if interstellar  
colonization is even practical or avoiding 
existential crises like artificial intelligence. 
Others are middle filters on the rise from 
animal to where we are now, like if fire can  
be safely and practically used on that planet or 
if sophisticated intelligence is a trait evolution  
is prone to producing. While yet others are very 
early filters, those we would qualify as Rare Sun  
or Rare Earth filters, like if a star is in the 
right size range or has sufficient metallicity  
to allow rocky planets, and if a rocky planet 
was the right mass and temperature, contained  
enough of certain substances like surface 
water or elements like phosphorus or nitrogen. 
We’ve explored many of these filters before and 
how they might be stronger filters than we think,  
or even weaker filters, such as when we’ve 
explored biology based around ammonia or  
silicon instead of liquid water and carbon.
But one we’ve never spent much time on,  
and which is sort of staring us in the face, 
is the possibility that life never gets very  
complex. That the galaxy might be full 
of planets where the most sophisticated  
things on it are algae and lichen, or where cells 
never developed nuclei, never got multicellular,  
or developed sexual reproduction.
That life might be common enough,  
but that it rarely gets very complex.
Now what do I mean by ‘staring us in the  
face’. Well a couple things, first, life has 
been on Earth for around 4 billion years now  
and we still don’t know quite when it first 
emerged but it may have been about as soon  
as physically possible. We don’t know if that 
was good luck or if life just starts emerging  
very nearly as soon as the conditions permit, 
it could be that worlds identical to Earth on  
average need a trillions years for life to pop 
up and we’re just the outlier, and indeed Earth's  
conditions changed a lot since life first emerged.
Nonetheless, it’s hard to ignore that for the  
super-majority of Earth’s history simple 
life has existed on the planet, and the  
periods with an absence of life and now, with 
complex life, are both combined a lot shorter.  
Perhaps half a billion years after earth formed 
life popped up, possibly sooner or a bit later,  
then around half a billion years ago we get the 
Cambrian Explosion, and we have a period over 3  
billions years in the middle of that where life 
was quite simple. Indeed one could argue that once  
complexity started rolling it rolled real fast, 
and more so when we consider the sample size. 
Because here’s the other thing, we can say 
humans dominate this planet and that’s true  
enough but the vast majority of biomass 
is simple organisms, and a pound of those  
organisms is trillions of them, where it's 
barely one smaller organ of a larger organism. 
Think of evolution as flipping a coin each time a 
new organism emerges, heads it's done better than  
the average organism on its genetic lottery, 
and tails it did worse. A human generation of  
20 years might produce two to four new organisms 
who get that coin flip, and several billion humans  
planetwide flipping those coins in a generation, 
while bacteria in a single cup of water, or single  
human stomach, get to flip that same number of 
coins and do it often in as little as single day,  
not a human generation of decades. In that 
sense, there’s more evolution going on in a  
single human stomach than the entire human race.
We are probably several million generations  
removed from the first mammal, and likely not 
even a billion generations removed from the  
first ancestor we’d dub an animal, yet any modern 
bacteria has around a trillion generations since  
that first bacteria arrived in which they 
have not fundamentally altered that much. 
That is, of course, oversimplifying, but for 
all that multicellularity has separately evolved  
a couple dozen times that we know of, that’s 
actually still very uncommon when you consider  
the sample size, then contrast it to evolutionary 
events inside mutli-cellular organisms. You, the  
epitome of complexity in nature, have trillions of 
cells in your body, and most of them are bacteria,  
and the remainder are mostly simple red and white 
blood cells. There are literally hundreds of times  
more bacteria in your body alone than there 
are living mammals on this planet right now. We  
estimate perhaps 130 billion mammals alive today, 
across about 5500 species, and humans making up an  
amazing 6% of that these days. Most of these have 
a generation of a year or more, and so we might  
estimate around 10 quintillion mammals have ever 
lived. For scale, that’s how many grains of sand  
we believe exist on our planet, across all its 
beaches and deserts. If you wrote down the name of  
every mammal who ever existed so tiny it could be 
inscribed on one of those grains, you would need  
all those beaches and deserts for your catalog.
But we estimate nearly a trillion times that  
many bacteria are alive at this very moment and 
reproduce around once a day, for over a trillion  
days. That means there’s been a trillion-trillion 
times as many of them as mammals, and again for  
most of this planet’s history neither mammals 
nor any of our complex cousins like birds, fish,  
and reptiles were even around.
Let’s put this in some scale,  
we said we had as many mammals ever living 
as grains of sand, but if all those grains of  
sand were the current organisms on Earth, 
only one of the grains would be mammals,  
not even one per species, just one for all.
Now let’s imagine the solar system's history  
as a clock, which we’ll semi-arbitrarily put 
at 4.8 billion years just to make each hour  
200 million years long. The Sun formed at 1 in 
the morning, 4.6 billion years ago, and about  
1:30 AM the Moon had finished coalescing. By 5:30 
AM life had emerged, possibly a good bit sooner,  
Eukaryotic life with cellular nuclei 
didn’t pop up till early afternoon. 
We think that first fish fossil is 
from 530 million years ago, at 9:21 pm,  
the first insect fossil, 10:05 pm, the first 
amphibian at 10:10, the first reptile at 10:26 pm,  
the first mammal at 10:57 pm, the first bird at 
11:15, the first primate and the last dinosaur,  
both 11:40 pm. Australopithecus arrived 1 minute 
ago and Homo Sapiens about 1 second ago. All of  
human recorded history is in the last tenth of 
a second of this planet’s single day, the whole  
universe is just three days old, and the Sun dies 
late tomorrow night. Stars will form and live and  
die for a year or two to come, bigger ones might 
live just a few minutes, the smallest for a year,  
much longer for life to develop on them.
So not only do we see that virtually every  
class of the animal kingdom sprang up in under 
4 hours of that planetary day, we see the entire  
animal kingdom in its modern phylum and classes 
aren't even three hours old yet. There’s debate  
on how many other kingdoms there should be in 
taxonomy, the original two of plants and animals,  
flora and fauna, obviously doesn’t even include 
bacteria, most of all life now and in the past,  
and also we aren’t really sure where 
to put the beginning on plants. 
But the other thing that the clock reminds 
us of is that advances can happen fast. Our  
great filter series has a handful of episodes 
covering billions of years and one of those is  
rare technology, and as we noted, technology 
is only seconds old on that planetary clock,  
and less if we start after the stone age.
Things can snowball quickly. For around  
a million years ‘technology’ for humans meant 
fire, sticks sharpened in fire, and stone knives  
and axes. Sometime in the last 10-30,000 years, 
only a few percent of the time we had technology,  
we finally started getting a bit more serious 
about it and transitioned from the Paleolithic  
era to the Mesolithic era. Pottery, agriculture, 
and several minor but noteworthy inventions start  
appearing, and only for a few percent of that time 
have we really been doing science and spitting  
out new technologies like a machine gun.
This episode is not on Rare Technology,  
which already has its own entry in our Great 
Filters Series, as does the idea that intelligence  
might be rare, but it demonstrates that things 
can avalanche quickly and in a small group. 
But only once it gets going, and we can fool 
ourselves with numbers and scale. Whatever  
the odds of any of the individual big steps 
in evolution since the tetrapods emerged,  
they were vastly more likely on a per-organism 
basis than multicellularity is. And we tend to  
look at multicellularity emerging many times that 
we know of and assume that surely is not filter,  
but we need to be mindful that the period between 
when life emerged and when multicellularity first  
appeared is longer than the period that animals 
have been around, along with every mutation they  
have accrued, and that there were trillions and 
trillions of times more candidates to mutate  
multicellularity from then the entire pool of 
animals. So every mutation an animal has had  
is vastly more likely, again on a per-organism 
basis, than multi-cellularity or any of the other  
early mutations from that 3 billion year period.
It is also a far bigger statistical pool making it  
easier to speak with confidence about. Ten people 
each flipping a few coins doesn’t tell you much  
about if those coins were fair and balanced or 
if one might have been 55% likely to come down  
heads. Similarly, some trait that popped up in 
a single species that might only have 100,000  
living members at over maybe a million generations 
is certainly a bigger pool but it isn’t anything  
like the immensity of those bacteria numbers 
and generations. So while conditions unique  
to earth might alter the probability of 
a simple lifeform’s mutation catching on,  
we should be able to speak with real certainty, at 
least to an order of magnitude, about how likely  
the mutation was to occur in the first place.
We don’t know the odds on that first lifeform  
that emerged, it might be some fluke event 
that even on a planet-sized object over a  
trillion years was lottery-odds of happening, or 
it could be something so common that its actually  
happened on Earth repeatedly but those future 
proto-organisms always failed to flourish inside  
an existing ecosystem. We can say it's not more 
likely than once in several thousand years though,  
back on proto-Earth anyway, as if it were it would 
be very unlikely we wouldn’t have had several  
competing biologies by now, some of which 
functioned better in certain extreme conditions. 
Though we don’t know that all life descends 
from the same single original proto-cell,  
we just tend to assume that it would have been 
able to spread it’s copies over the entire  
planet fairly quickly compared to something 
effectively identical popping up elsewhere,  
similar to our reason for assuming that if 
intelligent life develops space travel in a galaxy  
less often than once in a million years then a 
single species will settle that whole galaxy.  
It will get to every planet before a competitor 
a million years behind gets into space at all. 
For our purposes today it does not actually 
matter if life popped up once or ten times  
before it took hold planetwide, and whether the 
first cell died before dividing and had to pop up  
six times before one managed to evolve enough to 
spread out of a thermal vent’s habitable region  
before it went extinct or if fifty different 
abiogenesis moments occurred over ten million  
years and our common descent is from 10 of them 
because one managed to evolve a DNA swapping  
or stealing ability and got DNA from 9 others in 
the process of everything else getting wiped out. 
Which is a valid caveat to add to our early 
discussion, one reason we can ‘evolve faster’,  
as it were, is by sexual reproduction swapping 
mutant genes, and another is that our DNA is a  
lot longer than smaller organisms so has more 
traits and more room for mutation. Those are  
the mechanisms that allow this explosion of 
evolutionary improvements in complex life. 
As such, I think it’s fair to suggest that 
one of those rare complexities in early  
life that matters is some way to swap DNA, 
and we’ll look at sexual reproduction as a  
possible Fermi Paradox filter later today too.
Though note that doesn’t have to be sexual  
reproduction and doesn’t necessarily have to be 
DNA swapping. We shouldn’t be assuming DNA is  
universal, especially as many processes don’t 
use it in favor of RNA, and the properties of  
some other life-blueprint molecule might be 
very different when it comes to mutation.  
Beyond that though, we can hijack other organisms. 
Mitochondria don’t have any of your DNA in them.  
We do have examples of lateral or horizontal 
gene transfer in nature between species,  
instead of the usual vertical transfer we see from 
parent to offspring. Horizontal gene transfer is  
the primary mechanism for how bacteria get 
resistant to antibiotics or pesticides. 
Given that, we could indeed have some bizarre 
ecology on Earth of dozens of different origin  
life forms we mixed and matched relatively early 
on, as opposed to everything tracing back to a  
single original organism. In any event, the 
easier it is to share useful mutant traits,  
especially earlier on, the more it indicates that 
some of these key advances in early life were very  
unlikely to occur and might be a major filter 
themselves if the specific key mutation did turn  
out to be less likely than not to have evolved 
thus far. Typically, once in a trillion years,  
not a hundred million, but we won that lotto.
What are some of those complexities though? 
Well, some we can dismiss, for all that we can 
make a good case that multicellularity is a  
rare mutation compared to those in modern 
organisms, it still separately happened  
many times so isn’t some once in a trillion 
years event we lucked out on by early draw. 
Nerves are probably too simple to qualify, and 
for example, as complex as a human eyeball is,  
all you need on the front is a light sensitive 
cell, and then there’s several paths to making  
something eyeball-like, with some 
estimates arguing it could get from  
simplest photosensitive cells to full eyeball 
in well under a million years, and the eyeball  
is that classic example of evolution seeming 
implausible on first glance, pardon the pun. 
Many of the advancements in simple life fall into 
that zone where it would seem inevitable once you  
get that first mutation in that direction 
and where evidence indicates it did happen  
more than once, though we should be cautious 
using words like ‘inevitable’ or ‘likely’ when  
it took trillions of trillions of organisms 
alive at once for millions of generations for  
that step to occur. It was insanely unlikely, it 
just had a huge number of critters playing that  
lottery every day for a very long time.
But speaking of photo-sensitive cells,  
one of the most important mutations to pop 
up was photosynthesis and critically because  
it allows a vastly larger number of lifeforms 
and raw quantity of biomass to exist. A planet  
without photosynthesis might only support 
1% of the population and thus might need  
100 times as long for a critical mutation to 
occur. So it’s a very good potential filter. 
Let me put some caveats on that though. First, 
we think photosynthesis popped up very early too  
possibly within a few hundred million years of 
life emerging, and before it there would have  
been a lot less lifeforms as they might, 
for instance, have only been able to have  
dwelled within a few meters of geothermal vent, 
which were hardly plentiful. This at least adds  
to its role as a possible great filter as it is 
quite likely many planets might not have enough  
geothermal vents to support much of an ecosystem 
and indeed they might be weak and short-lived,  
or so spread out that organisms could not 
migrate from that first vent to other ones. 
This reasoning is why I tend to like 
photosynthesis even better than eukaryotic life  
emerging as a filter, which is another good one 
we’ll get to in a moment. However, photosynthesis  
is not a single massive jump, we think early 
photosynthesis might have been an adaptation  
to weakly absorb low wavelength light from oceanic 
thermal vents, 3.4 billion years ago, not visible  
sunlight, and that cyanobacteria didn’t arise for 
700 million more years, 2.7 billion years ago.  
If true, then this is a different process than 
normal photosynthesis as typically this involves  
taking 6 carbon dioxide molecules and 6 water 
molecules and using sunlight to turn them into 6  
oxygen molecules and one glucose sugar molecule.
This early low-wavelength photosynthesis would  
still have used six carbon dioxide molecules but 
used six hydrogen sulfide molecules instead of  
water as the other material changed. Hydrogen 
sulfide is 2 hydrogen and one sulfur atom,  
as opposed to water, which is two hydrogen and one 
oxygen. This is not usually what folks mean when  
suggesting alternate biologies using sulfur as it 
still ends with a glucose molecule, but you end  
up with 6 water molecules and 12 sulfur atoms 
leftover. This is pretty hypothetical still,  
for one thing we still don’t know if geothermal 
vents are where life emerged or anything about  
their typical frequency and properties, but 
it has the advantage that photosynthesis  
this way is producing molecular oxygen gas.
Now as we know, an oxygen-rich atmosphere  
is vital to larger and faster organisms like 
animals, but oxygen reacts to everything so  
even once cyanobacteria arrived later on and began 
pumping out vastly more glucose, and oxygen gas,  
it took hundreds of millions of years to build 
up to quantity as so much of the local rock could  
absorb it, giving us those banded iron formations. 
There’s no reason to think the dynamics here on  
earth would be the norm, many planets might 
have cycled new geological material up too  
fast to get oxygen saturated ever, while others 
might have done it too slowly and poisoned life  
off before it adapted to having oxygen around.
The weakest argument for photosynthesis as a  
great filter is that there are several different 
photosynthetic processes out there already,  
not all of which would require sunlight to 
function, and that we would expect sunlight to  
reach ecosystems on many planets. Some worlds 
might have ten miles of ocean between their  
highest thermal vents and their sea surface, 
some might have an atmosphere so thick the  
only light you ever saw on the surface was from 
lightning strikes, but those sorts of conditions  
should not be strong filters themselves. Albeit 
they may both be significant ones, but we would  
still expect plenty of worlds with conditions like 
ours in that regard, not a vast scarcity of them. 
One way or another, photosynthesis had hit its 
stride long before the first eukaryotic cells  
arrived, and that arrival also came after our 
atmosphere had more or less settled into its  
modern form of mostly nitrogen and most of the 
remainder being oxygen. They are hardly newcomers,  
they popped up about 2.2 billion years ago, 
but that still means they were sufficiently  
hard to evolve that for at least a billion 
and a half years they were no shows, and most  
of that time with plenty of photosynthesis 
around to power huge ecosystems. And indeed,  
the vast majority of organisms are not 
Eukaryotic, though their combined biomass  
is a lot higher than that of prokaryotes.
And that’s an important thing to note because  
people tend to think of Eukaryotes and think 
of them differing by having a nuclei, which is  
quite true, but your typical Prokaryotic cell is 
100 to 5000 nanometers wide, on an order of the  
wavelengths of visible light and near-IR, hard to 
see even under a microscope, whereas a Eukaryotic  
cell is typically 10,000 to 100,000 nanometers 
wide, though they can get a good deal bigger and  
an ostrich egg, for instance, is a single cell.
But just those typical ones represent a huge  
difference in volume and mass. Meaning even 
the bigger prokaryotes compared to the smaller  
eukaryotes have an order of magnitude less 
stuff in them, while on the other end,  
smaller prokaryotes can have a billion times less 
material in them than one bigger eukaryote. Think  
of the typical Eukaryotes as a country, with a 
million to perhaps even a billion people in them,  
now think of a prokaryote then as everywhere from 
a small shack one person lives in to a modest  
metropolis of a hundred thousand.
And the nuclei still is very  
important here, think of it as the capital city 
of that country, but in your Eukaryotic cells,  
you might have half a million mitochondria, which 
we usually assume were prokaryotes and ones that  
existed before eukaryotes since every eukaryotic 
cell has mitochondria, they’re not just different  
because the have a nucleus and that’s why I’d 
emphasize the size difference. It’s not a small  
dog and a big dog, it’s generally a canoe and 
a cruise ship, and if you picture a big cruise  
ship with a lot of little lifeboats on the side, 
that’s your mitochondria, except there’s way more. 
Sometime way back a cell absorbed another cell 
but didn’t destroy it and got a symbiotic process  
going on, presumably allowing mitochondria to 
massively simplify themselves into a power plant  
while the wider cell around them fed off that and 
fueled them. But we think this might have happened  
more than once, that eukaryotic cells might have 
absorbed something besides mitochondria. It’s a  
bit of a ‘chicken or egg?’ situation now because 
we tended to assume that some bigger prokaryotic  
cell absorbed another one and this snowballed 
eukaryotes, but you can make a good case the  
bigger prokaryotic cell already had a nucleus 
and that this is part of what allowed safe  
endosymbiosis to go on when it swallowed that 
mitochondria-precursor and didn’t digest it and  
survived it multiplying inside itself, which would 
not tend to seem safe or healthy. Without that  
nucleus its DNA would probably have been damaged 
by the mitochondria growing all around inside it. 
Again diagrams show you a tiny mitochondria 
inside a bigger proto-eukaryote but not really  
to scale any more than solar models of planets 
because while the size difference was probably  
much smaller in the original ones, modern 
human cells contain hundreds of thousands  
of mitochondria and those originals ones probably 
had plenty of room for a decent population too.  
Otherwise it probably wouldn't have worked 
as too initially disruptive, or explosive. 
We have the same thing having occurred with 
chloroplasts in plants, and nature shows us some  
other events of endosymbiosis, so I’m hesitant 
to say this is all that improbable of an event,  
but multicellularity evolved dozens of 
times and to the best of our knowledge  
eukaryotes evolved just once, and a long 
while after Earth had developed life,  
photosynthesis, and an oxygen rich atmosphere.
This also laid the groundwork for more complex  
multicellular organisms. There are no 
multicellular prokaryotes though there’s  
plenty of organisms like us who use prokaryotes 
heavily inside them, and not just mitochondria.  
This event, or events, as multicellularity evolved 
separately repeatedly, came after eukaryotes  
emerged and so too did sexual reproduction.
Now you can make a case that sexual reproduction  
is vital to complex life but I think it's 
weaker to argue it’s a filter, as life was  
quite plentiful before then and some life such 
as fungi continue to reproduce both sexually and  
asexually. We also have a miscellaneous category 
of eukaryotes that don’t qualify as animals,  
fungi, or plants called protists, and these don’t 
all share any known common ancestor before that  
first eukaryote but includes algae, slime molds, 
and amoeba, and sexual reproduction popped up in  
some protists pretty early compared to animals.
In any event, sexual reproduction is a decent  
rare complexity filter, though I’d tend to imagine 
not a very major one and probably gets suggested  
as much because it’s a bit scandalous or amusing 
to bring up. Once we get into the animal phase,  
obviously the ability to create 
sophisticated lifeforms, swap DNA,  
and have social and family structures is a pretty 
big deal, it's just that like multicellularity  
it's not seen as quite the uphill lift to 
have gotten compared to the Eukaryotes itself. 
I have to admit Eukaryotes were not a favorite 
option of mine for a long time, my friend John  
Michael Godier sold them to me as his preferred 
early Great Filter and he has discussed them as  
an option in more depth on his show, which I 
highly recommend. I still tend to tilt more to  
a robust photosynthetic ecology as the stronger 
candidate though it’s close and both are good and  
as reminder any filter that life has a decent 
chance of tripping over on its way to galactic  
empire adds into the whole. Years back we listed 
off 50 commonly suggested Rare Earth filters that  
made a good case for being coin flip odds or far 
worse of passing, and even at coin flip odds,  
your chance of flipping heads 50 times in a row is 
2^50 or about 1 in a quadrillion, which if true,  
even if none of those were worse, would mean 
it would be improbable for life to get to our  
current state even once in an entire galaxy, 
and indeed in its thousand nearest neighbors. 
What I mean by a robust photosynthetic ecology 
incidentally is that it has to permit a level  
of biomass and metabolic energy flux similar to 
our own planet. It would be very easy for Earth  
to have more atmosphere than it does now, for 
instance, and have less sunlight as a result, or  
have deeper oceans and thus fewer options for life 
to get nutrients up near the top of the sea where  
sunlight can reach. Or again for those thermal 
vents to just not be common and stable enough to  
allow life to flourish and migrate to other vents 
and eventually to other environments. All any of  
these things have to have done is slope evolution 
down to about half speed to ensure very nearly no  
place could have had intelligent life yet and 
that most planets wouldn’t remain habitable for  
the full duration. Indeed Earth only needed to run 
maybe 15% slower on Darwin’s Ladder to have lost  
our oceans not long after life first crawled 
out of them. And even a planet identical to  
us but just a few percent lower in mass might have 
already lost that atmosphere and all life with it. 
But to return to multicellularity 
for a moment, and to wrap us up,  
I think we need to be mindful not to just wave 
aside the importance of that because it popped up  
independently repeatedly. Because it also didn’t. 
Even if we widen the concept of multicellularity  
to include non-human DNA organisms in us 
beyond mitochondria like our gut bacteria,  
most organisms on this planet, both now and in the 
past, have not adopted a multi-cellular existence,  
even when we broaden that to border on viewing 
complex ecosystems as something close to being an  
organism in their own right. And I would argue the 
line between large organisms like us and complex  
ecosystems made of many separate organisms can 
get pretty blurry and I suspect can get even more  
blurry on alien planets with alien ecologies.
Nonetheless, bacteria may not be king but they  
sure have the numbers and there’s no reason you 
couldn’t have an ecosystem that evolved toward  
filling their niches with larger organisms, either 
directly or in that hazy-edge way our mitochondria  
or gut bacteria might count as. Food chains 
do not automatically go smaller to bigger nor  
do they require anything of any specific size. 
And indeed maybe left to itself, sans humans,  
life might have gone that way eventually, 
which as we discussed in the Gaia Hypothesis,  
some argue might be the final state of an ecology. 
However, it does not seem so inclined based  
on our past or present and as we discussed in that 
same episode, the rival Medea Hypothesis argues  
that biology is dominated by bacteria and bigger 
organisms tend to pop up and go extinct a lot too. 
In this way it may be that complexity itself, of 
any type, is the oddball in biology, and that when  
we get into the galaxy at large and land on 
Earth like worlds we’ll find plenty of life,  
but none more complex than the simplest algae 
mat, and maybe not even as complex as that.
One of the common worries about the Fermi 
Paradox is that aliens might be common and  
prone to spying on us, and essentially keeping 
us in a Zoo, or that civilizations might turn  
pretty restrictive and big-brothery, and we’ll 
be exploring some cousins of these ideas in next  
month’s episode Fermi Paradox, Cronus Scenarios, 
and then in Fermi Paradox: Interdiction in May,  
but you don’t have to look too far to see worrying 
trends on privacy and technology these days. 
Even before the internet there were plenty of 
folks who traded your data around, selling it like  
a commodity they owned, but the internet made that 
so much more common, and artificial intelligence  
is only making both legal and illegal trade in 
your data easier. Just between 2021 and 2022 the  
number of victims of identity theft rose 41.5%.
Even ignoring illegal use, there are public  
sites where your address, phone, family 
members, religious and political beliefs,  
and even license plate number can be found online. 
You do have the right to have that taken down,  
but you have to request it, and it would take 
you years to do it manually, just once. And  
you’d need to repeat the process every few months 
as data brokers continue collecting your data and  
creating new records, using AI. But Incogni can 
turn the tables around, and use AI to find your  
information and send takedown requests for you.
All you have to do is sign up, give them  
permission to act on your behalf to delete data, 
then they go to work, and your data goes away. You  
can check up on the progress and see who had your 
data and how detailed and risky it was considered.  
Incogni makes these data harvesters take your 
info down, and they keep doing it too, making  
sure that it stays down.
Incogni is available to try out  
risk free for 30 days, use code IsaacArthur 
at the link in the episode description to  
get an exclusive 60% off an annual Incogni 
plan. Go to https://incogni.com/isaacarthur  
and take your data back.
So as mentioned we’ll be  
returning to the topic of the Fermi Paradox in a 
couple of weeks to look at the Cronus Scenarios,  
where a spacefaring civilization may actively 
seek to prevent or wipe out their own colonies. 
We’ve got a few episodes first, starting 
with a discussion of the theory, creation,  
and usage of kugelblitz micro black holes, for 
powering spaceships or entire civilizations,  
on March 28th. Then we’ll close out the month 
with a look at multi-planetary empires, on Sunday,  
March 31st, to explore what nations controlling 
several worlds might actually be like and how  
they’d function. Then we’ll start April off 
on the 4th with a discussion of space based  
solar power and several other clean energy options 
from space that might be able to help us power not  
only our orbital infrastructure, but Earth itself, 
including options like Earth’s own magnetic field. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you’d like to donate or help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s 
episodes early and ad free on our streaming  
service, Nebula, along with hours of bonus content 
like Crystal Aliens, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
