This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
A long time ago in an engineering project
far, far away, I had occasion to help on some
death ray designs.
Unfortunately the prototype was destroyed
by militant protestors and the two gentlemen
running the show had a falling out, but I
remain optimistic about future attempts to
build death rays and the potential peaceful
purposes for people’s prosperity.
So it’s another Scifi Sunday here on Science
and Futurism with Isaac Arthur and I am your
aforementioned host, Isaac Arthur.
On this show we mostly focus on future technologies
under known science but once a month we like
to let our hair down and put our Vulcan ears
on and dip deeper into science fiction concepts.
Today we will be looking at the classic Death
Ray, what it is, why you might want it, and
if such a thing is possible.
Now as to why you might want it, while a death
ray is obviously useful to any supervillain
looking to upgrade their toolbox, the thing
we always have to keep in mind is that weapons
and tools tend to be interchangeable, swords
to plowshares and so on.
Even variations of Death Rays that literally
just kill someone with no outside damage have
peaceful applications, like potentially being
able to be calibrated to kill something specific
like a virus or microorganism, while the classic
giant laser is handy for everything from mining
to asteroid defense to energy beaming or pushing
spacecraft to other solar systems.
Indeed such things aren’t usually called
death rays, but handy devices, and the big
concern is often if they could be repurposed
or hijacked to serve as a death ray.
So we’ll be looking at what might serve
in that role and how we might protect against
such malign reuse.
Of course we’ll also discuss how to malignly
use them.
So as we discussed in last month’s Scifi
Sunday on Lightsabers and Laser Pistols, these
sort of directed energy weapons have a long
history in science fiction, but we have two
early accounts of them in science.
First from Edwin Scott, who claimed he had
developed a death ray and tried to sell it
to the RAF precursor, the British Air Ministry,
a century ago in 1924, for killing humans
and bringing down airplanes, but he never
demonstrated it or produced a working one.
The next one is a ‘Death Beam’ and comes
from the famous and controversial Nikolai
Tesla, though he explicitly said it was not
a Death Ray and such a thing wasn’t viable,
instead preferring ‘Teleforce’ and this
is more along the lines of the electromagnetic
cannons we often discuss for rapidly accelerating
metal pellets or slugs, such as a mass driver.
Again it specifically was not a death ray,
but thanks to the New York Sun and New York
Times it got mislabeled as one in 1934, and
also as a “Peace Ray”.
Again Tesla himself was specifically saying
such beams or rays weren’t possible and
we should use electromagnetically accelerated
bullets instead, but it stuck in the public’s
awareness.
Incidentally the Laser – Light Amplification
by Stimulated Emission of Radiation - was
first demonstrated in 1958, and Scott and
Tesla were discussing this in 1924 and 1934
respectively, and while Einstein raised the
basic concept of Lasers in 1917 in terms of
stimulated emission, that didn’t suggest
a beam, and it wasn’t until 1939 that Valentin
Fabrikant even theorized you could use stimulated
emission to amplify radiation, this still
implied no beam.
Again Tesla called it a “Teleforce” and
it got confused as a Death Ray, I’ve also
seen folks confuse it as a precursor to an
equivalent of a Tractor Beam, but it’s just
a machine gun that runs on electromagnets
rather than gunpowder, throwing electromagnetic
slugs or pellets out, not energy beams or
rays.
Prior to that the notion was that light and
energy could be focused in, but no sort of
tight beam was even considered.
This episode is not on Lasers but the basic
notion is that you can hit an atom with a
light particle, a photon, of a specific frequency
to make it spit out another one, to stimulate
emission of a photon or electromagnetic radiation.
You do this between a pair of mirrors, one
totally reflective and the other nearly so,
and a beam of light will come out of that
latter mirror.
That’s a laser and we also have the Maser,
which does this with microwaves rather than
visible light, though both are electromagnetic
radiation, and we have other chunks of the
spectrum you can do this with too but in general
we would just call it an “Ultraviolet Laser”
or UV Laser rather and a UVaser or maybe IRaser
in the case of Infrared, though given that
heat rays are a popular option for rayguns,
and an infrared laser is a heat ray, a powerful
one for vaporizing beams being called an Iraser
or “Eraser” would be apt.
We’re simplifying the explanation of how
lasers work for today, but that’s it in
a nutshell, and without that approach you
can only focus light and energy in on a spot
using the classic mirror and lens approach
with a focal length.
This has been contemplated as a weapon for
a long time, maybe all the way back to Archimedes
time, for using mirrors and lenses to focus
sunlight and burn things.
However this requires some very big lenses
if you want a focal length able to shoot down
airplanes or hit anyone not close enough to
throw a rock at.
As an example, while the Hubble Telescope
is not our most powerful lens, it's certainly
up there, in both size and literal location,
and its focal length is a bit under 60 meters
or 200 feet.
Hubble certainly looks like a big cannon,
but in spite of being able to see across the
Universe its lens and mirror system, if reworked
for weaponization, would not let you nail
even other satellites in orbit of our planet
by just shining a bright light at it and letting
that be pushed and directed into a ray.
Pre-Laser this was how you focused a beam
down to be a weapon, just a bigger version
of the magnifying glass using sunlight to
kill ants.
We have a device called “The Sun Gun”
suggested by Hermann Oberth in 1929, Oberth,
also known for the Oberth Effect, is one of
the founding fathers of rocketry, but in this
case his suggested use for those rockets would
have been to haul up a 100-meter wide mirror
to concentrate sunlight on a spot on Earth.
I should note that we do have some methods
for producing pretty impressive lenses in
space, the low gravity and rotation offer
some options for spinning a liquid lens up
for instance, and at the top of the atmosphere,
up there in Low Earth Orbit, the Sun is hitting
Earth with 1360 Watts per square meter of
light in various frequencies, and a 100-meter
diameter lens would have 10.7 Megawatts of
power available to it, which would definitely
be lethal, and rapidly so, if focused down
into some beam a few meters across.
A 1000 meter wide one would offer a hundred
times the power, over a gigawatt, delivered
down on a tighter spot.
The problem of course is actually focusing
it down that tight.
On the other hand, we do have lasers easily
capable of keeping a decently tight dot on
an object at even larger distances, though
they spread out eventually too.
Lasers do indeed have a focal length.
Now again the episode is not on Lasers and
that’s largely because they are not good
options for death rays, but when it comes
to just pouring energy down on a distant target
quickly and accurately they’ve got a lot
going for them.
On the other hand an upgrade on Oberth’s
Sun Gun might be a liquid lens stored in compressed
form in a stealthy satellite waiting to pop
open, spin out a very wide thin lens, and
aim it down on some place.
We’ve contemplated various giant lenses-
particularly in our megatelescopes episode
– able to make Oberth’s suggested 100-meter
concave mirror look like a hand mirror.
There’s little need for perfection in such
a lens as we’re not worried about resolving
an image, like with a telescope, just pouring
light down on some spot, so a cheap big and
expendable lens works well, and orbital weaponry
is ideally expendable because its easily retaliated
against, see our Orbital Bombardment episode.
So a cheap and replaceable giant inflatable
or spinnable lens and mirror works nicely
as a weapon.
Of course you don’t really want such things
as weapons because a nuke would work much
better, though a Sun Gun has the advantage
of speed, a signal to one can presumably have
it inflating or spinning up in under a minute
and aimed on target.
Still it's more their use as a hijackable
weapon that worries us.
It's nice to be able to focus a gigawatt of
juice down on some offending installation,
or city, but day to day it's far nicer to
have the ability to focus it down wider on
a power collector.
Power needs vary by time, season, nation,
and household size but we usually put it at
about 1000 watts, or 1 kilowatt, per household.
That’s less than a square meter of orbital
power collection, and a 100 meter wide Oberth
Sun Gun would supply about 10,000 households,
and a few of the kilometer wide gigawatt ones
would run a major metropolis.
Now that’s assuming you had 100% conversion
of sunlight in orbit to electricity in a house,
which ain’t happening, but even a 10% efficiency
rating would make this very tempting and is
hardly ambitious under known science and engineering.
Getting things up to space is expensive, but
all the equipment needed for power satellites
and receivers down on the ground is simplistic.
See our power satellites episode for the full
details, but in short form if we could manufacture
up in space for anything approaching the cost
down here, then supplying Earth with power
this way is cheap, abundant, renewable for
the next 4 billion years, and is even an upgrade
on Fusion.
Those are your two big hurdles though, getting
it into orbit cheaply and durably or making
it there, and the concern about it being used
as a Sun Gun or Maser.
The intent is to send the power down in Microwave
format.
Microwaves are easier to control than light,
and highly-efficient to convert to and from
sunlight to maser to electricity, but that
Maser is a potential weapon and so is the
enormous collection of mirrors used to gather
the light into the power production on the
satellite making the microwave beam, they
can probably be turned into a crude sun gun.
Now before we get into preventing that, let
me just note that even if we couldn’t this
is hardly a superweapon.
Anything in orbit is easily wrecked during
a counterattack, and a giant thin mirror reflecting
the sun isn’t exactly hard to locate and
target, given that even an Oberth Sun Gun
should be naked-eye visible when deployed,
let alone some massive multi-kilometer power
satellite array.
They’re also nowhere near nuclear weapons
in destructive potential.
A big Kilometer-wide array can presumably
focus a whole gigawatt down on a place, but
that means it needs 4 second to release the
equivalent of a ton of TNT in damage, whereas
even small nukes are measured in kilotons,
or thousands of tons of TNT, and a megaton
nuclear device would represent something like
a month worth of energy release by such a
beam.
Which isn’t to imply its weak, except in
comparison to a nuclear bomb, again it is
releasing more energy each second than several
large artillery shells going off, however
it does have to be compared to a nuclear bomb
because folks able to build big orbital power
satellites can build nukes too.
Now for hijacking one, it’s not going to
happen in seconds and it isn’t going to
result in cities being razed, but one hijacked
to be used as a Sun Gun might be able to wreck
a lot of buildings in the few minutes between
seizing control and getting shot with intent
to destroy, though you could also have beams
redirected at it meant just to shove it off
focus which we might permit to be fairly automated,
since an unfocused pushing beam under computer
control is less worrisome than a primary weapon.
Barring that it could do some real damage
before being destroyed but nothing cataclysmic.
And again this is assuming some sort of setup
that let’s them decently focus the beam
too.
The Maser is a different story, as it's already
designed with focus in mind, but the thing
is it's designed to focus to a specific amount,
and there’s no reason you’d design it
to have an ability to focus much tighter.
It should have a range of focal length so
that it can beam down to a receiver station
a few hundred kilometers directly below it
or one off at an angle and maybe a few thousand
kilometers, but it's not going to be built
to focus more than a kilowatt per square meter
and that’s not going to do much damage.
Microwaves are those things that heat our
food up in the microwave oven, but they’re
also what we use for wifi signals and radar
because they are absorbed by so few things
including air.
Your microwave oven is built out of materials
that are reflective to microwaves to make
them bounce over and over till some food inside
absorbs them, a crack in a microwave that
lets it leak – which usually run at about
a kilowatt – isn’t going to kill you.
Though it isn’t super safe either, it still
means these masers from above are vastly less
dangerous than other routine forms of power
we already use, and you can’t just jury-rig
one to focus some kilometer-wide power beam
into some meter wide death-ray, anymore than
you can jury-rig a pair of binoculars and
a flashlight into some laser rifle.
Building a focusing apparatus for some device
is hard and expensive, and harder and more
expensive the tighter the focus you want,
so you don’t casually build in more focus
than you need into a power beaming satellite,
given that its spending a ton of money for
no better benefit than needing to worry it
could be hijacked as a weapon now.
This doesn’t mean it isn’t a good weapon,
a powerful microwave signal beamed at a city
is going to play crazy with communications
there and shoot sparks all over, but it's
no death ray.
What is?
Well we mentioned nuclear bombs and we have
some beam options for those too, and we also
have sonic weapons to consider.
Let’s consider neutrons for a moment though.
Neutrons are the wrecking ball when it comes
to radiation damaging organic life, which
is ironic given that they make the majority
of the mass in your body.
They’re slightly heavier than protons and
with the exception of hydrogen every atom
has equal or more neutrons than protons.
Yet when one escapes an atomic nucleus they
are highly unstable and short-lived, having
a half-life of about twelve minutes.
They smash up any complex molecule they hit,
including DNA, and they make a wonderful weapon,
hence the neutron bomb.
Not a beam or ray weapon though, and hard
to turn into a beam given that they are electrically
neutral.
Can we make a bunch of neutrons and aim that
at something?
Potentially yes, but while we have neutron
beams nowadays they are essentially made by
surrounding a neutron emitting source with
some shell and poking a hole in it so neutrons
can exit, neutrons, unlike neutrinos, interact
with basically all matter and nothing really
bounces them backward nor does a magnet impact
them much since they are electrically neutral.
If you could control and focus them as a beam
though, then yes this would be a brutally
effective and deadly weapon that would hardly
be gentle on inanimate objects but would be
particularly lethal to living matter and complex
devices.
Needless to say charged particles beams of
protons would be a decent death ray too, but
hard to keep focused and dense since protons
would repel each other, same for electron
beams, and antimatter beams make a good weapon
option too, but a neutron beam if you can
make one has more of a death ray effect.
The rationale behind the neutron bomb was
that it would kill your enemies but leave
the infrastructure more intact and the neutrons
only have a half life of 12 minutes so that
part of the radiation disappears fairly quickly
though its hardly a clean bomb either.
It’s basically a normal bomb dialed low
on yield to allow lots of neutrons to escape
rather than enhance explosive yield in a fusion
bomb, and a neutron beam, if you could make
one, would again be terribly devastating to
living material for the same reason, but presumably
leave no significant radiation behind.
Of all our options under known science, I’d
say a controlled neutron beam would be the
lead candidate for a genuine death ray, but
it would realistically require either a material
specifically reflective to neutrons or a field
able to turn them, akin to how a proton or
electron can be turned by an electromagnetic
field.
The former implies a potential armor hardened
against neutron beams, the latter a potential
shield.
I’m only aware of one major fictional setting
with neutron laser, Warhammer 40k, and they’re
quite right to eyeball these as nasty devices
if you’ve got the tech to use them.
On the subject of atomic bombs and beams,
we do have something called a bomb-pumped
laser, and these would be familiar to folks
who are fans of David Weber’s Honor Harrington
Novels where they’re called Laser Warheads.
The method is surprisingly straight forward,
and was developed in Project Excalibur as
an X-ray laser that would have been a tube
lined with Uranium-235 filled with a lasing
medium, Helium and Argon were often suggested,
and a bomb goes off to supply the huge and
rapid energy input, causing a very powerful
x-ray or gamma ray beam to fire in a chosen
direction.
The first successful test was back in 1980,
a couple months after I was born, but it didn’t
get too much experimentation as the 80s saw
a curtailment of nuclear weapon research.
They’ve been contemplated for more than
just weapons though, and indeed even as a
weapon it was viewed as mostly of interest
for ABM application, blowing up ICBM’s carrying
nuclear warheads.
Using it to propel a ship being pushed by
the laser or using the smaller non-bomb-pumped
types, driven just by a nuclear reactor, for
things like deep cut welding or cutting materials
has also been suggested.
Needless to say a bomb-pumped laser is a stupidly
powerful one, though by definition a single-use
weapon since the bomb incinerates the mechanism
nanoseconds after it fires, which makes mounting
them in a missile for deployment an interesting
option, letting you shoot your laser from
a different angle at a target.
We’ll contemplate an even bigger laser power
source in a moment, but let's consider a death
ray not based on electromagnetic energy or
radiation.
Sonic and ultrasonic weapons have often been
suggested.
Indeed they’ve been developed and used too,
and much like light waves, sound waves are
subject to being focused on a target.
What’s more we have developed the thermoacoustic
laser or Saser, the sound wave equivalent
of a laser.
Simple sonic weapons, like loud or frightening
booms, have a long history, but we also have
devices like LRAD – the Long Range Acoustic
Device – which is a type of sound cannon
– and LRAD has seen extensive use in the
last couple decades as both a sound weapon
and a notification system, it makes a megaphone
sound like a stage whisper.
Now sound weapons can be deadly but are mostly
of interest as non-lethal weapons, not as
sonic death rays.
However extra-aural effects – that is ones
not related to hearing – of various sonics
weapons appears to include central nervous
system effects, muscle contraction, effects
on chest and lungs, tissue shearing, and hypothermia
strangely enough.
Testing and documentation of all of the above
is limited and disputed to various degrees.
The other thing sound weapons tend to be contemplated
for is the exact opposite of a death ray,
blasts of sound designed to shatter ultrahard
substances without damaging things around
them.
And while this isn’t what we’d consider
a death ray it does raise a point.
For those familiar with the Dungeons & Dragons
games, a long time popular and powerful spell
is the prismatic spray or ray, which is actually
seven beams of differing colors and causes
different types of damage with each, one being
fire, another acid, electricity, and poison,
with the other three effects including being
turned to stone, driven insane, or banished
to another plane of existence.
I raise it in this case from the last option,
which is where someone gets hit by two of
the beams at once, and of course ideally such
a weapon should hit someone with all 7 effects
at once, and a really good weapon might incorporate
several effects, so that something designed
to be immune to or hardened against one effect
still gets swatted by the others.
Strategically this is valid too, you don’t
nuke a planet, you drop biological and chemical
weapons all over it, then nuke it, then send
in hunter-killer drones to find the survivors,
then you virus-bomb and nuke it again.
Get the job done, no half measures, but a
death ray might be something conceptually
along those lines, you torch someone with
a particle beam, a neutron beam, superhot
plasma beam, laser beam, and then a string
of micro-sized metal pellets electromagnetically
accelerated to high speed, which might also
include tiny metal tubes or ampules full of
viruses or nano machinery to finish the job
up.
We’re starting up a series on Galactic Domination
this upcoming week, and a critical aspect
to taking over a galaxy is being ready to
deal with all sorts of insane superweapons
the enemy might have, and this sort of over-the-top
approach to planetary bombardment or prismatic
spray weapons might come in handy.
So does sheer power too, and death ray could
just indicate a conventional weapon dialed
up to 11, like the Stellaser, the sun-powered
pushing lasers we often contemplate driving
spacecraft out to the stars with or the Nicoll-Dyson
Beam, which where you convert a star into
a single enormous laser.
But these shouldn’t be assumed to be as
big as it gets, and concepts like the bomb-pumped
laser work just fine if that bomb is a Supernova
or if you’re using a neutron star or black
hole to generate your X-ray beams or Gamma
Rays, big focused in versions of gamma ray
bursts, or running the power system for some
other type of death ray.
Sometimes quantity has a quality all its own,
and as we like to say on the show, if Brute
Force isn’t working, you’re just not using
enough of it, but setting off a supernova
to bomb-pump a laser is the kind of brute
force you should only be needing for killing
gods, galaxies, or Lovecraftian Horrors…
which to be fair might be the sort of things
you run into out in the Universe and need
to handle.
We spent a fair amount of time today talking
about satellites and putting weapons in space,
and there’s a great episode on the Militarization
of Space over on Curiositystream if you’d
like to know more about the current endeavors
and worries, as well as the history of weapons
platforms in orbit.
As I mentioned near the start of the show,
today’s episode was a follow up of our conversation
last month on laser pistols, light sabers,
and other common scifi weapons as I felt it
deserved more than a quick aside in that episode,
and after that episode came out folks asked
about certain types of weapons that killed
them in the past or entirely erased someone
from history, essentially temporal weapons,
and that struck me as something that might
qualify as a Death Ray.
So we’ll discuss that notion briefly in
the Extended Edition of today’s episode
over on Nebula.
Nebula is our rapidly-growing streaming service
where you can see all of our episodes ad and
sponsor free and a couple days early, as well
as some bonus content like our extended editions
or Nebula Exclusives like our Coexistence
with Alien series.
You can also see tons of content from many
other amazing creators and help support this
show while you’re at it.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos, to offer Nebula for free as a bonus
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using the
link in our episode description.
That lets you see content like “The Militarization
of Space”, and watch all the other amazing
content on Curiositystream, and also all the
great content over on Nebula from myself and
many others.
And you can get all that for less than $15
by using the link in the episode’s description.
Incidentally I’m sure many of you have noticed
that today’s soundtrack came from the video
game Stellaris from Paradox Interactive, and
we use it fairly often, and I wanted give
them a quick shout out for letting us do so
and for endless hours of good games down the
years.
I’ve played a lot of 4x video games and
setting up space empires or achieving galactic
domination is a great way to spend an afternoon,
and next Thursday we will be having the first
episode of our new series, Galactic Domination:
Empire Eternal, and episode two a few weeks
later will look at Strip Mining the Galaxy.
But Before that, we’ll examine Brain Computer
Interfaces then wrap up June with our end
of the month livestream Q&A.
Then we will start July off with a long-requested
return to our Faster Than Light series for
Cheating Reality.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
