This episode is sponsored by Audible
Scientists may one day figure out how to duplicate
a person, body and mind.
No doubt the scientist who perfects the process
will be beside himself with joy after he successfully
tests it.
A staple of science fiction is the notion
of copying or cloning living things.
Today we’ll take a look at what such technologies
might actually produce in terms of new opportunities
and challenges for humanity and for individuals,
and indeed for the very concept of individuality.
We might as well start by saying that cloning
gets used to both refer to outright duplication
of a person either as a full grown copy or
one with the same mind and memories too, as
well as in the sense of simply growing a new
organism from the DNA of the original.
The word itself, clone, is Greek for ‘twig’,
as in a small branch and of course you can
often take a twig, plant it, and make a new
tree from it, as opposed to a pollinated seed.
This is a new tree but of identical and singular
origin, it hasn’t got two parents.
We’ve fairly recently learned how to do
this with animals, including humans, and it’s
what most often is being referred to as cloning.
We’ll keep with that for today, and save
“Duplicate” for meaning an identical copy
of a person, as opposed to a simple copy of
the mind, like mind-uploading, or some intentionally
hybrid form.
Cloning, which was still scifi when I was
a kid, is now commercially available for cloning
dead pets.
We obviously could clone humans too but it’s
quite the ethical sticking point for a variety
of reasons.
One of which is that there’s always a question
as to what role you’d have with a clone,
and it really has no black and white answer.
That person is your identical twin, only much
younger than you, and we could regard them
as a child or a sibling, and both parental
and fraternal roles have long been viewed
as transferable to folks you’re not related
to, not simply step-siblings or children,
but someone you regard as ‘like a brother
or sister’ or who you mentor or are mentored
by.
Now overall, this type of cloning, simply
making an infant copy of an organism doesn’t
have many advantages when we’re talking
about something that has a sophisticated brain
as personality is strongly influenced by environment.
Cloning a tree that you see is very healthy
makes sense, though it exposes you to downsides
of a lack of diversity.
A field full of genetically identical plants
is more vulnerable to disease for instance,
which we see with things like the Irish Potato
Famine of the 19th century.
And ethical issues aside, cloning animals
for lab testing is scientifically important,
because if you want your medical research
experiments to be repeatable, you need to
use identical standardized rats.
It’s potentially handy for animals where
their acquired behavior is mostly irrelevant
too, like livestock, where you clone your
best specimens if you can do it cheaper than
producing them naturally or if it adds a value
equal to or exceeding the increased cost.
Of course, in a society that can do that,
one can also probably just grow meat, as we
looked at in Synthetic Meat.
But cloning seems limited in its use, in terms
of humans, as we’d be unlikely to want to
clone complete people for many reasons.
As opposed to just cloning human organs for
transplant.
There are not a lot of uses for human cloning
that are either beneficial or ethical, and
fewer uses that are both.
So its impact on our culture is likely to
be limited to fiction, or if not, the black
market.
You clone Einstein and that kid is probably
going to be smart but he won’t be Einstein
and might go nuts being expected to live up
to that.
Someone might clone Hitler either hoping to
get revenge or try to redeem him through a
better upbringing, but both are rather contemptible
goals.
You could clone a lost loved one, but it’s
not them, and morally speaking it’s probably
not kind to them.
Few folks like getting compared to a parent
or older sibling with expectation of matching
their deeds, and think how much worse it would
be on the clone.
Particularly as it’s likely to be an act
derived from a special attitude toward that
original.
Someone might do that for a child they lost
or who similarly had gone down a bad road
and they wanted to have a do-over.
You might clone a spouse who died or left
you, but raising your cloned spouse is rather
horrifying, we see that in the 2011 film “Womb”,
and even if the intent was to have a child
you didn’t have a chance to have together,
you could just as easily create one who mixed
both your genes together, you don’t actually
need someone’s sperm or egg cells, just
their DNA and we leave that everywhere.
Cloning also raises weird legal issues about
who owns DNA, already a growing issue in biotechnology
research, because someone who doesn’t like
their genes can presumably get someone else’s.
I would imagine there will be quite a market
for that in the future, and of course, that
market already exists via sperm banks and
egg donors.
But could someone who had such a sample, legally
acquired, ethically clone that person rather
than using half their genes to make a new
person?
Imagine someone was thinking of having kids
or adopting, but met a child they thought
was particularly adorable and clever and picked
up a sample of their DNA and went and got
themselves a cloned version?
My gut says that probably ought to be illegal,
and I suspect most would agree, but I’m
not really sure what the crime would be or
its severity.
And that could be knee-jerk reaction, after
all, you are not your DNA, anymore than a
house is the tree or clay pit it’s lumber
or bricks were made from.
They certainly matter, but in terms of nature
vs nurture, regardless of which is the biggest
factor, nurture is a major factor and your
clone raised by different folks and in different
times and places is just not going to be you
in any meaningful sense, so it’s hard to
argue you’ve had something stolen from you,
and though I think many of us would feel that
was the case, folks in the future might feel
otherwise.
Particularly as we’re not likely to give
clones special legal rights of inheritance.
I mean if I clone a famous musician, I don’t
see how they’d have any rights toward that
person’s compositions or the royalties of
them, for all that they share far more of
their DNA than that musician’s own children,
who would normally inherit those properties.
Things get trickier when we start talking
about duplication though, since they are presumably
getting your memories.
Duplication here is a pretty vague term as
well.
It is arguably more like copying an identity,
itself a rather vague term.
This doesn’t necessarily mean I’m cloning
you but as an adult and down to your brain
cells, if I copy your brain into an android
and stick it next to a normal clone of you,
which one has a more legitimate claim to being
you?
Not something to answer too quickly either.
We don’t want to just say possession of
someone’s memories confers identity, because
we might be able to give someone multiple
people’s memories, we went over those in
some detail in our Consciousness & Identity
episode, but let’s consider it from the
cloning and duplication perspective with a
hypothetical example:
Let’s say two men, Alex and Zach, are in
the hospital together, and both are diagnosed
with some awful terminal illness.
They chat, and Zach says he’s getting frozen
at his friend’s cryogenics firm.
Alex is wealthy and has no next of kin he
wishes to leave it to, so he puts his money
in a trust held by his parents and goes on
ice with Zach.
A few years later, Alex’s parents miss him,
and no real progress has been made toward
curing his disease or even toward reviving
frozen people.
So they get him cloned and name the clone
Brandon.
But unbeknownst to anyone, Alex’s ex-girlfriend
stole a sample of Alex’s DNA and had it
combined with her own so that she can have
his child, who she named Charlie.
A few years later, still no progress has been
made toward reviving frozen people, but the
technology has advanced to scan frozen brains,
3D print exact copies with memories intact,
and implant those into cyborg bodies.
And so the cryogenics firm allows a brain-printing
company to transplant a copy of Alex’s brain
into a shiny cyborg, who they name Duane.
But the brain-printing company’s Terms and
Conditions page, which most people click on
without reading, allows them to sell customer
brain scans to a company researching mind
uploading.
They create and boot up a digital copy of
Alex’s mind on a super-computer.
The copy is convinced that it’s Alex, but
they name it Eric.
Not long later, they download a copy of Eric
into an android body and name it Frank.
Meanwhile, the brain-printing company has
figured out how to print actual bodies with
the scanned brains, so now they print a complete
copy of frozen Alex.
But the copy is imperfect and missing a few
of Alex’s memories.
But they do coordinate with other companies
on their alphabetical naming, so they name
the imperfect copy George.
And finally, the cryo company figures out
how to unfreeze people, and they unfreeze
Alex.
But they hadn’t quite perfected their technique
either, and Alex has a massive aneurysm from
the process.
This shouldn’t have been a major problem,
since they have his brain scans to use in
doing repairs, but they have another snafu
and accidentally grab Zach’s brain template
instead.
So now Alex is missing some of his memories
and has a fair number of Zach’s memories
and personality quirks.
It’s a dangerous procedure that the doctors
only attempted because Alex had been a vegetable,
so they flat out refuse to try to repair Alex
again, since he seems sane and whole.
But to study the possible effects of similar
mind-mergings, they simulate combining Alex
and Zach’s brain on the computer, so now
there’s Hal, an uploaded mind with both
Alex and Zach’s compete memories.
So now we’ve got Alex, who has some of Zach’s
memories and is missing some of his, we’ve
got his clone Brandon, we’ve got his son
Charlie, we’ve got Duane, who has that printed
brain copy in a cyborg-Frankenstein body,
we’ve got uploaded Eric, we’ve got Eric’s
copy into an android, Frank, we’ve got the
printed brain organic duplicate George, and
finally we’ve got Hal, who is now of two
minds on this whole freezing process.
Alex is really still Alex just with some brain
trauma really, and he and George arguably
have a claim on Zach’s estate.
Brandon inherited the estate from his parents
entirely legally, as their son.
Charlie is Alex’s son, just via sperm bank
and without his permission.
Duane was the first actual copy on the scene
with a full memory even though he’s a cyborg,
Eric also has full copy of that brain, just
no body, as does Frank, who has an android
body.
George also has Zach’s memory in a complete
cloned body, but is missing some, and of course
Hal is the same as Eric but has Zach’s too.
I’ve no idea how this case would be decided
in a court, or what would actually be fair
as justice and fairness are not always equivalent
concepts.
If there’s any probate lawyers or judges
in the audience, I’d be curious how you
think that would get ruled on though my own
guess would be that Brandon would keep the
estate and of course it would presumably depend
on where it was all done, since there are
a lot of different traditions on inheritance
rights.
There’s a temptation to divide it evenly
but that’s neither just nor fair and would
only add to the problem since for instance
if Eric thought that was going to happen he
might simply make another digital copy of
himself for an equal share, or a dozen, maybe
even just to spite the others.
So too, if Charlie, Alex’s semi-natural
son, gets a cut, wouldn’t any child of George
the Organic Duplicate be entitled to the same?
And for that matter, if George underwent the
same procedure Alex had after his aneurysm,
but with the proper brain scan being used
instead of Zach’s, would he now be more
Alex than Alex currently is?
And if yet another duplicate is made later,
can that duplicate challenge the ruling?
For that matter, none of this happened simultaneously
so who came first probably matters, especially
since otherwise we have to worry about future
duplicates getting a share if we discard chronology
or birth order.
Should the amount of memory actually matter?
Or alternatively, should the amount of other
memories from other people matter?
Duane might be considered the oldest mind-copy,
since he was around longest, and accumulated
the most life experience since.
Though that might be arguable too since Eric
is an uploaded mind and might be experiences
a subjectively sped up existence, running
at hundreds of times the speed of a normal
human brain and experiencing a year for every
day that passes in the normal world.
Now you might be thinking, with all this confusion,
maybe it would be better if we just didn’t
look into such technology but the stuff has
its uses, both to the individual and the society.
Also, the inheritance thing might not be a
terribly big deal in a high-tech civilization
that might be post-scarcity and not terribly
interested in money where survival and comfort
are concerned.
Let’s consider a few less confusing scenarios.
A person might get themselves duplicated because
they were a brilliant and passionate scientist
who was working on cancer and two heads are
better than one and a hundred better yet,
and we might approve of that.
A person might use this to extend their own
lifetime, though while that notion is popular
in science fiction, I’d imagine we could
repair an existing body, offering life extension,
with essentially the same technology.
That scientist case is an interesting one
though since the fellow was doing it to advance
a cause they were very passionate about and
that seems kind of okay, maybe even laudable.
Someone really passionate about a political
cause though might use it to mass duplicate
themselves so they could get extra votes in
an election, or extra soldiers in a war.
Indeed if they’re passionate enough about
the cause, they might go really overboard
and make tons of copies, even being willing
to commit suicide with all but one after the
election or conflict to avoid burdening society.
One would have to at least respect their commitment
to their cause.
But it has a more benign use too.
Most of us don’t feel we have any obligation
to justify wanting a child to anyone else,
and I suspect that would translate to a duplicate
of yourself too.
A person offered two very desirable but exclusive
life paths might copy themselves to enjoy
both, which seems fine and as we’ve discussed
for space colonization, might be a very good
way to get a big pool of skilled colonists
for many different star systems if lots of
folks were reluctant to leave their home for
century long journeys.
I could load a thousand people on a colony
ship from a pool of a couple thousand volunteers,
and just keep loading more and more ships
with a thousand copies each randomly selected
from those volunteers, different permutations,
and by the time those folks arrived at their
new world those unique combinations of duplicates
would have resulted in major changes to each
of those folks from all the different friendships
and duties formed, and unique daily experiences,
in each unique crew roster, long before they
landed on an alien world that will further
diverge them from those other duplicates.
Alternatively if a football player was offered
the chance to join two teams and couldn’t
decide which, he might copy himself so he
could be on both.
On the legal side, either team might object
to honoring the original contract, arguing
that they weren’t getting as good a deal
now that there were two of them.
Many would also object that it was robbing
another player of a chance at their dream.
A society might have serious problems if the
cream of the crop graduating from college
were deciding they wanted to take up several
appealing offers and opted for lots of duplication
so they could do each, as those positions
are now denied from the folks who would have
been the runner up.
Also, one might engage in quasi-polygamy by
duplicating yourself to marry two different
people, not really sure how that fits into
ethics but I suspect a lot of folks would
object.
One might imagine someone considering a divorce
because they were having an affair deciding
to duplicate themselves so they could marry
that other person while sticking with their
current spouse and children full time.
That might make for some bizarre divorce court
filings and custody battles, especially if
the duplicate who remarried wanted partial
custody of their kids.
The future is never something we should speak
with much certainty about, though I feel confident
saying that legal scholars will get a lot
of headaches and psychologists a lot of new
problems to study and a lot of new customers.
But lastly, I mentioned duplication of identity
near the beginning because of course folks
change with time, especially with very different
environments.
That’s why it’s handy for colonizing other
solar systems if you’re short on volunteers,
within a generation there’s very little
similarity in those colonies even if they
had identical rosters of colonists.
However, in general, a lot of folks would
want to duplicate themselves to enjoy multiple
experiences and still share them.
This offers some major technical challenges
since even if you could share memories, our
brains aren’t wired up with digital time-indexed
memory recordings, so trying to match those
experiences together might be very hard.
We see some examples of that in Alastair Reynolds’
novel “House of Suns”, which follows a
group of a thousand clones who explore the
galaxy separately and meet up every several
thousand years to swap experiences.
I suspect that might result in some sort of
multi-person narrative chapter experience
where you got fed the experiences of your
copies while you slept or similar, so you
felt like you were teleporting between lives
each day.
Such folks might form communal hive minds
in reverse, one mind in several bodies rather
than some overmind of collective consciousness,
but they might instead view it like commuting
between lives, getting fed those other experiences
like episodes of several TV shows… which
I also suspect would result in a lot of headaches
for legal scholars if one of those duplicates
commits a crime, trying to decide if they
should charge them all, and also a lot of
new business for psychologists.
As is so often the case with the future, about
the only guarantee is that it ought to be
an exciting and weird experience, though in
this case, it’s shuffling around who all
those experiences happened to that is the
weirdest part.
So some folks might be wondering why there’s
an extra episode out today, and in fact two
of them since we’ve got that bonus episode
on if Technology could develop without fire
just released on Nebula too.
I thought it would make an amusing Trick or
Treat and cloning seems an appropriate topic
for a day with multiple videos out.
It’s a popular topic in science fiction
too, and probably my favorite book series
featuring that is the Bobiverse Trilogy by
my friend, Dennis E. Taylor, beginning with
the novel, We Are Legion, We are Bob, which
introduces us to a character who rapidly becomes
additional characters.
Cloning is always a tricky topic, as is space
colonization, and Taylor handles both topics
superbly, with amazing realism and a superb
sense of genre humor that makes the trilogy
a favorite for those of us who are longtime
science fiction fans and are already familiar
with the concepts.
You can get a free copy of We Are Legion,
We are Bob, or the other books in the trilogy,
at Audible.com/Isaac or text Isaac to 500-500.
Audible offers a 30 day free trial, but each
month you’re a member you now get a free
audiobook and 2 audible originals, and those
credits rollover to the next month or year
and stay yours, along with any books you got,
even if you later discontinue your membership.
And with their convenient app, you can listen
on any of your devices and seamlessly pick
up where you left off, whether you’re listening
at home, commuting, running errands or off
jogging or at the gym.
Audible makes it cheap and easy to access
a vast collection of amazing stories on any
device.
That will close us out for October, and we’ll
back next Thursday for a look at Cybersecurity.
Until then, thanks for watching, and have
a Happy Halloween!
