This episode is sponsored by Skillshare
The Rocket Equation is an amazing thing, it
enabled us to launch into space and step foot
on the moon.
But at the same time, it’s the thing which
most holds us back from easy space travel.
So let’s avoid it by using beaming technologies.
We’ve discussed many alternative methods
throughout this series on how to get into
space, but most of these have revolved around
some extreme engineering, like Launch Loops
or Orbital Rings.
They can get you into space cheap, but have
big upfront construction and maintenance costs.
Last time in the series we discussed spaceplanes;
ships that could fly from an airport straight
to orbit and maybe beyond.
While that had many options, it was fundamentally
limited by the rocket equation, and we could
only partially circumvent that by letting
it get much of its propellant at lower speeds
from the air.
But it could only do that in the atmosphere,
and it still needed to burn huge amounts of
fuel to operate.
Today we’ll be looking at how to get around
that fuel issue, by beaming energy to a ship,
but let’s begin by a quick review of what
the rocket equation is and why it constrains
us.
The basic form of any spaceship propulsion
using propellant – shooting matter out the
back from internal storage tanks – involves
the propellant coming out at a certain speed,
relative to the ship, called the exhaust velocity.
We want the highest exhaust velocity possible,
as that contains the most kinetic energy per
bit of propellant and thus shoves your ship
faster.
Problem is the exhaust velocity is relative
to that ship, which will often be moving faster
than that exhaust velocity.
If your propellant comes out at say, Mach
1, but your ship is going Mach 2 at that point,
you will still get thrust but you have to
accelerate all that propellant mass up to
Mach 2 before you can spit it out the back
at Mach 1.
When you look at how inefficient that is,
you can see the fundamental problem with rocketry.
It takes exponentially more fuel to achieve
higher speeds relative to that exhaust velocity.
The Solid Rocket Boosters on the Old Shuttles
had an effective exhaust velocity of 2500
m/s, which is quite fast, but let’s look
at what an exhaust velocity of 2500 m/s would
get you if we burned 1 ton of it.
If we had a 10 ton spaceship, plus that 1
ton of fuel, we’d begin at 11 tons and end
at 10 tons at a speed of 238 m/s – quite
fast actually, that’s 858 kilometers or
533 miles per hour, way faster than the freeway.
Now if we just used a 1 ton ship and 1 ton
of fuel, it would begin at 2 tons, and empty
its fuel tanks to get to 1733 m/s - quite
a bit faster - 6238 kilometers or 3876 miles
per hour.
Unfortunately, still nowhere near the speeds
we need for orbit.
Let’s go to the other extreme, 10 times
as much fuel as ship, starting at 1.1 tons
and ending at just .1, a large human’s mass,
moving 6000 m/s – that’s almost Low Earth
Orbital speed, which is 7800 m/s.
However, in practice, what with atmospheric
and gravity drag we actually need a delta-v
of 9400 meters per second.
And for that, if we used 1 ton of fuel, we
could only get 22 kilograms or 48 pounds into
orbit.
Meaning we used around 50 times as much fuel
as our ship weighed.
If we wanted to get to Earth escape velocity,
rather than low orbit, we need to add about
3400 m/s more speed, and now that 1 ton of
fuel is only getting us 5 kilograms or 12
pounds of ship out there.
And it will get worse and worse.
From a practical standpoint you can’t really
get a ship up to more than about 4 times its
propellants exhaust velocity and that doesn’t
include fuel to slow down, which is way less
only because so much of the mass is now gone,
having been burned up to accelerate the ship.
Now if your fuel is liquid Hydrogen and Oxygen,
with an effective exhaust velocity of 4400
m/s, not 2500 m/s, you do a lot better.
Its exhaust velocity is 76% higher, so all
those ratios we spoke of in terms of fuel
to spaceship occur at 76% higher speeds.
But if we wanted something with a fuel to
ship and payload ratio of our first example,
10 tons of ship and one of fuel, more like
a car, we’d need an exhaust velocity 100
times faster than the shuttle booster had,
250,000 meters per second, which is very fast
but still just under 0.1% of light speed,
and such a fuel would also allow a spaceship
to reach Alpha Centauri in about a thousand
years, so hardly a miraculous interstellar
fuel.
So that’s the problem with the rocket equation,
or part of it, because I’ve been saying
effective exhaust velocity a lot, not just
exhaust velocity, and a critical aspect of
rocket propellants is that things don’t
just magically blow out the back of a ship
at thousands of meters per second, and when
total thrust matters more than exhaust velocity,
like trying to get out of deep gravity well,
how quickly you can push propellant out the
back can be more important than how quick
those individual particles are going, and
is a major reason why we often use very different
fuels and rockets for the first stage of a
rocket launch.
We’ve got to burn stuff to make it very
hot so that the particles are moving very
fast, and that means making our propellant
out of stuff that burns, which generally means
oxygen, which is a horrible propellant.
That oxygen, the oxidizer, is providing all
the energy when it combines with the fuel
to make the propellant, but it’s essentially
sapping our total thrust.
Hydrogen is typically your ideal propellant
because it’s a single proton and the typical
speed particles move at a given temperature
goes with the square root of temperature and
the inverse square root of particle mass.
Quadruple the temperature, double the speed,
Quadruple the mass, half the speed.
Oxygen, being 8 protons and 8 neutrons, weighs
about 16 times what hydrogen does and so is
only moving at a quarter the speed of any
hydrogen atom at the same temperature.
We just saw what a big deal exhaust velocity
was for ships, and quadrupling the exhaust
velocity of that propellant is the difference
between a ton of fuel getting 5 kilograms
away from Earth or about 60 times that.
It’s a very big deal.
We have one more problem though, because we
can’t just quadruple the temperature for
instance, or we’d melt our engine.
This is essentially why the ion drive is so
enticing as an alternative, its shoot particles
out at very high speed using a magnet and
electricity to do so.
This is also why we like using light or lasers
for a propellant, the exhaust velocity of
light is the speed of light, and when you
plug that in as your exhaust velocity, you
need to be moving at interstellar speeds before
you even need to worry about the rocket equation,
as it’s about 100,000 times faster than
our typical rocket propellants.
Heat is not the only way to move particles,
nor does it necessarily require burning stuff
on location, but it is what gives us high
thrust and that’s important for spaceships
leaving Earth.
We’ve talked about using light sails or
ion drives in deep space before, such as in
Interstellar Laser Highways, but it’s not
something we can really do down here on Earth
because of gravity and air.
That air is constantly trying to sap away
your speed, which is handy for saving fuel
on landing by aerobraking but not for speeding
up.
You also have to maintain at least 1 gee of
thrust to avoid falling down, which will rapidly
sap your speed via the method known as Lithobraking.
So you need to provide a lot of thrust, not
just a high exhaust velocity but a lot of
exhaust in a short time.
We could bounce a very strong laser off a
mirror on the bottom of the ship, same as
we consider doing for ships in deep space,
but this has some problems.
Photons, by themselves, are pretty much raw
momentum, they are the perfect propellant,
and they get around the rocket equation if
you’re firing them from elsewhere because
they double up the momentum transfer if they
bounce and most importantly, you’re not
carrying them around on your ship.
If you could, via some sort of perfect mirror
box with light inside it or with fuels like
antimatter or kugelblitz black holes, you’ve
got your perfect launch fuel, mostly.
See it takes either 3 [correction] gigawatts a kilogram
or 3 terawatts to push 1 ton of ship at 1
gee, just enough to make it hover on Earth,
if you’re carrying it as fuel, and half
that, 1.5 [correction] gigawatts a kilogram or 1.5 terawatts a ton
for if you’re bouncing a beam off the ship.
This is a bit of problem, because that is
a lot of energy.
Just to put that into context, a car weighs
around a ton and the best it can do is 0-60
in just over 2 seconds, a little over a gee
of thrust and can kick up to several hundred
horsepower or around half a megawatt, so they’re
pulling a similar acceleration as a 1.5 Gigawatt
laser-beam-bounce will pull off using [correction] 3 million times more power, 6 million
if we’re just emitting it rather than reflecting.
What’s more, lasers are quite hard to keep
on target in air, especially when powerful
like that, which we discussed in Power Satellites.
You’re probably wondering why I call photons
the most efficient propellant when that car
engine was doing [correction] 3 million times better, particularly
considering flooring the engine isn’t terribly
fuel efficient either.
But that car is getting all its oxygen from
outside, and it also isn’t using a propellant.
I mean technically the exhaust pipe on a car
does produce thrust too but it’s pretty
minimal.
We discussed how air-breathing engines worked
last time in Spaceplanes, but we glossed over
the energy issue a bit.
If I release a bunch of photons, 3 gigajoules
worth for a second, I will have accelerated
my one-ton craft so it’s going about [correction] 0.01
m/s faster.
If instead I heat up a big chamber of oxygen
with that, dumping 3 gigajoules into roughly
a ton of air, it will heat up by about 3000
Kelvin, moving around at about 1600 m/s, and
if I blast that out the back of that chamber,
which we’ll say was a ton itself, that chamber
will fly off at nearly a kilometer a second,
a hundred times faster than the light beam
offered, and if the propellant was hydrogen
molecules instead of air, about four times
faster.
Though in fact it wouldn’t since hydrogen
has a way higher heat capacity than air, about
14 times as much, but we’ll ignore that
for the moment.
Beyond noting that it let’s us add far more
heat to hydrogen, and thus energy, at a lower
temperature, and thus helps avoid melting
our engine.
Same energy used, 3 gigajoules, but one got
you a hundred times as much speed.
The problem is that we had to carry all that
gas, whereas the photons, assuming we’re
even carrying them rather than receiving them
from outside, massed virtually nothing, 34
micrograms.
That’s very important when you’re in deep
space and have no external source of propellant
and want to reach very high speeds, in which
case light becomes ideal.
Here on Earth though, imagine we just had
a big plane with a propeller and solar panel
or it’s microwave equivalent, a rectenna,
which we could beam energy to and which would
then power that propeller.
It’s never going to need to land to refuel.
It’s just sucking air in the front and out
the back, powered by an electric engine getting
its juice from elsewhere.
We can upgrade that to more of a rocket approach
too.
We suck air in the front into a chamber and
superheat it, this is basically how the ramjet
and scramjet designs we discussed in space
planes work, and gives them the nickname of
a stovepipe.
They have no moving parts, and they use their
fuel merely to heat air.
Needless to say we can do that electrically
same as a typical electric space heater.
Indeed quite efficiently too, heaters of all
types, electric or chemical fuel, are the
only machine we know of that is 100% efficient,
though that’s a bit of cheater-definition
since we measure how inefficient other machines
are by how much of the energy gets squandered
as heat.
The limitations on ramjets and scramjets,
in terms of speed, as we discussed in Spaceplanes,
is that they run out of fuel to heat that
air.
A Scramjet with a beamed source of power can
keep speeding up as long as it can get enough
energy in to offset what it’s losing to
drag and can stuff all that air through there
at a high enough temperature and rate without
melting the thing.
I don’t want to imply that’s the easiest
of engineering feats.
Nor is keeping your beam on target, or pumping
enough juice in to achieve this kind of thrust.
It’s generally hard to jam more than a megawatt
of power into a square meter of something,
and you lose a lot to heat, which in this
case is fine if you’re using something like
a rectenna that’s in the actual chamber
of the scramjet, the stovepipe.
Especially since all it is then is something
super-absorptive to the beaming frequency
that turns it right into heat.
Your ideal beaming frequency is something
that is easily absorbed by that stovepipe
but goes through air and other materials with
virtually no effect.
Your stovepipe probably needs to spin a bit
to make sure it’s getting evenly heated
by that beam, and done right, it could have
enough thermal mass to keep going for a while
even if that beam broke contact.
Fortunately you are still mere milliseconds
of light lag from your power sources so maintaining
that lock or re-establishing it is a lot faster
and easier than when we discuss power or laser
beaming for interplanetary or interstellar
ships.
The other good news is that once you start
getting up above the main atmosphere, your
drag starts going down, though of course you
are also running low on material to cram into
that stovepipe and to provide conventional
lift on your wings.
Fortunately you’d be moving very fast by
then, and as you go up more a lot of what’s
available becomes hydrogen rather than oxygen
and nitrogen.
Ideally this should let you avoid even needing
any on board propellant, but if you do need
some you’re getting an exhaust velocity
out of it equal to whatever temperature you
can max out at, and if we were talking something
like tungsten’s melting point, 3700 Kelvin,
diatomic hydrogen would be coming out at 6800
m/s.
In an energy rich society that would likely
do power beaming, hydrogen is easy enough
to source, what with all those oceans, and
you shouldn’t even need to tap that until
you’re nearly up to orbital speed anyway,
if at all.
Once you’re out of the atmosphere and in
orbit, you do need that on board propellant,
but you don’t need the high thrust anymore,
and could switch over to a low thrust option
like an ion drive, powered by that energy
beam, or even just go the reflection route.
It’s very easy for me to imagine personal
spaceplanes along these lines in an economy
running on either fusion or beamed-in power
like we discussed in power satellites.
You use classic propellers or turbofans for
low speed, switch to the stovepipe scramjet
for high speeds, and to ion drive or reflection
once in higher orbit for long slow acceleration
to interplanetary or interstellar speeds.
Of course beaming isn’t limited to photons
either, you could send a beam of ionized particles
instead, reflected magnetically or captured
for use as propellant later.
Though that doesn’t work well in an atmosphere.
So quite a few engineering challenges but
no super-science involved either, what’s
the upsides of this approach, beyond what
we mentioned?
First, it does circumvent the giant personal
weapon issue.
It’s still a fast device meaning you can
crash it into something, but unlike our other
high-power sources – atomic fission, bottled
light, anti-matter, or black holes, it doesn’t
actually contain those itself, it just has
its own kinetic energy and thus is way safer
for on-planet or low-orbit use.
Barring a fusion reactor that is also quite
compact and cheap, this is really the only
option that would ever permit a personal spaceship.
Your neighbor can have one in the garage,
no risk of explosions or terrorist applications
beyond speeding it up and ramming something,
which is not very attractive as an attack
method especially since to get power you need
that off-site beam and you need precision
tracking, so if you deviate dangerously you
can be easily targeted and your hypersonic
debris is going to mostly burn up before smacking
stuff anyway, you won’t be pulling high
speed maneuvers anywhere near the ground.
So it’s very safe, and it’s also very
cheap as a spaceship goes, because that core
engine is just a big scramjet cone and stovepipe,
probably just raw metal, though it might get
pricy with extreme precision machining and
expensive alloys.
However those are both the kind of thing an
economy of scale tackles well, so we could
be talking about car prices, something you
could probably fit into a large garage and
could probably buy without being fabulously
wealthy.
This will probably never be the most efficient
way into space, the Orbital Ring is likely
to always dominate that for reasonably fast
low-energy ground-to-space options, but for
an energy rich society, it’s probably the
safest and most personally convenient approach
we’ve got.
It is to the orbital ring what the car is
to the train, less efficient, but way more
convenient.
And it lets you get where you want, whether
to a destination on Earth, in orbit or off
to the Moon.
Indeed it could be scaled up for interplanetary
travel, your own personal space-yacht, though
without an onboard power source you do have
to stay in places where those beams are available
or have a secondary engine to work outside
their zone of coverage.
A bit like early cell coverage, you’d expect
it to grow with time.
But it would be ideal for space tourism, which
we’ll be talking about in a couple weeks,
and you can just take your own personal ship
anywhere you want, so long as you stick to
the powered paths.
You probably would use that approach too for
orbital versions, keep a powerful and wide
beam running between set mirrors or similar,
to create lanes, minimizing the need for tracking
and keep the beam on, and also minimize traffic
problems too.
If everyone owns one, you definitely want
some metaphorical roads, or Skyways.
So we’ve got our upcoming episodes in a
moment including a livestream this weekend
and it reminded me of a comment I got after
one about it being neat during those to see
where I did all my writing at.
I know a fair number of writers who can work
anywhere in a physical sense, but for me the
old rule of thumb about finding your own space
to work in is entirely literal, and my office
at home is entirely configured around that
and it’s the only place I write.
Writing is very wide area when it comes to
both mediums and styles so that no one’s
process or advice is really going to work
for everyone, or anyone if you try to mimic
a process exactly, but some advice is fairly
universal and that’s one of them.
There’s an excellent video course by Simon
Van Booy, 6 Steps to a Successful Writing
Habit, on Skillshare that I have to admit
appealed to me in large part because it was
such a close match for my own process, but
as mentioned there are many different work
styles and mediums, and someone used to writing
news articles on their laptop on the bus between
events is going to be far different then someone
writing a novel at a home shared with a noisy
roommate or someone writing weekly science
videos while trying to fend off his cats.
So you if you’re trying to get started writing,
it’s a good idea to sample the methods of
a lot different people till you find your
own, and that’s true of almost any creative
work, not just writing.
Skillshare has a ton of videos on writing,
everything from best methods to how to make
an interesting protagonist, and a lot of other
instructive or inspirational videos on creative
processes like drawing or animating.
A Premium Membership gives you unlimited access
to over 20,000 high quality classes on must-know
topics, so you can improve your skills, unlock
new opportunities, and do the work you love.
Join the millions of students already learning
on Skillshare today with a special offer just
for my listeners: Get 2 months of Skillshare
for free.
To sign up, visit the link in the description
and the first 500 visitors get 2 months of
unlimited access to over 20,000 classes for
free.
Act now for this special offer, and start
learning today.
So as mentioned, in a couple of weeks we’ll
be taking a look a space tourism, from the
near-term possibilities of orbital hotels
to the more fascinating options on the Moon
and Beyond.
But first, next week we’ll commemorate the
Fourth of July, the Day of Barbecuing, by
taking a look at synthetic meats and other
tasty technologies, from lab grown meat to
Mammoth Steaks and Dino-burgers.
We also have our End of the Month Livestream
Q&A coming up, this Sunday, June 30th, at
4pm Eastern, and I hope you’ll join us there
and ask some questions.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please like
it and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
