At some point, we’re going to run out of 
living room. So how can we use celestial  
circular innovation to put humanity’s lack 
of real estate in the rear view mirror?
Today we’ll be looking at the Banks Orbital, 
an immense megastructure in the form of ring  
shaped habitat more than a million miles in 
diameter, and depending on the ring’s width,  
containing hundreds if not thousands of Earth's 
worth of living area, all enjoying more naturally  
Earth-like conditions than any other rotating 
habitat design. We're talking about assembling  
a structure that makes all of humanity’s 
combined constructions to date look like a  
toddler’s sandcastle. We’ll be deep-diving this 
structure, its engineering, why it’s desirable,  
and what life on it might be like. So, let's jump 
into the cosmic deep end and find out just what it  
takes to live in space's answer to luxury living, 
spiced with a touch of celestial extravagance! 
Rotating habitat megastructures have a lot 
going for them, they let you pick your gravity  
and pressure and use way less material than 
a planet does for creating a given amount of  
living space. And since they are spin-gravity 
environments, not mass-generated gravity, it’s  
very easy for spaceships to come to and from.
Unfortunately the problem we have with our three  
classic rotating habitats, the Bernal Sphere, 
O’Neill Cylinder, and Stanford Torus, is that  
they are generally in the size range of large town 
or county, not a planet, and for the Bernal Sphere  
and O’Neill Cylinder, when you look up at the 
sky, you see the other side of that interior,  
more landscape. Imagine living in a place where 
the sky isn't filled with stars, but more real  
estate. It's the ultimate in not being able to 
escape the neighbors! The stanford torus is a  
lot skinnier so you just see a big ring in that 
sky, but also a big glass dome above. They often  
have to use either big mirrors or glass panes to 
let in natural sunlight or create it artificially. 
These are hardly fatal flaws, especially compared 
to the conditions on most other planets even when  
heavily terraformed, but they’re not ideal either.
Larry Niven’s Ringworld seeks to get around this  
by building an enormous ring around a star as 
wide as Earth’s orbit, but besides requiring  
materials stronger than anything we could 
plausibly imagine, you still have to put  
big sunshades orbiting between the ring and your 
star to block light to give day and night. And  
while it contains a million planets’ worth of 
living area, it is a pretty big lift to build. 
Iain M. Banks Orbitals, from his culture series, 
also sometimes called God’s Bracelet for their  
shape and magnitude, seek to split the difference 
in size while also allowing very natural lighting,  
and we have a trick that works to let us build 
them out of known materials without requiring  
super-strong tensile materials. Though 
at the cost of a lot more mass. Graphene,  
our go-to for continent class habitats, has 
such a strong tensile strength that it lets  
us build habitats like the Bishop Ring or 
McKendree Cylinder that are orders of magnitude  
larger than an O’Neill Cylinder or Stanford 
Torus, but still are smaller than a planet. 
So better but still not there.
The Bishop Ring lets in natural  
sunlight but also needs hugely tall rim walls to 
keep the air in compared to its size, since the  
altitude of your atmosphere is the same on them 
as on Ringworlds millions of times bigger in area.  
They also spin around a lot faster than once a 
day to keep gravity at earth-normal of 1-gee,  
so you can’t really use the natural sunlight and 
have to go for a rotating hub mirror or fake sun. 
The Banks Orbital however can rotate once a day. 
For any given planet and day length there is a  
unique diameter for a rotating habitat that allows 
you to mimic its gravity while rotating at its own  
day length. For Earth gravity and a 24-hour day, 
that is a radius of 1.84 million kilometers, or  
1.15 million miles. Size really does matter when 
it comes to playing Earth. That’s a big number,  
so let me put that in perspective. That’s over 
two and a half times the radius of the Sun,  
which is the largest body in the solar system 
by far. So, while a Banks Orbital still needs  
a rim wall, even a rim wall a thousand miles high 
that leaks less air than Earth itself does would  
be miniscule in comparison to the ring’s size.
For Martian gravity, which has about the same  
day length as Earth, that radius drops to about 
the radius of the Sun. It would be even lower  
for the Moon, but because its day is a month long, 
that radius jumps up to 267 million kilometers, or  
something bigger than the orbit of Mars around the 
Sun. The longer the day, the wider your ring needs  
to be, the higher the gravity, the faster it needs 
to spin. And the wider and faster both add to the  
strength requirements a ring needs to avoid being 
ripped apart by its own spin and angular momentum. 
Tensile strength is the bedrock of rotating 
habitats - literally - and nothing we know of  
has the material strength for an Earth-like Banks 
Orbital. We're in the realm of needing something  
so strong, it makes graphene look like overcooked 
spaghetti, and that's saying something. However,  
as we discussed in our episodes on Ringworlds and 
continent class habitats, we can cheat around this  
by building a second and more massive outer 
ring, that our inner ring can spin inside and  
like a maglev train, move over it very quickly by 
pushing off it without touching. That outer ring  
needs to be strong as well and the more massive 
you make it, the less strong it needs to be. 
One of the neat things about rotating habitats is 
that you can get some free launch speed or slow  
down by landing on the spinning hull, which is a 
little trickier if you have a non-rotating outer  
sheath like this. As channel regulars know, I am 
of the opinion that rotating habitats will usually  
be a drum nested inside a larger superstructure 
that either doesn’t rotate or counter-rotates  
with the same angular momentum but more mass and 
less speed. So for me this outer ring is already  
a normal feature of any rotating habitat.
Incidentally, unless stated otherwise,  
for the rest of the video when I say a Banks 
Orbital, I mean one that emulates Earth's day  
length and gravity, it is our default condition, 
though of course if you’re hunting for alien  
megastructures you would want to widen that 
range as their planet probably doesn’t match  
our gravity and day length. So too, since it is 
easier to build a lower-gravity habitat or one  
with a shorter day, we shouldn’t rule out people 
building them with lower gravity, though while I  
could see folks going for a longer day I can’t 
see them opting for a shorter one very often. 
As a reminder, our Banks Orbital is 1.85 million 
kilometers or 1.15 million miles in radius. If you  
resurrected the fastest commercial plane ever, 
the Concorde, with its 1350 mph greater than  
twice the speed of sound cruising speed, 
and circumnavigated the ring with in-air  
refueling and no stops, it would take you over 7 
months to get back where you started. In short,  
don't expect to get anywhere fast with our current 
modes of transportation! For every 43.8 kilometers  
or 27.2 miles that orbital is wide, you gain an 
Earth’s worth of surface area. So, in contrast  
to the Concorde example, for an orbital with the 
same surface area as Earth, you could just about  
fit the Large Hadron Collider in CERN, Switzerland 
that discovered the Higgs-Boson particle into that  
27 miles of width. Or for you fitness bunnies, 
if we had a Banks Orbital with the same surface  
area as Earth, you could just squeeze in a 
marathon race across its width. Needless to  
say I think you’d build them a lot wider.
This structure would orbit about as far  
away as Earth does from our Sun, depending on the 
brightness of its star and how warm you want your  
orbital. None of that needs to be tundra or desert 
as it is a flat ring, not a curved planet with  
an axial tilt. You can actually tilt the rings to 
give them seasonal variation but the whole of the  
ring will be in the same season at a time, which 
would play havoc with seasonally migrating species  
rehoused from an Earth-like world with seasons. It 
also doesn’t technically have seasonal variation  
in day length, but the rim walls cast longer 
shadows in the Winter, making it less bright.  
This will confuse the daylights out of plants 
and wildlife that rely on a seasonal day/night  
length variation. Incidentally, there will be two 
Summer/Winter cycles per rotation around the star,  
adding further consternation. Though if you 
are as good at genetic engineering as you are  
mega-engineering, this is probably easily fixed.
If the orbital lies mostly flat on its orbital  
plane, also called the ecliptic, the portion 
of the orbital currently closer to the star,  
if it is wide enough, in its night-phase will 
block light to the other side, usually getting  
daytime. This plunges the whole orbital’s inner 
surface into eternal night. The opposite extreme  
also causes complete night. This happens when 
the orbital is oriented perpendicular to the  
ecliptic and its axis is facing the star. In this 
case, the rim walls temporarily block the light  
from reaching the inner surface. Conservation of 
momentum in conjunction with the rim walls gives  
the orbital its seasons. Unlike our Moon, which 
is tidally locked to always present the same face  
to the Earth, the orbital won’t be tidally locked 
to the star and actually faces the same direction,  
irrespective of its motion around the star.
We have an analog of this behavior in our  
very own solar system. The planets rotate about 
their axes roughly perpendicular to the ecliptic  
plane. Though, like most families, there’s 
one individual that doesn’t follow the norm,  
and with the planets, Uranus is our black sheep. 
It’s actually cocked to have its axis lie almost  
on the ecliptic plane and it isn’t tidally locked 
to the Sun.[a] If we track the orbit of Uranus  
and imagine a ring spinning there instead of a 
planet, you can imagine how the seasons would play  
out by how the star’s light hits the ring’s inner 
surface and how the rim walls would block some of  
that light, casting shadows when the ring’s axis 
gets closer to pointing directly at the star. 
If you were standing on the inner surface of 
the orbital, the star would rise on the one  
side of the orbital half the year and rise on 
the opposite side for the other half of the year.  
Much like in the extreme Northern or Southern 
latitudes on Earth during the coldest months,  
the star at midday wouldn’t be directly 
overhead and would hug the rim walls,  
the walls casting longer shadows over the 
inner surface landscape and not permitting  
them to heat up as much compared to when the 
star reaches its zenith in Summer. How much the  
ring is titled controls how severe this is.
So, while the orbital uses natural light,  
has the same day/night cycle, gravity, 
atmosphere, and can be given seasons,  
it shouldn’t be thought of as perfectly matching 
the conditions on Earth. We can fix the doubling  
up of the seasons per year if we use a different 
star system, and I’ll get to that in a bit,  
but the lack of a consistent direction for 
sunrise and sunset, the constant daytime  
irrespective of the season and the lack of tides 
isn’t going to play nice with animals and plants  
that rely on those things. Setting up working 
ecosystems will be a challenge without genetic  
engineering or careful selection of species.
Things also get wildly different from Earth  
when we think about orbital velocities. 
The orbital rotates every 24 hours,  
and does so at a tangential speed of 301 thousand 
miles per hour, or 0.045% of light speed, a very  
respectable interplanetary velocity. This would 
be sufficient for interstellar travel, albeit  
it would take just under 10,000 years to get to 
Alpha Centauri this way. So it provides a nice  
boost to or down from interplanetary velocities 
and also ironically means that if you’re patient  
and mining other solar systems for materials, you 
could sling them by mass driver to the system you  
want to broaden an existing orbital in and not 
need to slow them down, just tweaking the final  
trajectory and speed so it meets the orbital’s 
inner surface at exactly the same relative speed.
We’ll get to how much material we need to build 
one in a bit but let’s talk about width. As  
mentioned, this thing is a couple of million 
miles wide in diameter and every 27 miles of  
width in that band adds another Earth’s worth of 
surface area. So, you can get two eclipses a year,  
but only if the orbital is wide enough. Imagine 
having your day interrupted by a scheduled  
mini-eclipse, courtesy of your local orbital 
configuration. It's the new daylight saving  
time! You’d need an orbital in the order of 800 
Earth’s worth of surface area to actually get a  
full eclipse. That’s a band 35,000 kilometers 
or 22,000 miles wide for the specific case of  
our sun and our orbital distance. So one this 
wide does have to be tilted to get sunlight too,  
and you might use minimal tilting and wide bands 
to moderate light if you really wanted a 365 day  
year but that would be a bit closer to the local 
star than comfortable, in terms of lighting. 
There’s lots of options. Incidentally, I’m 
borrowing heavily from the Encyclopedia Galactica  
entry on Banks Orbitals over at Orion’s Arm, 
written principally by Stephen Inniss, and since  
our calculations keep matching I’m going to trust 
his going forward and save some time. And one  
thing that gets mentioned in there that I don’t 
recall noticing before is that when you tilt  
the ring, you create two warm seasons per year.
For this reason, you could get away with a wide  
orbit too, to make a longer year if you wanted 
to avoid a double set of seasons per orbit.  
Another way to get seasons is to use an elliptical 
orbit, which will make it winter when the orbital  
is further away from the star, and summer when 
it is closer to the star. You can also combine  
the two effects. If you thought deciding where 
to install and how to tilt your satellite dish  
was tricky, try choosing an orbit and tilting 
a megastructure for optimal seasonal variation! 
If the season variation is too quick for your 
preferences, a slightly brighter star than our  
G2 yellow sun might be preferable, such as 
a G1 or G0 or even an F8 or 9, as these are  
only a touch more massive than our sun but a 
good deal brighter, so their habitable zone  
distance has a longer year, and again the 
lack of spherical curvature on these rings,  
like planets have, mean they are going to be 
warmer overall than planets at the same distance. 
You can also still use shades or mirrors to 
enhance or decrease or modify the brightness and  
spectrum of the native star, but while a Banks 
orbital is quite massive it still isn’t really  
going to have proper lagrange points like a planet 
does, so your shade or lens or mirror needs to be  
lagite to keep up good pacing with the ring’s own 
orbit around that star. You could use a similar  
trick to give it a moon if you wanted but that 
ring is still rather bright at night time as we’ll  
get to in a bit, along with mass. See our Statites 
and Lagites episode for more discussion of that. 
As a general point, the habitable zone and year 
length of any star is based on its brightness  
and mass, but brightness rises at a bit over the 
cube of mass while orbital period drops with the  
inverse-square root of mass, so habitable 
planets around red dwarfs have periods of  
weeks or months, while big giant stars can 
have habitable zone periods of centuries. 
That is for main sequence stars, and I should 
also note that a subgiant star on its way  
to a red giant is brighter for the same mass and 
thus might also be popular places to stick such  
rings. The timelines for subgiant phases for stars 
like ours tend to be on an order of a billion  
years so you can easily migrate or increase your 
sun shields as it slowly brightens. Those L1 sun  
altering effects are not altering that star 
to look unlike a normal sun, even ignoring  
that we do not look at the sun directly - which 
appears quite white if you do, not yellow - you  
would not really see a swarm of satellites there 
altering the content of the light coming through. 
And of course if you can build things you 
can also migrate them, should you decide  
your star is nearing its end, nothing stops 
you from artificially lighting one of these  
for a trip and you could build your engine on the 
backside to serve as a your fake sun for the trip,  
flipping it around for the slow down. 
Should your star start to show its age,  
just pack up your several trillion square 
kilometers of living space and move. It's just  
like moving house, but with a slightly bigger van.
Of course they take a lot of energy to move and we  
should discuss mass. We usually hold that at a 
bare minimum you need a meter of thickness under  
you or at least one ton of material for every 
square meter of artificial land under your feet,  
and many would prefer something closer to a 
kilometer of landscape and hull under you at  
more than a thousand times that mass. For Earth 
that ratio is several thousand kilometers and  
about 12 million tons per square meter.
That means your mass per unit of living  
area for rotating habitats is normally anywhere 
from 10 million times as good as Earth to maybe  
10,000 times. We tend to assume these bigger 
continent and planet scale habitats go a lot  
thicker on their landscaping too, even if 
they are dimpling their hull for deeper or  
taller lakes or mountains and filling the 
latter with aerogel to cut down on mass. 
In the absence of something like magmatter 
that makes graphene seem like weak warm butter,  
we have to use that thicker outer ring approach. 
That might be a giant torus, flattened on one  
side for the ring to sit inside, and the rest 
covered in solar panels and ancillary facilities.  
It might just be full of compressed hydrogen and 
helium gas too, like a donut shaped brown dwarf,  
given their abundance and limited usefulness for 
construction. If you have a fusion economy that  
can actually use hydrogen or helium as your fuels, 
then it's a good way to store your reserves,  
and if not, if you can’t do better 
than deuterium fusion, then it gives  
us something useful to do with that material.
If we just for the moment imagined disassembling  
Jupiter to make a such a ring from, and one of 
about a thousand Earth’s worth of living area,  
you should have no problem getting all 
the material from Jupiter’s core to build  
a mile-deep landscape, and still have tons 
left over for that outer ring. Disassembling  
Jupiter for material might just upset a 
few folks, but think of the real estate  
opportunities. Always look on the bright side of 
planetary destruction. Of course, for some of us,  
planetary destruction is the bright side too.
Indeed you should have enough material for  
several of these kilo-Earth scale Banks Orbitals, 
and you can always import from other star systems  
with less desirable locations or spectrums, 
if you need more material or want to leave  
Jupiter alone for sentimental reasons.
A solar system like ours should have the  
raw materials for a couple hundred of them 
in this size range, or a thousand of the  
smaller variety of just 200 Earth’s worth that is 
referenced in Banks’ novels discussing Orbitals,  
and that’s before resource extraction options like 
star lifting or importing matter from neighboring  
systems with less desirable stars. Field trips 
in a Banks Orbital would be epic. Today's lesson:  
orbital mechanics, followed by a practical 
demonstration. Tomorrow: How not to get lost  
on a megastructure. Essential survival skills.
You could in fact set these up like chain links,  
with each habitat on the same orbit of its 
sun having a neighbor spinning through its  
middle and with its seasonal angle cocked in the 
opposite direction. Usually when I refer to chain  
link worlds I’m talking hoop-worlds, donut shaped 
artificial planets that are full of mass for  
gravity, but this is probably the easier version.
Now I said temperature is the same everywhere but  
that’s not quite true, and doesn't imply 
similar weather either. As an example,  
my home is at 42 degrees latitude and is in the 
northeast corner of Ohio, and is the same latitude  
as Rome in Italy. My area has only slightly 
more mild winters than Buffalo, New York,  
my home away from home, which is at 43 degrees 
and legendary for its snowy winters. Paris,  
France is way further north, 48 degrees, more 
than most of Canada’s population, and London  
almost 52 degrees. Your landscape controls your 
weather and temperature a lot and we can build  
those as we please on such artificial worlds.
But not every place gets a 12-hour day all year  
either. Those rim walls are enormous 
structures hundreds of miles high,  
potentially even a thousand. We usually imagine 
stylizing them as impossibly tall mountains and  
on smaller habitats they would even have 
significantly lower gravity as you got  
higher but on a Banks Orbital, even a thousand 
mile high wall is tiny compared to the radius  
under rotation so gravity would barely diminish. 
In theory they could be made of a clear material  
but given the necessary thickness I think even 
something translucent would be dubious, indeed  
you’d likely nest the ring and entire rimwall 
into your outer torus for added protection, and  
that means you have shorter days near the rims.
How much this affects the habitat as a whole  
depends on the width of your bracelet or axial 
length, again every 44 kilometers or 27 miles of  
this axial length is giving you another Earth 
of living area. But half your time your area  
near a rimwall is under partial shadow and how 
much just depends on that rimwall height and  
your tilt. If your habitat is much wider than 
your rim walls are tall, the effect is fairly  
minimal outside those areas, and the same if your 
axial tilt of the ecliptic is fairly minimal. 
The sharper the tilt, the more seasonal variation 
habitat wide and the more shadow by that rimwall,  
and this will also help drive weather. Especially 
as you might decide you don’t want a flat ring but  
one with a little curvature, either bowing 
up in the middle or down in the middle. Up  
in the middle means water will tend to drain 
toward the rim walls, down, toward the middle,  
and you could get away with shorter rim walls 
if you had enough drop toward the center. 
Any mountain ranges you place throughout the 
habitat are going to locally cool things too, and  
those things can help drive weather and break up 
storms, but there is no coriolis effect and major  
temperature gradients driving the more vicious 
cyclonic weather we see on earth, let alone places  
like Jupiter which is more massive than one of 
these rings but considerably smaller. Though the  
axial tilt can allow some monsoon-like effects.
You can also place them on a more elliptical  
orbit, rather than something circular, so that 
you get your twice-a year season from the tilt  
overlapping with your high-eccentricity season 
caused by getting further and closer from the Sun,  
with a summer effect when its closest, or 
at perihelion. In this way you could get a  
high-summer effect by timing one of the two 
axial summers with the perihelion summer,  
and your aphelion winter would be at the same time 
as your other summer, making it a lot more mild,  
or even still wintery if you were using 
a rather eccentric elliptical orbit.
In the absence of a moon of real mass, which 
would probably be a pain in the neck, you do  
not get lunar tides. We're missing out on those 
romantic moonlit nights and werewolf stories,  
but on the bright side, no high tides means no 
unexpected swimming sessions. If you want a moon,  
you could fake one with lagites or orbit 
some hollow moon around the Banks Orbital,  
though I would not trust that moon option unless 
you were using the supermassive outer sheath  
secondary ring to add a lot of mass. You do still 
get solar tides though and pretty impressive ones,  
as you are getting 2 million miles or 3 million 
kilometers closer and further from your sun every  
day as that bracelet spins. That’s a 2% change in 
distance for any given spot of that ring relative  
to its sun every day, or a 4% change in its 
gravity on you and that would parallel ocean  
tides here on Earth, though you may want to use 
smaller basins akin to seas or great lakes,which  
would reduce that. Those near dimmer stars will 
have worse tides, and those on eccentric orbits  
would have tides varying over the year as 
they get closer and further from the Sun.
Now the one thing you probably don’t have 
on these is a moon and that’s because they  
are wider than our moon’s orbit and unlike 
a sphere, a big ring is not exactly ideal  
for orbiting around stably. Again you could 
fake one with a lagite and it would appear  
exactly like our own moon if you liked.
But that ring is quite bright at nighttime  
too. Our moon when full has a solid angle of about 
65 microsteradians, about the same as our Sun has,  
and Earth from the Moon is about 14 times 
bigger, at 880 microsteradians and would be  
about 14 times brighter in the sky 
on the moon than the moon is here,  
adjusting for different albedo or reflectivity.
A Banks orbital is further away, so that a given  
moon or Earth sized object would be reflecting on 
a 24th as much moonlight - or ring light - onto  
it’s nightside when getting sun, but that still 
means even a relatively thin ring of only a  
handful of Earth’s living area is much brighter 
than our Full Moon. Like some big bridge across  
the sky. Who needs constellations when you've got 
the ultimate night light? And very visible with  
its landmasses too. To the naked eye, with two 
layers of atmosphere in the way, it probably looks  
like a blue-green-and white smear but even simple 
binoculars would let you identify bigger seas  
and land masses readily enough, and especially 
directly overhead where light passes through the  
least air both ways, you might be able to make 
out seas and continents with the naked eye too. 
You do not see it curving away either, the 
curvature is a hundred times less than on Earth,  
and turns up rather than down, but should smear 
off into a red haze than remerge as a red hazy  
ring slowly turning blue and green as your look 
higher. When looking in the ring direction,  
which we’ll call east and west. North 
and south are toward the rim walls,  
and by default we assume this is flat, other 
than landscaping changes, but I do think you  
would put a slope into make the middle or equator 
slightly lower, which would result in a thin ocean  
belt around the whole ring, sort of like we 
discussed in Topopolis, the Eternal River,  
in our February Nebula Exclusive. That structure 
is the exact opposite of the Banks Orbital too,  
very skinny radius and incredibly long axial 
width, so it looks like a thread not a ring.
Don’t think of the ring as being ruinously 
bright either, folks tend to forget our  
eyeballs are logarithmic, the sun at noon is 
400,000 times brighter than the Full Moon,  
so even a wider ring that might be a thousand 
times brighter than the full moon is still  
darker than twilight or very overcast days.
You do have options for handling that too,  
like having a nested ring inside made of panels 
that flipped out of the way for sunlight,  
turning perpendicular, but then rotated in 
to block ring light at night. I personally  
don’t think you’d bother, given it wouldn’t 
be as bright as many suburbs at nighttime,  
much less cities, but you might.
Speaking of nested rings, in addition the  
chain-link connection of orbital, which I’ll dub a 
Banks Chainlink World, which could be through the  
middle or even close enough to touch atmospheres, 
which might be a neat effect, you could nest some  
smaller rings inside the orbital cocked at higher 
angles to give an appearance of an orrery of three  
of four of these together, maybe more, and of 
course you have countless additional facilities  
and smaller habitats in and around one too, 
adding themselves as constellations in the sky. 
Those cock-eyed ones, which I will name a Banks 
Orrery, could get away with being just, say,  
10,000 kilometers smaller in radius 
for each one with just half a percent  
drop in gravity in order to maintain the 
same day length of that shorter radius. 
The rings would shadow each other a bit, 
but create far more connected living area,  
and direct physical connections would be possible 
using the same sorts of tricks we discuss in the  
megastructure compendium for devices like space 
towers or sky hooks. You’d rotate under each  
one once a day, for an extra eclipse, so you 
wouldn't have more than a few unless you want  
to move your Banks Orrery a bit closer to its 
star, but it would be pretty minimal. You are  
spinning 300,000 miles per hour, so crossing 
under a higher ring even 20,000 miles wide is  
only eclipsing things for 4 minutes at a time.
This episode should air about a month after the  
big annular eclipse a lot of North America is in, 
including my house, so for those experiencing it  
you will recall that it’s not really dark during 
an eclipse, just dimmer, more like a very thick  
cloud passed in front of the sun on a partially 
cloudy day. Amusingly you could chain link these  
Banks Orreries together too, a Banks Chain Orrery 
I suppose, and if you are chaining these, you can  
also do nested rings of them around that sun, just 
as we sometimes contemplate doing with Ringworlds  
or Rungworlds to form a partial Dyson Sphere.
There are some fascinating variations of these  
structures over at Orion’s Arm and some 
short stories and fiction set there,  
Orion’s Arm is a shared open source hard sci-fi 
setting and it’s Encyclopedia Galactica has always  
been a favorite resource of mine long before I 
started the channel and many articles also cite  
me or were contributed to by me too so odds are if 
you like the show you’ll enjoy that site. The same  
goes for Iain M. Banks excellent Culture series, 
which is generally pretty upbeat and optimistic,  
and where the Banks Orbital is just one of 
several giant megastructures we get to explore,  
and Banks was a great storyteller. The Orbitals in 
there are their alternative to settling planets,  
as they just build those orbitals to live 
on as more mass-efficient and customizable. 
Now that we’ve explored them in theory and in 
fiction, will we ever see them become a reality?  
Hard to say, I think if no other engineering 
barriers pop up, which is probably optimistic,  
we will at least see some built to prove it can 
be done, maybe even as soon as in a few millennia,  
but I’m a little less optimistic about them 
becoming the mainstay of civilization as they  
are in the Culture novels. In a few millennia, if 
we've not found something shinier to distract us,  
we might just build one. Or we'll get 
halfway and decide it'd make a great  
tourist attraction as the galaxy's largest 
unfinished project. Either way, it's a win. 
Their size makes them a big investment 
and an interconnected one, whereas you  
can build O’Neill Cylinders and smaller 
habitats still able to house many thousands,  
connect them by tethers and shuttles if you like, 
and still be able to pack one up and leave, since  
they are very easily modified to be spaceships.
So I think it's easier for me to see a billion  
O’Neill Cylinders built and parked 
near each other, connected by tethers,  
than a Banks Orbital, and both having 
similar total living area. Besides,  
we have bigger versions of those in the forms 
of Bishop Rings and McKendree Cylinders than  
can allow a potentially happy medium.
That said, powerful people like to leave  
behind imposing monuments. You only need to look 
at the pyramids to understand how that works. So,  
if you’re an all-powerful ostentatious ruler or 
community wanting to leave your mark on history,  
you could do worse than creating a Banks Orbital 
legacy that a trillion people can live on with  
tons of elbow room. For more altruistic pursuits, 
we could produce continuous ecosystems bigger than  
a planet to house all those wonderful species 
that were snuffed out through natural calamities  
or human encroachment. So I think there’s a 
future for Banks Orbitals, and a beautiful  
future at that. How could it be otherwise in 
a solar system decorated with God’s Bracelets?
To build and maintain an enormous 
construct like a Banks Orbital,  
you need patience and determination at a 
level almost inconceivable for a human,  
or even a whole civilization. For ultra long-term 
projects like these, we may use machine minds,  
and in this month’s Nebula Exclusive, Machine 
Monitors, we’ll examine what sort of artificial  
intelligence we might select for such missions and 
consider some of those missions, from building and  
maintaining megastructures to monitoring 
deep system defenses, exploring galaxies,  
or primitive worlds where life is emerging 
and may need monitored for millions of years.
Machine Monitors is out now exclusively on Nebula, 
our streaming service, where you can also see  
every regular episode of SFIA a few days early 
and ad free, as well as our other bonus content,  
including extended editions of many episodes, 
and more Nebula Exclusives like last month’s  
episode Galactic Beacons, Crystal Aliens from 
March, February’s Topopolis: The Eternal River,  
January’s Giant Space Monsters, December’s episode 
The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis,  
Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark Stars at the 
Beginning of Time, Life As An Asteroid Miner,  
Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters, 
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will, and more. 
Nebula has tons of great content 
from an ever-growing community of  
creators. Using my link and discount it’s 
available now for just over $2.50 a month,  
less than the price of the drink or snack you 
might have been enjoying during the episode. 
When you sign up at my link, 
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur  
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only get 
access to all of the great stuff Nebula offers,  
like Machine Monitors, you’ll also be 
directly supporting this show. Again, to see  
SFIA early, ad free, and with 
all the exclusive bonus content,  
go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
We were talking about mega-engineering  
only advanced civilization could manage in today’s 
episode, and we’ll continue that look at advanced  
civilizations on Thursday May 9th as we look at 
the Interdiction Hypothesis of the Fermi Paradox,  
which asks if civilizations out in 
the galaxy might leave large buffer  
zones between their empires, and ask if Earth 
might be inside one such empty buffer zone.  
Then we’ll continue the alien theme with a 
look at the reverse case of Interdiction,  
where civilizations sprawl near each other 
and set up alien embassies. After that, it's  
on to the idea of massive galactic empires and the 
enormous cosmic capitals that might oversee them. 
As a heads up, in the last few weeks we 
launched Youtube Memberships, as another  
option folks can choose to help support our show. 
Memberships on youtube come with some perks too,  
so if you’re interested in learning more, just 
click the join button under any of our videos,  
or the link in the episode description on any 
of our platforms, and you’ll see the options  
and perks. I also wanted to thank everyone who 
has joined this last month and everybody else  
who's been supporting this show for years. 
In a sea of clickbait and algorithm-chasing,  
personal support really is what helps us and 
other shows keep producing quality episodes, and… 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. 
You can also help support the show by  
becoming a member here on Youtube or Patreon, or 
checkout other ways to help at IsaacArthur.net. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
