This episode is sponsored by Audible.
In recent centuries we’ve had an avalanche
of new technologies developed, and yet none
eclipse the impact fire has had on our civilization.
But could a civilization arise without fire?
I recently completed an episode on the Fermi
Paradox asking if Technology might be a good
deal less likely to develop than we might
expect, and it got me thinking about possibly
the other direction, that it’s nearly inevitable
to develop once any species has sufficient
technology.
This is our usual basic assumption, that anyone
clever enough to invent something will likely
be around those clever enough to see its usefulness
and replicate and improve the design.
Not always, but occasionally, and more often
then they’d discard something they knew
was useful.
So you’d expect any clever critters, from
our ancestors to aliens on some other world,
to eventually accumulate more technology.
In that episode, Rare Technology, we challenged
that assumption and a point I raised there
was that it seems like humanity has had fire
for around a million years, but took considerably
longer to use it for cooking food or fire-sharpening
sticks into spears.
Indeed, it was only relatively recently that
we started using it for making ceramics or
metals.
99% of the time we had fire, we didn’t have
pottery or metalworking, but of course we
did get it eventually and as long as a million
years is, it itself is only about 1% of 1%
of the age of the Universe or the estimated
lifetimes of the sorts of stars we’d expect
complex life to live around.
So if it took them ten or even a hundred times
as long to use fire for more constructive
ends, it doesn’t make a great answer to
the Fermi Paradox, the big question of how
the Universe can be so immense and ancient
and yet be seemingly absent other and older
civilizations on other worlds.
Of course that makes a big assumption about
how abundant worlds like Earth are.
With all the discoveries of exoplanets since
the century began, we tend to assume there
must be a ton of Earth Analogues out there.
But it is worth noting that we haven’t found
a single one yet, even as our catalogue of
exoplanets expands into the thousands.
Needless to say, that depends a lot on what
we mean by an Earth Analogue.
How close is close enough, but our means of
detection matters too.
By and large exoplanets are easy to spot the
bigger they are and the closer they are to
their own sun, where they are more brightly
lit and cause more gravitational wobble to
that star.
So it’s not that we think planet’s of
Earth’s mass and orbital distance or temperature
are rare, just that they are vastly harder
to spot than hot and massive worlds.
I’ve lost track of how many times some pop
science news source has proclaimed we found
a world like Earth that wasn’t even as close
a match as planets in our own solar system,
and usually what we call a Super-Earth, some
planet several times the mass of Earth.
Of course such places might host life but
there’s a bit of problem.
Earth began with the same elemental composition
as the other planets and even the Sun, as
we all formed from the same planetary nebula.
Earth and the other inner planets have virtually
no hydrogen anymore, whereas the Sun and outer
gas giants are mostly made of hydrogen, and
the other inner planets have even less of
it.
The second most abundant material in the Universe
and in our solar system is Helium, and as
Helium is a noble gas and doesn’t combine
with other atoms like hydrogen does, it’s
even rarer on the inner planets than Hydrogen
is.
This is good thing for us of course, we have
plenty of hydrogen in our water and a few
other chemicals, but the vast majority of
it blew away in the early days of the solar
system.
The lighter a molecule or atom is, the more
likely it is to be blown off a planet by solar
wind coming off the sun.
The closer to that star or warmer such a world
is, the more quickly those light elements
will be blown away.
The lower the gravity of that planet, the
more quickly too.
As a result, it’s quite likely that planet’s
much lighter or warmer than Earth would have
their atmosphere’s and oceans stripped off
long before advanced life had evolved.
Indeed that presumably happened to Mars long
ago, and it get a lot less light and solar
wind off the Sun to strip it down.
And while Venus, much closer to Earth’s
mass, not only has an atmosphere but one far
thicker than Earth’s, virtually none of
that is hydrogen or helium.
So it’s quite probable that even being just
a bit lighter or warmer than Earth would mean
no significant atmosphere or even just one
a lot lower in pressure than ours and more
arid.
Hard for fire to get developed without plenty
of oxygen and water, but probably more importantly,
hard for a lot of animal life to develop there
or the rich ecosystem that could fuel a diverse
and many-tiered food chain.
On the flip side, a more massive planet would
likely have retained a lot more of its hydrogen,
and since oxygen is abundant in every rocky
object, you’d expect it to have a lot more
water.
A planet initially twice Earth’s mass should
have had twice as much hydrogen and oxygen
to begin with, and lost far less of its hydrogen,
potentially retaining an order of magnitude
more than we have.
At the same time, such a planet, if it’s
density was decently parallel to Earth’s,
should have a radius only 26% higher than
Earth’s and a surface area only 60% higher,
on which we’d expect double the hydrogen
to be around and even if that’s all it retained,
that mean’s your oceans are also 26% deeper.
Though as mentioned, we’d tend to expect
it to have much deeper oceans and thicker
atmosphere from that higher gravity holding
on to lighter atoms that would otherwise escape.
The average depth of our oceans is 3700 meters,
so if they were 26% deeper that would mean
nearly an extra kilometer of water, and very
little of Earth’s surface area would be
left above water if that were so, and again
that’s probably conservative since such
worlds would retain more hydrogen.
Add to that, more water and thicker atmospheres
make for more powerful erosive forces grinding
down what mountains might peak above the sea.
This implies many planets a bit more massive
than Earth might be all ocean with little
to no surface land and thick atmospheres.
That’s not a problem for life, the oceans
are abundant in life, including many smart
critters, but not helpful for fire.
Now as a caveat I should note that much of
earth’s water is stored under our crust
and that could easily be the case in other
places and result in reduction to this problem,
time will tell, as we improve our models and
catalog of worlds and get better looks at
them.
For today though it merely reminds us that
it doesn’t take much difference on a planet
to screw up the ability to use fire or the
desire to want to.
Critters with good night sight and thick fur
coats benefit little from fire, which is scary
stuff, and so might never use it.
Same, it is scary stuff, so a species has
to be a bit weird in the head not to run screaming
from it whenever it encounters it.
A more humid and wet planet would rarely see
natural fires and would rarely have them start
on accident either.
We don’t know how fire got discovered, in
the sense of something we could make and control,
but I’d not be surprised if some ancestor
of ours was sitting there sharpening a flint
axe, striking sparks, and was sitting on some
nice dry tinder as a comfortable place to
work, and presto.
That won’t happen on a place that’s too
wet.
Same, biology matters a bit too.
Humans are omnivores but we don’t eat grass
or wood chips, we can’t get much nutrient
out of them.
Other critters can and other places wouldn’t
likely have identical biology to us, so it
might be you don’t really have large chunks
of combustible matter lying around that’s
dried out because things come by and eat it
first.
Planets with less oxygen might just be very
hard to start a fire on, that’s actually
very hard to do without devices designed and
refined to do it.
You don’t just invent a firebow one day.
To have it happen on accident you have to
be either striking the right kind of stones
together a lot or drilling into something
combustible at a rate at which heat can build
up enough to kindle a fire.
Both of those are much harder if the oxygen
ratio is even a little bit lower, whereas
alternatively if the oxygen level is just
a bit higher, it is much easier to ignite
a fire and that makes it even more dangerous.
We could go on but I imagine we’ve made
the point, there are a ton of things which
might make the invention and use of fire far
less likely, harder, or effectively impossible,
like it would be for underwater life.
It might be that only a very tiny fraction
of Earth Analogues would have a setup that
made fire’s discovery very plausible, while
at the same time permitted complex life to
evolve.
It doesn’t matter if that’s just a small
portion or vast super-majority, except to
the Fermi Paradox of course, what matters
today is if life forms as smart as humans
could plausibly exist on some place where
fire just wasn’t like to be available and
if technology could still be developed without
it.
It is hard to overestimate just how dependent
our various technologies are on fire and the
secondary technologies it permits.
Not every technology does, one can make very
sharp instruments out of rock or volcanic
glass or even bone.
Indeed obsidian can be sharper than even high-quality
steel scalpels, let alone early copper and
bronze knives.
It’s not very durable or malleable though
which is why we liked metals.
Similarly while pots are great for storage,
especially of liquids, we made ample use of
animal hides for that too and you’d figure
a water-logged planet where fire was hard
would have plenty of flora and fauna with
water-proof traits you could use for such
storage purposes.
So too, you could easily have local vegetation
that made for much better tools than most
of our trees do.
So at a minimum we can see a clear path for
a decent amount of basic technology developing
without fire, even if stuff like metallurgy
and engines would be a good deal harder, and
it is worth remembering that until relatively
recently, even most of the more advanced technology
available to civilizations was not in wide
usage, and often not even in limited but critical
usage.
Improvements can keep being made to those,
albeit probably slower without fire.
Now one quick note.
It would seem undeniable that, without fire,
technology would be a lot harder if possible
at all, but we must remember what we said
earlier about how long it took us to develop
fire-based applications even once we had fire
and that it was still an eyeblink of time
compared to how long life has been around.
If evolution has produced a species that is
using big and abstract brains to enhance their
survival, then it’s likely to keep selecting
for more intelligence.
Such being the case, that means over time
they are getting smarter, with or without
fire.
Invention is mostly a statistical process,
having someone very smart be exposed to a
problem or question and sort of stumbling
into an idea, that is going to be way more
common if your average person’s IQ is higher
than Einstein’s, which might easily occur
with different brain architecture or just
many thousands of more generations of it being
a critical survival trait.
An absence of fire slows you down, but if
your invention timeline is slowed to the point
that you’re getting smarter from natural
selection, you might hit a tipping point where
you’re figuring out alternative technologies
very quickly.
I pulled up a list of most important technologies
and while such things vary it included a lot
of the obvious candidates, printing presses,
paper, and of course writing, for recording
ideas, things like the wheel or sails or compasses
for getting around quickly and accurately,
animal domestication and engines for amplifying
available power and energy and work.
Many others too but it took me only a couple
minutes to think of how each of those could
be done without fire, replaced by something
around as good that didn’t require fire,
or which might not even be necessary.
As an example, the magnetic compass is a great
boon for navigation but in no way critical
for anything but ocean-going ships far from
any shore or planet-based navigational aids.
Now, you can have magnetic needles without
fire-based metal-working, magnetic rocks fall
down out of the sky as meteors after all and
might do so more often on some planets, but
there’s also no reason to think the average
planet has essentially two major landmasses
separated by mostly empty ocean devoid of
map references.
Plus you can navigate by stars with an accurate
clock, and while good carbon-steel springs
are handy for making those, there are a ton
of ways to track time.
One of those might be a smaller and closer
moon that orbits a planet more quickly than
ours and made for better time keeping, or
a species that had an internal clock.
We breathe at a variable rate and have a heart
beat that varies too, both by individual and
activity, but you could have species that
had some lung or heart that loudly and consistently
expanded or beat, or any number of other internal
clock options.
They might be math virtuosos or really good
at counting, especially if they’ve been
evolving bigger brains for a long time, and
have no problem remembering how many heartbeats
they’ve had that day and how many they normally
have and performing the trigonometry to navigate
with ease.
More time to develop bigger brains could have
some really bizarre effects like that, or
just seeing uses for a given object or phenomena
that took us far longer to develop an understanding
and application for.
Needless to say you can do writing even under
water, and make paper to write on in a compact
and handy fashion out of tons of stuff.
It’s nice to have the ability to melt and
mix lead and other metals to make nice typeset
for a printing press but it’s hardly mandatory,
and in terms of animal domestication and farming,
hitching a whale or dolphin up to a yoke dragging
a sharp rock or bone plow is presumably doable.
Other than those things specifically involving
fire, like combustion engines, rockets, glass,
and metal working, most can be gotten around.
But you kinda need those things if you want
to be making computers and rockets and telescopes
and microscopes and smart phones.
What are the options?
Potentially many, we can’t really guess
what another civilization might invent with
centuries or even millions of years to go
about it, or at least I can’t during the
relatively short period I’ve been thinking
on the topic.
One method sticks out though, and that’s
nuclear power.
We had started noticing interesting properties
of uranium long before we had modern civilization
and began learning its most obvious property,
that it produces heat, about the time things
like automobiles and planes and trains started
getting common.
Now it’s very hard to get much heat out
of uranium without getting a lethal dose of
radiation if you lack metalworking but a species
might be much more durable to radiation than
us, and wouldn’t necessarily need to be
in order to slowly develop improved primitive
reactors – those actually occur in nature
– and learn to handle it more efficiently
and safely, much as we presumably did with
fire, which even until quite recently was
one of the leading causes of death for humans.
Indeed long term cancer risks from things
like radiation, which might be less of an
issue for many species and biologies, is only
a big concern these days because we so rarely
die before getting old enough for cancer to
be a common killer.
Lacking many of the technologies that help
us live longer, an elevated risk of cancer
when you’re already rather old is probably
not even as much as a concern to them as the
dangers of fire have been to us for virtually
all of human existence, and we kept working
with it.
So they might work with uranium too, much
as we have with fire.
If they’ve got it, and start mastering it,
that does become all you need for replacing
fire, for everything from vehicle engines
to metalworking to spacecraft, as we saw in
our look at such spaceships in The Nuclear
Option.
Many other important bits of technology would
be quite a lot harder under water, hard to
mix chemicals under the sea, but we didn’t
specify underwater, just without fire, and
it should still be doable.
In that regard, while I think the trek to
advanced technology would be far harder without
fire, it is doable via atomic energy or solar
or geothermal too, though it will probably
take them much longer.
Maybe so long their planet died before they
did it, though that would tend to be a long
time even by evolutionary standards, and if
they are on an evolutionary path where bigger
and more abstract brains are being selected
for, it might not take that much longer at
that.
It’s a strange and hard path to all those
fiery stars in the sky without fire, but it
might indeed be possible, so maybe somewhere
out there in the Universe there is an advanced
civilization of dolphins or whales we might
meet someday.
Oceanic planets are always the first that
come to mind when this notion of technology
without fire comes up, as are alternative
pathways of evolution, and we see a particularly
interesting take on that in Stanislaw Lem’s
scifi classic novel, Solaris, our Audible
Book of the Month.
Solaris is amazing novel, exploring psychological
themes while contemplating what a truly alien
intelligence might be like and asking if it
could even be possible to truly communicate
with an alien mind.
Solaris has been adapted to film and audio
quite a few times but I recommend the audiobook
narrated by Allesandro Juliani, who you might
recall as Lt. Felix Gaeta of Battlestar Galactica.
He gives an excellent performance, and as
I’ve mentioned before with audiobooks, a
great narrator can add so much to a good book,
and Lem is already one of the greats of science
fiction and Solaris is his best known work,
so I highly recommend it
However, he wrote many other wonderful novels
too and you can find many of his other works
on Audible also.
And it’s a good time for some extra reading,
or listening, as Audible is offering a challenge
this new year to its new and current members.
Finish 3 Audiobooks by March 3rd and get a
$20 Amazon credit.
It’s that simple.
Finish 3 by 3/3 and get $20.
How easy is that?
There’s nothing to enter—Audible will
keep track of your progress for you!
Audible members can choose 3 titles every
month: 1 audiobook and 2 exclusive Audible
Originals you can’t hear anywhere else,
including access to guided fitness programs
if getting into shape was your new year’s
resolution.
You can listen to your audiobooks anywhere
on any device, and if you don’t enjoy your
book, you can easily exchange it for another.
Though I’m sure you’ll love Solaris, and
you can start listening today with a 30-day
Audible trial.
Choose 1 Audiobook and 2 Audible Originals
absolutely free.
Just visit the link in the episode description,
Audible.com/Isaac, or text “Isaac” to
500-500.
Incidentally, if you’re planning on taking
the Audible Challenge and need some ideas,
or just want some reading suggestions for
these cold winter months, check out the “Books”
Tab on our website, Isaac Arthur.net, where
we have all of our books of the Month listed
along with many other book recommendations.
And while you’re there, you can also check
out some of our awesome SFIA merchandise or
donate to help support future episodes.
As to those future episodes, this Thursday
we’ll be visiting the Moon to look at how
industry there might begin being setup and
what forms it might take, in Moon: Industrial
Complex.
The week after that we’ll ask the big question
of why life Exists, then close out the Month
with a look at life on board O’Neill Cylinders.
We’ll also have our usual monthly livestream
Q&A.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
the button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and we’ll see you Thursday!
