This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. Get 
access to my streaming video service, Nebula,  
when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
In an ancient and vast Universe we 
often wonder where all the aliens are,  
but just as concerning is where all their 
ancient and vast artifacts are?
 
So, today we are returning to 
the topic of the Fermi Paradox,  
the big question of where the aliens are when we 
live in a Universe that is so enormous and old.  
It seems hard to believe it shouldn’t have 
spawned billions of civilizations by now.
 
Now, what we really mean is, why aren’t we hearing 
communications from them, and why aren’t we seeing  
the signs of vast and ancient empires. Where 
are these empires, and if they no longer exist,  
where are the ruins of them? Where are 
their pyramids or Stonehenge, so to speak?
 
To be fair, many folks think the pyramids or 
Stonehenge are examples of alien work themselves,  
but in this context, we’re talking about 
megastructures, the sorts of things that dwarf  
even the Great Pyramid, and which can include 
examples that would dwarf even a planet. Things  
we could astronomically see, either by their 
sheer enormity or by their sheer quantity. 
 
So, I thought that today we would examine these 
apparently absent megastructures from a few  
perspectives. If they are actually missing or if 
we are seeing them but just not recognizing them  
as artificial. If they are abundant but not 
where we expect, like if civilizations build  
in interstellar voids rather than around stars, 
or even in pocket dimensions. If they simply do  
not build such megastructures, either because 
they just never get the resources and numbers  
for it, or they lack the desire to. Or if 
there’s just no one there to build them.
 
Those and other options are what we’ll 
be considering today, and as is often  
the case with our Fermi Paradox episodes, 
it will probably run on the longer side,  
so make sure to grab a drink 
and snack and don’t forget to  
hit that like button and to subscribe 
to our channel if you haven’t already.
 
Now, if you’ve seen our episode: the Megastructure 
Compendium, you’ve a pretty good idea what sort of  
constructs we’re talking about when I suggest 
they would be astronomically visible by sheer  
size or quantity. Our basic concept for today is 
that we’re not seeing them and that we should be,  
and that indeed the quantity of them 
throughout the Universe should be growing,  
such that as we look back in time by looking at 
more distant parts of the Universe, we should  
be seeing fewer of them in a given area, the Time 
Elapse Argument or TEA, which we’ll come back to.  
Astronomy is history though, as we like 
to say, and when we look far away we also  
look far back in time, and we need to remember 
that when listening for intergalactic messages,  
because they’d have been written long ago.
To summarize the core concept for today though,  
it is assumed that the longer a civilization 
exists, the bigger it is going to grow until it  
has comfortably maxed out local resources – we’ll 
also return to that point later – and the more  
things it is going to have built. In this context, 
we mean that term ‘civilization’ very loosely, to  
the point that civilization is less a continuous 
nation or empire, and more of a species, or even  
a clade in both the genetic and creative sense. I 
wish there was a different term available besides  
civilization or species, but essentially we mean 
a continuity of intelligent life and information.  
If three thousand years from now, Earth 
has been blown to smithereens and classic  
humanity has ceased to exist in favor of various 
genetically altered humans, cyborgs, and AI,  
that would certainly seem to imply that both 
our civilization and our species have ceased  
to exist. However, from the Fermi Paradox 
standpoint, it is the same civilization,  
just as the fall of Rome, or the Pharaohs 
or whoever, didn’t end human civilization.
 
Now, I scheduled this episode to be 
written sometime back in April, but,  
much like in astronomy, my episodes have a time 
lag. So as I got around to drafting it a month  
later than planned, I had coincidentally watched 
both the Sci-fi Disaster Film Moonfall and Doctor  
Strange: Multiverse of Madness, and then binged on 
Marvel Comics lore videos by Nerdsync and Comics  
Explained, and got rather absorbed by one where 
Rob was discussing the origins of Galactus, Eater  
of Worlds, as having come from a prior iteration 
of the Universe. Spoilers to follow, by the way!
 
So, while the originally planned focus was to look 
at our concept in more of an update of the Dyson  
Dilemma, and in the context of known science, 
I also want to contemplate the Fermi Paradox  
and the absent megastructures, in the context of 
some of the sci-fi concepts. Now, Moonfall shows  
us a hollow moon built by ancient human precursors 
who came up on the losing side of an AI rebellion,  
and there are all sorts of problems with this, 
but it is a Rolland Emmerich disaster film,  
so we’re not going to judge it for scientific 
realism anymore than we would an MCU or DC flick.
 
But I wanted to raise this from the outset because 
a lot of times on this show we say X, Y, or Z may  
be a common technology or plot device or strategy 
in sci-fi, but it doesn’t work under known science  
and relies on things in contradiction to our 
current understanding. We will be trying to zoom  
in on what our options to explain the apparent 
absence of megastructures under known science are,  
but since we are all going to contemplate a lot 
of those sci-fi scenarios anyway, because I and  
most of this audience are scifi geeks, I figured I 
should add some of them to our list to discuss. 
 
So, why isn’t the Universe littered with the 
relics and constructs of a trillion current or  
extinct civilizations? A point I often make about 
Faster Than Light Travel and Time Travel is that,  
while they’re not allowed under known physics, 
they only exacerbate the Fermi Paradox if you find  
out how to do them. And so do Multiverses or prior 
iterations of this Universe, if travel between  
them is possible. If it's weird that no one in 
our galaxy is currently transmitting hello signals  
and has never been willing or able to colonize 
the galaxy, it’s even weirder if there’s FTL,  
not only making that easier, but allowing 
intergalactic empires. Same for time travel,  
you’re not just dealing with if we might be one 
of the earliest intelligent species to arise,  
but also all the future civilizations that might 
arise and invent time travel and decide to visit  
our period or earlier, or even to colonize 
or conquer them, like Kang the Conqueror,  
who I’m guessing is the next big MCU villain.
Well, if we’re contemplating prior iterations  
of our universe or people jumping over from 
other Universes, you really start having  
problems justifying how this could be possible 
and explaining why we’ve never been visited. 
 
Now, we have to put a caveat on that in terms of 
megastructures and ever expanding civilizations  
because once you throw in alternate universes 
and so on, you start having to consider if  
civilizations migrate out of their birth universe 
to areas where life would be less likely to arise  
on its own, but where the setup and rules 
of physics are more beneficial to high tech  
civilizations. Some Universe where the speed of 
light is faster, or where entropy is less brutal,  
or where gravity is too weak for planets 
to form but allows for the building of  
insanely huge structures that won’t collapse in 
on themselves, or one where the physical constant  
allows for superstrong materials. Indeed, they 
might have places they mine for resources or  
energy that are awful for life to emerge in or 
dwell in, and so they migrate to the optimal  
place for them to exist, then pull resources 
from those other vastly more abundant sources.
 
You could have megastructures in parallel or 
higher Universes that had broom closets bigger  
than our whole galaxy or which even stretched 
into multiple universes and dimensions themselves.  
Imagine a computer mind that spanned not 
just one star, like a Matrioshka Brain,  
or even a whole galaxy, but spread itself 
through several realities. And a lot of your  
eternal growth problems don’t actually apply 
in certain multiverse setups… see our episode  
on Parallel Universes & Alternate 
Realities, as well as our episode:  
Infinite Improbability Issues, for more details.
 
Now, what is this eternal growth problem? Well, 
it’s the basic Malthusian notion that if you’ve  
got finite resources and something capable of 
exponential growth, it’s eventually going to  
grow to hit that cap. This, honestly, is a really 
simplistic notion from the late 18th century that  
just wasn’t able to really look at everything 
involved, but it spooked a lot of folks into  
thinking humanity and its growing numbers 
would one day hit some maximum population,  
ignoring that it had routinely done that for many 
centuries before, and then we would descend into  
some chaos and the fall of civilization. This is 
called a Malthusian Catastrophe and people often  
feared it was right around the corner, especially 
when I was a kid in the 1980s, and everyone seemed  
to think we were in a race between the Population 
Bomb and Nuclear Bomb, with either of them ending  
in what’s left of us running around as mutant 
cannibals in the wastelands of a barren planet.  
I seemed to be in a minority for thinking we’d 
survive the year 2000, but I’m a noted optimist.
 
As a result, it often makes discussing future 
mega-civilizations numbering in the quadrillions  
or quintillions kind of difficult at times 
because a lot of folks really do have a  
visceral reaction to the simple concept of us 
growing to such numbers, rather than the more  
core idea that we should not despoil all in 
our wake while growing recklessly quickly and  
brutally cannibalizing each other. They’re not 
separating the two concepts. The reality is that  
we don’t have decent predictive models of how 
our own population on Earth is growing. I know  
folks often think we do, that it’s going to grow 
to X by year Y or stop growing at Population Z  
or contract to some Hypothetical lower value. We 
don’t know because Earth is composed of hundreds  
of different cultures, each with different views 
on ideal family values and sizes, that shift with  
time and only loosely describe an individual's 
choices. This is why population estimates tend  
to be less accurate than weather forecasts.
Technology shifts, laws shift, incentives shift,  
and that’s just with the modern humans of the 
here and now. It doesn’t speak to aliens, let  
alone multiversal critters. So, I personally take 
the stance that in the long term, while resources  
are available, folks will tend to seek to utilize 
them or to obtain and store them, as biology seems  
to encourage, as also does logic. One of the 
more common things to do with those resources  
would seem to be to build either huge numbers of 
megastructures or fewer, larger megastructures,  
whether that’s for giant space habitats or giant 
space guns or giant space portals or giant space  
computers or giant space vaults for storing 
resources for later, for your giant space empire.
 
Our idea is essentially that, over very long 
timelines, species or factions which prefer  
to grow – either in population or resources – 
will come to outnumber or out-influence those  
who don’t, as long as the situation permits 
that; and it doesn’t just mean when they run  
out of resources. As things get more developed, 
folks might notice that crowding wasn’t here yet,  
pies weren’t getting cut into smaller and 
smaller pieces yet, but that this seemed on  
the approaching horizon and the balance might 
shift. Same a civilization in contraction  
either gets replaced or sees this is happening 
and some of its elements press for growth. 
 
I usually summarize this as saying that 
civilizations will tend to grow when they  
can comfortably do so, and with the caveat 
that some might not, but when we’re talking  
about civilizations growing over a whole 
galaxy, the rare one that doesn’t, simply  
disappears. Alternatively, if galactic growth is 
something that only a rare minority actually did,  
one in a hundred civilizations or so, then they 
would sprawl all over the galaxy and its billions  
of systems, while those others, once relatively 
numerous, were tiny dots on the galactic stage,  
on their hundred or so homeworlds.
I occasionally like to point out that  
math doesn’t dictate reality. Apparently cyclic 
behavior in people or civilizations is driven by  
actual cause and effect, not the equation that 
seems decent at predicting it. Things prone to  
exponential growth - in practice - do not tend to 
do this because they are following an equation.  
The equation is our simple, first order estimate 
of how something behaves. In practice, a species  
which is exponentially growing – like the original 
lifeform, presumably – eventually approaches local  
maximums and you start seeing divergence too, and 
some adapt to better live off unused resources  
in the environment and some adapt to live off 
them, cannibals turned predator-prey cousins.
 
And that’s still way over-simplified, I just 
pick it because it sounds sinister. In practice,  
you get an ecosystem of competing 
interests, symbiotic relationships,  
parasitic ones, and more, and even more when we 
include brains in the mix. If one group gets too  
powerful, others might rally against them, if a 
coalition makes enough progress towards its goal,  
its own internal factions might feel more free 
to fight factional disputes, weakening them  
as a group or causing a divide. This is common 
in two-party power structures composed of many  
smaller factions. I don’t view these as inevitable 
or cyclical things incidentally, I just view them  
as dampening forces on exponential growth.
But they don’t really apply to why folks would  
choose not to expand out to the stars or seek to 
take all the random and dangerous rocks floating  
around their solar system and put them to use 
before they hit their planet, hit their sun and  
become hard to get at, or just get perturbed 
and launched into interstellar space. There’s  
no implied unity here, anymore than now, or in 
various expansion periods on Earth. There might be  
unity, it might be helpful, but it isn’t needed, 
and indeed competition is often beneficial too.
 
Now, I do tend to think civilizations tilt toward 
the rational and peaceful more as they get more  
technological. I don’t take that as a given, just 
that technology tends to require an appreciation  
of logic and patience and being restrained 
in conflict when there’s so much wealth and  
resources that qualify as fragile rather than 
easily seized. I don’t think this represents  
an inclination of all advanced civilizations 
to run on hugs and good will, just to be a  
bit more predisposed to reasoned responses. Note 
that reasoned isn’t always kind or nice either.
 
Let me add the caveat here that I mean actual 
reason and logic, not sci-fi or Hollywood logic,  
like your typical cliché AI or Vulcan. Humans 
being irrational is a truism, we are the most  
rational life form on this planet. 
Most of the stuff we call irrational  
is actually really rational, just not updated. 
Nature encourages us to be cautious and mostly  
hostile towards anyone that’s different to us or 
acting atypically, that *is* rational behavior,  
and is the reason why we’re programmed to act 
that way. There are very good and logical reasons,  
not just ethical ones, why a more considered 
approach is beneficial to humanity. But that  
doesn’t make those old kneejerk reactions 
irrational, just often sub-optimal.
 
But, it’s a sad reality that, while science 
fiction often bemoans that aliens might judge  
us for our bigoted ways, realistically, 
they are likely to shrug with indifference  
to that realization because its something 
they’ve had to tackle too. And we probably  
don’t want to assume they came out the same 
place we are now or will be in a century.  
The good news though, is that if aliens 
are around that are more advanced than us,  
then they have thus far opted *not* to wipe 
us out, which to me would imply that all our  
high-minded ideals about individual values and 
dignity and respect are not just stuff we made  
up one day. That they feel we as individuals 
and our cultures have some sort of merit.
 
This, incidentally, is one of the better reasons 
why megastructures might be absent. They actually  
aren’t, we just happen to be crammed inside 
one. You may think of this as Earth with an  
artificial fake sky crystal sphere around it, or 
the whole solar system, or even the whole galaxy.  
Or an artificial pocket Universe they made for 
us as a zoo, nature preserve or quarantine zone.  
Indeed, we might live in a virtual universe 
they made for us after they killed us all and  
scanned our dying brains into digital 
uploads and a simulated Universe. 
 
Or, you might have done this to yourself, 
incidentally. It’s very normal for us to wonder  
if this is all a dream or if we’re recalling 
past lives or so on, and while that can obviously  
lead to some unhealthy solipsism, that doesn’t 
necessarily make it untrue. I am not some voice  
in your head right now, trying to clue you in 
to your reality being fake, but you’ve no reason  
to believe that based on the universe around 
you. Nothing here, nothing anyone else can say,  
can ever meaningfully prove or disprove if 
this is all real or if any of this matters.
 
Which is another possible reason we don’t see 
these megastructures. They might not get built  
because hyper-intelligent creatures believe 
there is no purpose in this Universe, and  
they opt to gamble on another one. You might be 
some million year old superhuman, or superalien,  
with a relative IQ of 200,000, but still be stuck 
on the feeling that entropy is going to get you  
eventually in this Universe and that there’s 
nothing new for you, just endless perturbations.  
Like reading the same basic plot of a book, all 
the characters have different names and places  
but it’s version two million of the young naive 
farm boy who finds a magic sword and turns out  
to be a prince. It’s not a bad story but it’s just 
kind of blah after a few hundred thousand reads. 
 
You might just opt to shutdown or commit suicide, 
but it’s also possible that your civilization  
has options for leaps of faith. Heck it might 
even lie and make some just to give folks an  
apparent choice. Maybe you’ve invented a way to 
travel to new universes – you think – but it is  
believed to be a one-way trip. And the math all 
works but nobody has ever found a way to return  
and say “yep, portal works, new young universe 
on the other side” so, eventually, everyone has  
to make that leap. Or you think this universe 
might be real, but you just can’t be sure and  
it’s lost its flavor, so you are gambling that, 
if it is a simulation, your death is going to  
either awaken you into a new world or reincarnate 
you into another sim or just simply not work,  
that something will keep you from actually 
doing it. Coincidence and distractions. 
 
We have the option for patience on this, the 
Reaper is going to swing by eventually. And  
in theory, so do they, but while any finite number 
is miniscule compared to infinity and immortality,  
there’s probably a big difference between us 
and some biological immortal posthuman – or  
postalien – contemplating millions, 
billions, or even quintillions of years  
as it waits on the Heat Death of the Universe.
Now, I don’t buy that one as being a civilization  
wrecker personally. I think a civilization 
headed that way would see many of its members, if  
necessary, just flat out indoctrinate themselves 
into a belief that life had a purpose and that  
reality was, well, real. You see folks around 
you jumping off metaphorical, or literal ciffs,  
so you brainwash yourself to never doubt free will 
and reality then erase your memory of doing it. 
 
You can make a good case that we already did that, 
this isn’t exactly a new discussion just because  
we’re adding aliens and advanced megastructures 
into the mix. To me, it would instead be a  
reason why I would expect those huge artifacts, 
because they definitely make for something to  
do if you’re bored. I mean, if you’re trying 
to find a grand purpose, something you feel  
will take you closer to what’s true and divine, 
then building a planet is a pretty good choice.
 
Again though, where you build is a bit more of 
a tricky issue. One that folks often object to,  
in the context of the Dyson Dilemma, the basic 
notion that civilization will seek to enclose  
their sun to maximize their available power, is 
that they might not choose this option in favor  
of better options. Indeed, folks commenting on the 
matter to me are usually pointing out a whole slew  
of alternatives that are better than a classic 
dyson swarm that they know of because we’ve done  
episodes on them. Like controlled fusion instead 
of a star, or using starlifting to take your sun  
apart to use as fuel when you need it, or 
dumping it down a black hole and so on. 
 
And speaking of black holes, we 
often contemplate using them to  
fuel civilizations long after the stars burn 
out, and often via ultra-cold computation,  
which works better when the Universe is 
older and colder – the Heat Death of the  
Universe isn’t about high temperatures – 
and that makes stars inside galaxies bad  
places to set up shop in the here and now. 
So folks migrate their civilization to the  
edge of the galaxy or even the edge of time. 
Which sounds good, but the problem is, you wonder  
why they’re not migrating a lot more material 
with them. Maybe that’s what Dark Matter is,  
all the big posthuman intellects surviving on the 
galactic halo, as computers around black holes,  
nigh invisible except for their gravitational 
pull. We’ll be examining black holes as a dark  
matter candidate next week and there are some 
less mundane scenarios for that like this.  
Civilizations evolve and decide to harvest their 
corner of the galaxy a bit then head to the Rim  
with a nice stash of raw materials. We just 
happened to have arrived on the galactic stage  
when about 80% of the available matter has 
been collected and migrated to its purpose.
 
Except, that would imply that a billion years 
ago, there would have been less dark matter and  
more visible matter, and two billion years ago, 
even less, and three, much less again, and so on.  
Problem is, we can see galaxies billions of light 
years away, as they were billions of years ago,  
and they’re the same as the ones in the here 
and now, in terms of dark matter content.
 
This is an example of what I call TEA, or the 
Time Elapse Argument of the Fermi Paradox. Any  
astronomical phenomena we might scratch our 
heads at and wonder if it’s natural or a sign  
of artificial and intelligent creation, 
needs to be viewed in the context that,  
as the Universe aged, more worlds should 
have come into existence which could spawn  
intelligent life and those that did should have 
had more time for them to grow and do stuff,  
like mega engineering and galactic colonization.
Thus if I’m seeing a phenomenon a billion light  
years away in about 1 in 100 galaxies that are 
at roughly that distance, and thus we see them  
as they were a billion years ago, if I then look 
at a bunch of galaxies 2 billion light years away,  
two billion years ago, and we see that phenomena 
still in 1 in 100 galaxies, it's not a good fit  
for us to assume that it must be a product of 
intelligence. Alternatively, something like  
quasars, ancient hyper-active galactic cores, were 
much more common in the ancient universe and thus,  
when looking at galaxies many billions 
of light years away, we see tons of them,  
we’ve found over a million of them thus far 
and they seem to have peaked about 10 billion  
years ago. Which is to say, they are at their 
highest density 10 billion light years away.
 
Whereas, there are very few near us, with 
Markarian 231 being the closest known,  
at 600 million light years away. They are 
probably nearly extinct in the Universe by  
now. Of course reigniting them artificially might 
be something advanced civilizations do, a tempting  
topic for an episode, Colonizing Quasars, 
but if so, no one seems to have thus far.
 
Now, we could take that peak at 10 billion years 
ago, when the Universe was about 4 billion years  
old, and say that that is when life first hit its 
big stride, that there were some planets maybe  
as soon as a billion years after the Big bang 
and that some had evolved intelligence on them  
after just 2 or 3 billion years, not the 4 billion 
with some spare change that it took here on Earth,  
the largest part of which was waiting on 
photosynthesis or cells with nuclei to evolve.  
Maybe vast empires arose then and peaked out, 
those quasars being their giant engines to open  
the way to new universes. Later civilizations were 
sent signals to just come there and use theirs, or  
given a better and simpler design invented later.
Or maybe those were the gateways used by folks  
migrating from an older Universe that spawned this 
one. We do have theories about the possibility  
that every black hole that forms, causes a new 
Universe to appear on its other side. Those  
quasars could be big white holes and those folks 
on the other end waited till the Universe was  
older and calmer to migrate, where stars had lived 
and died and created heavier elements and planets,  
rather than migrating at the moment of 
the Big Bang or the first million or  
so years when the whole Universe was as 
hot as a star and around as dense too.
 
Incidentally, the answer to that is almost 
certainly “No”, but when I was a kid,  
we had no idea what Quasars were, and them as 
White Holes was a pretty popular notion. We know a  
lot more about them now, and they are indeed very 
related to black holes, even double black holes,  
but not as white holes, which is another concept 
that sci-fi loved but which science has mostly  
moved away from. It is a reminder that a lot 
of our assumptions are guided by what we know  
now and what we kinda-sorta-half-guess 
and infer from theory, so, that could all  
change in as little as a single generation. 
Way back 20 years ago when I was a grad student  
studying physics, dark energy was still pretty 
debated as a core concept and dark matter was  
even darker and the notion that the Universe 
had an expanding acceleration was just getting  
to the point where it was starting to be taken 
seriously and was becoming the new consensus.  
In that context, I don’t want to casually chop 
options out of reasoning based on known science,  
but we also can’t ignore where it seems to 
have breaks with that. If we are wrong about  
our predictions and guesses for thousands 
of years from now, it just gives future  
generations standing on our shoulders a chance 
to have something to do correcting our errors.
 
This isn’t all physics and astronomy either. 
We also base a lot of our growth notions on  
the idea that it is biologically hard-wired into 
anything which clawed its way up Darwin’s Ladder,  
but a couple notes on that. First, it's overly 
simplistic to act like having a desire to survive,  
survival of self or species, or procreation. That 
these are actually hard-wired into us or anything  
else. We have a habit of acting like those are 
carved in as single-sentence directives or rules  
we follow. They’re not carved into any stone 
tablets, they’re collective evolutionary kludge  
and patches. Thousands of unrelated traits that 
evolved in us, and not all of which we share with  
all of our cousins, which collectively favored 
mechanisms that made us more likely to not die or  
want to die and to reproduce, especially favoring 
traits that made us more likely to successfully  
reproduce before dying. We routinely ignore those 
built-in tendencies, and since many are no longer  
terribly reasonable inside our technological 
civilization, we might curb or remove them or just  
modify them to the updated environment rather than 
patiently waiting millions of years for evolution  
to do it. This is what I mean about our old 
instincts being rational but often sub-optimal.
 
I do tend to roll my eyes when sci-fi stories 
present us some ancient ultra-advanced  
civilization that has evolved beyond ambition or 
desire and has no comprehension of war – and thus,  
in many stories, cheerfully encourage humanity 
to do their dirty work for them – but at the  
same time we shouldn’t assume aliens or 
post-biologicals or any civilization whose  
biology is just really adapted to an era where 
they had technology and ecological dominance,  
is one where they have the same goals and 
desires and to the same degree as we do.
 
Nonetheless, that all has to do with ingrown 
or innate tendencies, biological or cultural,  
causing you to act in a way which may or may 
not be logical, based on the true situation at  
hand. We wouldn’t really expect them to cease 
to be capable of logic, and logic would seem  
to dictate that all that mass and energy sitting 
around, either serves no intrinsic purpose at all,  
and thus you can do as you pleased with it, or 
that it’s sitting around waiting to be used in  
some fashion. Either way, you should either have 
things you would like to do with it or be trying  
to determine what you should do with it.
We live in an entropic Universe and one  
that actively burns itself up too. All those 
uncolonized dead worlds, asteroids and comets,  
are not eternally waiting on us all unchanged. 
They’re degrading, decaying, colliding,  
crashing into stars, getting hurled off into 
intergalactic space, and all around stars  
who each burn millions of tons of fuel every 
second. All to produce light, and neutrinos,  
and those photons of light rarely land on a 
planet and most will leave the galaxy without  
even brushing a mote of hydrogen gas. Not even 1 
in a billion photons that the Sun produces ever  
lands on Earth. Wasted, expended, like someone 
torching a forest, just to keep their toes warm.
 
So, inevitably, they will want to use those 
photons, all of them, and that’s where the  
Dyson Sphere comes in, vast constructs or 
swarms of constructs surrounding a star,  
to use its power, and eventually, the 
power of every star they settle too,  
to the galactic rim and beyond. They will take 
all of them, because a forest fire is not a thing  
you seek to preserve. To advanced civilizations, 
stars are things you put in the basement of your  
civilization or disassemble for future use. 
Thus, the Dyson Dilemma, which asks us why,  
in a Universe so ancient and huge, with so 
many hypothetical ancient civilizations, we  
can even see any stars in the night sky to wonder 
about the Universe. Why isn’t every single one of  
them a big infrared blob, invisible to our eyes?
Why do we see any stars in the night sky at all?
 
The default interpretation of that is that no 
alien civilizations exist and thus there’s no  
one building them. That meshes up pretty well 
with our apparent lack of visitations. There’s  
decent circumstantial evidence to think maybe 
we have been visited, I don’t personally find it  
compelling, but I don’t think it’s ridiculous to 
take that perspective. What I do find ridiculous  
is the notion that our planet is too boring 
and insignificant for aliens to visit. The less  
common life is, the more interesting any example 
of it would be to prospective investigators,  
and the more common life is, the more people 
who might find it worth investigating. There  
are folks who visit the most out-of-the-way or 
boring towns, and there are researchers who are  
interested in stuff that most of us find boring or 
even disgusting, like studying ant colonies, and  
I would only expect more of that in an advanced 
technological society. Therefore, I don’t accept  
any Fermi Paradox solution that is specifically 
predicated on us being too boring to visit.
 
Such being the case, I tend to feel that the 
best Fermi Paradox solution is just that all  
these absent megastructures and visitors represent 
not a lack of desire to build them or to visit us,  
but simply a lack of existence. No aliens near 
us, and this means within a billion or so light  
years. A Kardashev-3 Civilization, one which has 
captured all of its stars and tapped them, in a  
galaxy should be visible to us. By its captured 
light, emitted as waste heat, as far back in  
time as they existed in any place the light could 
yet have reached us. We’ll skip the calculations,  
especially as they have big margins of doubt, but 
since there are a million times as many galaxies a  
billion light years away as there are 10 million 
light years away, we would usually assume that,  
even though a civilization that arose 9 million 
years ago, 10 million light years away, would  
still be invisible to us, then there should be a 
ton more a billion light years away that evolved  
to technology, say, 1 billion and 1 million years 
ago. The number of galaxies contained inside a  
volume generally rises with the cube of distance. 
So, while life should be rarer the further back in  
time you look, or the further away you look, it 
wouldn’t seem likely that it was that much rarer  
or that we just happen to coincidentally have 
all the other intelligent civilizations just  
outside our light cone – the combination 
of time and distance which we can see.
 
Of course, many would say we can’t see them 
because they’re eclipsing their stars with their  
megastructures, but they’re not. They’re absorbing 
their light. Well that light from a star is itself  
the product of gamma radiation made in the core 
from fusion that gas in outer layers absorbs,  
heats up, and emits in different wavelengths, 
mostly visible light for our sun. The hotter  
something gets, the faster it emits energy as 
photons, of whichever wavelength, and it goes  
with the fourth power of temperature. Twice as 
hot, 2^4 or 16 times faster. 10 times as hot,  
10^4 or 10,000 times faster. The color mix on 
sunlight from stars is based on how much energy  
they produce by fusion and how much surface area 
they have available to get rid of it, as they’ll  
keep heating up until they reach an equilibrium. 
The same thing applies to a Dyson Swarm,  
but they are assumed to be about room 
temperature not solar temperature, thus,  
would peak at certain wavelengths of the infrared 
spectrum. Some years back, just about when I did  
our original Dyson Dilemma episode, we had scanned 
around 100,000 galaxies looking for any sign that  
they had more of that wavelength of light than we 
would expect. And we looked around to see if there  
were any blank spots glowing in the infrared 
but not visible. We came up with nothing. 
 
They could be storing that energy but understand 
that a system not losing heat by radiation should  
keep raising its temperature, and remember that 
the Sun makes up 99.86% of the mass of the solar  
system, meaning most of the solar system is 
already insanely hot. If enclosed so that it  
didn’t leak energy, the rest of the solar system, 
even a Dyson Swarm, would heat up in very short  
order. Especially as most of the remaining mass 
is already hot, like Earth’s Mantle and Core,  
Venus, and all the gas giant cores. 
Maybe they have some way to store heat?  
I can’t say no on this one, it is one of those 
technologies any civilization would mortgage  
its soul to get its hands on, so if it is 
possible they are almost inevitably going  
to find out how to do it, and it changes the 
game a lot. But I really don’t expect to see  
any violations of the Laws of Thermodynamics in 
this Universe, indeed, I’d give better odds on  
being able to cheat entropy by migrating to other 
realities. What’s more, it is another example of  
how a super-technology or Clarketech, as we 
call it, exacerbates the problem. I am trying  
to figure out why the galaxy isn’t littered 
with massive constructs and mega-civilizations,  
and that is not helped by someone showing 
up with a perpetual motion machine. 
 
A civilization with effectively infinite 
energy via perpetual motion machines or by  
sucking out vacuum energy or phantom energy or 
whatever, does not need to colonize the galaxy  
for its resources. But it can do so very 
easily, so you would expect colonization  
to happen just because some folks wanted the 
elbow room. Remember, we’re not contemplating  
truly unified civilizations sprawling over 
a galaxy. This is a statistical process,  
conducted over the course of millions of years, 
same as various hunter-gatherer tribes radiating  
out from Ethiopia or wherever, weren’t sending 
notes back there to check if their tribe should  
move again or split up or cross that land bridge.
But, it would seem likely that folks do try to  
stick together in many cases and that raises 
another problem. Folks suggest that we probably  
only use existing stars till we get better power 
systems and even just controlled fusion might  
count, but we’ve got options like black hole power 
generators or maybe dark energy or vacuum energy  
or what have you. Most of the mass in the galaxy 
is not in stars, it is floating around the void,  
so they ask why folks would bother Dysoning 
up, in favor of just grabbing some fuel and  
building their civilization where they want. And 
as we examined in our Deep Space Habitats episode  
a few weeks back, this works just fine.
But a couple problems. First, most of the  
mass in a solar system is in its star, 
and that includes heavier elements than  
hydrogen and helium, so you probably want 
to star lift those and take them away.
 
Second, not only does large-scale artificial 
fusion leave the same sorts of techno signature as  
a dyson, but odds are that a megawatt 
of solar panel collectors is easier to  
maintain than a megawatt of fusion reactor, 
so leaving stars untapped doesn’t make sense,  
and we see quintillions of them. Or billions of 
galaxies containing billions of stars anyway.
 
Which brings up point 3, when we 
surveyed those 100,000 galaxies,  
we were not looking at individual stars, we 
were looking at ambient infrared galaxy-wide,  
so Kardashev-scale civilizations that are 
just spread out wide rather than centralized  
on a star would have been equally visible.
Fourth, unless your physics is really different  
from ours, it takes a lot more effort and time to 
send messages or people to various megastructures  
and habitats further from each other, so you will 
generally begin finding some optimum balance of  
desired elbow room with compactness to minimize 
travel times and signal lag. Problem is, a Dyson  
swarm is already stupidly spread out, because 
space is huge, and in order to radiate heat,  
you have to get wider faster than your density 
rises. A Dyson Sphere built around a star that’s  
100 times brighter than our sun, needs to 
have 100 times the radiating area to avoid  
being burned to death, so it needs to be 10 times 
wider, which means it has 1000 times the volume,  
meaning it is a tenth as dense. 
If they want to live cooler,  
to take advantage of ultra-cold computation, they 
need even more space, again, the rate at which you  
radiate heat goes with the fourth power of 
temperature, so, if you are computing at a  
tenth of Earth's temperature, then you need 
10,000 times the radiating surface area.
 
Now, we can go through any number of what-ifs 
about how one might hide a megastructure, but  
none really seem to hold up, considering that, for 
us to see the galaxy as we do today, every single  
one of the potential megastructures would have had 
to have been hidden, and for every civilization  
that’s ever existed to have always done so too, 
not just some species of paranoid builders.  
Fundamentally, what it all comes down to is that 
such megastructures are incredibly attractive to  
build, and presumably, nobody building them 
has any reason to hide them from primitives  
anyway. It would be easier to just hide the 
primitives from you instead, by sticking  
them in some megastructure zoo or preserve.
So, in the end, the best reason to explain  
the apparent absence of megastructures is 
either, no one has built them yet because no  
one exists to do so, or, they already did, and 
we just happen to be crammed inside one.
 
Incidentally, if you want to hear more on 
megastructures and the Fermi Paradox I just  
finished up an interview with my friend Rod Pyle 
on Alien Megastructures that will be coming out  
tomorrow, Friday July 22nd, 2022. Rod hosts This 
Week in Space and if you want to catch the show  
now, his guest from last week was Astronomer Tony 
Cook from the Griffith Observatory who was on  
Rod’s podcast discussing those amazing first 
images from the James Webb Space Telescope.
 
It took a lot to get Webb going but now that 
it's running it's helping unlock Secrets of the  
Universe. Those were just awe-inspiring images 
to see and if you’d like to learn more about  
the history of the James Webb Telescope, 
and what it does and how it was built,  
there’s an episode of Secrets of the Universe on 
the James Webb Telescope over on Curiositystream,  
as well as another on the Building 
of the James Webb Telescope. 
 
Speaking of podcasts though, we do an audio only 
version of this show every week, with and without  
music, and we also do an ad and sponsor free 
version of the videos that we put up on Nebula,  
our streaming service, and now we are going to add 
our podcast up there ad and sponsor free on Nebula  
too, and like all our episodes they will come out 
on Nebula a few days early. We also often have  
extended editions of our episodes on Nebula and we 
have one today, as that that conversation with Rod  
Pyle inspired me to write a bit about the concept 
of Loud Aliens and their role in Megastructures  
and possibly even Kardashev 4 civilizations, 
which I might turn into a full episode on  
Grabby Aliens in general down the road.
Now Nebula is our streaming service where  
you can catch all those extended editions of 
our show, some Nebula Exclusives like Planets  
vs Megastructures and the Coexistence with 
Alien series, and now our audio-only version  
of the show ad-free. And all our new episodes, 
video or audio, come out there a couple days  
early and without ads or sponsors. It’s also home 
to an ever-growing number of content creators and  
is the largest creator-owned streaming service 
out there, making it a great way to help  
support some of your favorite channels while 
getting ad free content and bonus material. 
 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself but 
we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational 
videos on amazing topics like the James Webb  
Telescope. That lets us offer Nebula for free as 
a bonus if you sign up for CuriosityStream using  
the link in our episode description. That lets 
you see the amazing content on Curiositystream  
and Nebula for less than $15 a year, just 
use the link in the episode’s description.
 
So we were talking about awesome podcasts and 
interviews and I wanted to give quick shout out  
to our long-time friend and fellow creator 
John Micheal Godier, who has an episode of  
Event Horizon coming out later today with his 
interview of David Brin, who coincidentally was  
our Audiobook of the Month winner for this month 
for his amazing Uplift Series, and Uplifting was  
the topic of a collab episode John and I did 
some years back. John’s a great host and David  
Brin is an amazing writer, thinker, and speaker, 
so I’m sure that’s going to be a great episode and  
I’ll link it in this episode’s description when it 
comes out, or you can just subscribe to his show,  
and feel free to practice by subscribing to this 
show if you haven’t already, it will give you  
notifications when our new episodes come out.
Speaking of those upcoming episodes, next week  
we will be exploring Black Holes and Dark Matter, 
twin mysteries of modern science that might have  
a lot in common. Then we have our livestream 
Q&A coming up next Sunday, July 31st, at 4  
pm Eastern Time, where you can get your questions 
from the Chat answered on any of our show topics.  
Then we’re into August to examine the notion of 
survivors fleeing disasters or attacks to new  
worlds, like Earth, in Alien Refugees. The week 
after that we will look at the possibility the  
reason we don’t see any aliens is that they all 
blow themselves up with Technological Time Bombs,  
leaving no surviors. Then it will be time for our 
Scifi Sunday episode, Dumbest Alien Invasions,  
where we’ll examine the weirdest attempts 
and motives in fiction to invade Earth.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social  
media forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
