
This Episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
 
To all good and great things there comes 
an end, but it can be a spectacular end,  
when it at last comes, and that 
end can be a long time off.
 
Tomorrow, Sep 17 2021, we will celebrate 
the 7th Anniversary of SFIA's first episode,  
“Megastructures in Science and 
Science Fiction”. So this seems  
like a great time to return to what 
has become one of our favorite topics.  
For those new to the channel, welcome. And while 
I realize the episode title sounds like the name  
of a heavy metal band, the megastructures 
we discuss on this show are, often as not,  
entire artificial worlds with as much or far more 
habitable space than the surface of a planet.  
 
The end of Earth is a popular topic of discussion 
in science and philosophy, and the topic of a  
recent episode on this show. But in science 
fiction it’s also common to contemplate the  
end of alien worlds far from Earth. So given 
that it’s likely most of future humanity will  
live their lives on entirely artificial worlds -- 
immense megastructure habitats -- it is also quite  
likely the deaths of these worlds will be of far 
greater interest to future civilizations than will  
dying planets. But I suppose contemplating 
either of their endings would also be an  
appropriate theme for a heavy metal album.
So our focus today is going to be examining the  
ways these might die, and their stages in 
life, which will vary a lot depending on  
the megastructure type. Their end might also come 
about deliberately, in the way we might demolish  
a building, or accidentally, in the way a design 
flaw or unexpected natural event might contribute  
to their end. We have two classic science 
fiction examples we will look at for those,  
with lots of Spoilers to follow, the O’Neill 
Cylinder in the 90’s classic sci-fi series  
Babylon 5, and the titular Ringworld 
of Larry’s Niven Ringworld novels.
 
Now the saying goes that all good things come 
to an end, but considering the sheer scope of  
even the smallest megastructures, paralleling or 
exceeding the largest modern cities, it obviously  
is beneficial to build with durability in mind. 
However we have two caveats worth noting upfront.
 
First, the smallest megastructures are city 
sized and even those in the Continent-Class  
which we deemed more medium in scope 
might be thought of as more nation-sized.  
Cities and nations can certainly die but 
in general their centers of population and  
activity migrate. Many a long-lived river-city 
has moved around as the river shifted, at the same  
time sprawling up or down its banks, with areas 
changing from farmland to affluent neighborhoods  
to squalid slums and back again, as the city 
slowly creeps along the river or the coast.  
With that in mind, a megastructure might be in 
a constant state of repair with whole regions  
undergoing massive refit at any given time. Like 
Thesseus’s Ship, they may still be called the  
same place or thing even after every bit of the 
hull has been replaced a hundred times over.
 
Same, one might think of a city as being 
composed of many structures akin to living  
cells in our bodies, and those can repair 
and replace themselves rather automatically.  
One tech any megastructure-making civilization 
would want badly is regenerative buildings  
and structures, those able to heal or grow 
themselves, or automated repair bots perhaps. 
 
Such structures might be able to last 
indefinitely, constantly recycling their material  
powered by nuclear fusion, where a single 
kilogram of fuel might run them for a year  
while they had billions of tons of it on hand 
to last them for eons. Indeed those powered by  
matter to energy conversion or black holes might 
outlive the stars themselves, and die by slowly  
cannibalizing themselves, contracting in size 
by tiny amounts, the snake eating its own tail  
but taking a hundred trillions year to do so.
Indeed we often tend to assume that a civilization  
that builds giant things in space has 
already mastered such technologies as  
automated repair and construction and cheap 
energy, given the scope of the projects,  
so that such structures might be thought of as 
grown more than built. However it is worth noting  
that a self-repairing system can still die, indeed 
every known self-repairing system has a lifespan,  
with the possible exceptions of some 
stranger critters like Jellyfish, Lobster,  
or Hydras. It is not too big a leap to imagine a 
megastructure might get the equivalent of cancer,  
or that some structure in it with auto-repair 
systems might go off-kilter, though there’s no  
guarantee an artificially designed repair 
system would be prone to such faults.
 
There is also no guarantee we would get 
such technology working or that if we did,  
we would employ it for this purpose. 
Self-repairing is also not the same as  
reproducing, and the check on uncontrolled 
replication of cells is telomere-triggered  
apoptosis. A state of constant unchecked growth 
is rarely a good thing for an organism either,  
or arguably the meta-organism that a city, nation, 
or megastructure habitat might qualify as.
 
Now demolition at the end of life is easy enough 
to understand. In Babylon 5 – spoilers – we are  
shown the destruction of the Babylon 5 space 
station repeatedly as vision of the future by  
this or that telepath or seer or time traveler, 
but in the end it occurs 25 years after its built  
because its purpose has been served and nobody 
wants to spend the funds to keep repairing it  
so it gets a controlled and planned detonation 
to prevent it becoming a navigational hazard,  
along with a big ceremony. This happens to be one 
of the most beautiful series finales in science  
fiction history, titled “Sleeping in Light”. 
It is my own personal favorite series finale,  
and a rarity, as most shows’ last episode 
are mediocre when not anticlimactic.
 
Now it is an example of a major and unique 
enterprise. It was basically the galaxy’s  
UN headquarters and later its acting capital 
for quite some time, along with a trade hub  
as a result, much like the Citadel in Mass Effect. 
Everyone in the galaxy knew where and what it was.  
So one can see how economics would be secondary 
both to keeping its repairs up and to eventually  
deciding to decommission it too, rather than sell 
it or let it just fall into scavenger hands.
 
We might do something similar to the International 
Space Station sometime, but with better cause,  
we have a lot of traffic in orbit and 
would expect that to only grow with time,  
so a controlled deorbit or detonation to blow 
the debris down to burn up in the atmosphere  
would seem likely and also cause for 
commemoration. The Mir Space Station  
deorbit and burnup in early 2001 was a fairly big 
deal in the news at the time, also the spring I  
graduated from college in for those curious. 
It’s worth noting that it takes some skill to  
detonate a large object so it doesn’t leave debris 
incidentally, in practice you’re going to want to  
shove it down into the atmosphere enough that 
even debris moving up at high speed will still  
fall down then detonate it. Such being the 
case you would have to worry about that not  
working as planned and dropping intact bits on the 
populace below, potential megatons bits of scrap,  
so I suspect the fate of a megastructure past 
its prime would be disassembly not detonation. 
 
Alternatively if we’re talking about some Space 
Habitat, population 10,000, a minor rotating  
space habitat built by SpacehabCorp, one of ten 
thousand built by them to that specification then  
it shouldn’t be a very big deal for all that it 
would be to us. Same as the first skyscraper is  
a big deal but then 997th is not, even if it's far 
grander than the first was. Doubtless many people  
would care about it, same as every town or village 
has its own historic buildings and celebrations,  
but it's not likely to be big news to the wider 
world, and might be as minor a concern as some  
modest and unremarkable home on the outskirts of 
town falling into disrepair. It only interests  
the community because the Fire Marshall wants to 
use it for practice or the police want it knocked  
over to discourage vagrants, criminals, 
or curious kids from hanging out there. 
 
In the other direction, we often cite the US 
Highway system as a candidate for a modern  
megastructure, and with good reason as 
it is enormous. Interstate Route 90 is  
the longest part of that at just under 
5000 kilometers or just over 3000 miles,  
running from Boston, Massachusetts to Seattle 
Washington and through many points in-between,  
including my own backyard. Literally my backyard 
since Sarah and I moved earlier this year,  
but having lived in Northeast Ohio 
nearly all my life it’s always had  
a big footprint in my existence. It is the 
road that all others lead to, so to speak,  
and which millions of folks drive on for daily 
commutes or cross-country road trips. I would  
not care to guess how many billions of dollars 
of freight move down it every single day. 
 
Nonetheless, I would have difficulty seeing much 
fanfare or weeping if it was decommissioned in  
favor of something new and better, not in the 
way closing down a major monument might. Though  
there are so many businesses for which it is their 
revenue source, every gas station, restaurant, or  
outlet or novelty store at an exit would obviously 
have reason to miss it, and for some that might be  
sentimental not just practical. That might be a 
tiny fraction of our population but is still many  
thousands, enough to populate many an ancient 
kingdom, so it can’t be disregarded either.
 
So it is difficult to imagine any megastructure 
going down from mere indifference by all,  
just given the scale of them. We can imagine that 
scenario and we looked at that in our Trash Worlds  
and Space Derelicts episode, and our Mega-Cities 
episode for that matter. It could happen of  
course. A trade port built for trade between 
two stars might fall victim to new technologies  
that let them be circumvented or even stellar 
drift changing the path between those systems.  
Such structures are not just immense 
of scale in size, but also in time,  
and may see the rise and fall of ten thousand 
centuries before the warranty expires.
 
A civilization might be of such a scale that 
their big defense outposts and border forts  
had their own civilian populations and habitats 
numbering in the millions which no longer had  
resources coming in to support them after 
a change in the diplomatic environment. 
 
And remember the scale involved, some giant 
space gun designed for blasting interstellar  
armadas between warring K2 Dyson Spheres, might be 
a cannon so big it’s gravity actually allowed for  
pressurised environments in the various cracks and 
valleys of the barrel and magazine. I’m not really  
sure what you would do with a cannon designed 
for blowing up planets when the conflict it was  
built for was over, but it’s not hard to imagine 
a civilization arising on it and getting attached  
to it, and that would be a weird civilization. 
Forget a cultural mythos of your world being  
on the back of a giant turtle, your world was 
forged by the gods to kill worlds and you’re the  
post-apocalyptic tribes who hundred-times 
great grandparents used to maintain it.
 
However while we can imagine situations where 
a megastructure might slowly grow more and more  
neglected, it just seems less plausible than 
how we see that with neighborhoods or homes  
in modern times and history. A 
house can fall into disrepair  
when it need not have simply because its 
owners died or had their fortunes turn  
and no one felt like buying it or their kids 
did not wish it and their neighbors were few and  
by chance maybe the dozen folks who adjoined it 
were indifferent to its slow submission to time.  
But megastructures are just too big, 
and even if they were not populated,  
there’s a good chance they might actually have 
an onboard AI of human or superhuman capacity,  
possibly many, that regarded the structure or 
components of it as their home or even body.
 
Some things can be constantly repaired, others 
really are cheaper to break down and replace,  
and it varies by type and technology and 
circumstances too, but we would rarely expect  
a habitat megastructure to simply be shut down 
and evacuated rather than repaired gradually as  
a patchwork. Even major hull work that might 
require you de-spin it so you could repair  
stressed materials is probably easier done by just 
wrapping new rotating sheath around the outside. 
 
This might amusingly make for many layers of new 
hull, oldest to youngest as you dug down from  
inside it, potentially allowing its inhabitants to 
mine those older and higher layers for materials.  
That’s an interesting option given how often 
civilizations are imagined to have decayed  
to being techno-primitives because they had no 
metals in the ground on such habitats. Sort of  
a reverse archeology too, the top layers are the 
old ones. Repairing hulls with new outer sheath  
might avoid every needing to shut one down.
On the other hand, one that took a ton of  
damage at once, especially from something like 
an attack during a war, might be evacuated or  
even had everyone in it die, and nobody wants or 
particularly needs to repair it. A burned-out husk  
of a megastructure is a dead thing and probably 
tricky to repair like a burnt house. Neighborhoods  
can matter too, people rarely are rushing to 
fix up a house in a bad part of town, or in a  
demilitarized zone or the border of two hostile 
nations. Except for fortresses of course and in  
that same way, a border fortress is expensive to 
maintain and serves little point if the borders  
move. Traditionally you either repurpose it 
or wait for the local population to do so by  
slowly stealing the stone and bricks. Of course, 
automated construction and repair also permits the  
idea of automated demolition too, instead of 
blowing stuff up you let the robots carefully  
cannibalize or demolish it. Though it also might 
have automated defenses, such as those robots,  
that attacked anything on site when that damaged.
These set the stage for why a Megastructure might  
perish, and there are many other reasons but some 
are probably not as plausible as we often assume.  
For instance in the novel Ringworld, we find an 
artificial world with a million times the living  
area of Earth but which for some reason 
has little to no remaining technology. 
 
Abandoned relics or worlds with once impressive 
technology from bygone days is a common theme in  
stories but not really very realistic. For 
narrative purposes it allows the heroes to  
explore it, and we discussed some more examples of 
that in our recent Xenoarcheology episode, but it  
would not make sense for a civilization to build 
and people an artificial structure able to support  
millions of times the population a planet can and 
not expect some of them to go in for technology.
 
Now as a caveat, artificial worlds 
often are assumed to be metal-poor,  
with no large ore deposits, though the reasoning 
for this is a touch debatable in some cases.  
If you’ve got thick terrain on one to simulate 
mountains and ravines, you might have done that  
by just grinding up various asteroids and dumping 
them down there, still rich in ore. Alternatively,  
metal has no place to go, it doesn’t vaporize 
by magic, so you can presumably recycle existing  
material. And if you’re constantly spinning 
new outer layers of protective sheath,  
you can cannibalize the inner layers.
In any event, Ringworld is an example  
of a megastructure built by a powerful and 
advanced civilization that has disappeared  
and whose technology is failing. While it seems 
implausible that one that huge wouldn’t have  
other new civilizations arise able to study 
or fix the structure, the fact that it was  
failing from neglect is certainly plausible. 
In Ringworld’s case, a ring spinning around a star  
is not actually stable. It's common to describe 
the Ringworld as a vast ring orbiting a star,  
about as wide in radius as Earth’s orbit of our 
Sun is, lit by that Sun and relying on centrifugal  
force to provide gravity. Except this is wrong, 
it doesn’t orbit that star at all. Anything  
orbiting anything else experiences microgravity 
from that orbit. That’s how orbiting works,  
you are in a constant state of free fall in regard 
to that central body. The orbiting body can have  
its own gravity or internal spin, like Earth does 
or like an O’Neill Cylinder in Earth orbit would,  
but that spin around the main object is not 
an orbit if you’re not in microgravity from  
it. Which means you are not actually stable. 
The star pulls on the ring from each side  
but it’s subject to slow perturbation making it 
drift off so that the ring might get roasted.
 
Now this matters for the Ringworld because 
on reading it some folks saw that problem  
and told the author and he added in stabilizing 
engines in the sequel and getting them turned on  
to save the Destabilizing Ringworld was a plot 
point, and one would expect such engines to be  
very sturdy and big. We often see things 
orbiting Earth fall out of orbit and it  
would be a concern for any megastructure 
that gravity and time aren’t its friends.  
Planetary orbits are not stable and eternal 
things either, but they are a fairly natural  
conglomeration and planetary decays around stars 
are slow and can only happen when after millions  
of years of formation, most of the unstable orbits 
have decayed, merged, ejected and so on. So our  
existing planets in this solar system tend to 
make us think these are unchanging, but they are  
not. A megastructure could be built to be even 
more resistant to time and perturbation than a  
natural planet or moon but they need not be, and 
that presumably takes a great deal of effort.
 
And realistically, when building big things 
these days, we do not ask the architect  
if his plans for maintenance included our 
civilization going extinct or into a dark age.  
The whole thing might rely on a few dozen 
ten-cent washers that take about five minutes  
to replace once a decade. If the factory making 
them closes down, or is shut down by having a  
mushroom cloud grow out of it as the civilization 
falls into nuclear war, those washers might not be  
getting replaced. Nonetheless I don’t think the 
typical building inspector or investor would ask  
if you’ve checked to ensure your building is 
able to survive a breakdown in supply chains,  
unless it was for a survival bunker perhaps.
On the other hand, let's not assume artificial  
means fragile. A shellworld for instance can 
seem an incredibly fragile place. It’s surface  
is a thin layer of dirt, water, and rock sitting 
on a firmament made of countless orbital rings,  
containing either condensed gas below or a black 
hole. Folks worry about what would happen if a  
hole got poked in it or the power went off. And 
yet the typical planet is a thin layer of rocky  
plates floating on a sea of superhot magma 
surrounding a core of liquid metal, much of  
which is highly radioactive uranium. Poke a hole 
in that and you get a volcano, or much worse.
 
What happens when you blow a hole into a 
Shellworld, or rotating habitats for that matter?
 
Well, we need to keep in mind that these are 
artificial structures and usually built out of  
super-strong materials. Now nukes beat matter 
everytime, you should not expect to have any  
material that can just shrug off an atomic 
bomb except maybe those which operate on the  
strong nuclear force for binding rather than 
electromagnetic forces as mundane matter does,  
like magmatter or stabilized neutronium, or 
the Scrith from Ringworld that its built from.  
That Scrith was so tough it deformed when hit by 
something like a dwarf planet to form an inverted  
crater that looked like a volcano from the 
inside, only far taller than any natural mountain,  
and the air of the Ringworld slowly drained out 
through it. We could imagine building habitats  
so big that a collision just ripped a crater 
that helped keep a lot of air and water inside,  
but there are big limits on things like that 
and nothing shrugs off a nuclear blast. 
 
However, don’t fall into the trap of Hollywood 
science where nukes obliterate everything,  
they aren’t that powerful and their ability to 
damage stuff is directly related to how powerful  
an individual bomb is, be it low kilotons or high 
megatons, which indicates difference of tens of  
thousands of times the yield. Earth’s get hit 
by nuclear bomb levels of energy in meteor form  
all the time, thousands of tons of meteors hit 
this planet every year, each carrying way more  
destructive force than their weight in explosives, 
and Earth getting hit by individual rocks weighing  
thousands of tons is pretty common too.
For raw vaporization of metals, it varies by  
the metal but usually you need several TNT-tonnes 
equivalent to vaporize a cubic meter of metal,  
which is something to keep in mind when blowing 
holes in artificial structures with lasers or  
big bombs or kinetic weapons. Don’t assume 
some nuke, even a megaton sized one, can  
just punch a hole into any megastructure that’s 
kilometers wide. Don’t assume that they instantly  
vent to space either. Air generally moves from 
normal to vacuum at roughly the speed of sound,  
and like that speed it decreases as the pressure 
drops, which is one reason we like spaceships  
and spacesuits at partial pressure, all oxygen 
and no nitrogen, it leaks slower that way. 
 
Punch a meter wide hole in some large space 
station, one much, much bigger than a modern  
space station, and if the internal environment 
was Earth like, each square meter of hole in the  
hull should be spitting out about 343,000 liters 
or 420 kilograms of air each second. Which is a  
lot of air loss but means it loses 36,000 tons 
of air a day, an O’Neill Cylinder – our smallest  
megastructure habitats – might be 8 kilometers in 
diameter and 32 kilometers long, which would make  
for an internal air volume of 1.6 trillion cubic 
meters or 1.6 quadrillion liters, or 2 billion  
tons. Meaning it would take nearly a century to 
drop to half-pressure and be barely livable even  
then, all while having a hole big enough to 
step through and losing all its air out it. 
 
Assuming it ever did. Space Stations are likely 
to have constant leaks everywhere and have  
systems constantly pumping new air in, able to 
increase that production above normal capacity.  
Aircraft for instance are not pressurized 
statically, they leak and have compressors running  
constantly to keep up with that, so do modern 
space stations. Big space stations would probably  
leak way less per unit of mass or hull surface, 
but way more over all, in raw mass terms.
 
With that in mind, a McKendree Cylinder – the 
big brother of an O’Neill Cylinder – might  
contain millions of times that much air, meaning 
even a kilometer-wide hole in one might take  
centuries to drain it. And even bigger 
H-bombs, the multi-megaton affairs,  
generally would not leave a crater that big 
in a thick steel hull and layers of dirt like  
we would expect from the larger rotating 
habitats. A Ringworld on the other hand  
should have an atmospheric mass of around 5 or 6 
billion-trillion tons, given that it’s got around  
a million times the living area of Earth and 
Earth’s atmosphere masses 5500 trillion tons.  
One quick note, for pressurized habitats 
mimicking Earth’s atmospheric conditions,  
there’s roughly 1.2 kilograms of air per 
cubic meter, but on Earth and any place where  
atmospheric pressure is achieved by gravity or 
spin-gravity, continent-class habitats or bigger,  
the air gets thinner as you go up and you expect 
about 10 tons per square meter of surface area.
 
Of course air isn’t the only thing draining 
through a big hole in your habitat,  
though it's worth noting that since 
most liquids can’t exist in a vacuum,  
water draining out a hull puncture should vaporize 
or freeze, and so for instance cutting a hole into  
a space habitat with a laser whose beam diameter 
was much thinner than the hull thickness,  
poking a tiny but deep hole, would probably 
have that hole clog with ice or dirt eventually.  
For a big wide gash considerably wider 
than the thickness of the structure though,  
I wouldn’t count on clogging unless the structure 
had some ability at self-repair that way.  
On the other hand for these real megastructures, 
stuff in the continent class or bigger like Bishop  
Rings, Banks Orbitals, or Ringworlds, we 
often imagine them having hulls measured  
in a thickness of kilometers not meters or 
centimeters like we imagine with spaceships,  
and likely made out of diamond hard materials.
It is not actually that hard to bandage over a  
hole into space. Movies make folks think you 
could get a finger-sized hole in a ship and  
folks would be sucked through it like a sausage 
grinder. If you want a more realistic example,  
turn your vacuum on and stick your hand over the 
intake. From normal atmosphere to total vacuum  
is a much smaller pressure drop than a hole 
in a water pipe or garden hose. You obviously  
cannot duct tape a football field sized hole in 
a space habitat with actual duct tape but don’t  
assume any particular hyper-strong materials or 
near-instant deployment is needed to fix this. 
 
Patches might vary from some spider-like 
robot spinning a web over it to some rapidly  
solidifying patch material you could spray on, 
which isn’t too hard considering liquids don’t  
do well at lower pressures or exist at all in 
vacuums. Though if it's leaking, you won’t have  
zero-pressure at the edge of the leak, it should 
stay at roughly the internal pressure. Voided  
stations that leaked everything out already 
though, derelict and empty to space, would  
be very easy to reseal and pressurize in most 
cases. Especially if their rotation had slowed.
 
This does not mean a typical O’Neill Cylinder made 
of plain old steel, or even something like Kevlar,  
is surviving a nuclear blast, but it is plausible 
a lower-yield nuke on a larger end O’Neill  
Cylinder might survive, and for a bigger blast, 
it’s worth keeping in mind that a smaller hole  
followed by a missile that went inside and 
detonated in the internal landscape would kill  
everyone too, in the same way one detonating over 
your town will. It’s all a numbers and scale game,  
but don’t assume you insta-kill space 
habitats with nukes or cutting lasers.
 
There’s also defenses too. As I often 
note on the show, a rotating habitat  
is probably going to be nested inside a bigger 
non-rotating or slow rotating superstructure,  
and you might actually do several layers 
of rotating drums nested inside each other,  
with outer ones rotating slower or faster and 
just being a thin hull, so that various gaping  
holes quickly spun shut to choke off leaks. 
Spaceships might play this same trick with  
multiple rotating shells of armor so that gashes 
through several at once would all rotate out.
 
Probably worth remembering that a thick 
stream of gas jetting out your space station  
is going to shove the space station around too, 
though this can be mostly ignored for the big  
habitats whose atmospheres are significant but 
pretty small compared to overall station mass.  
One in orbit of planet might be de-orbited by 
this happening too, though since the hole is  
probably spinning around in a circle the 
jet coming out of it might negate out.
 
I also would be surprised if any attack that 
didn’t utterly scatter a megastructure as gaseous  
debris managed to kill everyone on it. You’re 
bound to have lots of compartments, even on a  
space habitat, that can be sealed and pressurized. 
As a comparison with nukes, we usually say any  
hardened underground structure will remain intact 
and pretty undamaged even just half-again the  
radius of the blast crater away, and potentially 
even less. It’s also plausible that even normal  
homes on space habitats would be built with 
the ability to act as a bunker or lifepod. 
 
So for those contemplating military engagements, 
yes you probably would need to send in the drones  
or clones or space marines to go clear out 
every single compartment on a battleship or  
space station if you were hoping to seize it 
vaguely intact, same as a city, only fighting  
through a megastructure is likely to be even 
more nightmarish than urban warfare. Especially  
given that if it's self-repairing to any degree, 
that most likely means automated repair drones  
and the ability to deploy and manufacture them, 
which is likely very, very easy to militarize. 
 
Kind of brings a different flavor to the term 
‘Megastructure Death’ when you contemplate  
battling through one while it cannibalizes 
itself to throw ten-trillion murderbots at you.
 
This also gives us one more plausible 
scenario for Megastructure Death.  
In theory if you’ve got mass and energy and 
automation you can keep repairing and refitting  
one indefinitely from pretty much any blow it 
might take and not be obliterated outright by,  
be it a natural meteor or manmade bomb, a rapid 
event or the creeping destruction of time.  
However, that assumption of robots doing the work 
leaves us open to needing to abandon one because  
those repair or growth systems went haywire, or 
its defense system did – and indeed such things  
might be so close to alive as to qualify 
as having an immune system. So they could  
get diseased or cancerous or hacked and have 
repair systems running around inside mutating  
it or killing anything that’s not supposed to be 
there to make new patches for the hull out of. 
 
I am guessing if this happened there’s a chance 
the place would be quarantined rather than  
obliterated and might be left semi-derelict till 
a cure or purge team or whatever could be sent.  
Takes a lot of firepower to utterly vaporize 
something like that and if you don’t, it is  
possible every thumb-size scrap of it remaining as 
debris now flying everywhere is infected with grey  
goo. So you might need to surround a megastructure 
gone diseased with an armada that’s just pounding  
it with atomic ordinance and vaporizing every 
bit of flying debris with point defense systems.  
Or blow its radiators off and shine a 
lot of light on it to bake the thing,  
like sterilizing something in an oven. 
Which sounds like a good approach  
except depending on your technology, you 
might just be feeding it tons of energy to  
build ten-trillion murderbots 
out of to attack your fleet.
 
In such a case I could imagine instead 
spinning a cocoon or membrane around the whole,  
or hitting it with EMPs, installing physical or 
metaphorical quarantine beacons and leaving it.  
However there would likely be in-between infection 
states where you’re actually trying to combat it.  
That really might be horrifying too, with some 
chunk of a station trying to cannibalize itself to  
murder its inhabitants while the rest cannibalized 
it to fight them off, make escape pods,  
and try to hold the place while fleets 
arrived to evacuate one or fight the plague.  
That’s just space habitats too, imagine 
megastructures designed for other purposes  
like a system’s actual defense guns, asteroid 
disassemblers, or megastructure manufacturing  
sites. Remember we’ve contemplated structures 
designed for disassembling whole stars before,  
or others with black holes in their basements, 
or for ripping holes in spacetime. I don’t think  
you want to be in the same galaxy as one of 
those if it goes rogue, let alone on board it.
 
Odds are the designers of any megastructure 
invested a lot of time and thought into failure  
modes and attacks on it, which is an upside, 
most would probably be more survivable than the  
typical structure, or even planet in the case of 
artificial planets vs natural ones. Though it also  
probably means whatever killed it was the sort of 
weapon best used for demolishing worlds.
 
So as mentioned at the beginning, this episode 
celebrates the 7th Anniversary of our original  
episode and I want to talk about that before 
we get to our upcoming schedule, but first I  
wanted to thank one of this show originals and 
longest sponsors, Brilliant, for helping make  
this show possible. We’ve grown a lot over the 
years, constantly seeking to improve the show,  
and so have they. Brilliant is an educational 
site just a couple years older than our show  
and dedicated to that same core mission, 
increasing people’s knowledge and love of math  
and science, and it’s been a fun time working 
with them and seeing the constant expansion  
of topics and improvements to interactivity.
That’s fundamentally critical to learning or  
teaching, the topic has to be interesting and 
is always best when interactive and hands-on.  
Brilliant is focused on learning 
not memorizing, for instance,  
most folks know that the area of a circle is 
pi-R-squared, but rarely why it is pi-R-squared,  
and Brilliant’s Geometry Fundamental Course, 
explains why and is full of intuitive lessons like  
this that let you see and interact with Geometric 
concepts in ways you've never done before. 
 
You learn best while doing and solving 
in real-time, not by long lectures or  
memorising formulas and facts, and Brilliant 
understands that and has something for  
everybody — whether you want to start at the 
basics of math, science, and computer science,  
or go straight to advanced material.
If you'd like to join me and a community  
of 8 million learners and educators today, click 
the link in the episode description down below or  
visit: brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
So today wraps up our seventh year of the show,  
and the anniversaries are always right around 
my birthday on September 20th - I’ll be 41 this  
year - and so it tends to be an extra time of 
reflection for me. It’s become a bit of tradition  
to commemorate the occasion personally by going 
back and watching that first episode, though  
I tend to cringe a bit at the audio, video, and 
overall presentation, as I suppose is unavoidable  
for anyone who's been doing something for years 
and comes back and sees their original work. 
 
Truth be told, I don’t recommend watching any 
of our first year of videos except for folks who  
never had a problem with my speech impediment even 
in its early form. Years of practice and speech  
therapy later, and several hundred episodes, 
livestreams, interviews, and so forth under the  
bridge, it's hard to reflect on that first effort 
and remember that originally I’d just wanted to  
practice a new feature of Microsoft Powerpoint for 
unrelated work and picked a random topic to do. 
 
In this case, I’d been missing talking about 
science and scifi much as my work at the time  
wasn’t nearly as geeky as college, grad school, 
and the military had been, and I mostly used  
social media to keep up with old friends from 
the service but had joined a couple of facebook  
forums, one for scifi writing and worldbuilding 
because a member had asked me join to answer a  
couple physics questions for some of the authors 
there and another on the Fermi Paradox. I always  
got a bit frustrated how few authors ever 
wanted to do anything but classic space opera,  
one or two planets per solar system with 
homogeneous culture on them, so often mentioned  
megastructures and space habitats and decided it 
would be a fun practice topic and did a video on  
it figuring it would be easier and better 
to do the topic that way over the text-only  
or text-and-image website or blog approach. 
That’s more or less the origin of the videos  
and why to this day it remains essentially a 
script that I narrate and put visuals up for.  
It is sadly why we don’t do more megastructures 
episodes though because the reasoning in the  
first place was that these structures are hard to 
envision and need images or animations for them,  
and there just aren’t many around. Probably about 
half the graphics assets for space megastructures  
in existence were developed for this show with 
most of the remainder being for Orion’s Arm,  
and I did want to take a moment to thank 
all our animators who’ve volunteered their  
time and art to the show over the years. 
If you animate for a hobby and want to try  
your hand at doing any of the megastructures 
we discuss, I can honestly say that a handful  
of animations of one of them is usually the 
difference between whether or not we do an episode  
on a given megastructure. And we are always 
looking for folks to help animate, edit scripts,  
brianstorm up episode ideas, and moderate our 
various social media so if you’ve got some free  
time and want to let me steal it from you, just 
shoot me an email at Isaac.Arthur.utube@gmail.com,  
and youtube is spelled U-T-U-B-E in this case and 
is on our channel’s About page if you lose that.
 
Anyway, the episode’s already on the long 
side, and while I take partial credit for  
encouraging other science shows to break the 
norm and do episodes longer than 5-15 minutes,  
I do try to keep them shorter than half an hour so 
we’ll wrap up here and do the upcoming schedule,  
but I did want to thank everyone for 
making the last 7 years such a fun and  
rewarding experience for me personally, 
and I hope to keep doing it for another  
7. I occasionally get asked if I ever worry 
about running out of topics and the answer is  
no, not even a little bit, we’ve tons of 
Science & Futurism topics waiting to be done  
and the nice thing about the Future 
is there’s always so much more of it.
 
Speaking of upcoming episodes, we still 
have 3 more outings for this month,  
and we’ll be returning to the Fermi Paradox on 
September 23rd for a look at the notion of Hidden  
Alien Civilizations. Then we’ll have our Monthly 
Livestream Q&A on Sunday, September 26th at 4pm  
Eastern Time before closing the month out by 
asking if it’s possible for future civilizations  
to exist without money, on Sept 30th. Another 
thing about all these huge megastructures is  
they are designed to let humanity grow our 
population comfortably into the countless  
trillions, and we’ll open October up by asking 
how someone could stand out in such a vast sea,  
then on October 14th we’ll ask how we might 
feed all those folks, as we look at the future  
of farming in the next few decades and beyond.
Now if you want to make sure you get notified  
when those episodes come out, make sure subscribe 
to the channel, and if you enjoyed the episode,  
don’t forget to hit the like button and share it 
with others. If you’d like to help support future  
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon, 
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, and I will  
shamelessly remind everyone it’s my birthday 
too, and patreon and our website are linked in  
the episode description below, along with all of 
our various social media forums where you can get  
updates and chat with others about the concepts 
in the episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for watching for 
the last 7 years, and have a great week!
