The problem with trying to hide your civilization
from others is that usually by the time you
think to do that, it is already too late.
So today we return to the Alien Civilizations
series to take a look at the concept of Hidden
Civilizations.
Vast ancient extraterrestrial empires that
lurk about the galaxy quietly or confine themselves
to small regions of space, possibly even just
their original home planet.
We might as well stick two qualifiers on this
before we go further.
We are not talking today about alien civilizations
that hide among us, nor about relatively new
civilizations that try to keep their heads
down.
For the latter, a new civilization on the
galactic stage has good cause to tread softly
in the early stages.
It’s almost certainly wasted effort, as
we’ll see, but prudence still seems to suggest
keeping quiet in new and unknown environments
rather than stomping around with a megaphone
asking if anyone is there.
No, our focus today is on civilizations that
are committed to staying hidden over the long
term -- not just being cautiously quiet while
they are new, or apathetically quiet because
they don’t care to talk with others.
We are going to discuss some of the reasons
why you might want to do this, some of the
reasons it might not work, and some of the
ways you might be able to hide yourselves
if you have certain technologies normally
limited to fiction or speculative science.
Let's start with possible motivations.
Why would a civilization hide?
For instance, a species that just wants to
keep to themselves because they’re xenophobic,
but not especially hostile or fearful, has
a different scope of possible actions than
one that is afraid of being invaded.
As I mentioned in a previous episode, if you
want to keep visitors away, hiding is often
not your best solution under known physics.
In the absence of FTL, Faster than Light Travel,
a spaceship can take centuries to get to its
destination, and it is most likely a one way
trip, especially if they can’t refuel when
they arrive.
Telling a decelerating spaceship just approaching
your solar system to go away amounts to signing
their death warrant… or possibly yours.
The species living there might not care, but
the rest of the hypothetical galactic community
is going to be asking why those guys didn’t
put up a simple beacon saying ‘stay away,
this is our solar system, no visitors’.
Some of those folks, especially the civilization
that ship came from, might decide to go ask
in person.
Having an alien armada show up on your doorstep
pissed off because you either killed their
people by negligence or shot at them when
they decided to try refueling is not a good
way to avoid interacting with alien species.
Plus, ‘no trespassing’ beacons are pretty
cheap, particularly considering you can safely
bet no species that lacks FTL travel ever
sends ships anywhere without pointing telescopes
there first, so you don’t need to be transmitting
very loudly.
The sheer cost of time and resources for interstellar
travel tends to encourage you to do your homework.
And to keep doing it too.
Either the ship has telescopes of its own
pointed at the destination as it cruises along,
or it is getting periodic updates from the
ones back home at light speed.
Telescopes, like transmitters, cost a lot
less money than spaceships.
Now obviously if you’re hiding, sticking
up big signs saying ‘go away, no visitors’
is not the best approach.
Our example here, however, is of a civilization
that isn’t afraid of an unprovoked invasion,
they’re just xenophobic.
A species that evolves to have technology
does need to have some traits like curiosity
and social behavior, but that doesn’t mean
they like things besides themselves.
I tend to think extreme xenophobia toward
other species is not too common with technological
civilizations, but we can’t assume xenophobia
is uncommon among aliens either.
What I do see being common is a fear of predators
and a desire to hide.
Humans are very afraid of predators sneaking
in at night and eating us.
Little kids frightened of shadows or boogeymen
under their bed are not being irrational,
they are obeying a very old and reasonable
fear of being eaten.
That’s a real threat even to apex predators
when they’re young, so a desire to hide
from predators is probably almost as universal
in alien civilizations as curiosity is.
One of the reasons hidden civilizations keeping
quiet tends to resonate so well with people
when discussing the Fermi Paradox is probably
just that.
Fiction is overflowing with examples of evil
predatory aliens sneaking out of the darkness
to eat us, and it works as a story device
because even though humans are about the most
dangerous thing on this planet, we are still
hardwired to fear the wolves.
A lot of seemingly irrational behavior in
humans derives from what is essentially legacy
software and hardware issues.
Figure on those being common in aliens too.
Behaviors rooted in biological imperatives
which made sense originally, but are a bit
hit and miss for decision-making in modern
contexts.
A given alien might be more likely to want
to hide than we are or less, but since impulse
control is one of those things that comes
hand in hand with a brain powerful enough
to develop logic, reason, and technology,
we can assume that aliens only try to hide
their civilizations when it is at least vaguely
reasonable to do so.
Now, that’s our first problem, if you assume
the galaxy is full of predatory aliens hiding
in the dark reaches of outer space, you do
not want to hide from them on your home planet.
They are unlikely to be afraid to visit sunlit
planets and to know that’s the easiest place
to find prey.
Consider the growing list of exoplanets, accumulated
at a time when we can barely put simple telescopes
in space, and then try to imagine the kind
of telescopes any species with basic interstellar
travel might have.
Forget about radio signals by the way, that’s
not a great search method even when you’re
confined to a planet.
Nothing you need to hide from will be planetbound
and they have better options.
Any species that hunts other civilizations
by waiting for them to discover radio and
TV is too stupid to be a threat.
We can broadcast all we want without concern
because first off, it’s already too late
since we’ve been broadcasting for a century,
and secondly, anybody who can come here and
hurt us never needed that to find us and already
knew about us.
The probable presence of life on Earth is
detectable by any number of other telltales
that can be seen at a distance, we were betrayed
by our own atmosphere a billion years before
life crawled onto land.
No, if you want to hide, you don’t do it
on your home planet.
You also probably don’t want to bother hiding
your civilization anyway, just some piece
of it as a backup.
We’ll discuss possible ways to hide in a
bit.
Before that, let us walk through two scenarios.
For the first, we will be the predatory species
folks should hide from, having shown up first
on the galactic stage, and in the second we’ll
be a species contemplating ways of hiding
from them.
So here we are, an evil interstellar empire
that arose a billion years ago.
How do we operate?
First, we need to assume we don’t really
colonize much ourselves, it’s obviously
very easy to keep alien civilizations from
arising if you just colonize every planet
in a galaxy, something that won’t take you
more than a million years if you’ve got
the ability to do interstellar travel in any
sort of plausible way, and much faster if
you have access to FTL travel.
Second, even a modestly expansive species
is going to have at least close to K2 civilization
numbers and resources, meaning they haven’t
got any problems deploying a telescope to
watch every single planet constantly and throwing
together fleets of billions of ships.
Check out the Kardashev Scale or Dyson Sphere
episodes to get some idea of the scale of
these kind of civilizations.
Third, we have to assume that for some reason
travel to other galaxies is off the table,
otherwise while your predator species is lurking
around the Milky Way Galaxy rather than colonizing
it, some Kardashev 3 civilization will arise
next door in Andromeda and decide to come
pay a visit, and they will crush you.
Those are some fairly dubious assumptions,
and if any of them aren’t in play this isn’t
going to happen.
The biggest issue against you is time itself,
because while any Kardashev 2 civilization
- that’s one that’s just maximized their
own solar system, not any others -- could
easily send a big battleship or even a fleet
to every solar system in the galaxy to monitor
it for life, there’s no guarantee they are
going to do that.
Let say we send a fleet to go watch planet
X for signs of emerging intelligence and attack
if they see any.
They get there ten thousand years later and
set up shop to wait, because they see land
life has just emerged.
Let’s consider this situation for a minute.
Even assuming we’ve got life extension or
had these guys on ice for the trip, once they
arrive the game has changed.
They, or their descendants, have a long time
to sit on their ships twiddling their thumbs.
How many generations before they decide to
just colonize the planet?
Or say screw it and nuke the planet instead
of waiting for intelligent life to emerge?
Or fall in love with the critters on that
planet and decide to protect them?
How long before they become aliens themselves,
breeding in isolation for tens of millions
of years?
You might need to send another extermination
fleet to go deal with them, and since they
will be expecting it, best build another fleet
to handle the ones they, and all the other
fleets you built, will be sending your way.
It’s hard for me to imagine humans opting
to do the galaxy-wide perpetual extermination
thing, and we’ve been known to try to kill
off other humans who are genetically just
a few thousand years removed from us.
If we assume the kind of extreme xenophobia
that would make you try to keep purging a
galaxy for a billion years, how likely are
they to be cool with mutant branches of their
own species who aren’t just a hundred generations
removed, but a hundred thousand?
While it is darkly amusing to imagine a galaxy
with a million empires, all descended from
the same planet originally, trying to wipe
each other out, don’t assume other species
could safely emerge during that conflict.
They would still be monitoring everything
and still be just as enthusiastically genocidal
as before; so they’d still know if some
new species emerged and would be able to divert
a small fleet there to nuke them… or use
whatever other method of extermination might
be in vogue.
Genocide really does need to be done in person
though, unless you are willing to go all-in
and kill every planet in a galaxy that might
spawn life, a K2 civilization could do that
from home using the weapons platforms we discussed
in Nicoll-Dyson Beams.
They just sterilize every planet once a galactic
orbit.
Now if you are really worried about mutation
from colonization, you probably need to go
the machine route, preferably the dumb machine
route.
We have discussed von Neumann Probes before,
self-replicating machines that reach a nearby
solar system, grab some raw materials, build
some more probes, send those to new systems,
rinse and repeat.
This is a good approach because you can slow
down mutation in self-replicating machines
and make sure everyone has the same priorities.
Unsurprisingly, it is one used in fiction
a lot, usually as the evil artificial intelligence
who just wants to kill any organic life.
Lots of good books on that notion, including
my own favorite series, Alastair Reynold’s
“Revelation Space”.
I’ve mentioned those before in other episodes
so I’ll instead recommend a newer book by
Dennis E. Taylor, “We are Legion, We are
Bob”, which is a lot more light-hearted
than when we usually see this technology portrayed
in fiction.
A key point in that novel and its sequel is
that even making copies of the minds can result
in very large and quick divergence in behavior,
and that is going to be hard to avoid in any
truly sentient mind.
The ability to think up new solutions and
analyze abstract problems pretty much guarantees
that those copies will diverge from each other
over time and new experiences, and if their
philosophies and motives change you’ve got
a problem.
So stupid is probably a better way to go,
guided interstellar missiles that just have
enough intelligence to do targeting and maybe
maintenance.
Either delivering an explosive strike or something
more biologically-targeted and clever like
the proto-molecule we see in the Expanse series,
TV or novels.
It could possibly be some very simple self-replicator
that has a lot of the mutations safety controls
on copying, “error checking algorithms”
or some other options that we discussed in
the self-replicating machines episode and
a very limited mission.
Keep it simple, go to place, scan for basic
signs of life, find a rock, replicate, destroy
life, send mission data home, send replicators
on to neighboring systems.
It could be dangerous giving it any real brains
or free will, and even then, leaving a swarm
of these things meandering around the galaxy
probably isn’t a good idea.
You could have them hard-wired to automatically
shut down and hibernate, only waking every
so often to scan their particular area, but
you might just be better off sending out new
batches of them periodically instead.
When sending out specialized weapons designed
for killing off intelligent life, it pays
to be paranoid in your safety precautions.
So in that context, it’s kind of hard to
imagine anyone doing this.
It’s so much easier to exterminate potential
alien civilizations by simply colonizing their
planets in the first place.
If you don’t want to colonize but still
want to eliminate even the possibility of
life evolving and posing a challenge, it is
better to send your probes there looking for
signs of life period, not just intelligence.
Or even just removing all the planets life
could arise on, mining away all the elements
and sending them home.
Now, let’s move on to case two -- folks
who are thinking about hiding their civilization.
They are going to have all the concepts we
just discussed available to them too, and
I think they’d conclude what we just did.
If there were predators out killing intelligent
species they’d have already been killed.
Anybody who has the willpower and skill to
maintain a galaxy-wide, billion year long
extermination process is going to be very,
very good at it.
They won’t make rookie mistakes, and they
might be monstrous villains, but this isn’t
Hollywood so the villains aren’t going to
be dumb.
If I can think of a dozen ways to kill off
all life in a galaxy, they can too, and probably
more, and if you asked me which method to
use, I’d say all of them.
You don’t nuke someone’s planet, you nerve
gas it, virus-bomb it, then nuke the place,
and when you’re sure you’ve got everyone,
you still send hazmat teams down to look.
Then you disassemble the planet as raw materials
to build more armadas.
So we can conclude nobody is out there planning
on killing us that we need to hide from.
Either they don’t exist, or they don’t
want to kill us, or they just plain suck at
genocide.
It seems to me, most species would draw these
same conclusions.
What’s more, even if they conclude they
should hide in case everyone else is doing
it -- hence the quiet galaxy -- they are going
to wonder why everyone is hiding since the
logic is flimsy enough that at least a few
species will decide not to.
Let’s assume they do hide, and they spend
thousands of years hiding and improving their
technology.
Someone will raise this issue again and say
“Why don’t we build a probe, send it to
a distant solar system, and have it set up
shop there and broadcast a message?
That way, even if there is something to be
afraid of the transmitter won’t reveal us.
Heck, we can even put a small observation
post nearby to send a discrete laser signal
home so we can monitor if someone comes and
investigates the probe.”
Now the immediate follow up to that is going
to be someone asking why no one has already
done this, other species would have thought
of it too and someone will have tried it and
concluded no aliens or no hostile ones and
proceeded to move around more openly.
How many millions of years are you going to
hide before you finally say nuts and abandon
the effort?
Especially since the first ones to do so have
the advantage in settling the galaxy, building
their numbers up, and being safe from any
previously quiet civilizations that may have
more recently become a threat.
After all, a species that hid for fear of
being exterminated might not be such nice
guys themselves.
They might be so afraid of being killed off
because they think it’s the logical thing
to do and would like to do it themselves to
others.
That is worth considering too since the ethically
proper thing to do if hiding would seem to
be to launch a few probes to get safely far
from your civilization and then transmit warnings
to others to hide.
So it’s not a good Fermi Paradox solution,
because it seems very unlikely everyone would
conclude hiding was best, particularly if
anyone else was already openly moving around.
But just because it doesn’t work for the
Fermi Paradox doesn’t mean nobody would
do it.
There’s a lot of reasons why some species
might decide they want to hide, and again
you don’t need to hide everything.
I mean if I have been hiding my civilization
for a few centuries, I might want to keep
some of it hidden in reserve, to be on the
safe side.
Just as we can send a probe far away to do
its ‘Hello, is anyone there?’
transmission, we could also send off a very
quiet colony ship somewhere to act as a backup.
So how do we hide a civilization if we want
to?
That last part about the quiet colony ship
gives us our first point to explore.
Wherever you hide should not be your home
planet.
Too obvious, too hard to hide.
As we’ve discussed before, there is no stealth
in space.
Planets are hard to hide and so are spaceships.
Similarly, you don’t need to hide your civilization,
you need to hide your backup.
That could be a few thousand folks for a stable
gene pool and copies of your records, but
a high-tech civilization doesn’t necessarily
need a few thousand people because they can
use a few, and a lot of frozen embryos.
And one decently more advanced can probably
store a digital copy of all their genetic
information for every organism in their biosphere
too.
And one just a little more advanced could
store digital copies of all their citizens
too.
Indeed, in a transhuman civilization odds
are a lot of folks will have copies of their
minds as a backup anyway, and likely many
of them with a few rather discreetly tucked
away.
I usually assume one bit of storage for one
atom, we can’t do quite that well yet but
we’re close.
And there’s options that might permit folks
to do even better.
It’s not really necessary though since at
that density of storage you can squeeze a
billion gigabytes of data onto a nanogram
of storage and that’s enough for a human
memory, likely many times over again.
That’s whole metropolises worth of people
on a grain of sand or the genetic information
for whole ecosystems.
A few weeks back, in the episode Civilizations
at the End of Time, we talked about keeping
whole simulated universes in your pocket.
That was an extreme case, but keeping a whole
civilizations backup memories in your pocket
isn’t.
Our digital memory is bigger than that right
now in the interest of fast and cheap memory,
they might have the same interest too, and
you might need to go bigger than the atomic
scale for storage, but at the atomic scale
you’d have no problem storing every human
mind, all of our art and literature and history,
and all the genetic information to replicate
Earth, on something that would fit in your
pocket.
However, we’ll be conservative and assume
that with some additional protective equipment
and casings, you might end up with a big cube
weighing a ton and about a meter wide.
That’s a little inconvenient, but considering
it’s storing an entire civilization we won’t
complain that it requires a forklift to move
due to all the shielding and various redundancies.
Ya know, built to last, because it’s hard
to get an insurance policy or warranty for
the high-tech equivalent of Noah’s Ark.
Where do you hide it?
Well first off you don’t hide ‘it’,
you hide ‘them’, as it’s not likely
to be something so resource intensive that
you can’t make many of them.
Regardless, where is an optimal place to hide
it?
And at the same time, where do you hide an
actual existing biological civilization?
Again, not on your home planet.
We assume malevolent and genocidal civilizations
are very committed and good at their job,
so odds are reducing your homeworld to atomic
dust is going to be on their task list and
they’ve probably had whole blue ribbon committees
and think tanks devoted to designing ways
to track down and exterminate any survivors.
If you’ve got force fields like we discussed
last week, sticking your archive inside a
star is a decent approach, or even your whole
civilization, since you don’t need to worry
about your energy output being detectable.
Even pretty advanced and determined civilizations
have to work hard for a long time to kill
a sun.
It’s also kind of hard to hunt around for
a needle in that haystack.
Ducking down inside a very large black hole
might be a good option too, though getting
out of either of those is a dubious proposition
at best.
But the more realistic approach is not anywhere
inside your solar system or even any solar
system.
In between the stars there is a vast amount
of empty space.
Only it isn’t empty, there’s all sorts
of cold small objects out there, very hard
to see even if you know what to look for,
and incredibly numerous.
They’re hard to see because they are small
and cold, and the reason why spaceships are
easy to see is all the energy they give off
while speeding up or slowing down.
They can also be seen by the heat they give
off just maintaining their environment inside.
That’s a lot harder and shorter range though.
Now nothing can be completely hidden, but
the less energy it gives off, the harder it
is to see.
You could detect a colony hidden in a comet
because the comet will be warmer than it should
be, but there is a range of uncertainty about
how much it should give off.
Some kilometer-wide ball of rock and ice in
the interstellar void is soaking up some starlight,
cosmic microwave background radiation, and
other types of cosmic background radiation.
There’s more than microwaves incidentally,
and it probably has some radioisotopes in
its composition slowly decaying and giving
off heat.
There’s some variation in all of that which
makes it difficult to calculate how much some
blob of interstellar flotsam should be giving
off naturally.
That allows you a decent amount of power you
can produce while still staying safely within
those margins of error for detection.
What’s more, you could pick a rock that
had a fair amount of radioisotopes, one from
a spot near a recent supernova that’s got
lots of fresh uranium and such, and just remove
those materials.
You can scoop out all those radioisotopes
so your own power generation can replace it
or just harvest and use them instead.
Now searching all of those possible hidey-holes
is a pretty Herculean task, but we are talking
about a species willing to search a whole
galaxy for life so you might assume they’d
do it.
But as strange as it sounds, searching a whole
galaxy for life-bearing planets is a lot easier
than searching even a fairly small volume
of interstellar space for a small habitat
hidden inside a comet.
It’s the difference between searching a
planet for cities and searching one beach
for a single specific grain of sand that looks
like all the others.
The more power you need to run your hidden
civilization, the fewer places you could hide
it and the easier those would be to find.
Trying to hide a whole O’Neill Cylinder
housing thousands of people and needing gigawatts
of power is a problem.
Interstellar rocks might give off less than
a milliwatt of energy per square meter, you’d
need some rock with at least a trillion square
meters of surface area just to have a chance
of hiding an O’Neill Cylinder’s emissions
in one, so we’re talking about something
many hundreds of kilometers across, a large
asteroid or modest moon.
They’re also the first place you’d go
look when hunting for survivors.
There’s not so many of these things in the
interstellar void that you wouldn’t go take
a peek, you search the biggest spots first
and the smaller ones can hide less power.
Some small rotating habitat buried in an icy
rock a kilometer across could probably afford
to give off a milliwatt a square meter of
excess power without being noticed and that
would let you get away with a few thousand
watts of power.
Enough to maybe support one person.
Maybe a few dozen to serve as caretakers with
them doing cycles in cryogenic suspension,
waiting for the aliens to leave and just waking
people up to tend a small hydroponic garden
and check the equipment and see if the bad
guys left.
However, we already mentioned digital copies
of minds and regular viewers of this channel
know that it doesn’t necessarily take much
power to run a civilization if it isn’t
organic.
If you are computing down near the Landauer
Limit for your area’s temperature, you can
get a lot of calculations done on just a single
watt of power, so one radioisotope generator
designed to put out a few watts of power continuously
for a billion years isn’t going to have
any problems running a modest civilization
on that juice.
We could hide that inside a chunk of ice about
the size of a large house and even the most
obsessively genocidal aliens would have problems
finding and searching all of those.
So no one one is pulling that off unless they
decide to convert the entire galaxy into raw
materials and clearly no one is doing that.
If you want the specifics of how you can run
a digital civilization on so little energy,
check out the Matrioshka Brain episode or
Civilizations at the End of Time’s discussion
of black hole civilizations.
Now speaking of black holes, they are one
of the ways often suggested to hide power
emissions completely, and even then you’d
probably have some leakage.
You can’t hide a Dyson sphere with one,
too much gravity, but you could partially
hide its emissions by having a second layer
around your original Dyson Sphere that was
highly reflective to its waste heat frequencies
and reflected all that into a black hole.
This is very dubious from a thermodynamics
perspective but thermodynamics where black
holes are concerned is somewhat iffy so we
can’t close the door on the option completely.
Still, it is not a particularly realistic
option because on top of leakage or gravity
being detectable, buildings such things is
not covert, and if everyone sees you building
your secret bunker it’s not too secret even
if it is invisible when complete.
But we do talk about using artificial black
holes for power here a lot so we’ll use
that as our last example for today.
Note that we are talking about artificial
black holes too, naturally occurring ones
are not very common, odds are your civilization
has none within many hundreds of light years,
and there could be a million solar systems
closer to hand.
They also tend to have accretion disks, so
suddenly blocking those by building your civilization
there is going to be a red flag, though like
hiding in a sun, hiding in an accretion disk
might not be a bad idea if you can survive
there.
Anyway, focusing on artificial black holes,
if you have the technology to make small black
holes -- Kugelblitz black holes - then we
can grab some very remote and decently large
body, scoop out its insides, line it with
a reflective material, and slap in an equal
mass black hole.
Incidentally trying to feed a black hole waste
heat infrared light is harder than it sounds.
The idea of a Kugelblitz black hole is that
you use ultra-tiny and dense gamma rays to
make one, but funneling infrared light and
microwaves, the waste heat of a hidden civilization,
into our black hole would actually be rather
difficult and maybe impossible.
Sounds strange since black holes are all-consuming
gravity wells which even light can’t escape,
but micro-black holes are smaller than atomic
nuclei.
Light can’t get out of them but getting
it in there in the first place is a lot harder.
Again, probably impossible, and there’s
no way you are getting all the light in there.
We’ll handwave that away though and assume
you could dispose of most of your waste heat
into them.
Amusingly, this option is better for organic
civilizations than digital ones.
They don’t need much power or space and
can hide in a rock the size of a house running
on less power than a flashlight.
However, the black holes that emit flashlight
levels of energy tend to mass trillions of
tons, modest asteroid territory and in that
range where if you’re hiding it in a small
body you might get noticed just by the gravity
given off.
Alternatively, a rotating habitat designed
for just a few thousand people and a modest
ecosystem only needs to be a kilometer or
so wide and needs power supplies in the hundreds
of megawatts, or gigaton black hole territory,
and a kilometer-wide block of ice masses about
a gigaton.
So it works out nicely, and if you’re smart
you set the icy body to have a plausible but
high speed in a direction that takes it far
away, preferably out of the galaxy, though
clever hunters might find that suspicious
enough to go check.
Intergalactic space is a way better place
to hide, and even the most determined hunters
might shrug at trying to hunt through that
or chase you if you’ve left the galaxy.
I tend to be pretty skeptical about using
black holes for heat disposal, it’s very
dicey where the Laws of thermodynamics are
concerned and I suspect it only seems to work
in theory because we don’t fully know how
black holes work, but I wanted to raise the
option since folks do suggest using them this
way.
You can’t hide a normal black hole either,
again the mass issue, but gravity is a very
weak force so a micro-black hole’s gravity
probably would escape notice.
Fundamentally, if you can dump waste heat
into one, it is a very good way to hide a
civilization and about the only way you could
hope to hide a biological one, rather than
a low power digital one, inside known physics.
And that’s where we’ll stop for the day.
What’s our summary for Hidden Aliens?
Short form, I don’t expect to encounter
them often, and I don’t mean because they’re
hard to find since they’re hiding.
It’s just not a good approach, we have to
come up with way too many convoluted motives
for both the civilization hiding and who they
are hiding from, who also seems to need to
bypass a lot of strategies they should follow
for hunting, like just colonizing everything
themselves.
On the other hand, I would expect civilizations
to hide things, and the methods we discussed
today work for hiding observational outposts
or secret archives and backups.
Next week we will be looking at some lesser
known technologies that haven’t gained as
much attention as some of the flashier technology,
but are shaping the landscape for the future
just as much or more, in Quiet Revolution.
For alerts when that and other episode come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
