This episode is sponsored by Skillshare.
What is a human being?
Every generation our scattered tribes changed,
and how much more so when we are scattered
to a million worlds.
Is humanity an identity
or a fundamental set of DNA?
So today we’ll be looking at the future
of humanity in a more literal sense, asking
what might change about us in the generations
to come.
This is obviously a bit tricky since we have
to consider things like genetic engineering
and cybernetics, or even folks entirely leaving
genetics behind in favor of an uploaded digital
life, though we’ll save that topic for next
week.
It’s also worth considering more natural
paths, how we’d tend to evolve if things
just stayed the same here on Earth or how
we’d evolve or adapt to different individuals
worlds we might settle in the space age.
Critical to the whole notion though is that
successful species not only don’t stay the
same over generations, but typically diverge
into many different species with time.
One could argue that we’re all the same
species as the original animal that presumably
evolved into us and cats and dogs and insects.
This approach to species classification is
called Clades - tracking the descendants of
a common ancestor - and we often use it when
contemplating future humanity, since it’s
entirely possible hundreds of different species
of human descent would be around calling themselves
that.
They might do so even if they were so diverse
they couldn’t interbreed anymore, though
that’s a debatable concept in a futuristic
context where one has mastered genetics.
Of course we call ourselves Homo Sapiens and
it’s common for science fiction to coin
new terms for future humans, like Homo Superior
or so on.
I suppose it would stand to reason that if
you had relatively isolated populations living
on Mars, the Moon, and Earth for a hundred
generations you might see enough divergence
that folks could use terms like Homo Martian,
Homo Luna, and Homo Terran respectively, and
we did look at how low gravity might affect
life in our recent episode “Life on a Low-Gravity
Planet”.
Usually the context in sci-fi these days has
more to do with a change in nature not very
related to the environment though, like developing
bigger brains or psychic or mutant powers
or so on.
Amusingly humans appear to have smaller brains
than we did 10 or 20 thousand years ago and
psychic abilities wouldn’t seem to be in
the cards, and while mutation can grant new
abilities, it’s a slow process.
Fast major mutation is usually synonymous
with death, not superhuman abilities.
Evolution is the process of minor mutations
slowly bringing about changes that make a
species better able to survive and reproduce,
but that’s only because the mutations that
aren’t survival beneficial or at least neutral
die off, and most mutation is a negative,
and it basically never produces some massive
single-generation advantage like you’d see
in something like Marvel Comics’ X-Men.
These things take time, hundreds of generations
at a minimum, and you really wouldn’t expect
them inside an interplanetary civilization
that was fairly unified and had a lot of trade
and migration unless a lot more than a hundred
generations had passed, as that’s only a
couple thousand years.
Not that you don’t get some trait emergence
in shorter times, especially in very large
sample populations.
You can obviously tell the difference between
folks whose ancestors come from the various
corners of the African, European, and Asian
super-continent, but even places fairly isolated
from them, like the native populations of
the Americas and Australia, are not particularly
distinct from any other human, medically or
psychologically.
Though you can get specific traits or medical
conditions that are far more common in one
human clade, these usually aren’t very related
to their environment and just a byproduct
of a given genetic condition having been more
common in that line without it having to do
with whether they hailed from Amazonian Jungles
or Siberian Tundra.
But the game is a bit different if the core
environment is radically different, like the
gravity or air pressure, and of course time
and isolation, even if it’s not total isolation,
can diverge these far more.
Now when we talk about terraforming other
planets the notion is usually to make them
as Earth-like as you can, the word Terra meaning
Earth, and what’s more, most of the artificial
habitats we so often discuss on the show,
like the O’Neill Cylinder, try to replicate
Earth as much as possible.
This not only might have a tendency to prevent
much genetic drift inspired by weird environments,
but actually cause a loss of intelligence,
amusingly enough.
We’re not really aiming for Earth after
all.
Rather, we’re aiming for ideal Earth, and
do so even more in our homes.
A highly automated society on an artificial
world might tend to start losing intelligence
as it’s an expensive trait meant for solving
survival problems which they would tend not
to have.
Plus any mutation to the brain is more likely
to be a negative than a positive, but if it
doesn’t alter the survival odds because
you live in paradise, you might get a drift
toward being a bit dull minded.
Now, as a few quick caveats on that notion
of devolving intelligence, first, intelligence
has a different survival value to modern civilization
than in earlier times, it’s not really being
used for moment to moment survival in terms
of food or not getting eaten, we use it in
all sorts of social survival contexts too
and those only really would cease being around
in a paradise setup if it was also an individual
paradise.
Such as a personalized virtual reality utopia.
Second, creatures lose things in evolution
if they represent a survival burden without
benefit, it costs too much to keep it going,
fueling and carting a big brain around for
instance, but the thing about paradise is
that you aren’t short of food and aren’t
getting killed by predators because you’re
not fast enough lugging that brain around.
And third, the handy thing about intelligence
is you can notice stuff like people getting
dumber from their environment and do something
about it, so there’s a bit of Catch-22.
If you’re smart enough to build paradises
that might make you get dumb, you’re also
smart enough to be aware of the concern and
handle it.
Though of course paradise might still incline
those born to it to be lazy or decadent and
ignore the problem.
I mentioned Individual Virtual Reality Utopias
a moment ago.
It would seem likely that those who dwell
solely in those might not be strictly human
anymore in favor of mind-uploading, and again
it’s our topic for next week so we’ll
explore it more there, but it might have some
peculiar effects on anatomy.
As an example, since any virtual reality sufficient
to cause mass migration to virtual lives automatically
means a level of technology capable of running
robots smart enough to do virtually all our
work.
You can’t make a passable computer character
who people will feel like interacting with
as much as a real person without having artificial
intelligence that can do most jobs after all.
So people living entirely inside these might
not even need a real-world job or have any
desire not to be in the virtual world, and
lose any interest in what their body is like
beyond its basic capacity to endure.
It’s conceivable such people, given many
generations, might mutate into something not
much more than a brain with some connections
and the basic support apparatus of a heart
and lungs and organs, limbs shriveling up
- or being amputated.
They may tend to have artificial hearts and
lungs and so on to do the work, and avoid
having the issue of those natural organs decaying
from neglect after a couple years without
exercise.
If something like that was supplemental, future
generations might slowly lose their natural
organs entirely.
Now you might ask how they are breeding to
propagate this mutation.
This is not a major issue since they could
probably swap DNA with a chosen partner and
have a tank-grown kid.
Indeed, given the implied sophistication of
the non-human characters in a virtual environment
you might not need human parents in favor
of very elaborate simulated parents.
That’s also a potential option for space
colonization.
As we discussed in Seeding the Stars, one
example of a seed ship for interstellar colonization
is a small ship with self-replicating machinery
that can arrive in some new system and start
terraforming and seeding life from on-board
frozen or digital DNA banks.
If your computers are good enough, human-level
AI or better, they can presumably grow humans
in tanks and raise them.
Many of those kids might be a bit adverse
to regular reproduction methods and opt to
tank grow their children too or even skip
on parenting trusting Grandma AI to do it
better than they could and might get evidence
backing that point by comparing those kids
to those born and raised more traditionally
on that colony.
An upsetting notion but a computer designed
to raise kids might be better at it than actual
people.
Were that so, or perceived to be so, successive
waves of colonies might be ever more prone
to adopt that approach and might start figuring
that their reproductive organs were fairly
redundant.
A pretty critical part of normal evolution
in complex organisms is sexual reproduction,
as such organisms tend to have very long generations
compared to, say, an amoeba, so swapping in
DNA allows you to collect all the mutations
every member of that species has acquired,
not just your long chain of singular ancestors
where the organism simply divides itself to
reproduce.
A high-tech civilization is presumably quite
capable of reproduction by cloning as well
as mixing DNA from several people rather than
just two.
But they also have the option of suppressing
mutation entirely by simply printing DNA from
a digital recording.
This is a technology we already have albeit
rather slowly.
In the last decade the price of synthesizing
a pair of DNA letters – your G, A, T, and
Cs – has dropped from a dollar a piece to
about 10 cents, but that still means at the
moment, since human DNA has 3 billion base
pairs, that it would cost hundreds of millions
of dollars.
However this is exactly the sort of process
we’d expect to get vastly cheaper and even
if it didn’t, you could use this or any
number of other techniques to avoid concepts
like copying fatigue to keep your civilizations
DNA the same as it used to be.
You wouldn’t need to print DNA for every
kid, just add it in occasionally.
Or alternatively to insert some new bit of
DNA, and I’d not be surprised if even a
century from now it was fairly common to have
your child’s DNA printed from optimized
configurations of the two parents, or one
parent, or a number of people, or even just
a relatively standard template from digital
archives and models.
You stick that in an egg that had its DNA
removed and grow, classically or in a tank.
But I’d also imagine this wouldn’t be
even a bit universal, and if it’s not, it
means you’d have folks going out into the
galaxy who did not employ it.
Or those who did and were fairly open to experimenting.
Both of which imply a lot of genetic divergence
as folks settle new worlds.
It’s not inevitable though, and it’s worth
considering that there’s a chance you’d
have a fairly rigid attitude toward letting
human DNA change too much, especially if our
civilization ended up having some fear – justified
or not – of genetically engineered people
or mutants.
We’re mostly discussing humans today but
the episode isn’t exclusively about humans,
be it hypothetical alien civilizations or
us, you have to decide before you start shipping
people out to far stars if you’re trying
to enforce a fairly static human template,
because once everyone moves out, you’re
not going to be able to change your mind,
short of war.
Now a home world or home system trying to
conquer its colonies might tend to sound fairly
futile but as we’ve discussed before, you
probably would still have more folks living
around our Sun than all the other stars combined
until you’d settled a million worlds or
more.
You can pack an awful lot of folks into a
Dyson Swarm around a single sun and until
it’s fully populated – with presumably
around a billion times as many people as we
have now – it’s likely to be growing faster
in raw numbers than all its colonies combined.
In the end so long as you’ve still got raw
materials you can keep building and growing
around your own star far faster and more easily
than you can around other stars, especially
considering travel time and resources pumped
into the ship and trip, so unless most of
your population growth at home is getting
put on ships, home grows faster.
Those Dyson Swarms are generally assumed to
be made of trillions of O’Neill Cylinders
or similar, and each one is potentially very
capable of being self-enclosed and living
in total isolation for very long times, probably
even more so if you’ve been spending vast
amounts of research effort into designing
generation ships which have to be pretty capable
of extended self-sufficiency and are basically
just such a station with a ship drive.
Or a bigger ship drive anyway, space station
habitats would presumably tend to have an
engine on them for maneuvering.
Those generation ships might be quite the
breeding spot for mutation and divergence
themselves, even more than the colonies they
founded.
Weird to think but even as your colonies are
terraforming worlds here or deep out in space,
you might be getting even more genetic divergence
on those artificial cylinder worlds right
here.
After all such things are generally expected
to be home to fewer than a million folks and
that’s the sort of situation that could
easily give you a setup that allowed rapid
divergence, much like a fairly isolated island
would.
Home might have more genetic divergence than
distant interstellar colonies, and sooner
too, interstellar travel takes a long time.
Some seed ship using DNA samples from the
22nd century might be using those exact same
samples as it slowly works its way from world
to world toward the galactic rim, when it
arrives it’s likely to be more like the
2200th Century, but still using that 22nd
century DNA data.
That could result in very long generations
in that sense, and that’s not the only way
that might happen.
If folks have access to the sort of medical
or nanotechnology that lets them achieve biological
immortality by constant repair, you could
potentially have someone from the 22nd century
still kicking around the 2200th century with
the same biology as now and without the aid
of some form of stasis or relativity, and
still having children.
It’s easy to imagine those distant colonies
growing ever more divergent from us, but we’d
be diverging back here just as fast and maybe
faster, especially throwing technology into
things.
It’s quite possible that within a century
or two we’d have figured out how to engage
in Uplifting, taking an animal and genetically
tweaking it to be more intelligent, like an
ape or dolphin or elephant or cat or dog but
with human intelligence.
If that happens it would seem almost inevitable
that you’d end up with relatively large
civilizations like that.
Keep in mind that in a Dyson Swarm you have
room for at least a billion times Earth’s
population, and there are more than a billion
stars in this galaxy we could settle and eventually
do the same too.
In something like that, where even an O’Neill
Cylinder or small conglomeration of them could
house a modest small nation inside, and you
could have trillions of those around our sun,
you might have thousands of different types
of uplifted animals, each having cylinder
habitats of their own with millions or billions
of them inhabiting them, and still only being
a tiny fraction of the whole population of
the Swarm.
This isn’t necessarily limited to space
either, if Earth ends up as some Ecumenopolis
covered in arcologies and huge habitation
towers or a Matrioshka Shell World, you could
easily end up with such hab towers or shellworld
layers being as isolated and divergent from
each other as space habitats.
It’s weird if rather darkly amusing that
you might end up with morlocks, mole people,
or chuds living in the lower levels of some
massive arcology super-tower with tens of
thousands of stories and levels each the size
of a large city.
Though I’m reasonably sure folks wouldn’t
intentionally engineer themselves into morlocks
or mole people, unless they were literal moles
we’d uplifted.
They might still be called that though, I
like to assume future civilizations are a
lot more enlightened than we are now but I’m
also a realist and I imagine there’d be
a fair amount of folks who didn’t like their
neighbors, and if your neighbors have 4 arms
or 4 legs it might make that a bit more likely.
They probably would have the ability to engineer
themselves into things like centaurs, or even
some Pegasus-centaur critter in a low-gravity
habitat.
You could easily have humans diverging by
genetic tinkering into those uplifted animal
populations and vice-versa, and all presumably
joining interstellar colony fleets or sending
out their own.
This doesn’t even go into all the cybernetic
and transhuman options, let alone the sort
of mega-civilizations you could produce inside
virtual simulated worlds, which can potentially
hold millions of times more people than any
station or civilization running on classic
biology, if they’re computerized versions
of neurons are more energy efficient.
Even cyborg civilizations can really pack
folks in, since they presumably only need
to biologically power a brain – depending
on if we’re assuming you still need a mostly
biological brain to count as a human cyborg.
Needless to say you can get pretty far off
the modern human template if you’re not
constrained by biology at all, you can go
cram your brain into giant mecha or have a
spaceship for a body.
You can also presumably start adding cybernetic
components to your brain, or even just growing
more brains.
Or networking folks together, you might get
variations on Hive Minds, minimalist or full-on
mergers into an individual, or an individual
having multiple bodies, cloned or android.
All of these options can presumably be setup
to be hereditary too.
I occasionally joke that the sheer divergence
we’d expect as we colonize the galaxy means
that should we find the galaxy empty of other
intelligent life and really want to meet aliens,
all we’d have to do is wait a million years
and visit a distant colony.
However you probably wouldn’t even need
to get on an interstellar ship.
Not only would a Dyson Swarm around our sun
probably have a vast amount of genetic divergence
– and other types of divergence – but
this is Home, and anybody we send out is likely
to have at least some of their descendants
decide to come home and visit, hopefully peacefully.
As mentioned, there’s not likely to be much
difference between an interstellar spaceship
and a cylinder habitat in a swarm except for
the very large ship drive and fuel reserves.
So they could just show up and park in the
swarm without having to worry about finding
a specific place that would welcome them.
Also because the fuel and energy needs to
move such spaceships around is so huge compared
to what you need to run life support on them,
even if you showed up with just the remnants
of your fuel kept for emergency maneuvering
it’s probably enough to run your power needs
for very long times, thousands if not millions
of years.
So you probably can immigrate fairly easily
so long as there’s not some organized hostility
toward outsiders, in which case on top of
all that homegrown divergence, you’d be
getting folks wandering in from all over the
galaxy.
There’s no real maximum size to such a swarm
so long as your density doesn’t get too
high to manage heat issues.
If you assumed every inhabited system, after
getting decently settled, sent home some big
habitat ship every century or so, then a fully
inhabited galaxy would be shipping over a
billion such habitat ships to Earth, or Sol
anyway, every single year.
And that’s ignoring any trade between systems,
just the occasional small group in any given
star system that feels like making the pilgrimage.
Presumably they’re also often doing this
to their neighbors or back down the long chain
of colonies they leapfrogged out from Earth
to Galaxy’s Edge along.
You also might see a lot of that colonizing
being done by Seed Ships or Gardener Ships
that just slowly meander out from Earth, stopping
at new worlds and systems to deposit some
colonists and restock on materials before
moving on.
Those Gardener Ships – see the Galactic
Gardeners episode for details – are basically
breeding up more people between stops since
they have decades between each and leave a
fraction of their people on each new world.
Many might reach the galactic rim then turn
around and follow their path back to go home
and see all those seeds they planted that
have been growing up over the tens of thousands
of years since they left.
Those are likely to often be viewed as something
like religious artifacts, or even exactly
that, as they make their procession back to
Earth and I’d not be surprised if whole
fleets got picked up along the way wanting
to make the trip, same as you might get fleets
trailing them on the original journey, catching
up to join their honored founders on their
quests.
I mention this because it’s often suggested
there’d be little to no interstellar trade
beyond information, which may be the case,
but even if it was you’d still expect things
along these lines to result in a fair amount
of immigration and pilgrimage.
Whether or not such exchanges would result
in more homogenous civilizations or even greater
and faster divergence is hard to say, maybe
both.
All of which seems to say that almost no matter
what routes humanity follows, or humanity’s
creations such as AI or uplifted or entirely
engineered critters, they’re going to diverge
vastly and a lot faster than simple evolution
would cause, even ignoring the weird environments
they might be adapting to that might speed
that up.
And given that galactic colonization is something
you do on a timeline of a million years, and
that such civilizations would presumably be
kicking around in some fashion for far longer,
that’s already enough time for huge divergence
even in a strictly natural way.
So the future ought to be a fairly weird place.
If there are no aliens in the galaxy you just
need to wait a bit.
And that doesn’t even include the more transhuman
or digital consciousness options that we’ll
look at next week.
We’ll get the upcoming schedule and announcements
in a moment, but first, I probably don’t
need to tell most folks watching this show
that it’s good to learn new skills and to
stay busy, or the value of online learning,
or of learning in general.
New skills don’t just offer new hobbies
or professional development, but they can
often give a great feeling of confidence,
purpose, and security.
If you’re a lifelong learner interested
in picking up some new skills, I’d recommend
Skillshare.
Whether you’re a beginner, a pro, a dabler,
or a master, Skillshare has thousands of classes
on a wide variety of topics from experts to
help you learn.
I’m particularly fond of the creative writing
classes, and if you’re one of the many folks
who watches this show and finds yourself thinking
up good ideas for science fiction novels or
short stories you’d like to write, try out
some of their creative writing classes, like
Yiyun Li’s “Writing Character-Driven Short
Stories”, she gives an excellent overview
of everything from how to get started to getting
published.
Skillshare is an online learning community
for creatives, where millions come together
to take the next step in their creative journey,
and Members get unlimited access to thousands
of inspiring classes, with hands-on projects
and feedback from a community of millions.
If you’d like to give it a try the first
1000 of my subscribers to click the link in
the description will get a 2 month free trial
of Premium Membership so you can explore your
creativity.
Act now, and start learning, today.
So speaking of communities, as a quick reminder
for channel regulars, I got married this last
weekend and so while the episodes are coming
out on Thursdays while I’m away, I won’t
be responding to comments on the episodes
till I get back from my honeymoon.
I’d be very grateful to any of you who have
some time to pop in to those comments and
answer any questions folks have that you feel
like you could give a good answer to.
I’d also suggest trying out our social media
forums on Discord, Facebook, and Reddit, which
are linked in the episode description, if
you’re looking for friendly communities
of folks to discuss ideas with, whether it's
for science or science fiction.
I’m also thinking one of these days we need
to have a short story contest on the channel,
it's a notion I kick around from time to time
and probably overdue.
As for upcoming episodes, we were talking
about genetic divergence but that’s only
one pathway we might follow in the future,
or rather many pathways, still it's often
suggested we might go digital instead of genetic,
becoming a post-biological civilization, and
next week we’ll explore that idea more in
“Life as a Digital Being”.
We were also talking today about spreading
out to distant stars in this Universe, but
there may be other Universes out there and
in two weeks we’ll explore that notion,
and dig into the science and theory of the
various Multiverse and Alternate Reality ideas,
in Parallel Universes & Alternate Realities.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode,
hit the like button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
