This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. 
Get access to my streaming video service,  
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description. 
They say there’s nothing new under the Sun, but 
what if someday Earth was flung away from our Sun? 
So today we’re going to be asking what would 
happen if Earth got ejected from its orbit  
around our Sun and if we could survive 
in the depths of interstellar space.  
As we will see today, this possibility is not as 
unlikely as it sounds nor as inevitable a doom  
as folks would tend to think. Particularly from 
non-natural events, like us intentionally moving  
our planet, which we will also discuss today.
To begin with, there’ve been frequent arguments  
about what planets actually are for a couple 
centuries now, which tends to interfere with the  
count, but while the number of objects we classify 
as planets might change, we generally accept that  
the objects themselves do not. But this isn’t 
entirely true and indeed if you skipped back a  
ways, we would find that the planets have changed 
in their number and their properties, and indeed  
some researchers believe that at some point in 
the early days, the solar system may have even  
had some Super-Earths, planets more massive than 
Earth but less than Neptune, which clearly aren’t  
around anymore. We looked at those recently 
and how habitable they might or might not be,  
and our solar system would be a very different 
place indeed if we had them and had kept them. And  
we seem to be a bit of an anomaly, in that most of 
the other solar systems we have gotten to look at  
have more mass and clutter in their 
planets and inner system than our own. 
There seems to be a tendency for systems 
to have one or more planets substantially  
more massive than Earth, orbiting 
closer to their sun than Mercury does,  
which might be an interesting topic for a 
Fermi Paradox episode at some point, all by  
itself. Of course we have to keep in mind that our 
catalog of exoplanets is nowhere near complete or  
representative yet, as we mostly detect exoplanets 
which are either bigger or closer to their star,  
and especially those which are both, such as 
a Super-Earth orbiting nearer than Mercury.. 
There are variations on a theory kicking around, 
with the Nice Model probably being best known,  
which generally say that Jupiter made an inward 
migration and may have ejected those planets, and  
indeed we also suspect other possible scenarios 
and occasions for ejecting or merging planets,  
but Jupiter migrating inward 
would certainly be a major cause. 
Every object exerts gravity on every other object 
and thus orbits get perturbed a lot when things  
are moving around or in unstable orbits. Stars 
have often passed a lot closer to our solar system  
than our nearest current neighbor has, and even as 
recently as 70,000 years ago, Scholz’s Star passed  
through our Oort Cloud in the outer solar system. 
Scholz’s star is actually a binary, as best as we  
can tell, a tiny M9.5 Red Dwarf, which is at the 
dimmest threshold of red dwarf stars and just 9.5%  
our own sun’s mass, and binary brown dwarf 6.3% of 
our Sun’s mass. While 22 light years from us now,  
we think they came within .8 light years of us, 
and again that was only 70,000 years ago, but not  
even a fifth the distance to Alpha Centauri. We 
expect a star passes through the Oort Cloud once  
every 100,000 years or so on average, and we’re 
currently expecting the much larger Gliese 710,  
an orange dwarf fully 60% of our Sun’s mass, 
to pass possibly as close as a sixth of a light  
year away in a bit over a million years, 
though this still may not be the closest  
another star has come to us in the past, 
and there may be even closer ones to come. 
Events such as these have major consequences, and 
apart from stars we would also expect things we  
don’t see like brown dwarfs, rogue gas giants 
or super-Earths to pass through with at least  
as much frequency as stars. Having anything pass 
near your delicate orbital system can have serious  
permanent results, but the greatest instability 
comes when one object passes inside the orbit of  
another. As an example, if something passed by our 
Sun closer to it than Mars but further from Earth,  
Mars would have a much higher risk of major 
perturbation or ejection than Earth, with the  
same being true if something were to pass inside 
Earth’s orbit but outside Venus or Mercury’s.  
They’d be less affected than us, and 
we would probably have a very bad day. 
The sheer mass of both objects also makes a 
big difference though, so Jupiter would be  
less affected by an encounter with an extrasolar 
object, even though it’s far more likely that  
things would cross its path. And of course it also 
matters where the various planets are relative to  
the interloper’s course at a given time. Now it’s 
worth noting that a sixth of a light year is still  
over 10,000 AU, Astronomical Units. Earth is 1 
AU from the Sun, Jupiter is 5, and even distant  
FarFarOut, our solar system’s currently most 
distantly known dwarf planet, is only 132 AU away,  
which is barely 1% of that distance. While the sun 
does yank objects toward it, for the most part,  
at this scale, frequency and probability tend 
to go with the cross-section of an orbit,  
or roughly the square of its distance from the 
Sun. So loosely speaking an object 10 times  
further from the Sun has 10-squared or 100 times 
as many objects passing between it and the Sun.  
That also means you’d expect Earth, 5 times closer 
to the Sun than Jupiter, to get objects inside  
its orbit only 5-squared, a twenty-fifth, 
or 4% as often. This is very approximate. 
In any event, while something like another 
star passing within those distances  
is somewhat improbable, were it to happen, such 
an event could be pretty catastrophic for us,  
especially if it was brighter 
or more massive than our Sun. 
The most popular video I’ve ever released, as of 
this time anyway, is our episode on Colonizing  
Alpha Centauri, where we prefaced the narrative 
with a rogue black hole entering our solar system,  
with its impending approach justifying a massive 
colonization effort, since it was expected to  
terribly perturb the orbits of all the planets 
as it passed. Echoing that, we wouldn’t really be  
worried about a passing black hole gobbling up our 
solar system as it went by, but it would likely  
throw everything out of whack while possibly 
badly irradiating us from the handful of objects  
it managed to gorge on during its transit. 
Even a minor planet, of which we have around  
a million in this solar system alone, or an 
asteroid maybe 10 kilometers in diameter,  
if eaten by a passing black hole, could release 
somewhere in the vicinity of 10^31 joules,  
if even 10% of its mass energy got emitted from 
the accretion disc it formed around that black  
hole. For comparison, that’s all the energy 
released by our Sun over several hours, but all  
in hard gamma or X-Rays, instead of soft sunlight.
This sort of rogue black hole on the march is not  
a terribly rare event on the galactic stage though 
you need not worry about it being super likely to  
happen to us ever, let alone anytime soon. 
It is not something to be discounted either,  
nor more probable events like other stellar 
remnants, regular stars like Gliese 710,  
or various large planets. But the massive amount 
of gamma radiation from that particular event  
is something for us to remember in a moment when 
we discuss surviving Earth’s Ejection. We also  
shouldn’t forget events like that are very likely 
to involve Earth being hit by other debris too,  
perturbed asteroids or Kuiper or Oort Objects, 
mostly small but getting whacked by kilometer-wide  
comets is not something you want happening 
even when the sky is empty of other problems,  
let alone while your planet is getting 
irradiated then kicked into the empty void  
of interstellar space. When it rains it pours.
One bit of good news is that such an event is  
mostly likely to happen from us intentionally 
moving Earth to another solar system, which lets  
us avoid the worst and do it on our own terms and 
with lots of prepwork. I still wouldn’t consider  
that case super-likely, but as I mentioned at 
the start, we will discuss that option today. 
How Earth gets ejected is pretty important 
to how well we could survive, which is part  
of why we discussed it in-depth today, and the 
biggest factor for survival is that prep time.  
We already mentioned how Gliese 710 will get 
close to us in about a million years and even  
another century of observations and modeling 
improvements we could probably pin down its exact  
path to a tight enough window we would be able 
to say that there conclusively was or wasn’t a  
threat and how much of a threat and what kind. It 
is also one option to colonize space, by seeding  
relative near misses, if it turns out interstellar 
space travel of several light years is not viable. 
A million years is a very long time to do some 
prepwork, to hunker down or flee or colonize,  
and many might say we could just leave Earth, 
but I think in a case like that you would always  
aim to preserve your homeworld even if it meant 
forcibly ejecting it from a solar system yourself.  
Mind you, you need not do one or the other, many 
might flee to other worlds while other sought to  
preserve ours. We’ve talked about ways of moving 
planets before in our Planet Ships episode,  
though we’ll briefly review those today too. A 
big star coming in has a risk of wrecking the  
local ecology, and would also be fairly brutal 
on something like a Dyson Swarm, and in many ways  
more for the light it gives off than its mass.
Smaller mass stars give off vastly less light,  
so it does matter, because while a star 10 times 
as massive as our Sun is obviously far more  
dangerous gravitationally than one a tenth our 
sun’s mass, the latter is not even a thousandth  
as bright as our own Sun, whereas the former is 
several thousand times brighter than our Sun,  
and thus would be brighter in our sky than 
our own sun even if it were out past Pluto,  
where’s its gravitational influence on us, for 
all its greater mass, would still be less than  
a percent of our Sun’s. Small stars are more of a 
concern for their gravity then, and big ones for  
their light, and the good news is, none of those 
could ever sneak up on us at this point. We should  
be able to see even sub-stellar brown dwarfs 
or Jovians many decades before they reached us,  
both now, and especially going forward.
Black holes are dangerous because we might  
not see them coming. Black holes are not 
common, only around 1 in a million stars  
is big enough to form one, and since big stars 
often form, live, and die in relatively tight  
clusters of other big stars, many merge with 
neighbors or get ejected from the galaxy.  
However, plenty do not and can cross our path at 
tens of kilometers per second, and ejected ones  
would often be moving even faster, potentially 
more than a thousand kilometers per second. 
Now black holes really are not black, 
there’s always some dust circling around one  
in at least a weak accretion disc, especially 
if it’s moving through interstellar medium,  
but it might be very hard to see 
one, even a few light years away.  
We would absolutely notice the gravity of it 
by then though, except the faster it goes,  
the less time it has to be pulling on stars and 
letting us visibly see the big shift, especially  
given that it wouldn’t be that big a shift. Though 
we might also see it by its gravitational lensing  
of the background behind it. Given time we would 
be able to see even minor shifts around stars  
hundreds of light years away, that would warn 
us to look closer but right now I’m not sure if  
we would detect a black hole even a light year 
from us, especially a fast one, and if it were  
moving a thousand kilometers per second, well 
then it would be only a few centuries away. 
This to me is the most probable scenario for a 
sneak up ejection, and still gives us plenty of  
time, we can imagine some scenarios that might 
be even less but I should note that if Earth got  
ejected out of the solar system, it will still 
take many months before Earth was getting too  
cold and dim for agriculture and even longer 
before surface operations become non-viable. 
Your only ‘realistic’ scenario for a sudden 
unwarned separation of Earth and the Sun  
would be if a wormhole popped up next to or inside 
one of them, and I’m pretty skeptical if wormholes  
can even exist, so we will assume nobody is 
waking up to an eternally black sky as a surprise. 
What would we do if we did though? Die?
Well no, even in this most extreme case  
and with current technology we should 
be able to salvage a remnant of humanity  
able to live for many millennia. We talked about 
such an emergency protocol some months back and  
in that you probably get your people working on 
deep underground bunkers powered by nuclear energy  
and also big freezer tombs for everyone else, 
gambling you will have restorative technologies  
for them down the road, to revive them from cryo.
Now what actually is happening to eject a planet?  
There's a number of different methods, as an 
example, close binary systems where you have  
planets orbiting both stars, called circumbinary, 
have a region of instability around them called  
STEP, Stellar Tidal Evolution of Planets. It’s 
a bit hard to explain how the ejection process  
works but in general terms for cases where the 
ejection is evolving over a long time, not a near  
miss of a big object passing through once, it’s 
much like how we use gravitational force to tow a  
planet. There’s a little extra force being exerted 
on the body to be ejected and it is not negating  
out in terms of it orbiting the star or primary, 
as this happens with moons around planets too. 
As an example, one way we can move Earth away from 
the Sun is by moving the Moon, which is easier and  
safer to shove on with its lack of atmosphere 
or people. The Moon tugs on Earth with the same  
force Earth tugs on the Moon, so move the moon 
and that influence shifts. The Moon has one side  
always facing Earth and another faced away, and 
there’s a point on each side that is the closest  
and furthest from Earth. Let’s say I kick the 
Moon. If I detonate a big bomb on the Earth-side  
of the Moon, at that closest point, and then do 
the same on the far other side, that explosion  
will push the Moon a bit away from Earth and then 
the second will shove it a bit back toward Earth. 
But if I detonate the bomb on the light side 
when the Moon is full – when it’s on the other  
side of Earth from the Sun, it will move a 
bit away from the Sun, then if I detonate  
the farside bomb on the new moon, when the 
Moon is roughly between the Sun and Earth,  
that push will also shove the moon away from Earth 
but will correct the Moon’s orbit around Earth.  
Hence the Earth Moon system is unchanged but 
shoved two bomb blasts away from the Sun.  
Not a lot by the way, the entire kinetic energy 
of the Earth Moon system around the Sun is about  
3x10^33 Joules, whereas a megaton H-bomb is around 
4x10^15 joules, or a billion-billion times weaker. 
Gravitational potential energy of a satellite goes 
with the inverse-square-root of radius, and thus  
is only shoving the Earth about a trillionth of 
a trillionth of a meter further from the Sun. So  
don’t worry about bomb tests or rocket launches on 
Earth or the Moon blowing us away into deep space.  
Indeed we get far more shove just from the 
Solar Wind and Light pressure of the Sun and  
it can still be mostly disregarded as an effect 
on Earth. Mind you it’s a lot different if you  
start covering the Moon’s surface with mirrors and 
directing stellaser pushing beams on it, again see  
our Planet Ships episode for more on that.
If we reverse our detonations, blowing the  
bombs on the close and far side of the moon during 
the New Moon and Full Moon respectively instead,  
the Earth-Moon system would move toward the Sun. 
This is also how the reflective mirrors around  
stars in a Shkadov Thrustersystem work, allowing 
you to enclose a star with mirrors orbiting it  
and use those to let that stars light push them 
and the star is tugged along by that, and are  
what we call gravity tractors, where we shove one 
object and it gravitationally pulls on another.  
However, that basic method, of uneven force 
of the Moon on Earth to slowly pull it free  
is our conceptual example of what’s happening 
as tidal evolution ejects a planet. Something  
is usually pulling on a planet in a changing 
way in terms of both force and direction,  
and it doesn’t average or net out to zero.
And that’s exactly what Jupiter does to Earth for  
instance, don’t be under the impression our solar 
system is actually stable. We even have a 405,000  
year orbital and climatic dual cycle of pulls 
on Earth by Jupiter – the biggest planet – and  
Venus – our nearest neighbor and more massive 
than Mars and Mercury combined. Fundamentally  
you’re looking at a sequence of uneven tugs slowly 
altering a planet’s orbit. That sort of tugging is  
vastly exacerbated as objects get closer too or 
in the packed interior of a solar system. So two  
closely circling stars of non-equal mass that are 
on an elliptical orbit with a planet orbiting them  
both on an ellipse itself and not actually on the 
same orbital plane, just close, can get all sorts  
of uneven tugs rather than a nice central one that 
makes for clean orbital paths. Older star systems,  
like ours, will tend to be low on strongly 
perturbing orbits not because they were rare,  
but because after billions of orbital cycles 
the more erratic ones have all been eliminated. 
These strong gravitational tugs would not be 
that extreme on the planet itself though, which  
is why gravity tractors are usually considered the 
preferred way to move planets. However a single or  
short cycle of tugs can be worse. You would need 
something on an order of 10^33 to 10^34 Joules  
of Energy to be dumped into Earth to move and 
eject it and if that was happening over a year,  
then we’re talking something like an average power 
exerted on our planet of 10^26 watts, similar to  
the power output of our Sun, of which we need 
to receive less than a billionth to stay warm.  
Now this is gravitational energy so it’s 
not scorching us – directly – but keep in  
mind that the Earth and Moon are constantly 
exchanging gravitational energy or momentum,  
as are both with the Sun, and most of our 
tidal energy in the seas is coming from that,  
or rather the equivalent of friction 
or drag losses on the exchange. 
The Moon is shifting something like 800,000 
kilometers closer or further from the Sun  
every month as it orbits earth, and that potential 
energy change relative to the Sun is on an order  
of about 400th the orbital energy of Earth around 
the Sun, so it's not tiny. It is in fact huge,  
nearly 2% as much energy as the Sun releases 
as sunlight during that roughly 2-week drop  
then 2-week rise as the moon dips closer to the 
Sun then further away. Now imagine over the course  
of just a few months, that full energy transfer 
to eject Earth happened as some big celestial  
body plowed through the inner solar system.
The term ‘ruinous’ would probably be conservative  
but also I would not expect this to be 
an end of all life kind of scenario.  
It could be, as some bright yellow star plowed 
through, exposing our planet to more sunlight  
than Venus gets for a few months while dumping 
huge amounts of tidal energy into us, but I think  
it would be survivable even if it’s the sort of 
disaster that might make the dinosaurs feel lucky.  
A black hole passing by might be better, even 
though it is probably converting huge amounts  
of matter to hard radiation as it passes by 
and might murder our ozone layer. But if we got  
ejected from the solar system, that loss might 
not matter as much as while interstellar space  
is also murderously full of cosmic radiation, the 
surface won’t be inhabitable much longer anyway. 
This doesn’t mean the planet is dead, not even 
excluding technology. Even as that planet freezes  
over – a process of many years – we would expect 
deep portions of the ocean to remain liquid for a  
long time, some of them even indefinitely. The 
more massive the planet, the more likely it is  
to retain warm pockets of water under the ice for 
longer and if it had a moon and kept it – which  
is not guaranteed, we might lose our moon if 
ejected – then tidal heating might permit warmth  
for a very long time. Earth has been slowly 
cooling in its core for billions of years now,  
and the Moon and Earth have both been slowly 
ebbing each other’s angular momentum away  
into heat for nearly as long, and neither 
is running dry soon, though the decaying  
uranium in Earth’s core is diminishing too 
and that provides a lot of mantle heat. 
It is plausible that if Earth got 
ejected, while it would freeze over,  
with the air itself liquefying into liquid 
nitrogen and oxygen, then freezing to ice,  
simple life surviving on geothermal and tidal 
heating might persist indefinitely, deep below.  
Either way, in a period of years to decades, 
the surface is going to have to be completely  
abandoned by humans, with a few caveats we’ll get 
to, in favor of subterranean or submarine ones,  
powered by nuclear fission or hopefully something 
better like fusion or micro-black holes. 
Incidentally, while it wouldn’t likely happen on 
Earth, a planet could maintain an ocean that was  
liquid nitrogen with a thin cold atmosphere of 
oxygen and helium above. I’d be very skeptical  
about life existing there or how long that 
oxygen would persist as a diatomic gas,  
but while you really cannot have surface 
liquids in the absence of an atmosphere,  
this doesn’t mean a rogue planet would 
automatically be an iceball with no atmosphere  
or only a trace atmosphere. It would be 
very dependent on a lot of specific mass  
and composition issues where the planet and 
its moon, if it had one, were concerned. 
It would take one heck of a suit to let a human 
walk around that surface regardless, though  
you might have nominally habitable zones around 
volcanoes too. In the grand scheme of things, that  
planet’s core tectonics shouldn’t be seriously 
impacted for millions of years after the ejection,  
minus the big shove around the ejection itself 
might cause. That means tectonic plates shifting  
and volcanoes rising and I’m not sure what a 
volcano blowing through layers of frozen water,  
oxygen, and nitrogen looks like when it erupts. 
It might be an environment life could persist in,  
we do have some weird and weirdly 
stable volcanic ecologies already. 
All right, what’s life like below? Well in the 
short term, long before the planet has utterly  
frozen-over, kilometers deep, odds are good a new 
civilization with a new equilibrium has arrived.  
Probably several, given the nature of such bunker 
civilizations, makes trade and communication  
tricky. Don’t assume this is a single planetary 
survival bunker or one per country or something  
either. Post-apocalyptic civilizations and those 
busy undergoing them are their own worst enemy,  
but again, remember, this event did not happen 
overnight or without warning. Even if it had,  
I personally tend to gamble on humanity having 
a ruthlessly self-sacrificing pragmatic streak,  
so I’d not be surprised if at least half the 
current nuclear reactors got turned into scratch  
survival camps even if it meant lots of voluntary 
suicide pacts, and as I’ve mentioned before,  
you really could offer people the scenario of 
being put in cryo for possible future restoration.  
Even an entire planetary population. Liquid 
nitrogen is cheap as dirt to produce now,  
let alone when you pump it rather than 
manufacture it from frozen lakes above. 
Personally I wouldn’t view freezing people 
for future revival as terribly bad odds  
but even a mostly symbolic outside chance 
is going to be enough for a lot of folks  
to be willing to cooperate and sacrifice in 
giving the civilization a chance at survival  
and such efforts are going to work better if 
you’re building a whole ton of survival bunkers  
not one big planetary or national one, honestly 
assuming you have at least a decade of warning,  
think more like county or city level bunkers. 
We usually say you can get about 24 million 
kilowatt hours out of a single kilogram of U-235,  
most of that will be heat not electricity but 
that’s okay in this case, it won’t go to waste.  
That’s enough power to run a million thousand-watt 
appliances for one day, or a single thousand watt  
appliance for a million days, or 40 of them for 
70 years. That should be enough to keep all the  
lights and heat on that a family would need for 
a lifetime including lighting for underground  
farming or hydroponics, but even if we said that 
you needed ten whole kilograms of enriched uranium  
per person to supply the lighting, or a similar 
amount of thorium, we’re still talking less  
than the price of used car, per person, and as we 
discussed in our episodes on Fission and Thorium,  
there really is no shortage of these materials. 
Definitely not if you had advanced warning to make  
and stockpile it and were only contemplating 
a civilization in the low millions rather  
than billions. In that case, such a civilization 
should be able to persist for billions of years. 
I wouldn’t trust those supplies to last 
as long for a civilization of billions,  
but many millennia at least. If you haven’t 
figured out fusion by then, you’ve got problems,  
and you might need to be thinking about cutting 
your population down. I don’t mean by mass culling  
either, or even freezing, again you’ve got time, 
you’re plotting your policies at the century scale  
and you probably need to be more worried about 
folks trying to steal your subterranean city’s  
reserve stocks of power or any other raw material 
that’s tricky to get once a planet freezes over.  
Though openly invading city-bunkers seems like 
a nightmare, so inter-city relations might be  
limited to diplomatic conflicts, or outright 
nuclear exchanges, which would be tricky under  
miles of ice. In that regard I could definitely 
imagine a lot of well-insulated surface outposts,  
they would be harder than doing an Antarctic 
one, but a lot easier than a Moon base. 
Underground tunnels are an option but not for 
sneak attacks, I really can’t imagine how you  
could bore or melt a tunnel without it being 
really obvious to everyone with seismic sensors  
which is kind of a given for any civilization that 
lives and works underground. See our Subterranean  
Civilizations episode for more details on 
actually living underground, or under ice,  
but cutting or melting tunnels for trade between 
various under-cities seems very plausible. For  
that matter, on the surface, a pressurized train 
might be able to run on superconductor magnetic  
levitation just given how cold it would now be 
there, and similarly you might use such cables,  
on the top or near the surface, to 
move electricity between undercities. 
Now your most heat efficient structure is 
a sphere but I would expect underground or  
under-ice cities to be more insect-hive like, 
with tons of tunnels going everywhere and most  
folks living in vacuum-walled or aerogel lined 
chambers cut out of it. This is especially true as  
that city is rather migratory – really all cities 
are, they creep around the map on long time lines,  
but these would presumably crawl vertically 
too, ever deeper. It's just we’re talking,  
especially after the first few millennia, about 
a very slow crawl happening on multi-generational  
timelines. Your big challenge is, you need 
to recycle your air and water where possible  
and you need to get very good at producing 
LEDs and strong tunnel buttressing. 
Incidentally, while a civilization with 
fusion, even just deuterium fusion,  
would have a vastly larger fuel supply, we 
should assume they are still underground too. It  
takes a lot of effort to maintain all that power 
generation equipment even if fuel is plentiful,  
so you are only contemplating options like 
relighting the entire planet via a fake sun  
or big sun towers if you also have really good 
automation too. At which point your planet’s  
circumstance represents an irritating 
starting point, not a long term dilemma. 
Nor does being stuck on a frozen world in the 
interstellar void imply any sort of abandonment of  
space travel or galactic colonization – the whole 
planet is now a spaceship after all. Fundamentally  
it is going to be easier to artificially light 
that planet than it would be to move it to a  
new star system but you might be on a trajectory 
you could nudge to enter one and safely orbit.  
More likely you’d just send out colony ships 
to new systems and expect them to keep sharing  
technology and resources with you, until you 
got to the point you cold revivify your planet. 
I could see worlds doing this to survive their own 
sun dying too, if they knew the red giant phase  
was looming, they begin the million-year task of 
slowly pushing their sun away toward a carefully  
calculated reentry around a new and younger 
star. Indeed you could do it even faster, but  
this strikes me as requiring the sorts of energy 
and efforts that would come from a post-scarcity  
economy and a Kardashev-2 civilization, just one 
that happens to be putting a lot of effort into  
moving their homeworld. Though for them the effort 
would be less in relative terms than us supporting  
an Antarctic base like McMurdo. In such a case 
the lifestyle and livelihood of those on it,  
depends a lot on their specific tech and 
how generous that wider civilization is  
when it comes to effort and resources.
In a non-fusion economy, in some remnant of  
civilization of a few millions living in fission 
powered bunkers, sort of a worst case scenario,  
I could imagine a big struggle between folks 
wanting to move on or accept fate versus those  
pushing for more effort to figure out a new power 
source or restore frozen folks if you had them.  
It would seem an interesting 
place to set a story or two in,  
but this is where we’ll finish our tale 
for today. As we saw, while our Sun is  
critical to our world’s survival and we’re not 
likely to ever be parted from it, if we were,  
we could survive, even in the eternal 
night of deep space under a frozen sky.
Needless to say, surviving after your 
planet freezes over isn’t going to be easy,  
as we saw today, but last week I was watching 
an episode of Catalyst over on Curiositystream,  
“Polar People” that was looking at how they 
select among applicants to work in Antarctica.  
There is a lot of screening, physically and 
psychologically, some of it surprising but  
logical, and combined with prepping this video it 
got me wondering on some scenarios for what life  
might be like a century after such a cataclysm 
and so we have an Extended edition of today’s  
episode over on Nebula contemplating that.
Catalyst is one of my favorites shows over on  
Curiositystream but it’s just one of many shows in 
their collection of thousands of educational and  
entertaining content. Now as mentioned, we’ll 
be having an extended edition over on Nebula,  
to look a bit deeper at life a century after 
the Sun disappears, and if you are interested  
in seeing that, or any of our other extended 
editions, you can try out Nebula anytime. 
Nebula is our streaming service created to 
give youtube creators more flexibility and  
not be at the whim of Youtube’s algorithms for our 
content, or any other platform. It is the largest  
creator-owned streaming service in existence, and 
all of SFIA’s content is up there, ad and sponsor  
free, and released a couple days early. We also 
release an extended edition or two every month,  
and have some exclusive content like 
our coexistence with aliens series.  
It’s a great way to help support some of your 
favorite channels while getting ad free content. 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself but 
we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational 
videos like Catalyst’s Polar People,  
to offer Nebula for free as a bonus if you 
sign up for CuriosityStream using the link  
in our episode description. That lets you 
see the amazing content on Curiositystream  
and Nebula for less than $15 a year, just 
use the link in the episode’s description.
We contemplated today the idea of traveling 
between underground colonies by tunnels or surface  
magnetic bullet trains, and each world is going 
to have different and better ways of traveling,  
so next we’ll ask how people travel around planets 
once they settle there, be it hang gliding through  
the clouds of Venus or darting between shadowy 
craters on sun-roasted Mercury. Then we’ll take  
a look at the concept of a Technological 
Singularity, an artificial intelligence  
of stunning capability appearing seemingly 
overnight, and ask if that outcome is inevitable.  
And two Sunday’s from now we’ll have our Monthly 
Livestream Q&A on April 24th, 4 pm Eastern Time.  
After that we’ll spring into May, to examine the 
idea of alien intelligences that are so ancient  
and advanced they are seemingly godlike.
Now if you want alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to 
the Channel and hit the notifications bell,  
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit 
the like button, share it with others, and  
leave a comment below. You can also join in the 
conversation on any of our social media forums,  
find our audio-only versions of the show, 
or donate to support future episodes,  
and all those options and more are listed 
in the links in the episode description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
