This Episode is brought to you by Hello Fresh!
We always assume alien civilizations simply
grow with time, sprawling out across the galaxy,
or else shrink and wither away.
But what if they shrink in size, not in stature?
So today we are returning to the topic of
the Fermi Paradox, the problem of rectifying
the apparent absence of alien civilizations
with a Universe so ancient and enormous it
seems like it should be teeming with a trillion
interstellar empires.
And one of the key concepts to the Paradox
is the idea that colonizing other worlds and
star systems should be possible and practical
and something that appeals to many species
who have the same basic imperatives that we
have and that life on Earth generally has
– to expand and explore and grow.
So the paradox always comes down to trying
to account for why this has not happened for
others, which might involve explaining why
life is rare, or acknowledging that it might
be out there but we’ve somehow missed detecting
it.
Generally the reasons why are that we would
expect intelligent life to be rare or short
in duration, which fall under the Great Filters,
or else that they are not rare but are hard
to detect, which falls to SETI, the astronomical
Search for ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence,
and finally why it might hide from us or ignore
us.
And regardless of their subcategories, most
of our answers in this case end up being somewhere
in those three main ones, or a fusion of two.
One of the common Fermi Paradox solutions
folks ask me to discuss springs from Moore’s
Law of Transistors, or the general tendency
of computers to get smaller and smaller and
yet more powerful.
The general idea is that civilizations then
would follow a similar pathway, getting more
miniaturized, opting to grow yet doing so
by needing less and less resources for each
person.
This solution has a number of problems we’ll
get into, but from years of thinking and feedback
on it, I suspect it might be a bit more plausible
than I sometimes give it credit for.
But of course, all of the Fermi Paradox solutions
have some issues, ranging from relatively
minor to multiple and gaping, to the point
that I suspect some critical part of our modern
perspective on the Universe must actually
be wrong or somehow skewed.
One of those notions is that life arises from
common ancestry and, through a long series
of mutations while under environmental pressure,
diverges into different forms which share
some common characteristics that emerge from
repeated natural selection coin flipping.
Principally, any trait that makes them more
capable of survival or of protecting their
own species or ecosystem, is going to persist
in future generations more often than other
traits.
This is more or less what we’d call evolution,
and its main focus, an emergent property of
biology in its most general sense, so it’s
something we expect to be somewhat universal.
Because of this we assume a species has some
drive toward betterment, and that even an
intelligent one with science, technology,
and abstract thoughts, still has this as their
default end goal, even if they are aware of
it consciously and able to resist it or dismiss
it.
That’s an important caveat, since by default
we might expect any technological species
to seek and colonize other worlds once they
can do so practically.
But we are also aware of the various pros
and cons of that general strategy, and we
also would be expected to seek the capability
to alter our own minds and instincts.
Which is to say, a technological species has
to worry about addictions and pathological
or maniacal behavior, and would seek the science
and technology to manage those too, and such
technologies probably let you switch off or
dampen a specific motivation like the drive
to explore or split the tribe to expand, for
good or ill.
So the default is a civilization seeking to
colonize the stars but we can’t ignore that
they, or some non-natural successor they made
like artificial intelligence, might lack that
motive.
And the follow up on that is that while they
probably would not be looking to remove all
pioneer spirit or ambition, they might opt
to dampen or redirect specific forms of it
toward others, indeed we often do this already
and it’s hardly new.
And for today’s topic that redirection is
the notion that we compact ourselves rather
than expand ourselves, doing more with less,
and thus still growing our numbers but through
miniaturizing the individual.
So if you need half the resources to support
someone as you did a generation ago, then
you could double your numbers, and use those
new folks to help find a way to halve things
again, letting you double again, and so on,
ad infinitum.
And that’s the first flaw on this; that
it does require the miniaturization be ad
infinitum, because the moment that you grow
faster than you can miniaturize, you need
more resources, and not all those resources
are infinitely reusable, getting expended.
What’s more, finding ways to grow more food
on less land presumably has its limits.
Now this is where the computer angle comes
in because the assumption is that we can upload
our minds to computers or create progeny and
civilization built on computers, possibly
living in virtual worlds.
And these virtual worlds offer far more variety
than we expect the actual Universe to have.
So the basic reasoning is that a humanity
– or post-human successor or aliens – opt
to create vastly more efficient and compact,
but also more interesting, virtual worlds
to live in.
And there is a certain tendency to assume
Moore’s Law about computer improvements
would continue indefinitely.
Even about 5-10 years ago, many of those futurist
minded folks I tended to discuss these concepts
with were often very resistant to any implication
that there was a limit to how long we could
keep doubling processor speed every couple
years or a hard limit on how compact computers
could get.
This has waned a bit, we’re hitting the
hazy limit of what a silicon semiconductor
transistor can be compacted into, just a few
atoms in size, as we brush close to the edge
of Quantum Uncertainties.
At the same time desktop computers aren’t
really improving as fast as they used to and
folks don’t seem quite as emphatic about
Moore’s Law being eternal.
So in the last few years I have noticed I
actually get far fewer arguments for eternal
miniaturization as a Fermi Paradox solution.
But some modify this by fairly pointing out
that the level of miniaturization you could
do is probably finite, but the amount of available
Universe to colonize presumably is finite
too.
So too, while miniaturization options may
be infinite, as may the Universe, your ability
to get to new bits of it is a factor to consider.
The Universe may be infinite, but if you can
only get to 10% more new systems in a given
generation, that’s all you can grow.
And the same limitation applies to miniaturization;
if you only get 1% more miniaturized in a
period, but grew 2%, that’s not sustainable.
And indeed, likely neither rate is sustainable
since resources do get used up.
Even the stars die.
Entropy slowly eats away at your gain, so
that even though you could support X number
of people now, tomorrow, the numbers you could
support would be reduced just a little bit,
and a bit more the day after, unless you either
got more efficient or got more resources.
You have to keep getting new resources, and
growing that way, or miniaturizing, not just
to permit new growth of your people, but just
to keep from declining.
So the other objection, and the one I usually
raise, is the Either-Or issue.
Which is to say that there’s nothing stopping
you from doing both strategies, go colonize
new worlds while finding out better ways to
use what you already have.
Given that some options will appeal to some
people – or aliens or AI – more than to
others, you presumably will have volunteers
seeking to devote their efforts to both paths
and all the subcategories of each and hybrids
of both.
Assuming you have not classified such people
as insane and sought to treat them, which
is very possible, and a point we’ll come
back to later.
Now a civilization might not care about growing,
and indeed might object to it.
To a high-tech civilization, every new mouth
to feed might be an eternal one too, as methods
of life-extension might make the idea of growing
old and dying a thing of the past, especially
for digital civilization living in virtual
worlds on computers.
To an individual lost in virtual empires of
their own making, potentially existing in
those for untold centuries, most of what drives
us to unity as a culture and species goes
away, such as desiring offspring in spite
of them competing with us for limited resources
and influence.
One might ask if there is any inherent value
to increasing your numbers, and post-biological
organisms with no overriding hormones or any
fear of death by old age might think the answer
is “No”.
And this is where we get two problems with
our normal perspective on this.
The first is that a virtual civilization living
in a billion private paradises probably isn’t
very good at running a civilization anymore,
and we have examined that concern before and
may give the topic of virtual reality or neurohacking
possibly wrecking civilization, their own
episodes, but for today we’ll raise our
usual main rebuttal on that.
Any civilization capable of building hyper-realistic
virtual realities populated with virtual characters
who do even an okay-ish job at mimicking human
behavior, and thus is attractive to most humans
as an alternative to living in the real world,
can also build ultra-good robots capable of
colonizing space or harvesting space resources.
We’ll return to that point later too but
the other problem is that purely digital or
mind-augmented humans who are featured in
most virtual or digital civilization scenarios
are not necessarily experiencing time at the
same rate we do.
Indeed as we’ve discussed in our post-human
and cyborg episodes, they are likely to experience
variable time.
Think of them as having processors and fuel
as their brains and how fast they run them
is how fast time passes for them, in terms
of thinking, as compared to in the outside
Universe, and of course if your whole existence
is digital in a digital world, that essentially
means time passes at whatever rate you choose
at the time.
This will be bound by many factors, and one
is that it is generally cheaper to run slower,
using less energy to calculate the same things
– or have the same thoughts – at a slower
rate.
This is the notion behind the Black Hole Farmers
we discuss in our Civilizations at the End
of Time Series.
But speed, while less efficient, has many
advantages, especially if competing for finite
resources, or if your resources spoil, or
your machinery decays with time, or you have
a certain baseline where slower isn’t much
better.
And for digital critters mimicking human intellect
on a computer, odds are good this would be
a lot faster than we experience.
So the notion is that if you think 100 times
faster than a normal human, you experience
about 2 years worth of thought in a week,
and a week of normal thought in a couple hours.
But this also means you experience a 40 year
journey to another solar system at a fraction
of light speed as 4000 years.
Now the upside of being such a being is that
you can slow your time down too, so as to
exist for centuries while only experiencing
a few years – and in point of fact we usually
assume slowing or speeding of subjective awareness
for transhumans and digital consciousnesses
– what we call frame-jacking – could be
occurring millions of times faster or slower
than normal times, not hundreds.
So this would seem to advantage such civilizations
at finding colonists and running interstellar
civilizations.
Those travelers can experience the journey
at whatever rate they want, presumably even
totally frozen.
Indeed they can experience it at normal time
or sped up time if they like, given that they
might already live on a computer in a simulated
reality, some or all of the time.
They make this voyage partially for curiosity,
but also because a virgin solar system offers
them virtually unlimited resources to continue
their own existence.
And indeed that is the case and what’s also
the case is that they might be able to make
such journeys at light speed by being sent
as a radio or laser signal of data, and so
too, a small number of colonists can be copied
millions of times to produce colonies if needed.
Indeed given that such civilizations might
number in the quadrillions back here on or
near Earth, and that copied minds diverge
from the originals and each other, you should
have little problem finding billions of volunteers
and even a few thousand volunteers should
give you a multiplicity of qualified candidates
for every necessary slot, especially given
that they might be superhumanly intelligent
and nigh immortal, which makes them likely
to be skilled at many things.
Consider, if a copied mind diverges, then
a pool of a thousand randomly selected colonists
from a pool of ten thousand, even cutting
that down to be random only from specific
candidates, like one biologist selected from
five available, offers more potential combinations
and permutations of colonists than stars in
this galaxy.
And divergence of personalities from different
combinations of friends and coworkers, and
different planets with different challenges,
would ensure those folks had very little in
common with their clones a thousand light
years away and thousands of years diverged.
I should probably note though that we’re
assuming their civilization does have outlier
folks who want to colonize.
They might not.
One case makes a pretty good argument that
our civilization’s pioneers and inventors
and researchers are all outliers, maybe even
crazy, and I’ve heard the analogy that a
lot of our civilization’s achievement is
achieved by encouraging and yoking our obsessive
workaholics.
This episode isn’t on the Pareto Principle
or its psychological variant for human productivity,
Price’s Law, but if it were true that a
lot of a civilization’s forward momentum
creatively and scientifically was being driven
by a relative minority of folks who are rather
atypical in motivation and drive, to the point
of being obsessive or maniacal about some
pursuit like exploring or scientific research
or writing or art and so on, a sufficiently
advanced civilization probably has the ability
to ‘fix’ that behavior and might feel
morally obliged to.
They may not want to make gains by what they
saw as the neglectful abuse of some members
for a reason akin to why we dislike dangerous
testing on humans even when doing so might
save many more lives.
Bit of a tangent and not one unique to miniaturizing
civilizations, but such miniaturization is
inherently based on altering human minds by
at least shifting them to some other substrate
besides a meat-brain, like semiconductors,
so given their embracing that option, mind
alteration of an extensive thing is likely
to be something they are very good at and
more open to doing.
We have to acknowledge then that such a civilization
has the ability to colonize the galaxy or
harvest it with ease.
Now one concern with a society of individuals
or small groups in a vast Dyson Swarm of computer
realities around our Sun, is that they really
have no personal motivation to go to those
new systems.
Whatever science fiction shows us, worlds
out in the galaxy will have a certain boring
sameness, if they’re all uninhabited dead
rocks when we get there, compared to endless
virtual worlds of our creation.
Curiosity isn’t a bad reason to send probes,
but mostly you send out harvesters to bring
back more resources for building and fueling
more virtual worlds or for fueling them longer
or faster.
Speed can still matter though and partially
because competition might be in play.
I don’t think the future of post-humans
in virtual worlds is necessarily a trillion
people ruling over their own personal world
of simulated citizens as petty god-kings,
but in such a scenario if you did have folks
harvesting resources from many stars away
and bringing them back, you might find it
easier to pirate them instead of sending your
own harvesters.
On the other side of things, folks might decide
the best way to run their personal universe
was to pack themselves, their computers, and
some resources up and fly off to the frontier
to claim a whole star for themselves.
Key notion is that in both cases, nobody is
really interested in their neighbors as cohesive
civilizations, just threats, rivals, and targets
for predation.
And in one where folks are motivated because
of a fondness for that civilization, you’re
asking them to head out to space where they
will miss out on participating in that civilization,
and be delayed on a lot of their civilization’s
experiences and events, including their friends
and family.
The reality is that their ability to slow
time to skip a boring journey or losing life
is no real advantage, they’re functionally
immortal if they’re digital and their personal
utopia is mobile too, it’s just their interactions
with others they are losing by traveling,
but to them it matters.
And to them, the lag is probably more brutal.
The civilization they love is a thousand light
years away, every message a thousand years
old, but everybody at home is experiencing
time a thousand times faster and so they’re
a million years behind.
This is a miniaturized civilization too, smaller
is faster.
By default an organism that is otherwise identical
but a tenth the size reacts and moves and
experiences things ten times faster.
In a realm of tiny fairies and Lilliputians,
a centimeter tall for every meter a human
is, with tiny nerve connections a hundred
times closer, with arms that only need to
cover a fraction of the distance to move and
can receive and send nerve signals in a hundredth
the time, reality just moves faster.
Though of course this assumes they can compact
as much brain into a small space, but that’s
the advantage of brains made of semiconductors
not meat brains of neurons, or maybe something
else even better at compaction than semiconductors.
So how miniaturized and faster is a digital
empire?
Consider, our default Dyson Swarm or Kardashev-2
civilization for those who’ve opted for
miniaturization and digitization is what we
call a Matryoshka Brain, essentially where
a whole star is devoted to computation.
Such a device is essentially one where all
the light of the Sun is turned into thought
as efficiently as possible, and the upper
limit for that is what we call Landauer’s
Limit, and it is actually about lower limits,
which is to say, lower operating temperatures
are better, a tenth the temperature, ten times
the efficiency of converting energy into thought.
This is where the Matryoshka part comes in,
referencing the many dolls nested inside bigger
dolls of the Matryoshka Doll.
Here we have inner layers that are very hot
and energetic, shells of energy collectors
close to the sun, surrounding it and computing
and radiating off waste heat at lower frequencies
and temperatures to be reabsorbed by the next
layer around, which repeats the process, probably
at half the temperature or less, but resulting
in some number of layers or shells around
the Sun between maybe 1000 Kelvin, in closer
than Mercury is, to perhaps 10 Kelvin, well
out past Pluto.
These need not be discrete layers either,
rather it’s probably swarms of objects ever
further from the star at a density that results
in the equivalent of layers.
Closer to the star, you think faster but inefficiently,
and your neighbors are close and fast to talk
to, further out they are slower but more efficient,
with your neighbors further away and with
you needing to run slow to let your switches
cool between flipping.
It takes a lot longer to cool from 110 Kelvin
to 100 Kelvin than from 1010 Kelvin to 1000
Kelvin.
All right, let’s run the numbers for two
of those layers real quick, one at Earth Temperature,
293 Kelvin, and one at a bit under Pluto’s,
29.3 Kelvin.
We usually assume a human mind emulated on
a computer could run at about ten microwatts
of power at that level of efficiency at Earth
Room temp, and that other one, at a tenth
the temperature, would do it ten times more
efficiently, a single microwatt, obviously
those are very loose figures.
The Sun gives off 4x10^26 Watts, so the Earth
Temperature Layer is capable of simulating
4x10^31 people – 40 million-trillion-trillion
people.
The outer colder layer is capable of doing
400-million-trillion-trillion folks.
Now they might be running a hundred times
faster than us and be 100 times less numerous,
but let’s keep to human normal intelligence
and speed for the moment.
What’s this look like?
Well, if we think of these as actual shells
divided into solar panels and processing chunks,
then if divided into pieces creating digital
people with the human-norms for thinking speed
and intellect, then that inner sphere, about
an AU in radius, is divided so that each individual
square meter of that shell is home to 100
million digital people, each fingernail-sized
area of a square centimeter, home to 10,000
people.
Incidentally that outer shell at a tenth the
temperature is a hundred times further from
the Sun and 100 squared or 10,000 times bigger,
though ten times more efficient, on the same
amount of power even if it’s red-shifted
much cooler.
Hence ten times as many people on 10,000 times
more surface, a thousand times less dense,
but that’s still 10 people per fingernail-sized
spot.
Now that means communication times at light
speed with your nearest ten billion neighbors
are basically nothing, much like it is here
and now for the 8 billion of us here, not
even a tenth of a second of round-trip communication
anywhere on Earth.
For these folks in the low density outer shell,
10 billion are in a spot only about 30 meters
across, and light doesn’t need a tenth of
a second to cover that distance, it needs
a ten millionth of a second.
Let's instead say everyone is operating a
thousand times faster though, here on this
slow outer shell.
Now the population density drops a thousand-fold
to 100 per square meter, and your nearest
ten billion neighbors takes up an area of
a square kilometer.
Signals back and forth take microseconds but
to you they feel like milliseconds.
This is still fine, you can communicate with
an entire world of people at speeds faster
than you can really talk, even subjectively
frame-jacked up.
Let’s scale again, a million times faster
thinking.
A population density of 10 meters per person
now, a small room-sized area – though only
out here, far past Pluto, in that inner shell
near Earth the real estate at a million fold
thinking is still putting folks into spaces
measured in centimeters, 100 per square meter,
what we looked at in our last example, only
they speak to each other in microseconds but
since they experience time a million times
faster, this is about human speed now.
We’ve reached equilibrium of modern Earth
communication times among modern Earth population,
with a layer in which you have 40-trillion-trillion
people living a million times faster than
we do… which also means the folks living
on the other side of that shell, over a thousand
light seconds away, but experiencing time
a million times faster, hear messages from
you at what feel likes a billion light seconds
–or about 30 years – which is to say,
they have the same kind of communication lag
time, subjectively, that we would have with
neighboring stars.
But back here past Pluto though, that means
your ten billion nearest neighbors now occupy
a space of 100 billion square meters, that’s
the area of a square over 300 kilometers per
side, where light takes a about a millisecond
to carry messages around, but to you a millisecond
is a thousand subjective seconds, and you’ve
got lag times of minutes in conversations
like if you were on the phone with folks on
Mars or Venus.
Alternatively, folks on the other side of
this outer shell are having conversations
with their distant neighbors taking thousands
of subjective years, since it’s 100 times
wider than the inner shell we just discussed.
They are still squeezing 400 trillion-trillion
people into this layer, an entire galactic
supercluster worth of traditionally colonized
planets, so the idea that conversations with
others in the far edge of their sphere might
take thousands of years instead of hundreds
of millions for a supercluster is still better.
Now odds are good many of these folks would
feel no need for live conversation with billions
of near neighbors either, let alone those
insanely huge numbers we discussed, but if
they do, slowing down to have real time chat
with those further away might feel like taking
a long trip away from friends and family,
and regardless, we would assume folks would
gravitate to the place that allowed them the
best optimization of cost of energy per thought,
speed of thought, and social inter-connectivity,
depending on their preferences.
This was also the extreme upper case of efficiency
under known physics, it’s probably lower.
Also, thinking more and thinking faster aren’t
necessarily the same thing, ten times more
brain power but running at normal experiential
rates might be the norm too.
The takeaway though is that outer layers have
very different economics and civilizations
than inner layers.
Sort of like urban versus rural, the compact
areas, or hotter areas, are more expensive
to live in, but more desirable real estate
in many ways.
Critical notion though is that we were seeing
an optimization probably hitting somewhere
on the fast side of a thousand times normal
thinking speed, so for these miniaturized
civilizations, interstellar space and its
lag times for travel and communication become
that much worse.
We said they can cram an entire galactic supercluster’s
population into one solar system fueled by
a single tiny star, but to them the interstellar
distances between stars, in terms of subjective
time experienced, feel like intergalactic
distances.
Giant tiny empires in a Dyson Swarm, worlds
worth of people in spaces the size of buildings,
not planets, and possibly each of those people
enjoying simulated worlds all of their own.
And if they are experiencing life a million
times faster than we do, that colony ship
to Alpha Centauri that’s going to take a
few decades to arrive, and a century or more
before any resources might come home, is an
investment taking 100 million personal years
to pay off.
Nonetheless I think they still would colonize
or resource harvest, but they might be much
more restrained in how far they’d go.
Yet they should still wish to expand.
So I still don’t feel this option of miniaturization
works solidly as a Fermi Paradox solution,
this realm of tiny little giants living at
superspeeds, but it is a much stronger argument
on contemplation than it seems on initial
inspection.
And it’s certainly a fascinating contemplation,
and perhaps worth remembering that if those
folks living a million times faster were watching
this video now, for them it would have seemed
to take several decades to play, an entire
natural human lifetime.
So as we’re moving into the holiday season
it tends to be a great time for both doing
some cooking and spending time with friends
and family and and my wife Sarah and I tend
to do a lot of cooking together and have friends
over a lot, and one of the things I love about
Hello Fresh is that it’s always been recipes
neither of us has made before so it switches
things up a bit.
That’s especially nice right right after
Thanksgiving if you’ve been working through
lots of leftovers.
And with all the running around in life, especially
at holiday season, it really is nice just
to get the entire recipe delivered to you
with everything you need fresh off the farm,
pre-measured and the instructions easily laid
out to make the meal.
The recipe cards are perfect for it and I
was joking with a couple other creators who
also do Hello Fresh about the growing folder
of those recipe cards we all seem to be collecting,
and they offer 50 menu and market items to
choose from every week, include tons of seasonal
options, and I lost count of how many recipes
they had on their website, including plenty
of gourmet, vegetarian, and calorie-smart
options.
That includes Quick & Easy options for 20
minute-meals and easy cleanup, and they put
a real focus on minimizing waste and using
recycled shipping materials as part of their
goal for maximizing sustainability.
So you can get the food to your door while
minimizing waste.
And they can also ship to your friend’s
door too, and your friends will enjoy receiving
the Hello Fresh box a lot more than the usual
gift basket of cheese and sausage, and the
recipes are also great for entertaining and
having guests over for dinner.
With the giant selection, easy instructions,
and straight to your door fresh ingredients,
it’s no wonder Hello Fresh has more five
star reviews than any other meal kit, and
you can try them out today, just go to HelloFresh
dot com and use code “ISAACARTHUR14” to
get 14 free meals AND 3 free gifts! plus free
shipping!
Eat fresh, eat healthy, eat variety, and eat
sustainably, and again you can try it out
for free today, just go to HelloFresh dot
com and use code “ISAACARTHUR14”.
So we’re into December now and next week
we will look at Upcoming Advances in Material
Science on December 9th.
Then we’ll have our Scifi Sunday episode
on December 12th to look at folks staking
and jumping claims on asteroid mines and similar.
Then we’ll move on to a discussion of Vertical
Farming, the technology that may let us nourish
many billions of people while keeping our
planet pristine.
Then we’ll take a look at Escaping the Galaxy
the week after that, if we need to get away
from someone who has blown up our planet,
before closing out the month and the year
with a look at the Challenges we will be facing
in the next 100 years.
Now if you want to make sure you get notified
when those episodes come out, make sure subscribe
to the channel, and if you enjoyed the episode,
don’t forget to hit the like button and
share it with others.
If you’d like to help support future episodes,
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website,
IsaacArthur.net, and patreon and our website
are linked in the episode description below,
along with all of our various social media
forums where you can get updates and chat
with others about the concepts in the episodes
and many other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
