The Alpha Centauri Star System may be 
the closest star to us after our own Sun,  
nevertheless the journey there will 
require covering a longer distance than  
every human voyage ever made before… 
combined. To achieve such a mission,  
to travel to another star, we will need to 
harness the power of stars to drive our ships. 
Welcome back to Science & Futurism with Isaac 
Arthur, and today we will be looking at how  
we will get to our nearest neighboring star 
system, Alpha Centauri, what sort of ships and  
technologies might get us there, and some of the 
misconceptions we often have on this topic from  
science fiction and even real modern spaceflight.
Some years back we did an episode on Colonizing  
Alpha Centauri and it went on to be 
one of our most popular episodes,  
and one of our longer ones too. We had to cut a 
lot of material to get it down to a reasonable  
length for one episode. One of the things we left 
out was the trip there, focusing instead on what  
we would do when we arrived. We’ve recently 
been looking at Interstellar Colonization  
Strategies and there I emphasized that we were 
contemplating later scenarios, strategies we  
would use as we colonized the billions of 
systems in this galaxy, not the first one. 
There is a big difference between the 
journey Magellan and other explorers  
took to try to circumnavigate Earth and the 
vastly faster and more reliable trade of even  
a couple centuries after, not only because 
engines replaced sails on ships. So too,  
there is a big difference between the Apollo 
Missions, or even the new Artemis missions, and  
the trip made by some future spacecraft that might 
land travelers on the Moon for a weekend vacation. 
I’m not sure we will have reached that point when 
the time comes to send people to Alpha Centauri  
or not, but it’s hard to imagine we would send 
out a colony around another star before we even  
had an established presence on a few other local 
planets, let alone our own Moon. It is a journey  
that will take a large portion of a human 
lifetime, or even longer than one lifetime,  
and require so much self-sufficiency, redundancy, 
and precision that I can’t really see us trying  
it – short of some solar system wrecking 
emergency – until we had a couple generations  
of interplanetary manned missions under our belt 
first. And not like our experience going to the  
Moon where we did it half a dozen times in a 
few years and then waited over half a century  
to set foot on it again, which still has not 
happened though does seem to be ever more likely. 
So we might want to ask what might make us 
try a journey to Alpha Centauri before we  
had absolute confidence in our abilities and 
technology. We might also ask if we would ever  
do a scout mission, manned or unmanned, or crewed 
or uncrewed, before we sent a full-blown colony. 
Barring an emergency though, it is important to 
understand that while we already have many of the  
technologies needed for interstellar flight, 
these technologies require such a degree of  
improved mastery and casual efficiency that we 
can’t ignore the differences this improvement  
implies about the civilization launching that 
ship, or ships. Emphasis on ships, plural,  
both in the sense of sending a squadron or 
fleet of colony ships rather than a lone  
ark to one destination, and of sending 
colonization fleets to neighboring stars  
rather than waiting for the Alpha Centauri 
Fleet to send back a report of success. 
But the civilization with steam engines instead 
of sails for their ships is also the civilization  
that has steam engines running its factories and 
trains as well. Getting from one solar system to  
another requires you to check the box on at least 
one of the following options: faster than light  
travel, extreme energy abundance, artificial 
intelligence, super recycling, or the ability  
to put people into stasis or freezers 
and bring them back to life on arrival.  
Check any one of those boxes and interstellar 
flight becomes at least somewhat practical. 
Now, there are ways we could do it even without 
that but if we tried to do it now we would have  
to use the Super Orion Drive method, which is a 
great big cylinder ship spinning for artificial  
gravity powered on uranium, plutonium, or 
thorium fission reactions. For this method,  
we would need a reactor running power and life 
support and actual nukes being fired out behind  
it to propel it along, see our episode on 
Revitalizing the Orion project for details. 
Now, ships using the Orion Drive Method 
are probably the most common type of ship  
to be discussed when contemplating travel to 
Alpha Centauri outside of science fiction,  
although it is pretty common there too. 
One of my favorite video games was Sid  
Meier’s Alpha Centauri, where you colonize a 
planet there after arriving on the UNS Unity,  
which I’m pretty sure was meant to be an Orion 
Drive vessel. I was very fond of that game,  
so much so that it partially inspired our Life 
in a Space Colony Series which features the  
spaceship Unity in homage to it, and like 
many tales of traveling to Alpha Centauri,  
it assumes some calamity that collapsed 
civilization back home, here on Earth. 
Sometimes that’s the inspiration for the mission 
and how they were able to get the resources and  
cooperation to make the mission happen, but it 
is very difficult to come up with a plausible  
scenario where some kind of calamity happens, 
which only interstellar colonization can help  
with. For instance, when we were writing the 
Colonizing Alpha Centauri episode 4 years back,  
we had a devil of a time coming up with a scenario 
where it would actually make sense to send a  
colony mission out of the system as opposed to 
doing some prevention or repair here at home.  
I eventually had to suggest a rogue black 
hole was on path to pass through our inner  
system as the most plausible, if improbable, 
reason for us sending a mission as the passage  
of a black hole inside Earth’s orbit of the 
Sun is very likely to not only disrupt the  
solar system massively, but also shower the 
whole area with crazy amounts of radiation. 
You can still find ways to survive here and 
it would probably be easier than moving to a  
new system, but it was better than the normal 
rationales given in scifi. Basically it almost  
never makes sense to flee the solar system to save 
humanity. Having backup colonies tends to make  
sense, but fleeing an alien invasion or murderous 
AI in a spaceship – which are incredibly easy to  
spot – is unlikely to work well. It might be worth 
trying but it basically requires indifference or  
incompetence on the part of the AI, Aliens, 
or Alien AI. As for terraforming new worlds,  
if we wreck our own, it would be easier to 
make Earth habitable again, even if we turned  
the whole atmosphere into a smog bank or even 
outright nuked the air and seas off the planet,  
than making a place like Mars livable.
For that reason I just don’t see us trying  
to throw together some desperate mission to 
Alpha Centauri. So I think we need to instead  
think of things in the context of what sort 
of civilization is sending a mission to Alpha  
Centauri in the context of something more like 
the Age of Sail explorers or the Space Race. 
We should imagine ourselves on the committee 
planning to approve such a mission or send them  
back to the drawing board to await further 
advancement to make it cost-feasible, and I  
think that means we have to also assume we would 
never spend more than 1% of our economy doing  
that. Whether that was the GDP, or Gross Domestic 
Product for a year, of a major nation like the US,  
or the entire Earth, or even the colonized solar 
system, the Gross System Product perhaps, really  
is more of a political question. Unity tends to 
come to mind for the simple reason that a unified  
humanity has a lot more resources combined than 
separate, and presumably doesn’t need to spend  
as much on defense or watching their neighbors, so 
has more to spare - in theory anyway. But you can  
also make a good case for competition initiating 
progress too -- just look at the Space Race. 
Trying to estimate the cost of any spaceship 
that’s never even been fully modeled is a bit  
of a futile process, and one likely to end up 
doubling or more when production time comes,  
but we generally feel we could make an Orion 
Nuclear Pulse Vehicle, equipped with 300,000  
megaton nuclear devices and massing 500,000 
tons, for about a tenth of the US’s current GDP,  
a few trillion dollars. I do think that’s 
conservative, but it does mean that given  
a few years and global cooperation we probably 
could make that happen without it bankrupting us. 
That is an enormous ship, 5 times the mass of an 
aircraft carrier and comparable to the largest  
ships ever made, giant supertankers like the 
Seawise Giant or Batillus-class. And yet it’s  
pretty tiny for a ship that not only needs 
to bring along many hundreds or thousands of  
colonists, but those colonists all need to survive 
on a multi-decade journey and make a home on some  
strange new world at the other end. This implies 
a lot of cargo needs to come along, and is part  
of why advanced automation, manufacturing, 
or nanotech is so handy if you've got them. 
And multi-decade journey is being generous, 
that design from the late 60s and has seen some  
informal improvements since then that we discussed 
in the aforementioned episode on Revitalizing the  
Orion Project, but the best guess for speed is 
about 3% of light speed and an arrival time of  
around 130 years. That is insanely quick too, 
roughly 10 thousand kilometers per second and  
hundreds of times faster than we usually get 
out of our spaceships. That speed is achieved  
by a couple weeks of launching nuke after nuke 
out the back of the ship and riding the energy  
from the detonation… which is not too dissimilar 
from what rockets already do, just scaled up. 
The century-long journey means you also 
need a ship that can last for that long,  
and that includes maintaining the portion 
of the bombs needed for slow down,  
maintaining the reactors that power it for 
decades, patching leaks in the hull and  
replenishing the air and water that seeped 
out through them, growing food to replace  
what’s been eaten and recycling the waste, 
and ten thousand other minor details. Many  
of which we probably don’t even know yet, and 
time and experience with interplanetary ships  
and colonization will make us far wiser in 
that regard. Odds are good even then though,  
that some of those minor details won’t be known to 
us till that first interstellar voyage of decades,  
and being trillions of miles from home is a bad 
place to have a breakdown. Little problems have  
a way of becoming big ones when we’re far 
from home and short on backups and manpower. 
And this is why I would tend to feel such a voyage 
would not happen till we were a bit beyond the  
Orion Drive level of interstellar ships, or had 
been using them so long as to be very comfortable  
with both them and space travel in general. 
It is also why multiple ships would be nice,  
though generally, bigger ships will be more 
efficient than an equal mass in smaller  
ones. And I’d really emphasize that bigger is 
better when it comes to human colony ships. 
Now, I mentioned a few things that would take 
us to the next level for interstellar travel  
and which I think would make it practical, 
but the Orion Drive is our fall back if we  
still haven’t made any major improvements to 
drives after a few centuries of spaceflight  
and settling our solar system, and our Oort 
Cloud. See our episodes Crawlonizing the Galaxy,  
or Colonizing the Oort Cloud, for more discussion 
of very slow interstellar colonization for making  
the trip to Alpha Centauri the slow way at less 
than 1% of light speed, by building outpost  
after outpost in deep space till there’s 
an effective interstellar highway there. 
Even without something better than an Orion 
Drive pushing your ship along, some of those  
improvements I mentioned earlier could allow that 
ship to be done far bigger and cheaper, relatively  
speaking. If you’re sending a few hundred O’Neill 
Cylinder sized ships out to Alpha Centauri,  
dispatching a new one every few months, simply 
because your economy and industry is so impressive  
you can pull that off, then fast or slow, you’re 
going to succeed at colonizing Alpha Centauri. 
The ability to produce a spaceship by asking some 
artificial intelligence to convert a big rock of  
an asteroid into a ship is also the ability to 
tell it to mass manufacture space habitats for  
people in space to live on and that’s going to 
rapidly improve your knowledge of life support,  
and how to grow food and keep animals and 
people healthy in space. But it also means  
your civilization can churn out vast 
amounts of solar collectors in space,  
or that you can build so many space habitats that 
you can support trillions of humans in comfort.  
And those same trillions probably don’t have 
to work as much, since that superior automation  
can produce all they need of most things far 
easier and cheaper and quicker than nowadays. 
In that sort of context, if a civilization 
of trillions with superior automation and  
interplanetary space travel can’t find a way to 
get a colony ship out, either by having millions  
of geniuses researching new technologies, or by 
using the raw brute force of throwing resources  
at the problem, then it’s probably impossible. I 
tend to assume we’ll probably have licked the key  
problems before we even have a Mars Colony worthy 
of the name though, and that’s the other aspect  
of this. Why are we going to Alpha Centauri?
In the long run, as you just get better and  
better at space travel and grow your knowledge 
and numbers, interstellar colonization seems  
an inevitability if we don’t kill ourselves off 
first. However, that first colony isn’t the same  
story. We’re not talking about the conditions 
needed for us to do the trip in style and total  
safety, but rather the conditions that apply just 
enough to convince some powerful group – be it a  
specific nation, corporation, or unified humanity 
– that the effort is now viable and worth doing.  
And that’s quite a limiter too because again, 
we could have gone back to the Moon anytime in  
the last half century as could really any of the 
major economic powers, if they felt it was worth  
the investment. There’s not much to be said 
about being second, most people don’t know who  
the second person to climb mount Everest was, 
either the Sherpa who went with Edmund Hillary  
or the next expedition to succeed.
The problem with Alpha Centauri,  
as things stand now, is that you’re not likely 
to still be alive when that expedition arrives  
and reports back that it succeeded if you were 
the politician who risked your political capital  
to make it happen or if you were the CEO who 
convinced their board or got the investors. Heck,  
you probably wouldn’t even have your grandkids 
around by then. Missions to the Moon or Mars  
you get to see happen and people whose tax 
dollars made it happen get to experience it. 
Which inclines me to think that if there is 
a better option than the Orion Drive we will  
be using it to get to Alpha Centauri, because 
we probably will discover it sooner than not.  
We’ve had some successes with fusion, including 
some recent ones producing more energy than put  
in for ignition, and I am optimistic we’ll 
have working fusion this century. However,  
if practical fusion doesn’t get invented 20 years 
from now but instead 200, I’d still expect that  
Orion Interstellar vessel to be waiting on a 
drawing board or have only been deployed as an  
unmanned probe and prototype. I’d bet if one ever 
does get launched it’s either many centuries from  
now when everyone feels better options can 
be ruled out, or because someone has managed  
to basically prove fusion, antimatter, black 
hole drives, and laser pushing systems are all  
eternally impractical pipe dreams so it’s shooting 
nukes out the back of a big spaceship or nothing.  
In the former case, you probably have 
had time for humanity to grow to massive  
numbers in an emerging Solar Empire 
running on huge solar collectors too. 
In which case it really is hard to 
imagine how a power-rich system like  
a multi-AU long Mass Driver or laser pushing 
system for launch assist wouldn’t be viable. 
Alternatively, if we have solar collectors and 
have refined beaming technology to the point we’re  
comfortably able to keep a beam on a ship to the 
outer edge of the Kuiper Belt, either by very good  
lenses or by relays, then we can launch, and the 
same logic is true for fusion, but it really is  
possible we might have artificial black holes or 
straight matter to energy conversion by then too.  
I think almost anything that will turn out 
practical with enough science is going to get  
discovered inside the next few centuries, and 
realistically we need that sort of timetable  
to build up around the solar system even if we 
have energy abundance and cheap spaceflight,  
it’s just not the sort of process that 
feels like it’s going to be rush-rush. 
So by default we tend to assume a fusion powered 
ship, drive and life support, but I would argue  
it’s just as likely we would have power beaming, 
as the drive and the power source for the trip  
would be fission or fusion, beaming energy in 
during acceleration just circumvents the whole  
rocket equation issue so that it’s hard for me 
to imagine anyone not using that. Breakthrough  
Starshot wants to do that with a tiny microchip 
sensor and thinks they can get to a third of  
light speed using only known science and tech 
and some reasonable near-horizon improvements.  
I was a big fan of that approach even before I 
got to meet and talk about it with Pete Worden,  
the Former Director of NASA Ames and now Starshot, 
and he made me an even bigger fan of the viability  
of that concept. It’s not something happening 
next year but it's definitely viable tech,  
and it can be scaled up, everything can be. As 
we like to say on the show, if brute force isn’t  
working, you’re just not using enough of it.
We’ve also detailed how to slow down with such  
systems if you have to, via a combination of 
vanguard sacrifices to the Sun and Magsails and  
other tricks. So that’s my best guess for the 
future ship to Alpha Centauri, one running on  
either fission or fusion to keep the lights on 
and something else for speed up and slow down,  
which would probably only take about 1% of the 
mission timeline. Though it could be a longer  
portion of the trip, many drive systems 
work better when burning low and slow,  
like ion drives, as do free braking options like 
Magsails. Or maybe you have a higher top speed  
or need to go slow to avoid sloshing around 
the air and water in your habitation drums. 
Again, emphasis on plural, because while O’Neill 
Cylinders are awesome, they’re definitely overkill  
for a first colony in terms of size and you also 
want to have multiple drums or rings anyway,  
in case one is compromised. You can partition them 
into segments too but it helps to have redundancy  
and that’s a good way to do it especially since 
you might want very different conditions in some  
environments. Your optimized hydroponics hothouse 
conditions are unpleasant to live in for humans,  
and you also probably already know what 
planet you’re planning to settle on and  
what its day length and gravity are, 
so having a hab drum that replicates  
those conditions during the trip lets you start 
experimenting and adapting to those conditions,  
including having several generations of 
organism living in them to see what adapts best. 
As it is quite likely we will have ever bigger 
telescopes hunting exoplanets and small flyby  
probes arriving long before the ships arrive 
or even depart, we may already have habitat  
cylinders devoted to mimicking conditions on some 
world around Alpha Centauri before we even begin  
constructing the colony ship. Indeed it would 
seem logical to have purpose built spin gravity  
environments back here around our sun mimicking 
any planet we want to colonize long before sending  
missions to those distant planets. A cylinder 
habitat drum is likely to be far cheaper to build  
and operate than its spaceship version.
Which raises two other points. First,  
is it actually a colony mission from the outset 
or more of a classic exploration mission,  
or even something else? And second, are we 
actually going to Alpha Centauri or to Proxima? 
Proxima Centauri is closer than the Alpha Centauri 
Binary and not by a trivial amount. It’s a fifth  
of a light year from the two big binary stars, 
hundreds of times further from them than Pluto is  
from our Sun, and we’re not sure if it actually 
is a part of the Alpha Centauri System, or is  
maybe a new addition or passerby. They may not be 
gravitationally bound together, as we initially  
assumed, but it’s still a bit unclear. Whichever 
the case, Proxima Centauri is also known as Alpha  
Centauri C, with the bigger binary pair being 
Alpha Centauri A and B, and they have actual names  
too, Rigil Kentaurus and Toliman. You can call 
them A, B, and C but if you’re calling the outer  
red dwarf Proxima then A and B should be Rigil 
Kentaurus, or Rigil Kent, and Toliman. If you’re  
curious, that roughly translates as foot of the 
Centaur and Two Male Ostriches, referencing their  
Arabic constellation names. They weren’t known 
to European astronomers till recent centuries,  
and if you want to go have a look at our possible 
new home system, you’ve got to be somewhere south  
of the equator since Alpha Centauri is 
not visible from the northern hemisphere. 
Incidentally Beta Centauri is an entirely 
different Star System in roughly the same  
direction, part of the Centaur constellation, 
but nearly 400 light years away, not 4.  
Alpha Centauri A and B are much closer to each 
other in position and size, being about as far  
apart as Pluto and the Sun are, and orbiting 
every 79 years. One is 91% of the Sun’s mass and  
the other 108%, though in terms of brightness that 
means the smaller is half as bright as our sun and  
the larger half again as bright. This does make 
for some interesting Habitable Zone scenarios,  
especially if we widen that outside the 
classic surface water case of being just  
a little warmer or colder than Earth so as to 
not be covered in ice or have its ocean boiling.  
Neither has any known planets, though we might 
have a mini-Neptune or Hycean near Rigil Kent  
at potentially a habitable distance. It is 
even possible there’d be some viable colony  
options orbiting both stars. As we’ve 
noted before, the best colony options  
for interstellar civilizations aren’t 
necessarily classic habitable planets. 
Going back to the Alpha Centauri system, 
Proxima is a fifth of a light year closer,  
which might shave years off a voyage, and the 
system does have multiple known planets, albeit  
we don’t yet have great data to say too much 
about them with certainty. Proxima b is a planet  
20 times closer to its dim red star than Earth 
is to our Sun, which is actually in the star’s  
habitable zone because Proxima is so faint, and we 
think it’s just a little more massive than Earth,  
somewhere between 10-25% more, making it one 
of the very few Earth-sized worlds rather than  
the giants that we’ve found so far, as the big 
planets are far easier to spot. We did select  
this planet for first colonization in our Alpha 
Centauri episode some years back and you can see  
that for more discussion of the topic. There’s 
plenty of good reasons to think there might be  
ice on its dark side – it is probably tidally 
locked and if not then it probably has water and  
air – we think those slow tidal locking down, but 
we are pessimistic about planets near red dwarfs,  
which tend to fluctuate in brightness a lot 
compared to our sun, retaining their atmospheres. 
There also appears to be either a Super-Earth or 
Gas Dwarf, Proxima C, about 7 times more massive  
than Earth orbiting out as far as Mars would be 
in our system, though in this case that makes  
it less well lit than Pluto. It could be a Hycean 
Planet, which can hypothetically support life even  
when quite cold, as we discussed a few weeks 
back. It is also a gold mine for anyone with  
fusion technology, and it probably has moons. 
Proxima D is a newer and softer discovery,  
from about a year ago, and would be a Sub-Earth 
probably bigger than Mars but not by a lot and  
it’s even closer than b, getting nearly double 
the light that Earth gets, mostly in infrared  
as that’s virtually all the light Proxima 
gives off. That makes it a good candidate  
for terraforming using methods we contemplated in 
Winter on Venus for terraforming that hot planet. 
So all in all, as things currently stand, 
it would seem like Proxima would be the  
better candidate than the main pair, Rigil 
Kent and Toliman. It might be ironic then  
if it turned out Proxima wasn’t even in the 
Alpha Centauri system but just passing by. 
That would generally mean we’re not making the 
journey with any hope of making an Earth 2, and  
it’s worth asking if we’re even sending colonists 
on mission 1. The usual notion is that since the  
trip takes lifetimes, there’s no reason to even 
contemplate Apollo style missions. Instead,  
you get to other star systems and stay, period, a 
permanent colony from the drawing board. I think  
that is true but also feel obliged to point out 
that a civilization in the 22nd century is very  
likely to have radical life extension technology 
as well as stasis options like freezing,  
they’re fairly interconnected tech that are likely 
to be something where you have both not either. 
So, a mission there is viable as you could be 
coming home to your actual family and we might  
be talking a round trip of a couple decades, not 
centuries. Indeed ‘manned mission’ might actually  
be some uploaded human going out there with 
von Neumann probes to get some infrastructure  
in place for a future colony mission and then 
might just shut down and transmit a current  
copy of its mind back home at light speed to enjoy 
a parade in its honor when that person reuploads  
into some android or clone or cyborg body.
Indeed that really does make a lot more sense  
than sending some AI out there as a vanguard or 
some big colony ship full of thousands there as  
first on the scene, with no existing supplies 
or infrastructure to rely on when they arrive. 
As for the journey itself, there is a lot to be 
said about freezing but at the same time, the same  
technology that offers massively longer human 
lifespans or restoration from decades of being  
a frozen corpse also imply the ability of the 
ship to self-repair a lot, in which case the main  
advantage of staying frozen – less wear and tear 
from a warm ship and living crew – becomes less of  
an issue. And again, those automation and nanotech 
options that permit that are the same types of  
tech that let you start engaging in massive 
post-scarcity space civilization, able to churn  
out gigatons of spaceships and habitats. So, I’m 
guessing anyone making the trip frozen is doing  
so from a specific desire to help minimize their 
footprint on that ship or that ship’s footprint  
in their own life and experience. And I would be 
surprised if there wasn’t an awake and active crew  
there for the entire journey, even if they’re 
rotating who’s not a popsicle at the moment. 
This does not necessarily mean we have a large 
awake community including children born on the  
voyage. Indeed if the ship is a prototype many 
might feel it reckless to have kids until they  
arrive and are settled in, especially if they 
have no shelf-life on their fertile period  
from technological improvements to fertility 
methods and lifespan. As I’ve recently learned,  
little kids are very good at finding 
ways to poke at and break things,  
not a good combination with a prototype vessel.
You do need a lot of power to keep the lights on  
in a habitation drum, probably no less than 
100 watts per square meter, or 10 watts per  
square foot of cylinder living area or ring area. 
Some lifeforms are not going to do well getting  
frozen or being raised from embryos in some vat or 
bag without existing parents. They are generally  
going to be larger ones too, who would need more 
habitat space. This is a very tricky topic and one  
we explored more in our episode Exporting Earth, 
and we tend to handwave the assumption that our  
biology and genetics will just get way better 
before we launch colony ships or that we will  
do it the big way, tons of giant space habitat 
ships flying entire ecosystems to the destination.  
Though we explored alternatives, including animal 
androids raising small critters, or even people. 
I tend to assume a bit of both, better biology 
and bigger habitats, not because you might not  
have the technology to stitch life together 
from scratch via nanotech when you arrive,  
but because again, that same technology means 
you could stitch together continent-sized  
space habitats and massive engines, with a 
little more patience and no more actual human  
effort. You just grow the ship from a template by 
supplying some asteroid to grow in along with a  
power supply. Then load it and fire it off.
As a journey on a tiny spaceship of half a  
megaton of mass, like the original interstellar 
Orion design, is going to be way different than  
flying on some McKendree Cylinder as large in 
living area as Eurasia, but the technology for  
sending them is the same. The only difference 
is one of scale: the difference between pouring  
a sidewalk from your house to your garage and 
pouring a multilane freeway to the other side  
of the continent. And the distance to Alpha 
Centauri is on such an immense scale too. The  
Moon is 20 times further from Earth than any two 
points on Earth’s surface are from each other,  
and Mars is vastly more than that, more like 
10,000 times as far from us as we are from any  
distant corner of our own world. Alpha Centauri 
is more like a couple billion times as far away. 
That raises all sorts of other issues like 
what’s keeping the crew from having a mutiny,  
or going rogue, when they’re a hundred billion 
times further from the nearest sheriff as any  
town in the Wild West was. That’s a lot of 
time for folks to get weird or get crazy too,  
one reason why freezing the crew might be wiser, 
as you can probably make a more reliable AI that  
needn’t have much more brains and free will 
than what’s needed to thaw out a skeleton  
crew if various preset failures happen, 
or signals arrive, or you do, and so on. 
As to what might drive folks crazy on such a 
voyage, well as we saw in our episode Staying  
Sane in Space, the laundry list of psychological 
issues and agitators even on the space station  
orbiting a couple hundred miles over Earth 
is bad, much like the submarines that prowl  
around deep in our seas for months. And 
this is like submarine 1 or spacewalk 1,  
so there’s going to be a lot of tight budgets 
to make it happen and shave off any fat,  
and a lot of unknown unknowns to face 
with less resources than you wanted. 
So, an interstellar mission can dial 
that up a lot, and this is Mission 1,  
so while you probably have decades of practice 
with space mission mental health issues, even deep  
space missions of a year or two to the Kuiper Belt 
perhaps for comet mining, you haven’t got tons of  
practice handling options related to interstellar 
travel. Like being a teenager born on a small ship  
and told you’re stuck there your whole life. 
Like watching the clock mismatch a little more  
every day between your ship’s clock and the news 
and entertainment feeds coming in from Earth. 
Like getting a message from your sister telling 
you your niece or nephew just started college  
and knowing that by the time you got it, they 
either had already graduated or failed out.  
Like finding out the relative or pen pal you’ve 
been writing letters home to for decades and  
getting messages from died some years back and 
you just found out now. That even if you all have  
extended lifespans able to survive the voyage and 
early colonization and take the trip home one day,  
everyone you knew is so different that they may 
as well not be the same person. Like meeting a  
friend from elementary school decades later, 
there’s just so much water under the bridge  
that you could run a hydroelectric dam off 
it, all of it spent apart from each other. 
For all the technical challenges getting 
to Alpha Centauri, I suspect the biology  
and medicine of surviving the trip and forging 
a new home at the other side will dwarf all the  
physics and engineering needed for that starship, 
and yet the difficulty of making that journey on  
the humans on board it may make both seem trivial.
In the End though, I am convinced we will have the  
technology to do it one day, and no shortage of 
volunteers for that first mission to a new star,  
and that we will find people up to the 
challenge of journeying to Alpha Centauri,  
and that ship will unlock the gateway to a 
galaxy of billions and billions of new worlds.
So if we make a spaceship that could travel to 
Alpha Centauri at around 10% of light speed it  
would take 40 years to arrive. That’s about how 
long someone’s entire career lasts in modern  
times, and if this show ran for 40 years total I’d 
have ended up producing about 3000 episodes and  
presumably spent about 80,000 hours as that’s 40 
hours a week, for 50 weeks a year, for 40 years. 
I love my job. I would be thrilled if I 
got to keep doing it for decades to come,  
and it really highlights what you can do with 
80,000 hours, and I think most of us want to  
feel like our career really mattered and made a 
positive difference in the world, and would like  
start or switch to one that did, but it’s hard to 
pick one that our skills and interests align to,  
make a plan we feel confident in, and get ideas 
for high-impact careers. That’s where 80,000 hours  
comes in. They’re a non-profit entity that spent 
a decade alongside Oxford University researching  
which careers have the most impact, and all 
the research is on their website, for free. 
80000 hours isn’t the cookie-cutter advice we 
often see from schools or aptitude tests. No  
generalized platitudes and dull repetitive advice 
about how you should become a doctor, teacher,  
or charity worker if you want to help the world. 
If your career is going to last 80000 hours,  
it is worth spending many of those to find out 
what real data and evidence suggest would be a  
good high-impact path for you, and spend some time 
with the curated resources you can find at 80,000  
Hours, like their profile on space governance.
Indeed their podcast has covered some fascinating  
topics, like one of our favorite ones here, 
the Fermi Paradox, where they had on Anders  
Sandberg for a discussion of that topic, so 
yes they’re definitely including the kind of  
topics that fascinate us when helping folks 
try to find a career they can love and feel  
good about doing. And again, everything is free, 
forever, because they’re a nonprofit — their only  
aim is to help solve global problems by helping 
people find the most impactful careers they can.  
If you join the newsletter now, you’ll get a free 
copy of their in-depth career guide sent to your  
inbox - just sign up at 80000hours.org/isaacarthur
So February is drawing to a close but there’s  
still our Livestream Q&A coming up this weekend, 
Sunday, February 26th at 4pm eastern time,  
where we’ll take live questions from the audience 
in the chat and answer them. After that we’ll  
start off March with one of my favorite topics, 
Space Habitats, on Thursday March 2nd, then on  
March 9th we’ll contemplate far longer voyages 
than the interstellar one today to our nearest  
neighbor star, by instead contemplating voyages to 
other galaxies and even superclusters. Then we’ll  
discuss how to survive various apocalyptic 
scenarios that weekend, March 12th, for our  
mid-month Scifi Sunday episode, here on SFIA.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting our website, 
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s  
episodes early and ad free on our streaming 
service, Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
