This episode is brought to you by Curiositystream
We often celebrate the pioneering spirit and
hope to see it applied in the future to settle
distant, barren worlds and transform them
into future paradises, but they might not
begin that way.
We usually try to focus on the more cheerful
aspects of the future, but while we’re getting
started and you’re grabbing a drink a snack,
I should note that today’s topic will be
a bit more grim.
Title aside, we’re as interested in alternative
approaches to classic prisons as their scifi
equivalents today, options like corrective
therapies or virtual reality, but we’re
also curious at looking at how such facilities
might be used for space colonization, such
as settling harsh worlds with prisoners.
Today’s episode also has the somewhat distinct
honor of having been a runner up in two separate
topic polls, though under different names;
The specific topic of space prisons or penal
colonies, and the general concept of Rogue
Civilizations.
We often discuss how in the future we’re
probably more likely to diverge socially than
converge, and we also mention how the sheer
size of future humanity, in terms of both
numbers and territory, would eclipse modern
civilizations the same way modern superpowers
compare to small Paleolithic tribes.
In such a context, even tiny fractions of
the total human population could have splinter
civilizations that dwarf anything existing
nowadays, and many of them, by their very
nature, would tend to be intentionally isolated
from any main civilization, either by their
choice or by exile.
We’ll be looking at some of these Rogue
Civilizations this year and I thought we’d
begin with an example of the latter case,
exile, and the classic penal colony planet.
Space prisons and penal colonies are incredibly
common in science fiction, indeed it’s hard
to think of a series that hasn’t had one.
Sometimes it’s a whole planet officially
devoted to being a prison, like Hadante in
the Stargate SG-1 Episode “Prisoners”
or the deportation of Terrans that would end
up as the origin of the Terran Confederacy
in the Starcraft franchise.
Other times it’s more unofficial, like Ceti
Alpha V in Star Trek, the world Khan Noonien
Singh and his followers from the Botany Bay
were exiled to by Captain Kirk.
Both the Star Trek and Stargate Franchises
do a lot of prison episodes.
Kirk himself gets dumped on Rura Penthe, a
Klingon penal colony, in the sixth Star Trek
film.
Ships are pretty common in this trope too,
sometimes as prison transports and other times
where the heroes of the series escaped from.
Battlestar Galactica had one in both the original
and the remake, with Richard Hatch from the
original series playing the nominal leader
of that prison ship in the remake, Tom Zarek
of the Astral Queen.
The show Blake’s 7 basically starts with
the main cast on a prison transport ship heading
to a prison planet, Cygnus Alpha.
While it’s good for storytelling it often
seems a rather impractical notion, giving
over a whole planet to be a prison, but of
course it’s hardly without precedent, if
not to the planetary scale.
This episode will be coming out just before
Australia Day, a timing I couldn’t quite
resist, as it commemorates the First Fleet’s
arrival there to establish a penal colony.
I have to say, while I picked this week for
the episode mostly to tease our upside down
cousins, there’s actually quite a fascinating
history to that founding that we will of course
skip here, this is not a history channel,
but which I would recommend exploring.
Of course Australia is hardly unique in this
role, and indeed its founding was largely
due to the loss of the American colonies more
than a decade prior.
It was fairly common for prisoners to be transported
to the US as indentured servants, and Cromwell
also sent folks to Western Ireland even before
that.
Siberia was a common destination for prisoners
from Russia, Portugal used Angola for this,
and it’s been quite common throughout history
to banish whole groups of folks to hostile
places.
It’s quite common for empires to settle
other regions and mistreat the indigenous
population, something that we probably need
not worry about when colonizing an apparently
dead world like Mars or Venus, but those empires
also were often rather brutal or deceptive
in their treatment of their own colonists,
and that would be something to worry about
in the future too.
This gives us the basic premise we see in
sc-ifi, colonizing places is traditionally
dangerous, and such places are remote, so
it makes sense to send criminals there to
civilize the world.
I choose the word ‘civilize’ here because
we tend to immediately doubt the wisdom of
making a colony peopled with criminals since
they presumably won’t be very civilized
and won’t like you very much, but in practice
that hasn’t been an issue.
The American colonies obviously did breakaway
from British Crown but that had little do
with any grudge over penal colonies, nor do
I recall legions of kangaroo riding Australians
raiding England, and I’m sure history would
have recorded that if it happened.
Countries are of course heavily influenced
by their founders and by their relations with
their motherlands, if they have them, but
it is worth remembering that an awful lot
of nations were founded by folks who, minus
a lot of historical whitewashing, were basically
pirates, thugs, and brigands.
So while founding a nation with criminals
might seem unwise, it’s probably not too
bad an approach, and we’ll bypass the obvious
joke about most nations still being run by
pirates, thugs, and brigands.
What a civilization’s judicial philosophy
is also might not matter much.
While at first glance the motives for what
to do with prisoners would seem important,
whether you are focused on punishment or rehabilitation,
retributive justice versus restorative justice,
these can often have the same essential features.
For instance, in a highly automated future
society there’s precious little need to
use prisoners for dangerous forced labor,
but that hardly means you wouldn’t have
them do it anyway.
A popular punishment in the military is to
hand an offender a shovel and have them dig
a hole, traditionally digging ditches, foxholes,
and latrine pits was a common activity for
soldiers but less so these days, but we often
still have folks do it, one can argue it’s
good exercise and good practice should the
need arise, and Idle Hands being the Devil’s
Workshop is a fairly common attitude.
From the other perspective, simple punishment,
nowadays when such a task is done with the
hole dug, the second half of the punishment
is filling it in, I think the notion being
that you’re telling them their work is utterly
pointless.
A high tech civilization and certainly a post-scarcity
society has no real need for prison labor
but that would hardly mean they wouldn’t
use it.
There’s a common notion that folks with
antisocial tendencies can sometimes be forced
to develop social skills when stuffed together,
especially if we’re not talking about psychopathic
murderers, who are the minority of killers
let alone prisoners.
Stick a thousand criminals on an island with
no guards and reasonable supplies and odds
are pretty good they’ll put together a society
that’s at least nominally functional and
maybe develop a greater appreciation for living
in normal society and following the rules
of one.
I, personally, am generally neutral on judicial
philosophies of dealing with criminals, I’ve
too many friends who are law enforcement,
attorneys, or judges with differing views
on the matter, not to mention a fair few friends
who are ex-convicts, and it’s tended to
leave me rather dubious about any studies
or reports documenting how this or that approach
is clearly the better one, cherry-picking
data seems to be common.
And of course on this channel, while we like
to raise the ethical issues for consideration,
I try to keep neutral on them.
It’s a point for remembering though, we
often assume the future is low on crime and
very gentle if firm with criminals, but we
might be making big assumptions there.
For instance, our first assumptions about
a post-scarcity civilization with technology
like virtual reality and life extension is
that a lot of crime ought to be nearly unheard
of, mostly crimes of passion and even those
would likely be reduced.
You have no reason to steal a loaf of bread
since there no starving family to motivate
it, but there’s a second interpretation
of that.
A society in which you have plenty of wealth
and lots of virtual reality for less savory
desires, is presumably one with less crime,
but it might also be one which has far less
tolerance of crime.
We’re generally a lot more lenient on crimes
where the basic motivations seemed at least
a little reasonable and forgivable, such a
society, where you have almost anything you
want, might be beyond draconian on those who
still break the rules.
This is also ignoring that you might have
a lot folks who had selfish and decadent attitudes
and long lifespans who might intentionally
commit crimes for the thrill of it.
And on the subject of longer lifespans, while
on the one hand it makes the notion of life
sentences seem implausible, I’m not so sure
that would be the case.
Even assuming we accept the notion that anyone
can be reformed, there’s a lot less motivation
for early release and probation when you have
life extension.
You wouldn’t have a parole board looking
at an old and frail 70 year old who killed
someone decades ago and thinking it a safe
gamble to release them, since that 70 year
old might have the body of twenty year old
and have many centuries left to them.
As we mentioned in the brainwashing episode,
there’s a very real chance in the future
we’ll be good enough at our psychology that
we can reform almost anyone almost instantly,
but that’s likely to be voluntary, a person
gets the option of such brainwashing or doing
their time, and a society that has very good
psychologists who can minimize recidivism
might be quite fine with very long sentences
for anyone who refuses the treatment and probably
can check their mindset at a parole hearing
with a strong certainty of how likely they
are to repeat their crimes.
If an expert can come in front of that board
and say “This man still has a 20% chance
of killing again, and still refuses treatment”
they are very likely to shrug and send that
man back, whether it’s been a year since
his incarceration or a millennia.
Speaking of brains though, one thing to keep
in mind about future criminals is that they
might not be quite human.
We often talk about transhumanism on the channel
and what’s called Speed Intelligence, one
of our 3 types of Super-Intelligence.
Where you still have a human intellect but
can speed up your thinking, to experience
more time from your perspective, what we also
sometimes call frame-jacking.
Our brains operate at roughly the speed of
sound, an augmented mind using optics would
operate at light speed, a million times faster,
experiencing a year in under a minute.
If you have virtual reality you could hypothetically
make someone with such augmentation experience
a prison stay of a century in about an hour
of real time.
We see examples of this in both the Outer
Limits episode “The Sentence” where a
scientist tries to deal with overcrowded and
underfunded prisons by inventing a virtual
prison with such an expedited timeline, and
we see that also in Star Trek Deep Space Nine’s
episode “Hard Time”, where Chief O’Brien
gets 20 years of prison time implanted into
his mind by an alien government.
Virtual prisons of this sort or another are
certainly one option, before we dip into that
though, I should note the subjective time
can go the other way too.
If you can speed thoughts up, you can slow
them down as well, so a prisoner sentenced
to a decade in jail whose got such mind augmentation
might instead frame-jack to such a low speed
he only experiences mere minutes.
This then becomes the same problem we have
with science fiction that suggests sentences
could be served while frozen, all you’ve
done is remove that person from play for a
while, they experienced no rehabilitation
nor retribution beyond however much being
jumped ahead in time might upset them.
It probably goes without saying that the classic
sci-fi prison planet isn’t too likely to
happen, though not because of a lack of planets
or prisoners.
Your typical Kardashev 2 civilization of a
billion, billion people could obviously fill
up several planets with prisoners, even with
incredibly low crimes rates and population
densities on those prison planets parallel
to an Ecumenopolis City Planet.
We’ll discuss this more in a moment, but
as we were discussing early this month, for
a lot of high-tech civilizations “World”
and “Planet” are not synonymous.
They’re going to have many worlds that are
artificial habitats like O’Neill Cylinders
and lots of planets that are entirely virtual.
If for some reason you want that Mad Max Dystopian
wasteland for your prison planet, that’s
a lot easier to do in a Virtual Reality than
an actual real planet.
Note that we’re seeing a lot more options
than just some barren world you’d dump prisoners
on, and it’s not like you’d actually have
planets that were barely habitable lying around.
Worlds in general will either be terraformed,
in the midst of terraforming, or utterly lethal
to life, and the midway point where they aren’t
quite lethal but would only be survivable
after a lot of terraforming and time.
The galaxy isn’t likely to have places with
breathable atmospheres lying around in abundance
and as the easiest to terraform, they’ve
be valuable real estate, not low value discards.
So a prison planet would likely be a temporary
place, used during that time it was harsh
but livable, and moved on to another world
in a century or so, unless you intentionally
kept it that way.
Such brutal planets have an appeal in science
fiction of course, and not just for punishment,
in Frank Herbert’s classic Dune novels,
the empire uses a hostile world called Salusa
Secundus officially as a prison planet, but
in reality as a Darwinian recruitment and
training facility for its elite military,
the Sardukar.
In that story, the harsh desert world of Arrakis,
also known as Dune, essentially represents
an even harsher and more superior recruitment
and training world.
There’s a logic to such an approach, even
if it’s ethically atrocious, but one hardly
needs an entire harsh Death World to achieve
that, even ignoring virtual reality training
scenarios, large islands or continents on
a planet, or smaller artificial habitats,
would work as well and be easier to monitor.
Of course virtual reality is even easier to
monitor.
But if you do have some planet you’re using
this way, you can make it very hard to escape
from, you could wrap it in surveillance and
defense satellites, or even an intentional
Kessler Syndrome event of orbital debris.
That latter is an excellent way to temporarily
quarantine a planet if you figure its criminal
colonists will probably be civilized in a
few generations when the space debris is cleared.
This sort of setup makes it very hard to have
guards on a penal colony though, unless you’re
recruiting them from the better behaved prisoners
for some sort of reward perhaps, and that
raises the fairly nasty scenario of people
being born in penal colonies who are guilty
of no crime.
Going this path way could also result in hereditary
caste systems, like the guards being the children
of the previous guards.
Alternatively you could make the prison single-gender,
or sterilize the inmates, and avoid the issue
of children and even replace them with other
colonists later on.
Similarly an O’Neill cylinder in orbit of
Earth makes a good prison, but without the
guards needing to be cut off from society.
We often envision thousands or millions of
those in orbit of Earth and fairly easy and
quick travel between them.
One also can hardly dig your way out of space
station with a spoon any more than you can
off planet, so prison breaks are hard and
need to be external.
There’s a basic dichotomy with prison location
that still applies to space stations, planets,
and even virtual reality.
If you stick it far away from the main civilization,
it’s a logistics nightmare supplying it
and guarding it.
Every transport carrying prisoners has to
be guarded along a fairly well-known, lengthy,
and vulnerable route, and the same is true
of every supply convoy and even the transports
for the guards, who don’t really want to
live far from civilization in a compound for
long rotations.
The location itself is isolated and will be
delayed getting reinforcements from any major
attack and those reinforcements are vulnerable
to ambush en route.
It’s also a major hindrance for those wishing
to visit the prisoners, like their family
or legal counsel.
Sticking a prison in the middle of a city
avoids most of this, but is unpopular, as
no one wants to live near one, hard to isolate
and secure, and will likely have dependencies
on the local infrastructure.
Budget matters, and you’re likely to have
your water, sewer, power, and emergency services
connected into the local system, which are
harder to secure and also to protect from
bribery or coercion of the folks working there.
All such places need evacuation plans in event
of riots, prison breaks, or a strike team
just running in the front door during visiting
hours to take hostages and bust out their
target, and once they’re outside the facility,
in the middle of a city, it’s much easier
to fade out of sight and much harder to lock
down or search for escapees.
Even in the virtual prison case, those folks
are stored somewhere, and we have to keep
in mind a society is using mind augmentation
to implant memories or expedite sentences
or stick people in tailored-made hells or
redemption quests is also one where purging
memories is probably possible, so maybe you
can implant a long term prison stay in minutes,
but some black market group can probably remove
those quickly too.
The same would apply for brainwashing, someone
knowing they’re going to be arrested and
offered a good mind-scrubbing of certain behavior
might arrange for treatment afterward, potentially
even to be kidnapped by their de-programmers
if such rehabilitation treatment includes
an injunction against having it removed.
It also raises the question of how we’d
deal with people who had backup copies of
their minds, potentially ones made before
they committed the criminal act or even planned
it, or how you go about imprisoning someone
with an uploaded digital mind.
We also shouldn’t ignore that even in a
highly automated society there’s likely
to be unpleasant or dangerous tasks still,
even if only by a relative standard.
We often speculate that we’d not have too
much of a problem coming up with volunteers
for colony missions, but we can’t be sure
of that, and you could bolster your numbers
by recruiting from folks serving time, avoiding
those with very violent or deranged tendencies,
many might cheerfully take the option of serving
in a colony or space freighter.
As we mentioned in Sleeper Ships a couple
months back, there’s not much prestige or
glamor to tempt folks to serve on the crew
of a big slow freighter hauling ice or ore
around on journeys of years or decades.
You can’t really hijack spaceships and sail
to a port of your choosing, once you’re
up to speed, you’re pretty much locked on
that course, and indeed freighters between
existing ports are quite likely to be relying
on the destination port, not internal fuel,
to slow them down.
It’s more efficient, not having to carry
tons of fuel for slow down or reserves for
course corrections, but also more dangerous.
Plenty of historical precedent for that too,
a lot of ships got their junior crew by basically
emptying out the prison at their port of call.
If it’s getting you a sentence reduction,
partially tied to good behavior, a mutiny
on a ship that can’t really change course
is probably not too likely.
It’s also hard to guess at punishments in
the future, it’s common for instance to
suggest that if we had life extension treatment,
prisoners wouldn’t get them, avoiding the
multi-century life sentence issue, but I find
that a bit unlikely if such treatments are
already available to the average citizen.
Those citizens might have changing views on
crime and punishment too, as we suggested
earlier, in a prosperous civilization there’s
likely to be less sympathy for crimes.
They might expand crimes too, it’s not really
that hard to imagine thought crimes coming
up, but I’m thinking more of a lot of the
courses or workshops we often have for folks
who have anger management issues or so on.
Crime isn’t the only way someone might get
sent to some virtual prison designed to fix
their behavior, I could easily imagine a lot
of companies or communities firing or ostracizing
people for certain behavior but offering them
the option of an entirely ‘voluntary’
course, especially if they could experience
it quickly.
Little Timmy’s parents send him to the futuristic
version of juvie or military school hoping
to correct his anti-social behavior or Bob
managed to irritate all his neighbors in his
condominium building and the condo board tells
him he either has to move out or has to go
in to some time-accelerated or memory implanted
virtual corrective course.
We’re painting a fairly grim picture I suspect,
as we try to survey all these various options.
Again, our goal today isn’t really to say
what’s ethical or more effective, you can
contemplate that yourself or discuss it in
the comments section or our social media platforms.
I suspect we will see a future with a lot
less crime and a lot of superior alternatives
for addressing it, but it is good to remember
that while the future offers many benefits,
it also offers many challenges, and many of
those will be ethical ones, and are best overcome
by contemplation and foresight.
As we enter into space, first our own solar
system and it’s thousands of minor planets,
then onto the galaxy, one problem facing us
might be a shortage of colonists.
Early on you have prestige helping with recruitment,
but there’s little of that when there’s
billions of stars to settle and you’ve done
it hundreds of times already.
We’ve addressed some ways of getting around
that, either by taking your time or using
techniques like cloning, but I suspect there
will be a temptation to push with colonization
quickly, once we can, and using prisoners
or subsidizing colonies with groups of folks
who want to be away and who you’d like to
leave too, is something I suspect many civilizations
in the future will have to wrestle with.
In future episodes we’ll look at some of
the other scenarios beside prisoners and the
potential rogue civilizations those might
produce.
One thing to remember though, as I mentioned
earlier, many a nation got founded by convicts,
pirates, brigands, or other rogues, and that’s
often ended in a lot of just, creative, and
vibrant civilizations, and may do so in the
future too.
So we were talking about off-world colonies
today from a slightly different perspective
than normal, and we’ll be continuing that
throughout the year, but it’s always worth
remembering that we still haven’t got any
yet, even on the Moon, and even 50 years after
we first went there.
I’m very glad to announce a new sponsor
for SFIA, Curiosity Stream, which has an amazing
catalog of top quality science documentaries
you can peruse, and I’d recommend the series
“Destination: Moon”, which is a good hard
look at the options and challenges for getting
a base on the Moon, with great visuals and
narration.
Curiosity Stream is a subscription streaming
service that offers over 2000 documentaries
and nonfiction titles from some of the world’s
best filmmakers, including exclusive originals.
You can get unlimited access starting at just
$2.99 a month, and for our audience, the first
30-days are completely free if you sign up
at curiositystream.com/isaacarthur during
the sign-up process.
From the founder of the Discovery Channel,
Curiosity Stream offers a ton of amazing content
on space, science, history, technology, and
more.
And again, the first month is free.
So today we were talking about our future
among the stars, and next week we’ll discuss
our possible past among the stars, the concept
of Panspermia, that life may have originated
off of Earth.
The week after that, we’ll be talking space
colonization again, as we contemplate the
impacts radical life extension would have
on generation ships and the notion of serial
colony ships that only stopped briefly at
each new world, setting up and moving on to
the next, in Galactic Gardeners.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
