This episode is brought to you by Skillshare
It seems like the galaxy is a cold and barren
place, but in truth it’s a fertile garden
waiting for us to plant it.
So today we return to the Generation Ships
series to look at what I tend to consider
one of the more likely scenarios for colony
ships to other solar systems.
Under our current understanding of physics,
the speed of light limits us to taking many
years to get to even the nearest stars, and
even getting to a fraction of light speed
is quite difficult.
This means any pioneers looking to settle
the galaxy are going to be old and gray before
arriving, or long since dead.
As we mentioned back in the first episode,
there’s essentially five core methods of
getting around this issue.
One of those is to simply settle new worlds
with the descendants of the original crew,
the classic generation ship.
Another is to freeze the crew and revive them
on arrival.
What we call a Sleeper Ship.
We also have the Seed Ship and Data Ship routes
we discussed last time in Seeding the Stars,
and these two have a lot of overlap in concept,
the default Seed Ship settles worlds by using
machines to go there and terraform the world,
and potentially even to grow humans in vats
from frozen embryos and raise them, while
the Data Ship contemplates a more digital
approach, potentially simply bringing uploaded
copies of human minds to a new world.
Of course the Data ship has some overlap with
the Sleeper Ship too, since those uploaded
minds can make the journey as archived data,
essentially asleep for the trip, but they
could be running the entire time too, since
an uploaded mind isn’t at risk of dying
of old age, at least not in the conventional
sense.
However, this extended lifespan is also a
key aspect of our fifth type of colony ship,
the Methuselah Ship, and one of our key topics
for today.
Such a ship takes its name from Methuselah,
the biblical patriarch said to have lived
the longest, dying at age 969, and doubly
appropriate as he’s also the grandfather
of Noah, whose famous ark carrying samples
of all life is the basis for why colony ships
are often called Interstellar Arks.
And grandparents are a big factor in our topic
for the day, because an obvious problem with
very-long lived people on a ship is that the
original crew is not dying of old age, so
any children and grandchildren they have on
the voyage are not simply replacing them,
as they do on a classic generation ship.
They could of course be told not to reproduce
on the voyage, except to replace any losses,
and even with extreme life extension there
presumably still would be some, but the problem
here is that one of the more obvious motives
for joining any colony effort to a new world
is because you like having kids.
Especially after the first few dozen times
you’ve colonized new stars, the prestige
and risk elements start going away, and we
do have many billions of stars presumably
needing colonizing in this galaxy.
This starts to take us into what we sometimes
call our sixth type of ship, the Gardener
Ship, but as I mentioned last time it’s
not so much a new ship type as a different
approach to colonization, utilizing hybrid
methods.
We could add other types to that basic five
too, for instance we don’t know that faster
than light travel is impossible, it just looks
that way now, and while the whole concept
of the five core ship types is about dealing
with being stuck going slower than light,
FTL doesn’t automatically remove the core
problem of very long voyages, and indeed some
types would introduce their own logistical
issues which we may discuss more later in
the series.
For that matter, the whole reason you can’t
go faster than light is because as you get
closer and closer to it, it takes more and
more energy to speed up any more, and also
introduces time dilation.
With enough energy you can get arbitrarily
close, not just spitting distance but right
up close to kissing light speed.
If you go fast enough and time slows down
enough, the original crew can arrive at their
destination without experiencing lots of time.
This has its own problems and we’ll probably
look at those later in the series too, though
again like with Sleeper Ships, it’s not
really a Generation Ship, nor is its usage
limited to colony vessels.
However, at its core, the Gardener Ship is
a Generation Ship, while at the same time,
the Methuselah Ship is not, and indeed it’s
the fundamental problem with the Methuselah
Ship that gives us the Gardener Ship concept,
or Gardener Fleet, which we’ll explain in
a bit.
The Methuselah Ship itself is easy enough
to explain, we launch an interstellar ark
on which the people do not age or do not age
much.
Of course they are aging, this isn’t a Sleeper
Ship, they just aren’t growing physically
old.
We’ve discussed Life Extension’s impact
on society in the Life Extension episode and
the technological hurdles to developing it
in the Science of Aging, so we’ll mostly
skim that here, but some key points need to
be raised that are relevant to interstellar
arks.
And the first one again is that they are indeed
aging, they are not static individuals but
potentially unbelievably ancient ones.
Age doesn’t always bring wisdom and knowledge
but in general it does, and one of our big
concerns with generation ships is how those
ships need to contain enough people to retain
every important specialization a new world
will need, because you can’t call home for
advice unless you don’t mind waiting centuries
for a response.
A person can pick up a lot of skills in a
regular lifetime, especially in a high-tech
civilization that needs skills more than labor
and whose technology permits a lot of free
time to pick those up, so you can imagine
how much a person with a very long life might
learn.
That’s also assuming they’re just a regular
person, and when we’re talking Methuselah
Ships, odds are pretty good they have access
to things like mind augmentation too.
This is the other problem with a classic generation
ship, you need a lot more people on one because
they are spending a large portion of their
life learning a skill, and a large portion
of their career once they learn it teaching
it to others, and trying to ensure none of
those core skills get lost as generations
roll by.
A Methuselah Ship has no such problem, especially
if they’re only replacing their numbers
with new people on rare occasions someone
is lost.
Contrary to the often-proclaimed maxim about
it being easier to learn when you’re younger,
by and large you can pick up new skills way
faster as you age and get more and more related
experience to draw on.
Indeed one of the biggest bars on learning
as you get older is that you rarely have much
incentive to do so, learning to use a word
processor after having mastered a typewriter
can seem a bit unnecessary, and indeed might
slow you down, and learning a typewriter after
spending years developing a fast and clean
script with a pen or quill might feel likewise.
This is a relevant point because one of our
big concerns about life extension technology
is that it can produce a society that’s
maybe a bit set in its ways and not really
embracing new things, possibly ossifying technologically
and socially.
However, while that can be problematic back
here, at home, it’s actually mostly beneficial
to a colony ship.
This isn’t Star Trek, starships aren’t
braving the unknown and serving as the source
of lots of new science, all that’s going
on back at home where most of the scientists
live, and while such ships will have scientists
and they will doubtless do speculation and
research, they’ll mostly be getting tech
updates from back home that are decades if
not centuries out of date.
If you’re 100 light years from home, for
context, you’d be hearing about how Eddington
had just tested that fellow Einstein’s new
theory of General Relativity, and how they
have these cool new telephones with rotary
dials.
You aren’t very likely to devote all your
time to theorizing and testing that theory
when you know that back home, in the year
2019, they’ve had a whole century to work
on the matter and the whole resources of the
civilization to assist in that, not just one
small, lonely ship.
Indeed, considering we’re talking about
life extension, they’d still have Einstein
working on the problem personally.
And as we discussed in the Ark of a Million
Years, the issue with long voyages isn’t
just maintaining the ship and the knowledge
for centuries of travel, but the same basic
mission and goals.
Now, nobody is going to live centuries without
changes of priority and purpose, but odds
are you’ve got a much slower drift when
the crew is still the original crew, not their
great-great-great-grandchildren.
They still remember Earth, they still have
their childhood culture built into them, heck
they still have living relatives back home
sending them correspondence.
Societies on Earth and its colonies probably
would not diverge as fast when everyone is
living a real long time.
So it’s a lot easier to engage in centuries
of travel and centuries of colonization efforts
when you’ve got those kind of lifespans.
All of which might make you wonder why early
on I said the Methuselah Ship has a fundamental
problem, since they seem practically perfect
for the job compared to our other methods.
You don’t need as many people because you
need fewer folks to maintain your skill sets,
less need for wide redundancy because if your
ship’s surgeon dies, odds are several other
folks have those skills too or sufficient
related knowledge they can pick it up from
archived lessons.
A colony ship has no need for a geologist,
no geology on board, but obviously needs one
on arrival and probably a lot more than one,
so that ship needs to carry enough folks educated
in or capable of learning that field to ensure
they’ve got it on arrival – people who
can’t really use it or feel useful to their
shipmates.
Hard to give a portion of your life over to
studying a field of science you can’t practice,
that no one around you really values, and
that has a huge number of practitioners centuries
ahead of you back home.
Hard to recruit and get the best recruits
for you to pass your knowledge on to.
Not really an issue on a Methuselah Ship though.
Similarly, they aren’t drifting much socially,
and there’s no retirements or ambitious
young new folks shaking up the routine.
So the mission should go smoother and is less
likely to produce some colony vastly different
from the one they left and potentially militantly
so.
That’s always a concern with colonies, they
might come home for a visit, and you’d rather
it was a friendly fleet of tourists and traders,
not an armada loaded for bear.
So again, what’s the fundamental problem
here?
This method seems to work and seems to work
very well, assuming, obviously, that you have
access to life extension technology.
Fundamentally it’s a practicality issue,
this method clearly is advantageous but no
society is likely to be stagnant even if long-lived,
especially one composed of people who want
to go found new civilizations and want to
enough that they’re willing to basically
divorce themselves from their homeland.
They probably want to have kids during the
trip and while a very long lifespan would
let you convince them to hold off, the issue
is that it’s very easy to argue that they
should not.
And this is where we get into the Gardener
Ship, because a Methuselah Ship doesn’t
really need to leave Earth carrying a lot
of people, it can easily create its colonists
on the way there from a small number, something
a classic generation ship could do too, but
without the loss of skills or culture implied
by a small, short-lived initial contingent.
So you can send a big ship with a small crew
and grow as you go.
We have to couple this to a few other things
we’ve noted throughout the series though.
First, it’s very unlikely any human will
ever set foot on another planet without something
much better than our modern 3D printers on
board, indeed I’d be surprised if anyone
even set foot on the Moon again without it.
Folks going to Mars are going to have some
production capacity on that ship, folks going
to Alpha Centauri are likely to have automation
able to produce anything their ship or colony
needs so long as they have the energy and
raw materials for it.
Realistically, barring maybe the first few
colonies to prove we can do it, interstellar
arks aren’t likely to be common until such
an ability is on the table, and as we pointed
out last time, one of the reasons you don’t
need to send small self-replicating ships
to other solar systems to do our colonizing
is because you can just as easily have them
build giant ships in our solar system instead.
So space and equipment isn’t likely to be
a big issue for a realistic colony ship.
Even strictly digital ones manned by artificial
intelligences or uploaded minds have no reason
to go small, you could build billions of ships
that each dwarfed our largest supertankers
while barely scratching the resources of this
solar system, and each one can easily send
back freighters from their destination carrying
back raw materials to repay those used in
its construction many times over, many billions
of times over.
So there’s no reason to go small out of
scarcity of resources, and as we’ve seen
throughout the series, bigger is always better
when it comes to colonial ships.
Way back in the Life in a Space Colony series
we posited a ship – the Unity – that had
left on a mission where some of the folks
were frozen and some were long-lived, we assumed
the frozen folks were too but were people
who didn’t want to make the whole journey.
Indeed we noted that some making the journey
awake might opt to go on ice during the voyage,
temporarily or till they arrived.
We also noted that they might have kids, and
maybe some would go on ice to make room for
them, but odds are the sheer redundancy of
the ship, designed for a long journey without
resupply, combined with constant tech updates
from Earth, would probably let them carry
a lot more people than they set out with as
they got those updates and felt more comfortable
with the ship not breaking on them.
They had a colony plan that called for a certain
number of colonists and had all the equipment
for that plan, now they have a lot more people,
a century’s worth of new technology they’ve
received during the voyage, and are already
over-prepared for safety’s sake.
They also have a ship that’s excellent at
recycling and has onboard manufacturing able
to produce any component the ship or basic
colony needs.
They are not a ship with colonists and gear
anymore, they’re a mobile civilization,
and when they arrive someone is bound to point
out that they have a fully functional ship
that can suck in raw materials and repair
and refuel itself and make all the colony
gear another world would need, and which has
more people on it than the colony needs.
They could, of course, just do the classic
colony concept of having them all descend
on their new world, more people and more tech
and more supplies is hardly a problem, though
the more people part might actually be a limiting
factor.
You’ve got people who spent centuries on
that trip and are absolutely focused on colonizing
that new system, you’ve got folks who did
the trip frozen, or part of the trip, who
feel the same, but you’ve also got folks
born en route who only know that ship and
their life on it, and others who may have
changed their perspective during the trip
and now have different ambitions.
Indeed, you might have people who joined them
during the trip.
Same as you might make room on such a ship
by freezing some folks who were a bit bored
and happy to go on ice while someone new did
their job, they might be going digital instead,
stored digitally rather than on ice or just
running in a virtual world in parallel to
the physical ship.
Or faster ships might be catching up, with
better tech and not needing to carry as much
gear or even fuel, if they can just slow enough
to rendezvous and drop off people.
Likewise, you might enlist digital people
from back home to sign up during the trip.
The ship moves fast, but if we’re assuming
very high technology, you might have folks
who are digital minds and are relayed by traveling
as transmissions, beamed to the ship only
after it safely approaches its destination.
You might even wait until your advance probes
report back on your destination to request
specialists in particular fields.
The probes report one of your destination
system’s planets has an interesting type
of plant life and requests a few exo-botanists,
who are current on the latest research and
similar types of life, and they might enthusiastically
make the trip, or send a copy to make the
trip, to study this new life.
We also have the Stellaser and Interstellar
Laser highways concepts we’ve discussed
before, which might well be getting built
by a vanguard just ahead of the main colony
ship, or colony fleet, to slow it down, and
follow-up vessels with more colonists might
be arriving, relying on that to slow them
down, and moving far faster as a result.
This same platform can easily push the ships
back up to speed, not just slow them down,
and can let people go home if they want.
Interstellar travel isn’t automatically
a one way trip when you have very long lifetimes,
since unlike even freezing people, these folks
can arrive back home having not physically
aged much but be greeted by family and friends
who stayed home and haven’t aged much either.
Either way, it gets very likely some of those
colonists are going to suggest that after
a brief stay-over helping get the colony set
up, they will move on to another new world.
And considering they are restocked on raw
materials, and have a long voyage ahead of
them, they don’t need to be too numerous
when they leave to arrive at a new system
full of new people and new colonial gear.
They can move on, planting a seed to grow
on each new world they pass, stopping whenever
they start getting enough people or low enough
on raw materials to be considering a resupply,
planting a new seed, and slowly working their
way out from Earth to the wider galaxy.
But this goes a bit further too, because again,
they can make any component their ship needs,
that’s really a necessity for any interstellar
colony ship.
After all, stuff breaks and you need a lot
of replacement parts to cover centuries of
breakage, even ignoring that centuries is
a long time to expect replacement parts to
last even stored rather than in use.
Indeed you’d want to be getting tech upgrades
from back home and making and installing them.
So, if you can replace any part of the ship
from raw materials, you can also make a copy
of the ship.
Such ships aren’t just stopping to plant
the seeds of colonies, they’re stopping
to grow more of themselves too.
The galaxy is basically a big disk after all,
so ships heading out in straight lines can
divide along the way and spread out.
Is there a motive for this?
Certainly.
Imagine you were a lieutenant onboard one
of these ships for a century, now you arrive
and some of your friends are staying at this
new system and some remaining, but the captain
probably is staying on that ship.
If you want a ship of your own, to get promoted
as it were, dividing ships up is probably
faster than waiting for people who are biologically
immortal to die, or get bored and leave at
the next colony destination.
Same applies for the colonists, upward mobility
is an issue in a long-lived society and while
a new world relieves a lot of that, that new
world is likely to be governed by someone
pretty old.
If you were basically third or fourth inline
to be in charge of something, you might decide
staying on board for the next stop and being
number one is preferable.
This is also not likely to be frowned on behavior
either, as that attitude might well have been
a big motivator for a lot of people to join
the colony mission in the first place.
Now all of this works out on paper but does
ignore some of the human angles.
A ship arriving somewhere with everyone getting
off only once and all together does not fracture
the community.
On a Gardener Ship, every several decades
you stop somewhere and people have to start
making hard choices since some people they
know will be staying and others not.
I don’t want to minimize that at all, you’d
have family and friendships cut apart at every
stop, and you could probably fill the oceans
on a new world with all the tears shed in
sadness or anger or bittersweet pride as folks
went off on their own new path.
But this is nothing new to us, people moving
and growing up, and until this last century
or so, when someone left home, it was very
likely, and often more likely than not, that
you’d never see them again.
I’d note that these were folks who already
did that once, leaving Earth in the first
place, but many of them would never have been
from Earth having been born on the voyage,
and speaking from personal experience, doing
it once doesn’t necessarily make the second
time easier.
After a decade away at college and then at
war, I was very glad to finally go home, and
it would take a herd of horses to drag me
away again.
I don’t think it would be any easier or
harder for these colonists to say goodbye
a second time.
Some caveats on that though.
First, we already noted that it’s not just
going to be the crew dividing between staying
on the ship and leaving for the newest new
world, every so often it will be a new ship
too, but in fact it’s much more likely to
be whole fleets of ships arriving and likely
even building new ones during the flight and
some possibly departing or arriving ahead
or behind of the rest.
Imagine for the moment you were a fleet of
a dozen ships flying together and one departs
almost right away to act as the vanguard at
the next system while another stays late to
pick up stragglers.
Sometimes a ship will get tasked to fly people
back home or to the previous system you colonized,
sometimes you build a new one, sometimes 3
or 4 break off as a whole new fleet in a different
direction.
This is easier because there’s still a community
but it’s a bit more separate.
It’s also very likely big colony ships would
have a lot of semi-autonomous communities
in it, more like many towns sharing a region
of land than a single big city.
That would allow a lot more time for folks
to slowly sort and separate themselves into
entire communities that would go.
There’d still be some separations, but not
as many or as sharp overall.
They’d still have shared bonds and culture
even ignoring that folks would presumably
migrate between those communities too.
To a degree this separation will happen even
if all stayed in that one system too, a planet
is a big place after all, and a star system
is likely to have many of them and minor planets
to settle too, and it is logical to settle
several places in a system, not just one small
initial base on one planet.
But that shared culture is a thing to remember,
as these fleets plant their seeds on world
after world and divide to spread out in a
wedge across the galaxy, those worlds being
planted share a lot more in common with each
other than two separate colony missions both
launched from Earth arriving at neighboring
systems, and they’d be close enough to talk
without absurdly long delays and to send ships
back and forth.
So you might get some loose-knit interstellar
civilizations popping up along wedges spreading
out from Earth to the Galactic Rim.
There’s another aspect to this too, as we’ve
discussed before, while I never figure we’ll
be short of colonists, especially since we
can breed them en route, we do have technological
options in play.
We shouldn’t automatically assume having
life extension implies a very transhumanist
culture, after all you could easily have life
extension by some simple pill or potion or
retrovirus you took that folks might be fine
taking even if they were otherwise into techno-primitivism,
but it’s quite likely they would have a
lot of transhumanist tendencies.
Such being the case, a person torn between
staying with the crew they call brothers,
and their spouse, and their kid planning to
join another ship’s crew, might just do
some dividing and copying of their own, uploading
their mind into multiple bodies with a copy
going each way.
Obviously some might be okay with this approach
and some not, but in a culture focused on
increasing their numbers quickly, I’d imagine
objections would be minimal, since you get
to add a person and one with a full complement
of skills and experience too, and each such
fleet would likely vary in its approach and
attitude on this and many other things, as
they leave Earth and as they splinter off
from each other.
We’ve looked at a lot of colony options,
and have more to come, and each has its pros
and cons and would vary in those by what cultures
emerge in the future as much as by what technologies
emerge; But of all of them, this particular
spectrum of colonial options, of Galactic
Gardening as it were, strikes me as the most
appealing.
Sending out fleets to all the nearest stars
who arrive and splinter, some remaining on
those worlds, some heading right off to the
next, some even heading home on highways of
light, somehow seems more like the way we’d
choose to go.
It doesn’t require that all-or-nothing approach
of the classic colony ship, especially when
we can dampen the impact of time through extended
lifespans for both the traveler and those
they left behind, something Sleeper Ships
or Time Dilation only offers us half of.
So those are Gardener Ships, and we’ve discussed
the idea more, along with a lot of the actual
colonization methods at the planets they visit,
in the Life in a Space colony series, so you
can check that out for more discussion of
the topic.
It’s also where the Unity comes from, the
spaceship we reference in a lot of episodes
and channel discussion, as that was the ship
we spent our time on in that series.
I mentioned during the episode that one advantage
of Methuselah Ships is that with very long
life times people can acquire a lot of skills,
and that’s something we already see nowadays,
but it can be inconvenient and expensive to
go off to college or a workshop every time
you want to pick up any new skill.
We’re seeing a lot of advances in education
in terms of convenience and improved presentation.n.
But it’s not a thing of the distant future
and we already have organizations like Skillshare
leading the way in letting you pick up useful
skills, at your own pace and in the comfort
of your own home.
They are an online community with over 20,000
courses on everything from technical topics
like virtual reality, graphic design, and
computer programming to accounting or culinary
arts.
If you want to improve your skills, unlock
new opportunities, and do the work you love,
you can get a Premium Membership and have
unlimited access to classes on those topics
and many more.
Join the millions of students already learning
on Skillshare today with a special offer just
for my listeners: Get 2 months of Skillshare
for free.
To sign up, go to S-K-L-dot-S-H slash Isaac7.
Again, go to S-K-L-dot-S-H slash Isaac7 to
get 2 months of unlimited access to over 20,000
classes for free.
Act now for this special offer, and start
learning today.
Next week’s episode is on Valentine’s
Day, so I thought we’d celebrate the occasion
with a discussion of the future of dating
and relationships, both the good and the bad,
in “Happily Ever After”.
The week after that, we’ll return to the
Earth 2.0 series to discuss cloud cities,
and look at possible human habitats sitting
high among the cloud tops of mountains or
even floating in the sky, in “Cloud Cities”
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please like
it and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
