This episode is brought to you by NordVPN.
A glorious and bright future awaits us if  
we can become a Kardashev Civilization, but what 
barriers stand between us and that bright future. 
So, this episode marks the 8th Anniversary 
of our first episode of Science & Futurism  
with Isaac Arthur, and I thought for 
SFIA’s 8th Birthday, it would be a good  
time to revisit the core concept behind 
our original episode on megastructures,  
which is what a Kardashev-scale civilization 
really would tend to look like compared to our  
classic science fiction and space opera 
interstellar empires and federations. 
I think in many ways, that’s best discussed by 
way of by what the barriers are to reaching that  
level, but first let’s review what the Kardashev 
Scale is. Now there are 3 levels of Kardashev  
civilizations known as K1, K2, and K3, and each 
level on that scale has its own barriers to  
reaching it and challenges to overcome once there.
But first, if you’d like to help the Channel  
reach a new level, make sure to hit 
those like and subscribe buttons. 
The Kardashev Scale’s originator, Astronomer 
Nikolai Kardashev, suggested it as a  
classification for advanced civilizations 
based on how much power they’d consume,  
and the scale is on astronomical grades – 
Planetary, Solar, and Galactic. It has come  
to also imply a civilization’s technological 
level, but honestly, it is not really good for  
measuring that. The basic notion is that your 
typical planet should be getting around 10^17  
watts of sunlight hitting it at any moment and 
the same radiated away as heat or reflected back  
into space unused. A civilization that comes 
to use all that energy directly is called a  
K1 Civilization. We are of course not considered 
to be one. How you define ‘use’ is a bit tricky,  
since photosynthesis by plants used to grow 
food for citizens would seem to count, but as  
an example of how the Kardashev scale isn’t the 
best scale we could come up with when attempting  
to describe a civilization’s technological 
level, an intelligent world-spanning fungus  
or algae with no technology; just a naturally 
evolved planet-brain, would be nearly K1. 
Now, a justification for using technology levels 
interchangeably with Kardashev levels is that  
presumably, a giant planet-wide brain would be 
likely to have far greater mental capacity (than  
humans do) for reaching advanced technological 
levels quickly, as might any civilization with  
2x10^17 watts of power at its disposal, which 
is how much sunlight Earth gets and is also  
10,000 times the average total power consumption 
of humanity these days. Imagine what we could  
do with that much power? 10,000 times what we 
have now? That’s K1 and it’s the lowest level. 
The funny thing is that, while we do need a 
bit more technology to get to K1 ourselves,  
we should have all of that by this century’s end, 
and that technology could take us to levels K2  
and K3 as well. A K2 civilization is just one 
that uses all the power generated by its star,  
rather than just all the sunlight that star 
puts on their planet. But once they’ve built  
the megastructures to capture all the energy 
radiated onto a planet, they don’t need higher  
tech megastructures to encase a star, just 
a lot of them. And K3 just means they use  
all the power generated by an entire galaxy.
Categorizing civilizations by their power usage  
is great for astronomy and SETI purposes – the 
search for extraterrestrial intelligence – because  
that usage will determine how you can detect 
those civilizations. Stars and planets have  
some very specific traits when most or all of 
their energy is being used technologically, and  
especially so when talking about an entire galaxy. 
It is widely believed that energy can be neither  
created nor destroyed, just changed in type.
Planets, or any other bodies in space that are  
absorbing sunlight energy, will get hotter and 
hotter as they absorb light, until they begin  
radiating it away as fast as they absorb it. The 
color, or spectrum, of the light emitted will look  
roughly like a Bell Curve but with a peak based 
on its temperature too. Earth’s peak is at a  
wavelength of about 10 micrometers, corresponding 
to our typical temperature of about 290 Kelvin.  
This is the infrared band, which is huge and 
covers everything from 3 Kelvin to 4000 Kelvin,  
in terms of emission peaks, but we divide the 
band into subgroups, near-infrared, the hottest  
and the majority of what most stars actually emit, 
short-wavelength IR, which about 1000-2000 Kelvin,  
Mid-wavelength IR, which is everything between 
the boiling point of water at one atmosphere,  
up to 1000 Kelvin, and Long-Wavelength IR, 
which is what we usual call Thermal IR,  
and would include every animal on the planet, and 
the planet itself, down to Antarctic temperatures. 
We have Far IR after that and this is what 
basically every other celestial body gives  
off that’s neither a star, nor close to one, 
and is 3-193 Kelvin, most asteroids, comets,  
and moons are in this territory, and right under 
that we get microwave radiation. As a quick  
reminder 273 Kelvin is the same as 0 Celsius or 32 
Fahrenheit, what water freezes at here on Earth,  
and 373 Kelvin is Boiling point, 100 Celsius or 
212 Fahrenheit. And we assume any life based on  
the principles we know of must come from a planet 
in this temperature range where liquid water  
is possible, or one just a bit cooler perhaps.
And again, Earth glows with infrared emissions  
at roughly 290 Kelvin, in the Long Wavelength 
Infrared or LWIR, or Thermal Infrared range,  
290 Kelvin is 17 Celsius or 62 Fahrenheit, 
and that’s the average Temperature of Earth.. 
Now our Sun is about 20 times hotter, so 
has a peak about a twentieth the wavelength,  
half a micrometer. This actually corresponds 
to the color zone of blue-green, but the Sun  
is white in appearance if you look at it – which 
you absolutely should not do – and atmospheric  
scattering results in that yellow-ish look around 
it during mid-day. When we use light as a power  
source, it ends up as heat in the object using it 
and eventually radiates out at a characteristic  
temperature. The amount and spectrum of light a 
star gives off matches very tightly with its mass  
and brightness, so someone using a big portion of 
a star’s light for powering their civilization is  
going to alter that star’s spectrum a lot and it 
would stand-out like a fighter jet on a highway. 
It should be pretty easy for us to spot any 
K2 civilizations that existed at a time where  
their light could possibly have reached us, 
even with the equipment we have today, same  
as it should be easy to spot any K1 civilization 
that is absorbing or emitting more power than we  
would expect it to naturally. Any given planet has 
a specific orbital period around its star based on  
the star’s mass and that planet’s distance from 
it, so if we see a planet around a star of known  
brightness orbiting every X number of Days, we 
know how much radiation it should be giving off,  
either as reflected and scattered sunlight 
or emitted as infrared. We can add those  
up and throw in modifications for greenhouse 
gasses altering that ratio, and if it is off,  
we know we’ve got someone making tons of 
power there, presumably by nuclear fusion,  
or beaming it in from orbital solar arrays. Where 
the Kardashev scale is originally about detecting  
civilizations, this is how that can be done.
And we tend to assume you could see this if their  
emitted power or wavelength was 10% or more off 
from what we’d expect from an uninhabited planet,  
maybe even lower like 1%. Same notion for 
galaxies. So that’s why the classifications:  
K1 and K2 and K3, they are useful specifically 
in astronomy, we’d expect to see if there was  
a sizable distortion to a planet or star or 
galaxy’s natural light output. These are really  
big ranges though, because planets can vary in 
luminosity quite a lot and still be habitable,  
especially when technology comes into play, 
and they vary in size a lot too. So, our own  
planet’s luminosity of about 2x10^17 watts, or 
our galaxy’s luminosity of about 5x10^36 watts,  
can easily vary by an entire order of magnitude 
or two; between two different planets or two  
different galaxies. Stars are even worse, our 
sun, at 4x10^26 Watts, is 2 billion times brighter  
than earth and a bit under 10 billion times 
dimmer than our galaxy, but our Sun is also  
10,000 times brighter than the dimmest red dwarfs 
stars are, and there are hypergiants that are a  
million times brighter than our Sun, that’s 10 
orders of magnitude or a factor of 10 billion  
between dimmest red dwarfs and might hypergiants.
So, it isn’t that we could say a civilization is  
Kardashev 2 if it gives off 386 Trillion-Trillion 
Watts like our own sun does, or standardize it as  
Carl Sagan suggested to 10^16 watts being 
K1, 10^26 being K2, and 10^36 being K3,  
or doing that in megawatts to drop the 6’s. It’s 
just that, from an astronomical perspective,  
if that specific object is varying enough 
from what we would expect, and if that  
variation falls within the scope of what our 
instruments would detect as a clear anomaly,  
with continued observation, it might be 
enough to label it as artificial and alien. 
So basically, if we had good telescopes we 
could spot a sub-K1 civilization on Pluto  
that was causing just 1% variation of its 
normal emissions – which would correspond to  
some subterranean cities 4 trillion watts of 
power generation that radiates away as heat,  
slightly raising Pluto’s temperature, and 
that’s about a fifth of humanity’s current  
power generation too, but on the Sagan Scale, if 
we were to do it calculator-style with 4x10^12  
Watts reading as 4E12 watts, and Earth reading 
2E17 watts, we could presumably replace the E  
with a K and then subtract 6, again putting it in 
megawatts, and divide by ten for the power number.  
So a default K1 Earth is, on this Sagan Scale 
version, 2K1.1, and this hidden Pluto civilization  
would be 4K0.6, and modern Earth civilization, 
ignoring all our agriculture and free lighting,  
would be a 2K0.7. We’ll usually just round on 
that first digit to say, in that case, K0.7 
As usual, you don’t need to memorize 
any of this, there’s no pop quiz coming,  
and I’m not a big fan of using the Kardashev 
Scale for anything other than SETI efforts,  
where it’s really more about how much the objects 
are varying from what we would expect than what  
their actual power output is, but again, we’re 
kinda stuck with it in that other context,  
so we might as well be systemized about it. Folks 
discussing it in our channel forums usually are  
systemized too, but use different systems, so 
maybe that will streamline it for discussion. 
Thus, a full Dyson around our Sun would be a 
4K2.0 civilization, whereas a quarter Dyson or  
one around a Sun a fourth as bright as our 
own would be a 1K2.0 or just K2 civ. Some  
Rungworld around our Sun might be a K1.8 and 
a Niven Ringworld could be viewed as a K1.5.  
Larger modern nations are in the K0.6 range, 
the biggest might hit K0.7 in our lifetimes. 
The thing is, it’s all about *what* you do, not 
just how much you’ve got, and it's so easy to get  
more once you’re in space. Solar is ridiculously 
simple, especially solar thermal, on an asteroid.  
It's then very easy to mine that asteroid out to 
make solar mirrors and panels that are tinfoil  
thick and have an area that is comparable to that 
of a planet. You can then wrap a star in those  
and you’ve got a dyson swarm of power collectors, 
which can very easily power either giant beaming  
systems to move systems up to relativistic 
speeds or even to make antimatter, even with  
a 10 million-to-one loss ratio, for interstellar 
ships to use as fuel. Though we can probably do  
better than 10 Million to one, see our Antimatter 
Factories episode for more discussion of that. 
In this context, becoming a Kardashev civilization 
is real easy once you get to our point,  
and implies no advanced technology, just the stuff 
we expect to get this century or already have.  
That could get us to K2 inside a century, with 
dumb robots on asteroids, mass-producing power  
collectors, but it doesn’t necessarily imply much 
technology beyond that, or a purpose for having  
it, whereas, that tiny little Pluto civilization 
4K0.6 might be super-technologically-advanced  
in comparison. Though again, we would 
assume access to that level of power  
would let you improve your tech very quickly.
And with that in mind, let’s shift to discussing  
what that power really means. In many ways this 
is just as variable because efficiency can help  
you get a lot more done with a lot less. Now, 
efficiency isn’t a magic wand either, an electric  
motor or gas engine isn’t really going to get more 
efficient at doing work, your irrigation pumps  
for water thus can’t improve much, but various 
technologies can make you need less irrigation  
per acre, or get more food out of an acre or 
waste less between field and table. Indeed, we  
often contemplate post-human societies running an 
entire civilization on less power than the typical  
modern household uses, see our civilizations 
at the end of time series for details. 
Let us imagine an entirely baseline human 
civilization though, regular modern humans,  
not cyborgs or AI, but up in space. 
One that just built an additional acre  
or half a hectare of land, be that as an 
arcology, space habitat or domed colony,  
and did that for every human born, and added 
on a megawatt of power generation. Almost all  
of which is going to be used as artificial 
sunlight for forest, lawn, garden, farm,  
etc. Even just with modern technology, 
with that much power generation,  
you can make all the food, clothes, 
and goods someone needs and power them,  
right down to reversing the process to turn water 
and carbon dioxide back into gasoline if you want. 
We’ll refer to this society as a Megawatt Society 
for the rest of the episode and its Kardashev  
level Population is 10^10 for K1, 10^20 for K2, 
and 10^30 for K3, conveniently easy to work with.  
This is of course an intentionally round number 
and show regulars know we’ve run calculations  
showing how even 2 kilowatts (or even less) 
might be enough for a person, with hydroponics,  
we’ll refer to this as a Kilowatt society going 
forward. But critically, there’s no free sunlight  
here, either you’re using the sunlight for power 
generation, including running artificial lighting,  
or you’re bouncing or channeling it around to use 
directly. In all probability you’re doing both  
but this is the difference between a K1 and what 
we are now, and it’s the difference between the  
amount of us and them. We’re a planet of nearly 
8 billion, with many in great need and with an  
endangered ecology which often forces tradeoffs. 
They, at a megawatt each, would have 200 billion  
people living in better circumstances than your 
typical wealthy upper-middle class modern human  
and without ecological concerns. Their population 
could be at 100 trillion using the 2 kilowatt  
figure, but that is definitely a many-layered 
Ecumenopolis mega-city whereas the Megawatt  
figure is more like garden-parks and arcologies.
In situations like this though, I tend to think  
your best bet where nature is concerned, is 
to build thousands of O’Neill Cylinders and  
other space habitats to use as dedicated nature 
preserves, rather than trying to do that on Earth.  
Also, there are a lot of barriers to getting to a 
place like this, not least of which is the barrier  
of whether or not we want to, and many of those 
may be political or ideological but critically, in  
this example, it wouldn’t matter which political, 
economic, or religious system you went with so  
long as it wasn’t opposed to the final product 
as described. I’m sure some would be better or  
worse at getting you there but everyone’s 
mileage is likely to vary on that matter. 
One of those big barriers is population growth, 
because a relatively simple improvement in  
automation and power generation might let us start 
knocking out kilometer-wide solar panels from  
random asteroids as fast as we felt like building 
them, and that same technology leads to the kinds  
that let you churn out space habitats or 
arcologies for folks to live in; faster  
than we could grow people, so to speak, even if 
everybody was having a dozen kids a piece. Nobody  
agrees on population growth rates, nor should 
they, models of how fast populations grow often  
seem as reliable as next week’s weather forecast 
and for similar reasons, its a system that’s just  
chaotic and has a lot of variables with big and 
hard-to-predict impacts, including human opinions. 
As a result, the channel’s default philosophy is 
that the future offers us greater productivity,  
health, and longevity per person than we have 
now and that most people like being parents,  
so we assume that while resources are plentiful, 
or felt too plentiful, folks will opt to have kids  
and probably repeatedly, especially if they’re 
not confined to having kids between their late  
teens and forties, and I’d be willing to bet 
we will see that latter restriction crumble in  
the next few decades, with improved fertility 
treatments. Predicting population this century  
is hard because we are a civilization currently 
very confined in our growth urges by ecological  
and resource-limitation concerns. We know 
that and it influences people deciding on  
when and how big to have a family.
I would guess that by the year 2100,  
we’ll either have those issues mostly solved 
or we’ll pretty much cease as a civilization  
in the modern context, and by that same time, 
I would expect average lifespan to have risen  
to well over 100 and with no effective limit 
on what age an adult could have a child at,  
there are just too many technological pathways 
emerging for that not to be the case. It is  
possible other factors might come into play that 
inclined us to negative growth, unknown feedback  
effects and so on, but the simplest interpretation 
of folks living longer and being fertile longer is  
more people being around and having more kids 
over their personal lifetime. Reality is often  
counterintuitive though and an obvious and fair 
rebuttal would be that people used to live shorter  
lives and generally had more kids then, but for 
the moment, let's accept that interpretation that  
longer lives and fertility periods inclines to 
more population growth, and that greater personal  
knowledge and age bringing wisdom, people are more 
inclined to act strategically in a longer-lived  
society, which would be to choose growth when 
it was a good option and not when it wasn’t. 
Such being the case, by the year 2100, 
we are presumably back to being a growth  
civilization – not that we aren’t now, but there 
are definitely many folks currently hesitating on  
having families, or that are limiting family 
size or delaying having a family for worries  
it could hurt the planet, civilization, or their 
career. Those concerns aren’t magically waved away  
but don’t really seem to apply as growth limits 
as strongly in early Kardashev Civilizations. 
Note that I say “early”, because, if you are in a 
growth phase, even if the Universe were infinite,  
you still bottleneck if you’re growing in number 
faster than you’re growing in resources or  
efficiency in utilizing those resources, and 
an absence of Faster Than Light travel, FTL,  
generally implies as much. This is much as 
we’re a bit bottlenecked on Earth right now,  
needing to temper our growth while we get 
more efficient with our resources, to be K1,  
and off into space to get more worlds and 
resources. We would expect you would get  
those bottlenecks in K2 and K3 civilizations as 
well, though the variety and specific reasons are  
bound to vary a lot on how space colonization 
works out in a practical sense, and probably  
would go through epochs much like Earth and 
humanity’s growth have undergone. I can't really  
call these barriers though, or even hurdles, 
just periods or conditions of harder growth. 
If you grow faster than your resources do, you hit 
a limit, if you stop getting more efficient, you  
hit a limit, if your resources are expended when 
you use them, you hit a limit. And all of those  
would appear to be true under known science, so 
there is an actual limit as to how many folks you  
can keep on a planet or in a K2 Dyson Swarm, but 
things like Birch Planets obviously stretch that,  
since they are a K3 civilization all on their own 
and one so compressed – onto a single galaxy-mass  
planet, light months wide – that even the normal 
K3 limit on a cohesive civilization isn’t in play. 
Nonetheless, we want to be careful where we 
assume those barriers are. As an example,  
our megawatt-per-person civilization would number 
4 billion-trillion humans around our own Sun. Now,  
we have to remember that our sun will eventually 
run out of fuel, but in the process it actually  
gets bigger and brighter every year, 
about 1% every hundred million years,  
which means a millionth of a percent per year, 
or every year it adds about 4x10^18 Watts of new  
sunlight to our solar system, enough to support 
another 4 trillion people. So, it’s insignificant  
growth in terms of total solar output but that 
insignificant amount is still huge in modern  
terms, 500 times our current population. Stars 
die-off weirdly in that way, burning brighter,  
then blowing-up into red giants, with most ending 
as white dwarfs and your typical white dwarf is  
only a thousandth as bright as our Sun after 
a billion years of that white dwarf cooling. 
And those are not really typical either, only 
the largest stars have died thus far, our Sun  
is in the top 5% of stars by mass and only those 
about our size or bigger can actually have burned  
out yet, most dead stars were bigger than our 
sun. Now, we do have ways of living after stars  
burn out, indeed, even around black holes, which 
similarly get brighter with time, not dimmer,  
but by default your white dwarf civilization 
is going to be a tiny remnant of what it was,  
not even a percent. Though, it's hard to imagine 
any K2 Civilization lying down meekly for that to  
happen, and posthuman digital civilizations can 
do way better, and stars can also be refueled,  
see our Civilizations at the end of time 
series for more discussion of those. 
That’s all billions of years down the road though. 
In the here and now, or a century or two from now,  
we can probably build power generation way faster 
than we can build people, and we can add power  
through patience or by building up more fusion 
reactors or black hole generators or similar.  
Your first barrier is getting production capacity 
off-Earth, and is the one we probably focus most  
on here at SFIA. And my writing really is more 
focused on climbing the Kardashev Ladder than  
exploring cool or strange new worlds, that 
to me is more of how to incentivize growing  
and expanding civilization for others. The next 
step after you get decent off-world production,  
which probably means lots of automation 
but doesn’t have to, is simply patience. 
Everything about colonizing the galaxy once you 
get that first foothold off-Earth is patience,  
patience, and more patience. The second half of 
this third millennium is likely to see us having,  
at an individual level, insane amounts of power 
production per person, essentially as much as  
you want if you don’t mind not being too close 
to others to avoid heat building up. I don’t  
think we’re going to see growth rates like we 
did in the 20th century, even if we get radical  
life extension, but if we did, by the year 2500 we 
would number a stunning thousand times more people  
than are alive now, 8 trillion. But even that 
megawatt society would then only need 8x10^18  
watts, or 20 billionths of the light the Sun 
gives off, and just about 40 times what hits  
Earth. Even very crude clanking self replicators 
that required a lot of human oversight should have  
had the time and ability to utterly englobe 
our Sun in power collectors by then, and  
had they done so, those 8 Trillion people would 
each have 50 trillion watts of power each, enough  
to run a mighty modern nation, just for them. 
That’s assuming very fast growth by humans and  
honestly rather slow work by constructor swarms.
Life extension continues to make progress,  
for my part I think people are alive now who will 
live to see an end of aging, and indeed, I think  
if we even show tangible progress to pushing back 
the maximum lifespan and slowing aging, we’ll see  
a big uptick in folks opting to be frozen in their 
old age for eventual restoration. I think come the  
year 2500 a lot of folks watching this episode on 
the day that it airs are still going to be around,  
and assuming we haven’t obliterated ourselves or 
been replaced by something that is not in any way  
human or fond of humans, then it’s a civilization 
in a golden age of post-scarcity where there  
really shouldn’t yet be any pressure to limit 
growth or usage of power. Later probably, but  
not for a millennia or so, and this is probably 
the phase where we’re launching colony fleets  
off by the millions, each to claim their own star
This is another example of the K1-2-3 scale not  
really fitting, odds are, more countries and 
effective discrete civilizations will exist  
around at this point than nowadays, but some 
are already around other stars and many are  
living in orbit of Earth, there’s nothing to 
really point at and say “That’s K1”. Indeed,  
a fully populated Planet Swarm for Earth would 
be more like K1.4, and might come into existence  
before our first interstellar colonies had even 
grown to count as a lightly populated planet,  
unlike in your typical space opera, and ironically 
that lone Planet Swarm would have the troops,  
resources, and material to beat the snot out of 
the typical Space Opera galactic empire. A K1.4  
civilization, one with 10^20 watts of power, as 
a Megawatt Society, would number 100 Trillion  
people and presumably have no problem fielding a 
trillion soldiers and billions of battlecruisers.  
Keep that in mind when contemplating colonies 
in the solar system or even the neighboring star  
systems breaking away and going independent or 
rebel. And keep in mind that that’s still only  
about a millionth the scale of a Dyson Swarm and 
not even a trillionth of a smaller Birch Planet. 
Incidentally, see the Megastructure Compendium if 
any of these structures aren’t familiar to you. 
Your next barrier though, comes at deciding 
how to get your raw materials for building  
all those megastructures. You’re not there at 
8 trillion folks, or even 100 trillion, which  
is why I view this as a golden age period. Even 
if everyone wanted their own O’Neill Cylinder,  
one per family perhaps, basically a county of 
garden and nature preserve all to yourself,  
well that’s a gigaton of habitat per person and 
that means even 100 trillion people have only  
used up 10^20 kilograms of mass, which 
is a few percent of the asteroid belt.  
Keep in mind that even this ludicrous standard 
of living for that enormous population that would  
require record growth rates to reach by the end of 
next millenia, would have needed just 1% of 1% of  
Earth’s own mass, acquired from various asteroids 
and moons and barely denting the stockpile of  
them, and not even a millionth of what we have 
in the system, as we will see in a moment. 
This is the phase though, where you’ve got 
trillions of O’Neill Cylinders and other giant  
space habitats, where you need to start looking 
at moons and even planets for raw materials and  
I think this would represent a crunch period. 
Folks probably live on those and while they can  
be used more efficiently as space habitats, by a 
factor of many thousands or even a million-fold,  
this argument might not be super persuasive 
to those already there when folks would be  
whining in their eyes about not having a 
whole O’Neill Cylinder to themselves and  
maybe having to squeeze a million people into 
space habitats the size of large modern country. 
They’re probably likely to say that should be 
fine or they can get their butts on a colony ship  
to one of the half-trillion empty star systems 
in the galaxy. And another camp is going to be  
talking about engaging in starlifting to pull 
resources from the Sun and extend its lifespan,  
which is definitely something you want to do 
because it's got thousands of times more building  
material of metals than Earth and the other rocky 
planets and moons and asteroids combined have,  
and even extends the lifespan of the star. 
But, it is not an easy task and it's one  
that everyone in the solar system is going to 
want some hand in controlling and regulating,  
what with it involving ripping planets 
worth of super-heated gas off our Sun. 
That may be something that can be practically done 
at a far smaller scale, but that’s going to be the  
emerging hurdle, probably for the 4th millennium. 
Do we disassemble planets or mine the sun or just  
mine other solar systems? If the latter, do we 
opt to set up planet harvesting on new worlds  
rather than colonization, or starlifting up 
around virgin stars before settlers got there? 
It could be some combination of all of 
the above but that’s the next hurdle to  
becoming K2 for a megawatt society, and 
would hit a kilowatt society even faster,  
as those would tend to be more mass per person. I 
don’t really want to use the term gigawatt society  
as that gets terribly non-specific but that 
would be the kind where everyone has a modest  
spacehab to themselves or hundreds of acres or 
hectares of land inside some arcology or spacehab,  
or your own interplanetary spaceship. I’d tend to 
expect anything beyond this scale is so post-human  
that their anatomy consists of kilometers 
of computer chips, semi-immortal hoarders,  
or so post-scarcity they can afford to 
be embarrassed about their lavish waste  
and focus on growing their numbers 
rather than their watts per person. 
Other than patience, your remaining barriers 
really would tend to be existential ones,  
trying to decide what your civilization’s purpose 
is and what your goal is and if you’re willing to  
be coercive about making that happen and 
how much and in what ways. This could go  
a lot of ways and we’ve looked at that more 
in our post-scarcity civilizations series.  
As to the technology needed for getting to these 
points, I normally say more helps but that isn’t  
necessarily true, technology beyond a certain 
point might be destructive to civilizations,  
and we did examine the possibility of low-tech 
Kardashev civilizations a couple years back. 
In the end though, those are the big barriers you 
need to beat to become a Kardashev Civilization,  
you’ll always be fighting heat dissipation 
and entropy, and humanity’s various internal  
divisions, but getting off Earth with our 
production capacity, getting decently automated  
with it, deciding what lifestyles we want to 
live in terms of resources and energy, getting  
those raw materials, and finally, just finding 
a sense of purpose for civilizations themselves,  
are the barriers to getting to Kardashev 
Civilization Status, K1, K2, K3 or beyond. 
For my part, I think we’ll get there, and that 
‘we’ will actually be some of us listening today,  
and I think the journey there will 
be an amazing time to be alive too.
So we have a couple announcements coming up 
including what a K4 civilization would be,  
but first, we suggested today that the big 
barriers to moving forward are often going  
to be more conceptual than technology and 
science options, like a civilization not  
believing in free will anymore, or which can’t 
trust the information they’re getting as true,  
not propaganda, or lacking a feeling of privacy, 
and next week we’ll look at concerns over options  
like that as reason technological progress might 
be intentionally slowed or halted completely. 
In the meantime though, it does often seem 
technology is making ambitiously leaps forward in  
the arena of removing our privacy and for my part, 
I don’t like my personal data, major or mundane,  
vulnerable to misuse by any entity that lacks 
scruples or lacks a good security system,  
which in my book is nearly everybody.
That’s where a virtual private network,  
or VPN, like NordVPN can help. Whether you just 
don’t like the idea of any random webpage knowing  
your IP address or because many sites change 
costs or limit the availability of your shopping  
or streaming based on your location, NordVPN makes 
it easy to encrypt your data anywhere and send it  
through any of their 5400 servers in 59 different 
countries. You can even double route your data  
through two servers for extra encryption, and 
there is an automatic kill switch to protect you  
in case the connection drops. NordVPN is also easy 
to use, you can turn it on with 1-click or even  
automatically, it works with on up to 6 devices 
and on different platforms Windows, Android,  
iOS, macOS, Linux, and even your Android TV.
You don’t need to justify why you would like  
your internet activity encrypted and private, 
anymore than why you like curtains on your  
windows or don’t have your home address and phone 
number stenciled on your clothes for all to see. 
No more bandwidth throttling, no more 
geo-restrictions on which videos and games  
you can play based on location, and NordVPN’s 
Threat Protection upgrade offers an enhanced  
layer of protection against malware, intrusive ads 
and web trackers. You can check out their website  
to learn all the benefits NordVPN offers, just go 
to NordVPN.com/isaacarthur to get a 2-year plan  
plus 4 additional months with a HUGE discount. It’s 
risk-free with Nord’s 30-day money-back guarantee!
So this episode comes out two days before 
the 8th anniversary of our original episode,  
the Megastructure Summary, and just a 
few days before my own 42nd birthday,  
and as 42 is my lucky number, it is a 
birthday I’ve been looking forward to. 
Since it is the birthday of the show and myself, 
it has become a bit of a tradition to make a  
pitch for donating to support the show, and you 
can do that on Patreon, Subscribestar, Paypal,  
Subscribing to Nebula, or even snail-mail, 
see our website or the episode description,  
and for that matter every time you check out one 
of our sponsors or watch and ad on the channel  
it helps. So does hitting the like and subscribe 
buttons, leaving a comment, or sharing the video. 
I wanted to thank everyone for watching and 
supporting this channel as we enter year 9  
and most of that as a weekly show, six and 
a half years now. Which wouldn’t have been  
possible without so many people volunteering 
time and effort to edit scripts, moderate forums,  
donate art or music, help me brainstorm episode 
ideas, or a dozen other things that make doing  
a half-hour long show every week plus two 
Sundays a month possible. A lot of them are  
listed in our credits and do hang out on our 
forums and if you bump into them on a thread,  
let them know how much their effort means to 
us all, because I can never thank them enough. 
So, one of the big things that I love about 
Kardashev civilizations is literally those  
big things, Megastructures, and I want 
to give a shout out to Neil Blevins,  
the artist who compiled Megastructures: A Visual 
Compendium, and the artwork in it is stunning,  
and the personal note in the copy he sent me 
was very touching. I’ve often felt I should  
make a book along those lines and never had 
the time. But now that I’ve seen this one,  
I’m glad I didn’t, because it did it better 
than I ever could have. It’s a must have if  
you enjoyed our original episode or its more 
recent upgrade The Megastructure Compendium. 
So almost every time the Kardashev Scale comes 
up someone is bound to ask what qualifies as a  
K4 civilization and in between now and when 
I wrote this episode’s script I also did  
one on the Grabby Aliens perspective on the Fermi 
Paradox, and I finally found something that seemed  
like a good in between step on the scale between 
galactic and the observable Universe, and that’s  
what for the moment I’m going to call a Hanson 
Bubble, and a K4 Civ, and we’ll discuss that  
more in our grabby aliens episode in two weeks.
Before that though, next week we’ll be discussing  
post-science civilizations, both those that might 
abandon research and those which find they have  
either hit a wall or learned all the science there 
is to know. Then we’ll have our livestream Q&A on  
Sunday, September 25th, at 4pm Eastern Time, and 
as usual, my lovely wife Sarah will cohost that  
and relay on your questions from the live chat.
As always, if you want alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, don’t forget to subscribe 
to the channel and hit the notifications bell.  
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and 
would like help support future episodes,  
visit our website, or check out the links in 
the episode description, for ways to support  
the show or for our forums for discussing all 
these awesome topics and many more. You can also  
try out our audio-only versions available 
on itunes, spotify, audible, amazon music,  
soundcloud, and many more, or get our extended 
editions and exclusive episodes on Nebula. 
Until next time, thanks for watching, and 
thanks for giving this show another great year!
