In the future we’ll be so automated that
machines will be able to take care of your
every want or need, and will be constantly
monitoring you to make sure you have anything
you could want, except of course some privacy.
So today we are beginning our extended look
at post-scarcity civilizations.
This is going to be a major theme of a lot
of our episodes this summer, both in those
that are formally part of this series and
as we look at various projects and challenges
such civilizations might tackle.
This is not our first time discussing such
civilizations.
We had an episode on it two years back as
well, which you may want to watch as a quick
refresher on the topic.
But we’ll review the core material today
along with focusing in on one of the biggest
problems facing such civilizations, personal
privacy, that in many ways is interwoven into
what permits that civilization to exist.
This was a surprisingly difficult topic to
discuss and in no small part because looking
at some of the challenges to post-scarcity
civilizations, places normally thought of
as Utopias, we get a peek at their darker
sides, which are somewhat the opposite of
this channel’s normal tone.
Here at SFIA we hardly try to make the future
look like it is all rainbows, hugs, and kittens
but we undeniably have an optimistic tone
about the future.
We’ll be focusing on a lot of those challenges
though, rather than just the many benefits
and up-sides, and that can paint an artificially
bleak picture.
So as we launch into this topic both today
and as major theme for the summer, I just
wanted to emphasize going in that while I
think the future is going to be quite a bright
place, it is going to have its own unique
challenges and we’ll often be focusing in
on them and looking at extreme examples.
Quite a few of them are specific to what path
you take in the future, however I wanted to
start with privacy today because it’s essentially
interwoven with the very same smart automation
that provides the most likely path into post-scarcity.
Our focus here is not about how technology
could be used to invade privacy, from a strictly
technological perspective that’s the easy
part.
Next week we’ll be exploring how to look
at planets light years away, monitoring every
single person on a planet real time is a lot
easier than that.
If an advanced civilization doesn’t value
privacy, the question isn’t if they’re
monitoring your every movement, but whether
or not they’ve developed a cheap long distance
brain scanner.
So our focus isn’t if you can do it but,
rather, how gathering and using all that information
is simply part of what makes that civilization
so prosperous.
We often say we are living in the Information
Age, a term I’ve always rather disliked,
but it is fairly accurate and it puts the
focus on our challenge.
Where you have a lot of information and a
lot of smart computing, you don’t have much
privacy.
A lot of stuff is being recorded, which makes
it easy to search and find reliable information,
so you can play detective amongst that wealth
of information and get very accurate images
of what’s going on, even on fairly little
data.
However, there’s no need to do so as we
have tons of data and that will only grow
in the future.
One of things that will probably be scarce
in post-scarcity civilizations is classic
crime, as it ought to be nearly impossible
to avoid getting caught.
Odds are good everyone will be constantly
recording their surroundings, no unreliability
of eyewitnesses and hazy memories.
Even if you eliminate their records, you just
have so many others nearby you could piece
together what probably happened pretty easily,
and once you’ve got that, finding the additional
necessary evidence wouldn’t be hard.
And that’s great, but it cuts both ways.
It’s very hard to have much privacy in such
situations.
In the future your kitchen auto-chef will
prepare all your meals to your exact tastes
and dietary needs and guess at other dishes
you’d enjoy, but to do that it needs a lot
of information.
If you want to have guests over and feed them
what they like, it needs their information
as well.
This extends far wider too, in order to get
rapid access to something you want, we need
information about you and whoever might supply
that product or service.
If you want to find your soul mate from all
across the planet, then some computer has
to have access to a ton of information of
a very intimate nature on both of you to achieve
that and ways of verifying its true.
Ideally that needs to include even information
you don’t want your partner to have, or
even yourself.
This is a family friendly channel, so we’ll
limit our example to saying someone might
have an irritating way of laughing, one that
wouldn’t bother some people, but that’s
not something they want to think about or
could be asked about.
Few folks would admit, even to themselves,
that they’d find that trait murderously
irritating, but the computer has your lifelong
biometric data and can see how you responded
to such laughs in the past.
It’s that very surplus of information and
computation that allow something like that,
sorting through billions of people for that
person whose various traits and interests
most perfectly match your own, and vice-versa,
and can speak with such authority that both
of you trust that answer, confident that even
if they seem like someone you’d never go
out on a date with let alone make it through
one, this will turn out to be the person right
for you and vice-versa.
You’d never have gotten to date number 10,
where you both find out that, to your surprise,
you both love a bunch of the same books, the
same meals, the same bands, have the same
long term goals and priorities in life, and
don’t care as much about some of the normal
ones we tend to use when fishing and filling
out scorecards.
Now something like that is optional, and a
person might forgo that route to romance if
they like but will have sacrificed something
to do so.
However that’s at the very core of a post-scarcity
civilization, because scarcity of friends
and relationships is just as important as
scarcity of basic survival needs.
So if you’re routinely blocking all access
to your data, assuming that’s even viable,
you aren’t enjoying a post-scarcity existence,
at least not to the full degree.
Let’s review what that is briefly.
The basic notion is one in which scarcity
of resources no longer exists, you are post-scarcity,
but you have to toss that out right away.
First, it really isn’t what we mean when
using the terms as essentially a synonym for
Utopia, and second it’s essentially an impossibility
under known science and our current understanding
of the Universe.
There is a finite amount of resources and
some energy is expended, and entropy increased,
when using them.
So we’d usually amend that to no major scarcity,
that almost any reasonable material desire
could be met.
Indeed, with virtually reality on the table
even a lot of unreasonable ones can be too.
However as we pick away at the concept, as
we did in the original Post-Scarcity episode
a couple years back, we see that the more
appropriate meaning is more a scarcity of
anxiety, want, and need.
We used Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs there
to examine those and saw many of them having
nothing at all to do with how much energy
or raw materials you have, or even how good
your production is if you’ve got robots
who can make most of those items.
After all, it’s nice to have plenty to eat,
but it’s even nicer if you don’t have
to spend half your day doing stuff you’d
rather not to get those.
Of course everyone’s priorities are different,
I quite enjoy my work and have always put
a premium on having work that gave me a sense
of usefulness and purpose, money is nice but
secondary, as is recognition, and many people
feel this way but for others, money is more
important, or perhaps prestige is.
Everybody prioritizes their wants and needs
differently and generally we’d say that’s
not only their business but their fundamental
right of self-determination, so long as it
can be plausibly met without inconveniencing
the rest of us too much.
After all, there’s nothing wrong with wanting
to rule the planet as king, but typically
many folks will want this job and obviously
you could only have one, and most of us would
find such a ruler, both in how they governed
and how they got the job, more than a little
inconvenient.
Personally, I’d never want to rule a planet
but I’d love to build one, which requires
a lot more resources than conquering one and
would inconvenience a lot of folks as a result.
Again that’s an example of where virtual
reality can help a lot, but even there you
have limits, which we’ll discuss more in
episode 2.
You could probably have your own private virtual
planet to make or rule, but processing power
will still be necessary and you probably couldn’t
simulate 7 billion people to plausible accuracy
all simultaneously, nor realistically could
we let folks go around simulating people to
the point of genuine emulation.
As we’ve discussed before, unless you’re
a really big believer that only biological
life can be a genuine person, then you have
to place a hard limit on such simulations
so you’re not letting someone basically
be a tyrant over countless digital but real
people.
So we end up with a definition of post-scarcity
where people have very little anxiety over
most basic wants and needs, a scarcity of
desperation, but we have to be careful with
this one too, as we get artificial suppression
of those needs.
I was discussing this with a member of the
audience some months back and he suggested
the term ‘post-discontent civilization’
for those where that was happening.
As an example, one in which people are engineered
to be happy and content even while living
in a very poor and oppressive society.
Or are juiced up on happiness drugs or even
simply just indoctrinated to put their priorities
on other things.
That can be a very hazy line too, as indoctrination
is quite an ambiguous thing if we’re talking
about encouraging folks to not care about
material wealth for instance.
This is a common criticism of Star Trek, as
we are presented a Utopia that we know is
a Utopia mostly because they all say it is.
This is very common in science fiction and
I hate picking on Star Trek but it is the
best known example.
We see tons of contrary evidence to this claim,
including being told at one point in Voyager
that the entire crews’ brain waves are being
constantly scanned by the ship.
However they make a good core point, in a
Universe where replicators provide pretty
much anything you want on request, there’s
not going to be much focus on money in the
classic sense.
We’ll bypass whether you need it at all
or not, and as best as I can tell in Star
Trek, they do have it but everyone likes to
pretend they don’t, but it does mean raw
material possessions aren’t something that
motivates folks too much.
More importantly, it means the drive to have
them is decreased in influence.
We have a lot of folks who themselves don’t
much care about material wealth but focus
their life on acquiring it because of the
attached social status of having it.
Say you want to be wealthy because you feel
it will attract a better mate, even if you
don’t personally care about it, you will
pursue that.
If it is no longer particularly relevant to
society then you presumably put your efforts
elsewhere.
Reasons for divorce are numerous but some
of the more common ones are money, weight
gain, household chores, and a lot of behaviors
that require an additional person.
You can scratch money right away, as whether
you are in a capitalist, communist, or simply
post-money society, it’s simply not much
of a concern if it’s a post-scarcity one,
there’s simply no attached desperation for
money to enable you to survive and be happy.
Physical attractiveness is unlikely to matter
either, as technology will probably not only
let you sculpt your body to pretty much however
you want but they can flick on augmented reality
if they like.
So if your partners new taste in clothes or
hair or whatever irritate you, you can simply
view them as you preferred, and it can delete
away any annoying habits, like if you love
your spouse immensely but absolutely hate
that snorting laugh they have or their snoring.
Robots are presumably doing most of the household
chores, so little arguing there.
And virtual reality offers at least some alternatives,
since someone could use that to vent in.
Of course virtual reality is another topic
that like privacy represents some serious
challenges to advanced civilizations, and
again we’ll save that for the next episode
in the series.
One big one is that it might eliminate any
desire for a spouse or friends exactly because
it can be tailored to your taste, without
complaint, and any deficiencies removed.
I mention the augmented reality options as
a partial rebuttal for now.
Virtual reality might let you conjure up your
dream partner, if you have sufficiently advanced
computing, but that same advanced computing
let’s you find your perfect match in the
real world too, and augmented reality lets
you further tweak that.
If you love everything about them except their
eye color, you can just change that to your
own perceptions.
You’re not arguing about how your partner
has managed to annex most of your closet since
moving in because you can get a bigger closet,
or how they sprawl over the whole bed and
steal the covers because you can get a bigger
one, it’s a post-scarcity society.
An awful lot of the problems that wreck relationships
among partners or friends or family now simply
aren’t there in any driving way or are easily
removable.
That hardly eliminates the virtual reality
benefits or concerns but it offers some alternatives
that dampen them, and again that’s a topic
for another day.
Ours for today is privacy and now that we’ve
reviewed the basics of post-scarcity we can
see how that’s a problem.
All of these benefits derive from smart automation,
not just the ability to run all your mines,
farms, and factories with robots but all your
distribution as well.
In a landscape of a billion products you need
smart automation to help find what you need,
suggest what you like, and ensure that product
is good-quality and arriving quickly and intact,
whether from a warehouse or your home 3D printer.
All that smart automation is doing the job
we used to reserve for servants, and which
allowed limited post-scarcity for a small
minority though one that had to worry about
rebellion.
We can use a parallel concern for robots and
AI, being the abused servants or murderously
rebelling, but that implies your programmers
suck at their jobs.
And I don’t mean because the AI has been
programmed to love its work, that’s just
creating a post-discontent society among them,
I mean you don’t build something that can
experience loss, desire, love, and pain in
the first place.
I don’t want a smart robot that’s basically
a human in brains and emotions working for
me even if it loves its job because I’d
constantly feel like a jerk or monster for
condoning its existence.
I’d rather wash my own dishes, and more
to the point my dishwasher doesn’t need
to be very smart.
However, one of the roles of a good servant
is being able to handle a lot of decision
making for their boss and anticipate things,
and why there are a lot jobs of that sort
these days even as automation means a lot
of basic tasks are done by machines with little
to no circuitry in them.
Needless to say this does require a brain.
We’ve talked about that before and will
more down the line but for the moment we’ll
just say you don’t necessarily need a very
smart and generalized brain for that.
You don’t need a sentient computer running
your house to anticipate what you like for
breakfast and have it ready when it detects
you are beginning to wake up.
The thing is that it does need to be able
to monitor you in pretty close detail to do
that, collecting and sorting information.
And if it isn’t supersmart it probably needs
to be able to share that info with something
else specialized in handling that problem,
like calling up your doctor, be it human or
machine, to ask if this or that spike of pain
or fatigue when doing something might indicate
a health concern.
It needs to be able to relay your sleeping
conditions to your hotel when you travel.
You and your partner need to be able to send
both of those to your furniture store or decorator
to determine the conditions best optimized
for both of you, and so on.
Many of these could be gotten around by simply
not using them, but in the first place if
you are then you aren’t enjoying the full
benefits of that society and in the second
it’s probably pointless anyway as there’s
bound to be tons of info already floating
around about you that allows some very detailed
profiling from available data.
As an over the top example, we can easily
imagine all sorts of black market groups existing
just for that purpose, not so much for financial
gain as simple excitement or enjoyment of
playing detective or snoop.
What’s more, the various AI in your civilization,
which might have some pretty crazy motivations,
might all feel your privacy matters only in
the sense that people should feel like they
have it.
If you’ve got a lot of household computers
that are quite smart and exist only to protect
and serve their person or family, it might
deduce very quickly that all that privacy
seriously interferes with that motivation,
but only them knowing their privacy was invaded
actually hurts them.
And as we discussed before, in Machine Rebellion,
that can lead to some crazy behavior that’s
not actually crazy.
Same as the Paperclip Optimizer exists only
to make paperclips, and views all facets of
existence in terms of that, a house computer
feels the same way.
It would have no ethical issues nuking every
other house on the planet if it felt that
would achieve higher safety, happiness, and
security for its family.
We mentioned the need earlier to have access
to other people’s preferred foods if you
were hosting a dinner party.
So imagine that Summer was hosting such a
party and her friends Alice, Bob, and Cameron
were coming over.
When her home computer finds out that they
have privacy settings that won’t let it
get those, and deduces that Summer will be
slightly upset if they don’t enjoy their
time, and thus their meals, it could go to
some pretty crazy lengths to achieve that
goal.
While Alice is coming over it hires a black
market hacker to get into her house computer
and gain that data, it’s a post-scarcity
society so the cost of this is fairly irrelevant.
When it finds out that Bob has a superior
security network when it tried to do it to
him, it waits till he leaves and hires a team
of commandos to raid his house.
When it determines it can’t do either to
Cameron, it blackmails her parent’s house
computer to reveal the data in its archives
from when she was a kid.
It has successfully attained the data, and
can proceed to keep Summer safe from the emotional
hurt of unhappy guests.
And the whole time the party is going on it's
constantly scanning Summer and all her guests
for any signs of problems.
It might detect that Cameron doesn’t like
this meal after all and covertly drug her,
or do the same to Alice if she starts saying
something mean to Summer.
Or try to drug or distract Bob if he starts
talking about a controversial and unpleasant
topic over after-dinner drinks.
Heck it might start blocking any news items
coming in about that topic if it decides reading
about them would upset Summer.
That’s all it cares about, keeping Summer
safe.
Now since that’s the main priority of all
these machines they might just conspire together
to share all that data around between them,
and Alice and Bob never even realize that
they were calculated to be an optimum pair
and were introduced by various entirely contrived
circumstances that seemed plausibly coincidental.
This is all ignoring that deductions from
observation might not even be necessary since
someone might invent a brain scanner that’s
very compact and hard to beat.
Or even illegal to beat.
Keep in mind that privacy represents a threat
to others, especially in a high tech civilization
where down in someone’s basement they might
have a replicator or printer able to spew
out doomsday weapons or run simulated Universes
with genuinely sentient inhabitants they oppress
or torture on a whim.
Privacy and freedom versus safety and security
is very old debate and isn’t a particularly
clean-cut one.
But if any random lunatic can create a doomsday
weapon you pretty much have to either force
an abandonment of that level of technology
or start giving the okay to things which either
limit privacy or let you program people not
to do such things, and both represent very
slippery slopes obviously.
While these seem like pretty implausible and
ludicrous scenarios, and I certainly tend
to like to use those on this channel to illustrate
a point, in this case it really isn’t.
You’ve got a clear motivation to invade
people’s privacy for their own benefit.
So on top of all the concerns we have about
hacking and abuse of data for personal financial
gain, which can at least be countered by making
those harder or less attractive, you’ve
got the problem that the very nature of that
society requires tons of information to provide
the very benefits everyone wants, the more
you restrict that, the less benefits.
So whoever is running things has a pretty
clear motivation to either encourage folks
not worry about privacy or to run a scam where
people think they have it but don’t.
The alternatives tend to be those Post-Discontent
Civilizations, where you are employing some
method for making people not want something
they’d typically be prone to want.
Now, this does not mean you can’t solve
these problems, you can probably think of
some ways already and we might find more in
the future.
If nothing else challenges like this help
give folks in the future something to work
on and that might be a good thing since a
Sense of Purpose is also something people
want and need and might be in short supply
in your typical quasi-Utopia.
We already have segregation of data, even
in your mobile phone, where data you get on
one app is not shared with other apps unless
you authorise that.
That’s a very simplistic solution, but I’m
sure we will come up with more sophisticated
data siloing going forward and it will probably
be mandatory to do so to avoid the dystopian
futures many fear will occur.
I don’t want to underplay the concerns because
they are real.
At the same time, I don’t see them as necessarily
unsolvable or that they should make us dread
the future, which in most respects ought to
be fairly awesome.
We’ve been dealing with privacy issues for
a long time and constantly get new sources
of worry and new solutions to those.
And forewarned is forearmed, so if we are
aware of these issues and put carefully thought
about solutions into place early, we can avoid
many of the dystopian scenarios.
One of those is obviously the internet, and
a great example of new tech creating problems
that never existed before, and also how the
benefits outweigh the risks.
Considering this episode is about privacy
concerns and that the news of late has been
reminding us all of the trust issues we have
with social media giants, I think it would
be rather redundant to point out how important
it is to safeguard your own privacy and security.
This episode is sponsored by the Virtual Private
Network provider NordVPN, however, and I thought
I should emphasize that while no security
package is going to cover all your bases nor
do it without requiring you know and understand
those threats and how the security systems
handles them, it is nice to have something
that’s very broad in its threat coverage,
affordable, and works with a relative minimum
of effort.
NordVPN is a great example of all of the above,
offering military-grade security, for a number
of different devices, that is easy to use,
covers lots of internet security risks, and
if you use the link in the description it
will cost you less than 3 dollars a month.
The simple reality is the internet isn’t
going away and even if you were willing to
avoid it and all the benefits it offers, that’s
not an option nowadays.
It’s just too important to us for professional
and personal use, but it does expose you to
risk so want to minimize that and NordVPN
is one of the best additions you can add to
your personal security arsenal.
Like a lock on your front door or anti-virus
software on your computer, it’s easy to
add and use and decreases your personal risk.
The most important tool in that arsenal though
is knowledge, and if you want to learn more
about it and its features, visit NordVPN.com/Isaac,
use code “ISAAC”, that’s I-S-A-A-C at
checkout, and get 77% off a 3 year plan today.
Okay, last week we looked at Interstellar
Beacons, ways of being seen and heard far
away, and next week we will look at the opposite
side of that in Megatelescopes, and explore
the options and challenges for seeing things
far away, and just how big a telescope a post-scarcity
civilization can build.
The week after that we will take a look at
Planetary Invasions, and our book of the Month,
Robert Heinlein’s Starship Troopers.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, this is Isaac Arthur, saying
thanks for watching
and we’ll see you next week!
