This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
Money makes the world turn round, so the saying
goes --
but how will the economy change as we move
beyond this world,
and perhaps even beyond our current understanding
of money?
So today we’ll be looking at possible economies
of the future, from the dystopian to utopian,
from ultra-scarcity to post-scarcity.
We’re principally going to be looking at
how future developments might impact economic
systems so we’ll try to look at everything
we can think of, but obviously we’ll never
get through all the options, or be able to
cover them all in deep detail.
As a quick sidenote, channel regulars probably
know I’m getting married this weekend, and
I’ll talk about that for a bit at the end
of the episode, but I did just want to confirm
that we are still having episodes during my
honeymoon but I’ll be delayed responding
to comments and the next couple episodes will
air while Sarah and I are away on our honeymoon,
so advance warning we might get some technical
difficulties or delays with me out of the
studio.
Unsurprisingly, weddings tend to make one
think of the future and economics, so it was
an interesting time to tackle this topic.
What do stuff like extended lifespans do to
retirement, pensions, debt, and interest?
What sort of effect on the medical industry
is there if someone comes by and invents little
medical nanobots that can fix almost anything?
What does an automated manufacturing chain
do besides make things cheaper and put folks
out of work?
What kind of money, if any, does an advanced
civilization use?
I figured we might as well start with this
one.
Some Science Fiction, like Star Trek, has
a tendency to assume an ideal future economy
is post-scarcity, and that it wouldn’t need
money.
That might be so, but in my experience this
generally just means a currency by some other
name.
I can’t really see how you could have an
economy that didn’t have money of some sort,
as the basic premise is that I want something
or to do something and need someone else to
do it, or do it better or faster at least.
Even if we assumed you had infinite resources
and automation that could spin up any object
on the spot in an instant, which probably
can’t be made, see the Santa Claus Machine
episode for why, physical objects aren’t
the only commodities, and grow less so every
day.
Nor are we just talking about a book or computer
program, which can be endlessly copied.
If folks are all wealthy, they might write
or program for free, simply for the fun or
prestige of it, which is arguably a commodity
in itself.
In a very advanced civilization folks might
not need to consult others for their skills
as some artificial intelligence might easily
provide consultation and work on anything.
However, you still have some things which
are finite.
Bandwidth, radio frequencies, energy off the
sun or reactor fuel, how much heat you can
get rid of, and even how much matter you can
import into an area without undergoing gravitational
collapse, all represent finite things under
known physics.
Your total population, if growing, can also
always turn any finite supply, no matter how
abundant and easily acquired, into a scarce
circumstance if those resources aren’t growing
as fast as the population is.
So a post-scarcity civilization can become
a scarce one again, even if their tech has
improved, simply because they decided they
wanted more people.
When it comes to clearly finite things like
radio or sunlight, some person or group or
whichever has control of those in some fashion
and has to administer their use, and it’s
a bit hard to imagine how such exchanges of
control would be conducted without some medium
and method for conducting them, which essentially
is then a currency or money.
Even if it is something like a set quota per
person or traded on perceived use or need,
there is an exchange, and those might be influenced
by things like the prestige of the person
or project involved, in which case you just
get prestige as money.
Indeed one might argue that money itself is
really just a generic, mobile, and liquid
abstraction of things like influence, respect,
trust, reputation, and prestige to begin with.
In a family or small tribe you don’t usually
bother with currency or even a barter system,
you need those when your civilization is big
enough that not everyone can have great knowledge
of each person they’re dealing with.
With those close to us, friends and family,
we do still engage in exchange but it’s
rarely as simple as this for that or quid
pro quo, in the background of every exchange
is that entire history of that relationship
in which exchanges happen constantly, every
time you so much as pass the salt at the dinner
table, and each exchange impacts all future
or ongoing ones in rather non-precise ways.
Two interesting notes on that though.
First, it is conceivable a society with lots
of mental augmentation capability might be
able to so increase our capacity for tracking
social interactions that our Dunbar’s Number
for humans – the number of people you can
have complicated relationships with at once,
usually put as about 150 people – might
skyrocket to a far higher number.
Second, technology often offers surprising
changes.
For instance, we probably will live in a world
even in our lifetimes in which pretty much
every action you take is recorded, even if
just by your own devices, and in which data
is heavily analyzed by AI in the background.
We’ve talked before about that making it
very easy to help folks keep track of their
keys or other possessions prone to getting
lost, as well as figuring out all sorts of
helpful health or behavioral patterns.
But it could go a lot further than that and
potentially track and catalogue every interaction
you had with someone else and credit you some
sort of social currency.
Indeed that notion, of social credit, along
with general privacy concerns of constant
monitoring and advanced analysis, are rather
troubling to contemplate all on their own,
as we looked at in our Post Scarcity Civilizations
episode on Privacy.
For good or ill, we are likely to see at least
some places opt to introduce this notion of
a social currency in the future and you can’t
really isolate commodities from the main market,
so if you have a social currency you’d be
able to buy it somehow with regular money,
much as many online games have their own in-universe
currency and items that folks often trade
for real money.
Another example might be appearance.
Right now, nobody, no matter how egalitarian
a society might wish to be with money, will
have things like intelligence or appearance
be uniform, and these can be advantageous
and are at least partially inherited.
However we do need to consider that in the
future the equivalent of cosmetic surgery
might be so easy and safe and extensive that
you could get yourself basically whatever
body type you wanted, even for things like
height, gender, race, and so on.
Such a civilization could opt to be more egalitarian
by requiring everyone look alike, or simply
be prone to detaching appearance from their
thinking as folks were prone to always looking
like supermodel athletes and could change
their appearance without much more difficulty
than we change clothes or hair colors nowadays.
Intelligence might be the same.
I’m not a fan of the concept of IQ as I
consider it rather over-simplified, nor of
treating it like your IQ score was a direct
analogy to some computer chip’s processing
power, but the analogy works for our purpose
today.
We have a bell curve distribution of intelligence
normalized to 100, with outliers quite far
from that and all sorts of sub-types of intelligence
like memory or spatial imaging too.
However if you’ve figured out the brain
well enough, and genetics or cybernetics well
enough, you could potentially just be giving
everyone the same processor so that you had
a very tight bell-curve instead, everybody
about the same intelligence, everybody smarter
than Einstein and yet no Einsteins because
everybody is about as smart as everyone else.
Knowing people, I am pretty sure that if everybody
was a super-genius walking around in the body
of a bronze god, you’d still get folks driven
to excel or rebel or establish a pecking order,
not wanting to be the same as everyone else
in everything, even if that ‘same’ was
so impressive they’d have been worshipped
as a superman by prior generations.
That implies a need for exchange or system
of competition too, thus implying some sort
of currency too and an economy.
Though it doesn’t necessarily have to come
from a government, or have universal participation
in the same system.
Though I suppose we might also contemplate
a civilization which viewed such urges as
mental disorders subject to being fixed by
advanced psychology and neurology.
We can’t ignore that sort of thing in economics
either, most of our vices are relative things
and its extreme cases we tend to view as bad,
greed for instance presumably derives from
a basic survival instinct run a bit to excess
and a lot of the aspects of consumption that
many folks frowned on might be something a
society casually and effectively treated in
children.
Whether or not that is a good thing would
obviously depend both on one’s personal
opinion and the method of treatment.
This raises the notion of what we call a Post-Discontent
Society, a variation on a Post-Scarcity Civilization,
as well as how we define Post-Scarcity.
Here on SFIA we usually opt to define a post-scarcity
civilization as one in which the sorts of
basic needs at the bottom of things like Maslow’s
Hierarchy are just so easily obtained by virtually
everyone that they don’t produce any significant
anxiety.
For instance, most of us don’t worry much
where our next breath of air or sip of water
will come from or if we’ll have a warm meal
and bed waiting for us tonight, and certainly
less than our ancestors did.
So we view it as a scarcity of anxiety essentially,
rather than a scarcity of raw materials or
energy specifically.
By default, the higher you go on Maslow’s
Hierarchy of Needs where those needs are satisfied
easily, the more post-scarcity you are.
As an example, in an ideal post-scarcity civilization
every last need on Maslow’s Hierarchy is
filled, all the way up to stuff like Self-Actualization
and a feeling of achievement.
Needless to say, we assume it means access
to things to fill those needs is generating
the absence of anxiety, as opposed to simply
feeding folks drugs or propaganda to suppress
their worry over them, and we call that a
Post-Discontent Society, one where people
simply don’t worry about it rather than
having no real cause to worry about it.
A civilization whose psychologists are so
good, people don’t get needless anxiety
over phobias or self-esteem issues would presumably
be a good thing, but being able to brainwash
folks so they were happy living in a slum
and working 16 hours a day 365 days a year
is presumably not, and this would be a Post-Discontent
Society rather than a Post-Scarcity one.
This would also be an example of a civilization
where most people didn’t need money, since
you’re essentially not letting them have
personal goals they wish to achieve that might
require something more than what they’re
allotted.
Also needless to say, such things could come
in many shades and degrees and might be the
fairly mild dampening of human desires or
the flat out dystopian.
See the post-scarcity civilizations series
for more discussion of this entire topic.
But that’s what a post-scarcity civilization
is and what we’d presumably like to be aiming
for.
What sort of things get us there?
What technologies do we need?
Well, again, it would come in many levels
and varieties so it’s not really a finish
line you cross, nor necessarily a permanent
state, but we should start by acknowledging
that we have a lot of folks who are essentially
post-scarcity even today and it’s not entirely
a new thing.
A nobleman living in a past time rarely worried
about his next meal, though often had to worry
about many other things like rebellion or
annexation, and of course most people did
have to worry about their next meal.
We have no shortage of our own problems nowadays
but most folks living in the wealthier nations
obviously have a lot less basic survival concerns
than our ancestors did.
There are 3 things that would, either together
or in tandem, make us at least hit the bottom
of the Post-Scarcity pyramid.
First is energy, it’s our lifeblood and
we have plenty but more would be good and
more importantly we don’t have a stable
and safe supply.
Even if we ignore the ecological concerns,
that possibility of running out of fossil
fuels in decades, or centuries, prevents us
from being post-scarcity.
Now as best we can tell the resources of this
Universe are finite and entropy puts a limit
on anything being truly renewable, so even
a civilization that had mastered Fusion Power
or Black Holes can run out of energy, but
these are on scales of timelines in the trillions
of years or longer, and if we’re talking
about civilizations it’s generally pointless
to use a definition for one that would require
timelines longer than any existing civilization
has ever lasted, let alone all of them or
even the planet they’ve been on.
It’s also why we avoid using a scarcity
of a specific resource when discussing post-scarcity
here, in a finite universe any commodity can
become scarce, and indeed you can get bottlenecking
of supply even in infinite systems.
An infinite supply of water does a farm no
good if it can only pump a few liters per
minute to a location because of a finite supply
of plumbing equipment.
We’ve spent a lot of time talking about
all the cool options a vast new, cheap, and
renewable power supply offers humanity in
other episodes, everything from vast vertical
farms or space farms to interstellar travel
to new worlds or even building your own worlds
or megastructures, so we’ll leave it at
that for now.
Our second option is simply better analysis,
and as we discussed in our episode the future
of garbage, civilizations tend to produce
a lot of waste in their supply and utilization
chains, and one who has gotten way better
than us at that analysis, distribution, and
utilization problem might well be post-scarcity
even with just what we’ve got right now.
Far better computing and Artificial intelligence
might be amazingly good at that sort of thing,
and even for scarcity issues beyond the lowest
tiers of survival needs.
For instance higher on Maslow’s Hierarchy
are those things like self-esteem, social
and romantic relationships, and so on, and
very good analysis might make it possible
to match up folks with the job that they both
loved and were good at and help them screen
for friends and partners who were particularly
well-suited to them and vice-versa.
Now, we don’t actually pick our relationships
out of a hat at random, even friends you meet
at work generally have more in common with
you than most people picked at random.
If you’re a computer programmer who loves
science fiction, odds are pretty good compared
to random that your coworker shares those
interests and likely many other associated
ones.
A more remote form of work, where folks clock
in by computer from home, might tend to interfere
with that, but on the other hand there is
likely to be a lot higher concentration of
folks who love their job at a given workplace,
real or virtual, simply from better matching
of people to jobs.
That’s an interesting consequence of remote
work, a thing that is growing in our current
economy and will probably grow much more.
It’s much easier to find a hundred people
who absolutely excel at and love a specific
job if you can screen an entire continent
for them not just your local town.
This of course assumes there are any jobs
in the future, but even if there aren’t
- at least as we understand a job nowadays
- it will take a while to get from here to
there.
Our third option for post-scarcity is automation,
robots and so on, and obviously these eliminate
a lot of jobs too.
This isn’t new and in the past we’ve eliminated
a job and produced new ones, causing disruption
but still getting folks gainfully employed
and at a higher average standard of living.
There are concerns that trend might not continue,
that you’d really only have jobs for a tiny
few and those owning most near everything,
and you’d have to institute something along
the lines of a UBI, Universal Basic Income.
Now definitions vary on this but the usual
notion is everyone receives some set amount
of funds, income, or stipend simply for existing
or being a citizen, regardless of merit or
standing, much as we generally would do for
things like rights under the law, police and
military protection, voting, access to libraries,
and often things like education or healthcare.
I’ve seen other versions which link it to
merit too, like being able to get extra for
community service or suspension for criminal
conduct but the most commonly referenced form
at the moment is a stipend set to be roughly
at what the minimum reasonable income for
living is, decoupled from any behavior on
the individual’s part.
The pros and cons of that, and the ethics
of it, are obviously debatable and dependent
on how you’re doing it.
For instance, behavior or merit based bonuses
or penalties can have appeal but can also
make the skin crawl at thinking about who
decides what good and bad behavior is or if
someone is acting that way.
But if instituted it obviously greatly impacts
the economy and in some not so obvious ways.
Much like radical life extension it might
have some strange effects on interest rates
and lending.
Can people borrow against their UBI, or can
a creditor garnish a UBI income?
Do folks opt for mortgages more often than
renting homes, with a guaranteed basic income?
Do they lease vehicles more or less than now,
or other major purchases?
In terms of housing, especially combined with
remote work, might a set stipend encourage
a lot of folks to move out of cities to where
money tends to go further?
We tend to assume, from this last century
or so, that cities will just get bigger and
more numerous, but they grew because they
offered better pay, more variety of jobs,
and easier access to lots of commercial and
recreational options.
What happens when you can work from home,
even on another continent, when you can get
virtually anything delivered to your home
rapidly via drone, and when many recreational
options are digital?
You can get similar effects from automated
vehicles too.
Not only would they tend to make freight a
lot cheaper, lowering the price of almost
everything significantly, but it changes around
your commute.
Cars might tend to get remodeled to be more
focused on a passenger trying to get work
done or simply relaxing while en route.
Long commutes might be less bothersome to
folks, which might have the reverse effect
of remote work, which many people prefer simply
because they don’t have to do the long commute.
It’s a good reminder that seemingly inevitable
consequences of one new technology can be
impacted or even reversed by another technology.
As another example, we mentioned energy abundance
as one major economic impact path and prerequisite
for post-scarcity, but energy abundance that
takes people off the grid varies a lot from
one that requires everyone be linked together
by wires.
Folks sometimes suggest that energy might
become the new currency of the future too,
and I’ve also suggested that heat rather
than energy might be currency.
This of course would be an example of a Commodity
Currency, one in which a specific commodity
like gold or grain was what people traded
directly or traded tokens for.
This is as opposed to a Fiat Currency.
Fiat currency is where the medium of exchange
is not a specific commodity or token for that
with some intrinsic value but where the issuing
entity, like a government, says the money
has a value.
We discussed the difference between commodity
and fiat currency more in our Cryptocurrency
episode, and I’d generally tend to assume
fiat currency will remain the norm in the
future.
However other options for a commodity currency
beyond energy or heat removal might be processing
power, raw materials or reactor fuel, man-hours,
or going back to using land as one.
We’ve a set amount of land right now, but
construction of space habitats like the O’Neill
Cylinder might result in land returning as
an official or default commodity currency.
The problem with a fiat currency is that it
requires a very stable entity like a government
to keep it stable, and an unstable currency
is not desirable, that is one appeal of cryptocurrency
since it is a bit less dependent on any given
nation or group being stable.
Outside of a solar system, or even a planet,
it’s harder to do a fiat currency simply
due to light lag issues and all the complications
attached.
For instance if you’re trading between solar
systems you might need to convert money not
just over many light years but centuries of
time elapsing from when you left to when you
arrived.
Aluminum used to be super-expensive and is
now quite cheap, processing power as a commodity
is only plausible over long times if you plateaued
in your computing technology, and so on.
Something like that makes a commodity currency,
using heat or energy or gold for some examples,
a little more attractive if you have a commodity
that would have reasonably stable value between
times and places and is reasonably mobile,
and there aren’t too many good candidates
that meet all of the above.
We may look at that more in the future if
we choose to discuss interstellar trade but
as we saw in our episode on interplanetary
trade, where light lag is still fairly minimal,
banking is already problematic and might require
going a bit vintage in some regards, to use
modernized versions of banking techniques
we had before we had radio or telephones.
It does all leave the question of what most
folks are spending most of their money on
though.
As an example, even though in the past most
people grew their own food and bartered for
goods, we can still say the super-majority
of the economy was food as food production
was the super-majority of jobs and labor.
Nowadays that value is about 1.3% in the US,
of people whose job is farmer or rancher,
and even when you count related aspects, the
food sector makes up only about 5% of the
US GDP, not the well over 50% it has for the
vast majority of human history.
That will likely expand in an absolute sense
as folks desire more elaborate and diverse
food or preparation and handling, but it’s
likely to decline proportionally as we grow
in technology and industry.
For that matter a lot of things are likely
to grow more durable.
Planned obsolescence is a real thing, but
mostly stuff doesn’t last as long as it
could because we expect it to be obsolete
and people to want to upgrade or change, so
spending an extra 25% manufacturing it to
last twice as long isn’t necessarily a good
plan, even though it would seem a smart move.
You just have no motive to buy a smartphone
that can last 20 years but costs significantly
more when you will almost certainly want a
newer better model inside 5 years.
But as we discussed recently in Technological
Stagnation, tech could plateau, and probably
will on many things, and production shift
to the more durable.
Simultaneously a lot of new materials and
manufacturing make things more durable than
they used to be.
If wealth grows until the average person’s
living standard is better than the typical
millionaire today, much as it is now compared
to a millionaire a hundred years ago in many
relevant respects, what are folks buying with
all that money?
If food and most commercial goods are dirt
cheap through automation, if houses are built
to last from high-tech materials and maintenance
technologies, if people never go to doctors
except for weird cases because little nanobots
constantly fix every little scrape or bit
of DNA damage, what on Earth do folks spend
their money on?
As we’ve noted in discussion of transhumanism,
a person with serious cybernetic and mental
augmentation could potentially comfortably
live in a dilapidated shack eating literal
dirt with easy free access to all of humanity’s
stored knowledge and entertainment in their
head or the cloud.
It’s strange to think of it this way perhaps
but an economy is essentially run on a sense
of purpose, folks have personal goals and
purposes and they interact with others to
fulfill those, and that’s essentially our
economy.
By default that has usually been the default
basic needs for survival, so to figure out
what the economy of the future will be, we
need to know what people want, what their
day to day purposes and goals are, as combining
that with the available technology tells us
what folks will be making and buying.
And of course, while we don’t know what
on Earth they might want to buy a century
from now, there is a good chance it won’t
be anything on Earth, pursuing some of the
options off our world or in virtual or digital
existences, and we’ll be exploring those
more next month.
We’ll get to the schedule and announcements
in just a moment but first, one of the big
things we can say for sure about the economy
of the future is that it will involve a lot
more remote work and also remote learning,
and of course a lot more computers, particularly
AI using neural networks, advanced new computers
able to make predictions and decisions far
better than classic approaches.
If you’re interested in learning more about
Neural Networks, there’s a great course
for it over at Brilliant.
Brilliant makes learning fun and easier, and
lets you do it from the comfort of your own
home and at your own pace.
Brilliant is an online learning community
with over 60 interactive courses and many
quizzes and puzzles, plus fun Daily Challenges
that help get the brain warmed up for the
day.
Those Challenges provide a context and framework
that you need to tackle, so that you learn
the concepts by applying them, which is the
best way to learn new concepts.
Brilliant has brand-new interactive content
that makes solving puzzles and challenges
even more fun and hands-on, plus their online
community gives you places to discuss the
material or ask questions, and their mobile
apps offline feature lets you take courses
even when you’re not getting a good signal.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
I probably don’t need to tell anyone here
that education, and new methods and approaches,
are very important.
Unsurprisingly it’s an opinion I share with
my future wife Sarah Fowler, who serves on
the Ohio Board of Education representing northeast
Ohio these last 8 years since she was first
elected back when she was only 22, and as
the first homeschooler ever elected to a State
board of Education.
Needless to say I’m exceedingly proud of
her for that and many other accomplishments
and have counted her as a friend for over
a decade now, having met her not long after
I got back from the War.
If I’ve never mentioned before I was homeschooled
myself, though only from age 10-16 when I
started college.
As I mentioned near the beginning of the episode,
we are getting married this weekend and the
two big questions are will the show be on
hiatus during my honeymoon and how to send
a gift.
While I am a bit of workaholic, obviously
I won’t be producing material during our
honeymoon, however the episodes are all ready
to go and I’ll just pop in on Thursday morning
to release them, so yes we will be having
our regular Thursday episodes still, though
not our usual end of the month livestream
for April.
As to anyone wanting to send a gift or grab
a gift card, those are of course very welcome,
and I’ll include a link to the wedding registry
in today’s episode description for those
so inclined, though please do ensure that
you include a name and address so we can send
you a thank you card.
One sad note, do the health crisis the International
Space Development Conference scheduled for
the end of May in Dallas has been cancelled,
and I had been scheduled to go to that and
give a talk on space colonization and receive
the Pioneer Award, which is a very great honor,
and was looking forward to meeting some of
you in person since I so rarely do public
talks and the last one was last year at the
Carnegie Science Center.
As an upside, that does mean we will be able
to have our end of the month livestream in
May, and we’ll get to unveil the new studio
for that, and with that ready we’ll be able
to start experimenting with some fun new upgrades
and additions to the show for future episodes.
Speaking of future episodes, today we were
looking at future economies and one point
we skipped over was how it’s very locked
into what human’s desire.
In an economy run by AI, even if they keep
humans around as friends or pets, it’s really
they who are the consumer’s making decisions.
But we also want to consider how human’s
spreading out to new worlds or even those
remaining here might begin to diverge from
modern humans rather noticeably, and we’ll
explore that next week in Genetic Divergence
and Civilization.
The week after that we’ll look at more cybernetic
angles to humanity’s future, as we discuss
the concept of Life as a Digital Being.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week,
I know I will.
