So a few months back I finally got talked
into trying out some short form content and
after we did a bunch of folks started asking
if we could make a compilation of them to
watch on Youtube and over on Nebula and our
audio-only podcasting platforms.
I figured we would release them in groups
of 20, so unlike the solo shorts, you might
want a drink and snack.
I’ll talk more about it at the end, but
by popular demand and without further adieu,
here’s the first 20 shorts we produced in
Summer of 2023.
Quasar Cannon.
A Quasar is a quasi-stellar object many times
brighter than an entire galaxy, often radiating
more power than a Quadrillion normal stars,
and releasing a billion-billion-billion times
more power every second than a megaton thermonuclear
bomb.
Quasars are less common nowadays, as we believe
they are caused by large quantities of matter
falling into supermassive blackholes in a
core of a younger and more turbulent galaxy.
It should be possible to set off such an event
artificially, or even use a smaller blackhole
to generate the effect, such as we believe
causes gamma ray bursts.
Much as we convert an entire star into a giant
death ray, as with the Nicoll-Dyson Beam,
it should be possible to create a quasar cannon
around a blackhole that had a more focused
and targetable gamma ray beam potentially
millions to trillions of times more destructive
than even a Nicoll-Dyson Beam.
For more examples of such megastructures,
like the Quasar Drive, see our episode, the
Megastructure Compendium.
Birch Planets
I sometimes get asked what the biggest artificial
planet or habitat you could possibly engineer
is, and an answer comes from the late great
Paul Birch, who suggested you could build
an enormous planetary shell around the supermassive
black hole at the center of our galaxy, 4
million times as massive as our own sun, or
1.4 trillion times the living area of Earth.
More living area than if every rocky planet
in this galaxy was terraformed.
And yet that is just the bottom end of the
megastructure we name in his honor, because
you could feed all your surplus matter in
a galaxy into a black hole, using that to
power your civilization, and build a structure
around it with normal Earth gravity that was
nearly a light year across, massed as much
as our entire galaxy, and had a billion-billion
times the living area of Earth and likely
more than every habitable planet in the observable
Universe combined.
See our episode Mega Earths for details on
how such titanic creations can be made under
known science.
Aliens Beyond the Galactic Rim
About 5 years back there were studies showing
how rare phosphorus is in the cosmos, and
of the 6 keys elements making up 1% or more
of you or I or other organisms on this planet,
it’s the only one found in tiny quantities
and appeared as a possible bottleneck on what
planets might harbor life, a possible filter
for the Fermi Paradox.
We also believed that many regions of the
galaxy might be low in Phosphorus and potentially
devoid of life, especially older regions like
the galactic rim, and that life would not
plausibly occur at more than twice the distance
Earth is from the Galactic Core.
But an article in Science News earlier this
week reports a team of astronomers from Arizona
having detected relatively large amounts of
phosphorus in a vast gas cloud 3 times as
far from the core as we are.
I’ll link that article in the description,
and you can also check out our episode Fermi
Paradox, the Phosphorus Problem, for more
details, but it highlights that seeming paradox,
in universe so huge, ancient, and seemingly
friendly for life – where is it all?
BWC or “Because We Can” Megastructures,
is a nickname for those types of hypothetical
megastructures which are interesting as concepts
but wildly impractical enough that we would
only expect them to be built for prestige
or tourist value.
Though in a system of potentially millions
of more normal habitats and worlds, such rare
oddities might be built economically for their
novelty value.
Examples include Donut Planets, Chain Worlds,
Sombrero Planets, Cube-Shaped Planets, or
Flat Earths.
It should be noted that sometimes a BWC can
have specialized values as, for instance,
a coin-shaped world allows identical seasons,
temperature, and weather at all points, ideal
for a beach resort planet, something a classic
spherical planet lacks, with frozen wastes
at the poles.
What qualifies as a BWC Megastructure is somewhat
subjective.
For more examples of these type of Megastructures,
along with more practical designs, see our
episode, the Megastructure Compendium.
A Hegemonizing Swarm is a living weapon, or
self-replicating machine, which seeks to turn
every last available bit of matter into more
of itself or a desired construct.
Examples can include grey goo, a paperclip
maximizer, the Borg from Star Trek, the Replicators
from Stargate SG-1, or arguably even regular
biological life itself.
A hegemonizing swarm might also be a runaway
terraforming device, trying to turn all matter
in the galaxy into space habitats, artificial
planets, computronium, or giant weapon and
defense installations.
Whatever its end goal is, it is a relentless
swathe of destruction, like some killing cloud
descending on a world to disassemble everything
and destroy all that was.
A hegemonizing swarm is usually assumed to
be apocalyptic, and if it has any personality
at all, to be callous, stupid, unwavering,
or unwilling to show mercy or negotiate.
However, as we explored in our episode, the
Paperclip Maximizer, there may develop novel
variations of their goals or personality.
A solar Moth is a very simple design with
few failure modes and a solar moth might use
very nearly anything that can be vaporized
as a propellant, including common elements
in deep space like hydrogen, water, methane,
or ammonia, making them a potentially good
engine for probes and long-term monitors in
the Asteroid Belt or Kuiper Belt.
Scaled up, a solar moth is a good way to move
a comet, simply using it as propellant, as
energy beamed to it from in-system will create
far less outward thrust than the energy received
being used to vaporize ice and shove inward
toward the solar system’s inner regions..
Solar Sails operate on the principle that
photons of light carry momentum which may
be absorbed by opaque objects, transferring
that momentum, or reflected by reflective
objects, or mirrors, which can double the
imparted momentum, sending the photon back
with the same but opposite momentum, or deflecting
it at an angle to send both sail and deflected
photon off in different directions.
This allows a sail to quarter the Sunlight.
A Fusion Candle is a type of hypothetical
Megastructure that is an enormous fusion drive
that is placed in orbit of a gas giant, like
Jupiter.
The FusionCandle is designed to suck hydrogen,
deuterium, or even helium out of the atmosphere,
run it through a fusion reaction, and use
the energy released to send out two super-heated
rocket jets in opposite directions, up and
down.
The lower levitates the platform while the
higher goes into space to shove the planet
in a desired direction.
By this method, you can move a gas giant to
a different location, such as if you wanted
to move one closer into a system to warm its
moons for terraforming.
See our episode: Colonizing Jupiter, for more
discussion, or our Megastructure Compendium,
for more examples of Megastructures like the
Fusion Candle.
Non-Equatorial Space Elevators
One of our biggest goals in space development
is to make space travel affordable to everyone.
That’s where devices like Orbital Rings,
Tethered Rings, Space Towers, Launch Loops,
and Mass Drivers come in, and perhaps the
best known of these megastructures is the
Space Elevator, an enormously strong tether
reaching from some spot on the equator to
geostationary orbit or beyond, tens of thousands
of miles above Earth.
A major hurdle to building these is finding
a material strong enough, but the other problem
is that tether must be at the equator to avoid
it whipping around, and few major cities are
on the equator, but we would like to be able
to leave directly from those places.
However, we can place multiple tethers, some
originating from the south hemisphere, some
from the north, to meet high above like guy
wires on a tether, and hold each other in
place, allowing space elevators to be sighted
wherever we want.
See our episode Space Elevators to learn more.
Building Artificial Planets
We often talk about building enormous space
habitats for people to live in as alternatives
to trying to terraform planets like Mars or
Venus to somehow make them livable, and yet
as cool as big cylinder or ring habitats is,
for a lot of folks a planet like Earth is
going to be preferable.
And you can potentially build a planet just
like Earth.
Our usual assumption is that you would skip
on using rare materials like iron and uranium
in the core in favor of very abundant materials
like hydrogen or helium or even dark matter
or black holes, and thus be able to build
a lot more Earth-sized planets with a lot
less rocky matter.
And yet artificial planets identical to earth
isn’t your only option, you can build ones
very like Earth in climate and gravity but
a hundred times larger in surface area, or
even millions of times bigger than Earth,
as we explored in our episode MegaEarths,
where you might have a planet that is orbited
by a star, has a black hole in its center,
and has a surface so big that it has entire
archipelagos of large continents on it.
Computronium is a catch-all term from speculative
science and scifi for any type of matter which
supports computation or thought.
While human brains classify as computronium,
the intent is usually to describe substances
designed to maximize computation, and usually
very large objects dedicated to this goal.
Earth for instance is only 2 parts per quadrillion
human brain, so a planet-sized brain would
have 500 trillion times the brains of the
entire human race combined, and possibly far
greater if you had a form of computronium
vastly superior to a human neuron.
We can contemplate entire planets or star
systems turned into vast computers, such as
a Jupiter Brain or Matryoshka Brain, able
to tackle impossible mysteries or simulate
whole universes and emulate trillions of trillions
of people living inside them.
A post-biological civilization might seek
to turn all matter in the Universe into computronium,
possibly via a hegemonizing swarm, see Matryoshka
Brains for more details.
Deciphering Alien Codes
As we search for extraterrestrial intelligences
out in the cosmos, one common question is
if we could even recognize their signal or
ever hope to decode their language.
Folks often point to tons of untranslated
ancient tablets as evidence.
If we can’t decipher things written by members
of our own species, what chance would we have
with some aliens from an entirely different
evolutionary origin?
You might have seen recent articles about
AI translating those old tablets with relative
ease and speed.
At its core this was never a problem of those
languages being alien, merely us have so few
examples to work with.
Fundamentally language is about conveying
concepts to others, and some will be universal,
like math and physics concepts, and can serve
as a Rosetta stone with sufficient examples,
which we explored in greater depth in our
Alien Languages and Cryptic Aliens episodes.
It wouldn’t be fast or easy, but if Aliens
are out there, we should be able to talk to
them.
Astrochickens & Von Neumann Probes
The galaxy is huge.
It’s so big that if we sent out a new space
probe to a star every single day, it would
take over a billion years before we sent one
probe to each star, and that’s just in this
galaxy.
And almost none of those probes would reach
their destination, as they might need to keep
functioning for tens of thousands if not millions
of years just to get to their destination.
One answer to that is the von Neumann Self-Replicating
Probe, a class of probes that arrives at a
nearby star, rendezvous with some asteroid
or small moon, and make several copies of
itself to explore that system and send others
to every star in range.
The Dyson Astrochicken is a type of von Neumann
Probe massing 1 kilogram that hatches solar
panels as it approaches a star and uses those
to run an ion drive and self-replication processes.
See our self-replicating spacecraft episode
for more details.
A popular speculation in scifi is that the
Dinosaurs might have been an advanced civilization,
and that they were wiped out by some unnatural
cataclysm.
Possibly by a galaxy wide war among dawn civilizations
that left everything in ruins and from which
we are just now recovering.
And this is a popular solution for the Fermi
Paradox about where all the aliens are.
Good stories, but we have no evidence dinosaurs
ever had big brains.
Though some would argue that we have little
evidence about them at all.
Even a hundred fossils from a ten million
year period is just one fossil per hundred
thousand years, which wouldn’t tell you
much about humanity, especially if it was
gorilla or dolphin fossil, and skull size
says little of intelligence.
Could millions of years erase evidence of
prior civilizations on Earth?
See our episode the Silurian Hypothesis, to
see if we could even find such ruins, if they
existed or if we would leave any ourselves.
Will Humans In Space Be Taller?
It’s popular in science fiction to suggest
people who live on planets with higher gravity
than earth would be shorter or stouter, while
those living on low gravity places like the
Moon or Mars, or in the microgravity environment
of space itself, might be tall and thin.
There is little reason to think people would
need to be taller in such an environment,
especially as it’s easier to climb or jump
up to grab something high in low-gravity,
though many other variables might make extra
height a benefit or disadvantage.
However, low gravity means less need for thick,
dense skeletons, so you might see skinnier
people and those with more hand-like feet
and skinnier legs.
See our episodes Life on a Low-Gravity Planet
and Zero Gravity Civilizations for more discussion
of how people and life in general might adapt
to these environments.
The Stanford Torus is an enormous 10 million
ton space station habitat first proposed in
1975 to house 10,000 inhabitants at a station
diameter of 1.8 kilometers or just over a
mile.
The habitat section is a wide hollow, donut-shaped
ring, or torus, whose inner edge is transparent
and whose outer edge is for people and their
landscape.
By rotating once per minute, it provides spin-gravity
to the inhabitants and visitors, and can use
a large mirror to send filtered sunlight into
the habitat.
The Stanford Torus design has many variations,
often including multiple rings of larger diameters
for more living area and various ancillary
facilities, from power collectors to refineries
or smaller agricultural stations.
A docking module at the center includes secondary
mirrors to direct sunlight from the primary
mirror to the habitat, as well as a place
for ships to dock and unload, or be repaired
or built.
For more examples of space habitats, see the
Megastructure Compendium.
Medical Technology has revived people who
have stopped breathing or whose heart has
stopped, but could it revive those who are
already brain dead and, if so, for how long?
The answer is likely yes, as we better learn
how our brains operate, but this analogy often
gets stretched to imply recovery could be
done days or even centuries later.
That in this way we could resurrect the ancient
dead, or that a super powerful computer mind
could - which is the source of the Roko’s
Basilisk Retro-Casual Thought Problem.
By back-calculating the trajectory of particles
decaying or leaving a brain, we could resurrect
that person, by rebuilding that brain, especially
if well-preserved or frozen.
However, even without involving quantum mechanics,
many systems would likely be too chaotic and
complicated to model even with planet-sized
computers, and grow exponentially worse with
every day that passed without proper preservation
efforts.
See our episode Technological Resurrection
for more discussion of the potential methods
and problems.
We often hear that our galaxy will collide
with the Andromeda Galaxy, our nearest neighbor,
and that this will begin happening in a few
billions years, but this is not quite a correct
way of looking at things.
Indeed, one could make a case that Andromeda
and the Milky Way are merely part of a larger
galaxy and are simply condensing, as they
form a roughly dumbbell shaped collection
of stars with dozens of smaller galaxies in
and around them, all being drawn together
over the last 13 billion years, and finishing
over the next several billion.
The only other significant galaxy in the region
is Triangulum, and it will merge with us about
the same time, leaving a larger galaxy that
will eventually be isolated by Hubble expansion
from all the other merged galactic islands
in the expanding ocean of the night.
See our episode Intergalactic Voyages to learn
more about this process, intergalactic colonization
ahead of Hubble Expansion, and larger neighboring
galaxies like the Council of Giants.
The Bernal Sphere is perhaps the oldest space
habitat design, dating to 1929, and is a hollow
sphere originally designed to be 10 miles
or 16 kilometers in diameter, in which inhabitants
would live inside.
The original design by Bernal hollows an asteroid
out to build a sphere around it, which may
be replaced with a wider one as you grow,
and considers a hollow transparent outer sphere
for sunlight.
In this way asteroid mines in space might
slowly turn themselves into larger habitats
for bigger populations and more diversified
economies.
Others, such as Gerard K. O’Neill, would
refine the design, as his Island One and Island
Two stations, and introduce rotation to give
the station spin-gravity inside.
The Babylon 5 TV show features a Bernal Sphere
of this type.
For more examples of space habitats, such
as O’Neill’s Island three design, known
as the O’Neill Cylinder, see our episode,
the Megastructure Compendium.
Nuclear fuel contains millions of times more
energy than the chemical fuels rockets use,
and seem ideal for faster space travel, but
they must transfer that energy to propellants
and the maximum speed of that ship is controlled
by that propellant temperature and momentum
out of the back.
Rocket nozzles and other equipment will begin
melting as their temperature rises, so we
either must use slow propellant, slow accelerating
ion drives, or find a way to move energy from
our reactor to that gas propellant better.
The lightbulb is at 40,000 degrees fahrenheit,
or 22,000 Celsius, where most of its light
is ultraviolet and which quartz is transparent
too.
That ultraviolet can pass outside without
warming that chamber as much, strike a propellant
particle, and transfer its momentum, which
then leaves the rocket at high speeds.
This is believed to be a safe and efficient
engine design able to achieve 3-6 times the
speed of our best chemical rockets.
See our episode the Nuclear Option for more
discussion of Nuclear powered spacecraft.
First designed by Wernher von Braun in 1945,
this ring or torus shaped space station is
one of the earliest models of space station
that included artificial spin-gravity.
The original design is made of 20 cylindrical
segments, 3 meters or 10 feet in diameter,
and 8 meters or 26 feet long.
Each linked at the end to the next by an airlock
door and at a slight angle to form a circle
of 20 segments, and connected by a spoke to
the central hub, this is also popularly known
as a wheel design, and some inflatable versions
are essentially identical to a large bicycle
wheel.
By having spokes or tether connected to a
hub, it is possible to add segments as you
go, rather than waiting for a complete circle,
and some suggest that rocket boosters could
be collected and repurposed to make such a
station instead of letting them drop back
into the atmosphere to burn up.
See the Megastructure Compendium for more
examples of space habitats and stations.
So that will wrap up our first SFIA Shorts
Compilation.
Given that I do 8 or 10 shorts a month we’ll
probably release a new compilation about 5
times a year, and please make sure to hit
the like and subscribe buttons, as well as
the notification button, if you want alerts
when these and other episodes come out, along
with our episode polls where you can vote
for what topics we do episodes on and suggest
other episode topics for future polls.
For our long-time watchers, the plan is to
move away from our monthly Livestream to more
short form content and the occasional mid-length
episode when a short I’m writing just doesn’t
fit into the 60 second shell and needs more
like 10 or 12 minutes, as happened recently
with our unannounced Bussard Ramjets episode.
And I’m hoping this lets us occasionally
cover recent events of note since these days
I write our normal weekly episode 3 months
ahead of time.
We’re going on hiatus on the Livestreams
after New Years Eve 2023/24, youtube hasn’t
been promoting them well anymore, in favor
of shorts, and they’re disruptive to family
time on Sundays, though I’ll probably bring
content of that type back down the road.
I always like to try new things, like our
three hour Fermi Paradox Compendium next month,
and as we get into the New Year we’ll start
having content coming over from Nebula monthly
and some more bonus episodes made on the fly,
along with these compilations, so total content
should be on the rise.
As always you can support that future content
by donating to our show, by paypal, snailmail,
patreon, subscribe star, or just joining Nebula,
our streaming service, if you want to see
our regular episodes all early and ad free,
and Nebula Original like this Month’s Dark
Stars At the Beginning of Time.
And until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
