Leo Tolstoy said “The two most powerful
warriors are patience and time”.
When it comes to interstellar warfare, he
couldn’t know how right he was.
So today we will be looking at interstellar
warfare and the dynamics involved between
how two ships would fight while traveling
in interstellar space, how you’d move fleets
around, and the sorts of weapons people might
shoot from their home system to an enemy star
system, the interstellar equivalent of Intercontinental
Ballistic Missiles, ISBMs rather than ICBMs.
This won’t be one of our longer episodes
but you might still want to grab a drink and
snack, because there’s also a companion
episode talking more about the science fiction
and worldbuilding aspects of interstellar
warfare which I’ll mention again near the
end.
This episode itself is focused more on the
known science angles and how it affects the
concept of Interstellar conflicts.
That’s a tricky concept too.
As I mentioned back in the original Space
Warfare episode, predicting the future of
the battlefield in terms of tactics and strategies
is almost an exercise in futility because
the dynamics of combat can change massively
with a single minor piece of new technology.
I’ve seen that first hand too, my own unit
got in a ton of new gear prior to our deployment
to Iraq, a lot of lasers and optics, so unsurprisingly
my unit’s leadership decided the guy who’d
been working on a doctorate in physics before
jumping ship to enlist was well-suited to
figure out how all the new toys worked and
train the others with them.
New gadgets, no matter how good, are useless
if folks don’t know how and when to use
them, indeed they can do more harm than good,
but of course used properly even a seemingly
minor bit of technology can let you dominate
a battlefield.
That’s the first rule of warfare too, know
how to use your equipment.
Anyway I wanted to be upfront about that for
today, that we are playing a very big guessing
game.
To add to that my own background is in artillery
and infantry combat too, not ships, but then
modern sea-going navy ships will likely have
far less in common with spaceship warfare
than sci-fi tends to portray.
Or short form, I don’t really know what
I’m talking about here but odds are nobody
else does either.
All we can do is look at basic physics and
military history and try to see what does
and doesn’t make sense.
And of course the short answer is pretty much
nothing we ever see in sci-fi makes sense,
though with some weird exceptions.
For instance one of the classic complaints
against a lot of old shows is how both ships
would just park and shoot at each other at
short range.
That image is mostly incorrect, though forgivable
since spaceship engagement ranges are so big
you could never see the ships fighting if
portrayed realistically.
However the parking part is partially accurate.
Two ships approaching each other at interstellar
speeds will only get one short pass with an
engagement window that might be as short as
milliseconds.
They can’t loop around for another pass
even if they have the fuel as at 1G of acceleration
or deceleration, they’ll need a week for
every percent of light speed they were traveling,
to slow down and speed back up in the opposite
direction.
However the opposite case, a stern chase where
one ship is slowly catching up on another,
would actually seem like a stationary battle,
especially out in deep space where nothing
seems to be moving.
Even at decently relativistic speeds the stars
don’t go zipping past like in Star Trek,
so you’d still need pretty precise equipment
to even measure a shift to them over one day.
In that case too we have to remember this
is space, not sea or ground.
Ships can flip over and even move around side
to side or up and down while still carrying
that forward inertia, so that to the two vessels
involved in the chase it will just seem like
both are mostly parked or just moving around
to maneuver.
But it is the range of things, even over and
beyond what we saw in interplanetary warfare,
that makes interstellar combat different.
Let’s go back to that head-on attack example.
Two ships moving toward each other at, say,
15% of light speed from their home systems,
we’ll say Earth and Epsilon Eridani, about
10 light years apart.
Either of them would take 70 years to cover
that distance, but 35 years into things they’d
run into each other halfway between with a
combined speed of 30% of light.
The distance between them is going to shrink
by 100,000 kilometers a second.
Now most modern ships and fighter jets weapons
have an engagement range of less than 100
kilometers, especially for anything not guided,
so if that was their window to shoot at each
other they’d have exactly 2 milliseconds
to shoot as they enter that window then exit
on the other side.
That’s about 1% of the time a typical human
reaction takes place during, and a millisecond
is so short it is below the human threshold
to recognize.
Add to that if the two survive that first
pass, with human crews, and want to make another,
they both need to slam on the break at 1 gee,
and if they do, 15 weeks later they can re-engage
for a second pass, which is a lot longer than
the 15 or so seconds that it tends to take
in a sci-fi space duel.
Obviously, a human can’t handle much more
than a G of acceleration for prolonged periods,
and a human can’t handle millisecond engagements,
but a computer can be built to do both.
There are realistic limits on how much G-force
any complex machine can handle, and it will
depend on the weakest link in the ship, but
even 10,000 Gs might be plausible.
Suddenly a second pass doesn’t require 15
weeks, it requires 15 minutes, a ten-thousandth
the time.
Incidentally there’s just over 10,000 minutes
in a week.
Having said that, the amount of power required
to generate a 10,000 G turn in a ship of any
significant mass will be staggeringly impressive.
And again, that would seem to be obvious,
what a lot of folks say, that manned spaceships
make no sense, and that we only even see it
in fiction because stories not centered on
humans are boring to many people to read or
watch or play, so we stick crews on ships
and pilots in fighter craft to give them a
human face.
But that’s something we’ll be challenging
a bit today too, at least for a larger vessel
acting more like a carrier.
Fighters, at least the classic single pilot
variety manned by a regular human, are not
realistically viable.
There are a few things we can say with near
certain confidence about interstellar warfare.
Direct engagements will be terribly fast and
likely lethal to at least one if not both
parties, overall battles and wars will be
terribly slow, and the energies involved will
be terribly massive.
Nobody aims for pyrrhic victories so those
close direct engagements are likely to almost
always involve at least one of the combatants
only using expendable drones and munitions,
while their major assets stay far further
back and try attacks and maneuvers that are
far less likely to succeed, but also far less
likely to get them killed in the process.
That’s the first rule of warfare after all,
try not lose while winning, Pyrrhic Victories
aren’t.
Such direct engagements at speed also leave
you no room to follow up if it doesn’t go
according to plan, all assuming you even survived
it.
Just as an example, if we assumed some 100
kiloton space vessel from the examples we
just looked at, something of a mass and size
parallel to a modern aircraft carrier, and
remembering that energy goes up with the square
of speed, then that ship was carrying about
10^23 Joules of energy, about the amount of
energy in all the sunlight hitting the whole
planet of Earth over a weeks time.
So the human crewed one needing 15 weeks to
slow down will be turning on an engine at
least powerful enough to light a whole continent
while it slows down.
Or alternatively, the energy release of shooting
out several megaton-yield atomic bombs every
second.
This goes with something I’ve said before
in other episodes, that there is no such thing
as an unarmed spaceship, and this is certainly
true of an interstellar one.
When you think of a classic sci-fi manned
starship unleashing an orbital bombardment,
don’t think of it leveling a city, think
more like it was using a machine gun on a
planet with H-bombs as the bullets, and probably
more realistically, it likely has several
of those it regards as secondary weapons.
This is something sci-fi author Larry Niven
dubbed “The Kzinti Lesson”, for a militant
alien race called the Kzin in his Known Space
series, or rather the lesson they learned,
that “a reaction drive's efficiency as a
weapon is in direct proportion to its efficiency
as a drive.”, which can be re-stated in
a more generalized and simplified form as
“Whatever energy a ship has to move itself
around represents the minimum destructive
power it has available to it”.
Meaning, if that ship in our example rammed
Earth, it would hit with a force comparable
to the asteroid that is assumed to have ended
the dinosaurs, which had thousands of times
the total explosive yield of every warhead
in existence during the height of the Cold
War.
Now alternatively, the 10,000 G robot ship
will be turning on an engine 10,000 times
as powerful, able to light up thousands of
planets simultaneously, releasing as much
energy every second as our whole planetary
economy uses in a year.
That’s an important thing to consider too,
because if you’re assuming folks have these
kinds of energies to give a single ship, then
try imagining what their actual economy and
population look like.
On those rare occasions science fiction remembers
the kind of kinetic energy a spaceship has
in terms of planetary destruction, it tends
to forget the kind of fortifications a planet
could build if it had access to a power source
able to run one of those engines.
This would not be dozens of defense satellites
each carrying a big particle beam and dozens
of atomic warheads, but potentially millions
of titanic defense installations each able
to obliterate virtually anything we’d normally
think of as a spaceship in fiction.
We’ve talked about deploying entire stars
as weapon systems before, the Nicoll-Dyson
Beam episode covers that, both the idea of
a mega-laser able to turn the full fury of
a whole star on a distant system and the alternative,
of having it use that beam to shove missiles
with guidance systems up to relativistic velocities
able to arrive as volleys.
This is the preferred approach usually as
you can use the solar output for many months
or even years to push missiles launched separately,
all at slightly different speeds timed to
arrive simultaneously.
These devices, generally known as a RKV or
RKM, Relativistic Kill Vehicle or Relativistic
Kinetic Missile or a few other names, essentially
the interstellar version of the ICBM, and
can include fairly elaborate guidance a laser
can’t have.
What’s more, as you get closer to light
speed the kinetic energy no longer rises with
the square of velocity, but even more sharply,
so they carry an unbelievable punch.
Also, while there is no stealth in space,
a RKM is very hard to see and moving so fast
that even when you see it you have little
time to react, as the light from it is only
reaching you just ahead of the missile.
You either detect it during launch or have
to detect it by the slight glow of collision
radiation with the interstellar medium, which
will brighten as it goes faster.
The faster something is moving, the less time
you have to react to it and the more energy
it has to do damage, but you can also see
it further out and it’s even more vulnerable
to destruction by some small object just waiting
in standby to flick into its path.
They can also be manned since they aren’t
necessarily accelerating very fast.
That seems pretty dark, the notion of a manned
missile, but suicide missions are hardly uncommon
in war and finding volunteers generally isn’t
as hard as one might wish it was.
Add to that, high-tech civilizations, even
if they regard AI as just as human as a human,
can presumably find volunteers even more easily,
since they can offer to backup or copy the
mind of the individual involved.
That also has some disturbing implications
that get explored in our book of the month,
Richard K. Morgan’s “Altered Carbon”,
that we’ll discuss more in our episode on
Teleportation in two weeks.
Using the example of the energy in the dinosaur-killing
asteroid that hit the Yucatan Peninsula 65
million years ago, it’s worth noting that
the Sun releases that much energy every millisecond,
so a Kardashev-2 Civilization with full access
to their Sun’s total energy could be launching
such a RKM a thousand times per second and
would have no problem hurling literally a
billion of them to hit a neighboring system
simultaneously.
That’s just two weeks of solar output.
A billion missiles each massing around a thousand
tons, all shoved up to 99% of light speed
by giant lasers.
All presumably with an advanced guidance system
capable of splitting the missile up into thousands
if not millions of sub-munitions, enough to
strike every single square meter of a planet
with the explosive output of an artillery
shell.
And again, that’s just one of them, they
can hurl a billion.
This is assuming no new technology either,
such a weapon requires huge energy but is
very simplistic.
And these are thus the minimum kinds of attack
you need to prepare against.
Not a single enemy mothership, not even a
decently sized-armada of maybe hundreds of
ships, but the full and virtually incomprehensible
might of a civilization using a whole star
to fuel their war machine.
Folks often ask me why you’d make a Dyson
Swarm, since its seems a ridiculous amount
of energy and people, but while I think you
would fill such a thing up with people eventually,
I suspect tapping all that energy would be
a high priority even when you were barely
at the population needed to fill a planet.
Such energy can be stored too, possibly in
kugelblitz black holes, possibly as manufactured
anti-matter and, even using a steampunk technology,
as trillions of tiny flywheels spun up with
that energy just spinning around in space
waiting for use, after all the problem with
flywheels as power storage is that air and
friction spin them down, which is obviously
not a problem in space.
We’ll be talking about various energy storage
options later this spring in Portable Power,
but the key thing is that you can store energy
in huge quantities to use.
You also, in a high-tech civilization, probably
have virtually unlimited effective manpower,
since you can not only have robots do most
of the work but tell them to build more of
each other instead, then build whatever you
need.
So when trying to consider K2 or near K2 civilizations,
the only kind likely to have most of the normal
motivations for war, like resource shortages
or border disputes, at the interstellar scale,
don’t just picture vast amounts of rotating
habitats or computers or solar power collectors,
think massive factories, many potentially
just sitting there doing self-maintenance
on an army of robots, and huge energy storage
depositories ready to feed those into defense
or production.
You also probably aren’t arriving to attack
such a system after years of uninterrupted
flight for a final day of encountering resistance.
Such civilizations probably have their whole
outer solar system, even deep into the Oort
Cloud, loaded with defense installations hunting
for attacks, signs of attack, and potentially
ready to respond or retaliate.
You also don’t want an enemy using the material
in your own outer solar system to establish
a beachhead.
Your weapons hardly have to be sheer power
either.
Odds are good interstellar civilizations are
effectively immune to biological and chemical
attacks.
It’s just that the nature of space habitats
would make infecting or gassing one very tricky,
but even without considering weapons relying
on new technology, we have that army of robots
issue.
If they can build themselves, then they can
build ones that can build more and so on.
A single tiny bot covertly deployed somewhere
could fairly rapidly build up quite an army,
one that grows stronger with each victory.
Fighting self-replicating machines in space
is a lot like fighting a necromancer, you
don’t ever want to engage unless you can
win, because your lost troops stand right
back up again and join in the attack.
Now of course, the first rule of warfare is
to not fight battles you’ll lose, but a
common caveat to that would be that it’s
the war you don’t want to lose, so throwing
in on battles where you might lose, or even
are sure you will but will delay or distract
the enemy, are often okay.
Again not so in this sort of case.
You’re just feeding them.
However they do need a constant supply of
energy to manufacture and replicate, so it’s
a good idea to have all of those resources
bottled up and defended.
Energy not only provides a potential bottleneck
but a means of easy detection.
As I mentioned back in Space Warfare, there
is no stealth in space, but you can get a
lot closer before being seen so long as you
aren’t doing things that require power,
once you start using power you will light
up like a beacon signal.
And these same civilizations who can build
billions of relativistic missiles can build
billions of telescopes and detection devices,
so don’t expect to sneak up on them.
Now a rebuttal to that would be that this
sort of thing only applies to K2 civilizations
or those decently near that, but that’s
pretty much the only kind who will be fighting
interstellar wars.
Or at least one of the two or more involved
parties will be.
You have to consider the motives to get into
such a thing in the first place.
Obviously you need none but survival to be
attacked, but someone has to do the attacking.
So what were their motives?
Were they low on space or resources in their
home system?
If so that can only be because they chewed
through them or see themselves doing so in
the reasonably near future, which means they
are a K2 civilization, probably bigger since
it’s unlikely they have neighbors to fight
who aren’t their own colonies.
Perhaps they want to exterminate all other
life?
If so they must be pretty passionate about
it to plan out multi-century or millennia
purges across huge volumes of galactic space.
Presumably more than enough to decide to grow
their numbers and resources into a K2, but
they don’t actually need to grow their own
numbers either, just tell their robots to
grow their numbers.
Nothing says a K2 civilization needs to contain
a billion, billion people, just that it has
the energy and infrastructure able to do so
if that was their intent.
Maybe they just love war, like the Klingons?
Okay, if you love it, you probably make it
a focus for your civilization, meaning you
probably always want more soldiers and ships,
which means you want more people and factories,
which means you become a K2.
Or maybe they’re not aggressive but just
want to be safe against attack… in which
case they become a K2.
Any interstellar conflict, particularly if
you are limited to light speed or slower,
is only happening if at least one of the parties
involved is very passionate about it and in
a sustained way.
They won’t be folks prone to half-measures
or easily bored and we have to contemplate
that as part of their motives and behavior
in a potential conflict.
Fundamentally high-tech civilizations are
unlikely to be composed of wimps or idiots,
they’re unlikely to have ever gotten any
technology if they were either after all,
and again they don’t have to be numerically
expansionist.
They could, if they like, just stay living
mostly on the homeworld but have a bunch of
self-replicating robots stowed away in various
asteroids ready to exploit those raw materials
in an emergency, and a fair amount of solar
collectors and raw materials to build more,
with more robots near those, all just patiently
waiting for some deep space detector to send
the signal of an incoming attack and go into
a flurry of self-replication and manufacture.
They’ve got millions of detectors seeded
out in the depths of their Oort cloud ready
to give advance notice to turn those factories
on and pump out whole planets worth of defensive
gear.
An armada approaching an undefended system,
detected early, might find that by the time
they arrive in system those robots have converted
whole moons into defensive stations and ships.
Of course if you’ve got a swarm of a billion,
thousand-ton RKVS heading in at 98% of light
speed, your signal is only going to arrive
a week in advance of them for every light
year out you detected them at.
So it pays to have a lot of defenses ready.
You might ask how the heck you deal with a
billion, thousand ton RKVs, each smart and
guided, each able to hit with extinction-level
force.
And the answer is with a billion one kilogram
balls able to smack into one, at those kinds
of speeds they’d be obliterated.
This presumably leads to countermeasures and
counter-countermeasures with various point
defense systems on the RKVs trying to nail
such devices with anti-collision lasers or
even smaller anti-anti-RKV devices, but one
advantage the attacker has is that they can
do a lot of damage just by the sheer amount
of relativistic shrapnel and secondary debris
left over from their missiles.
The sooner out you can intercept that, the
wider the cone that debris will cover and
the more time you have to try to clean up
that nebula-like wave of deadly space trash
headed your way.
We discussed the basic concept last week in
Orbital Infrastructure, in regard to Kessler
Syndrome around Earth, and how a scaled up
version is a massive threat to a Kardashev
2 civilization.
And like Kessler Syndrome, this doesn’t
require an intentional attack, one interstellar
spaceship cruising in a system and exploding
from some engine fault could shotgun a solar
system.
Such threats are manageable but only if you’ve
got the infrastructure lying around to handle
it.
Now all these concerns only apply if there
is some parity in size and technology, which
in general won’t be the case if it’s say,
Earth and one of its new colonies, or rather
the Solar System versus one, not the entirety
of some interstellar empire due to the huge
lag times required just to decided to attack
and how.
So it’s probably more likely to be colony-on-colony
conflicts, potentially just two factions in
two seperate systems, neither of whom is the
only nation in that system.
In either case rules might apply, so as to
avoid drawing in neighbors who might take
sides or intervene.
Or two technologically maxed out civilizations
who originated thousands of light years away
from each other and the defender gains an
advantage as they get pushed back towards
their more built up core systems and have
more time, relatively speaking, to figure
out the enemy’s technology and build defenses,
while the attacker is increasingly slowed
by time lag for new tech, reinforcements,
and general coordination from their own home
systems.
Such interstellar empire on empire wars must
take thousands of years both from the space
involved and the need to bring along or build
your infrastructure in newly conquered systems
to progress to attack the next.
In-system conflicts we covered in Interplanetary
warfare and one-sided curbstomp battles we
discussed in the Alien Civilizations series,
which takes considerably longer to watch than
such conflicts would tend to last.
If an Armada from a K2 civilization shows
up in Earth orbit tomorrow looking to tussle,
we’re going to lose, and very quickly, unless
they’ve got some weird sense of honor where
they refuse to land more forces than we have.
In which case we’d probably still lose,
because they’re probably all genetically
or cybernetically enhanced death machines.
I wouldn’t like our odds even if they just
landed one ship with a single dude that walked
out naked with a sharp stick.
That’s a thing to remember and which we’ll
explore more in the Planetary Invasion episode,
an enemy invading some planet or space habitat
might have marines composed of genetically
or cybernetically enhanced super-soldiers
who don’t fear death because their minds
are backed up somewhere.
However, those civilian targets, composed
of normally peaceful inhabitants, might also
be cyborg’d up transhumans suddenly pumped
up with rapidly manufactured weapons and combat
software, all with their minds backed up somewhere
else too so they are less worried about death.
That same paradigm applies to big classic
manned ships too.
You have that acceleration issue and reaction
time issue, but you could use transhumans
instead of AI, and moreover you shouldn’t
be engaging at hundred of kilometers but more
likely at hundreds of millions of kilometers
or further.
And you probably aren’t engaging with one
ship or hundreds of ships but possible hundreds
of thousands of ships.
You potentially have large capital ships too,
each of which might have thousands or millions
of little drones they deploy for the equivalent
of fighter attacks and defense screens.
Back on those capital ships though, standing
off a potentially many millions or even billions
of kilometers, in order to be able to dodge
incoming directed energy fire moving at light
speed, the real concern on maneuvering is
fuel, far more than how fast they can maneuver
is how much total delta-v they have for that.
The further off you are the less delta-v you
need to apply to make sure your ship isn’t
where an enemy beam was aimed.
We discussed the details of that back in space
warfare, but in short form it makes classically
manned and large ships more plausible again
because their constraint is still more about
ensuring fuel conservation than how fast they
can burn it.
That said, the more G-force that ship can
handle, either accelerating or turning, the
closer it can be and dodge laser or particle
beam fire as it randomly jinks around.
Of course that’s assuming your ship is solid,
it could be composed of lots of smaller bits
acting more like cells or a liquid.
At the end of the day, an AI or cyborg run
ship is still the better option but the disadvantage
is no longer as huge for a manned capital
ship essentially acting as a carrier and command
and control for a swarm of drones.
Most likely you use lots of ships, big fleets,
engaging over huge distances, slowly coordinating
and maneuvering and inflicting some damage
until one side realizes it’s odds of victory
have dropped and peels off to retreat, rather
than decisive engagements where both sides
take huge casualties.
In cases like that you wouldn’t really have
Ships of the Line, our classic term for a
line of capital ships engaging another fleet,
but more like Ships of the Wall, a 2D screen,
something David Weber uses in his Honorverse
series, probably one of the best military
sci-fi series for discussing sublight battles
and how those might occur, though he’s got
FTL in there and a type of shields.
Any given fiction setting with made up technology
is going to need an entirely different approach
to realistic combat and sadly most don’t
think a lot of it through.
Understandably so, we’ve barely touched
on the topic today and even then only in the
context of known science, we aren’t including
options like opening a wormhole right on top
of your enemy’s planet, not to dump soldiers
through but to dump the other end in a sun
or black hole.
Thinking through what a given hypothetical
technology can do is a big aspect of sci-fi
worldbuilding and we’ll talk about it in
the companion video.
It’s pretty challenging too, and fun.
I mentioned back in the Interstellar Empires
episode a few months back that one of my side
projects to the channel was working on developing
the tech and lore for an upcoming video game,
Hades 9, and basically to help forge the setting,
and said I’d discuss it more down the road.
It’s also where a lot of graphics for this
episode and some others have come from.
That’s been progressing and I suggested
we do a walk up to release by setting up a
channel and doing some short videos about
not just gameplay but the setting, its story,
and the making of the game.
They liked the idea and we decided to roll
a few out to start and add as we go, and they
talked me into doing one of them.
Not that it was a very hard sell and I suppose
it’s really more ‘we’ these days, but
we’ll look there more at the concept of
realistic worldbuilding, especially in the
far future, not so much keeping to known science
but making those necessary departures from
science minimal and plausible and mesh well
together without obvious loopholes.
That’s what I aimed to achieve with Hades
9’s tech and backstory, set 4000 years in
the future.
As I said, that’s for the companion episode
and I’ll leave a link to it in the video
description, on an in-video card, and in the
end screen with the credits.
Next week we’ll be going even further ahead
in time, not four thousand years but 4 billion
years and further, back to the Civilizations
at the End of Time series for Dying Earth.
The week after that we’ll discuss the concept
of Teleportation and see what options there
might be for that under known science.
We’ll then close out March with a look at
Advanced Metamaterials and some of the potentially
world-changing applications they have.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you want to support future episodes,
you can donate to the channel on Patreon or
by going to the donations link at our website,
IsaacArthur.net
If you enjoyed this episode, don’t forget
to hit the like button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching and have
a great week!
