Today we will be looking at Dark Energy, the
mysterious force that is making the Universe
expand, and I am going to try to clear up
some of the confusion on this topic.
A few weeks back we looked at Dark Matter,
and I pointed out there that Dark Matter and
Dark Energy have few things in common.
One is that they have the word dark in them,
another is that they make up most of the matter
and energy in the Universe, and a third is
that we do not know much about either, part
of why they are called dark.
This is especially true of Dark Energy, about
which we know very little, but we have not
been studying it as long.
We do not know much about it but at the same
time it is not that mysterious, and we might
as well start at the beginning, since that
was a bit under 20 years ago.
Now to be fair, some of the concepts used
in and around dark energy are older than that,
but Dark Energy as a term popped up when I
was in college.
Michael Turner coined the term in 1998 when
I was 17 and just starting my junior year
in college but I don’t recall hearing the
term for another year or so when I attended
a colloquium on it, and at the time the interest
was all in Supernovae and whether the universe
was going to expand or collapse, it was just
getting hinted at that accelerating expansion
might be on the table and all those options
were inside the margins of errors.
At least as I recall, to be honest I mostly
sat through the weekly department colloquiums
for the free coffee and cookies those days,
I was very much a novice in my studies and
the topics were pretty over my head.
In any event the focus at that time was on
Supernovae, and at that time we actually had
not detected many, which was why the margins
of error were so large on cosmological expansion
back then.
Some of you might recall that Robert Evans,
a minister from Australia who was an amateur
astronomer, had amazed everyone with discovering
tons of them by direct visual observation,
over 40, and for a while in the mid 90’s
a sizable fraction of the supernovae we knew
of were his discoveries.
So not a big sample.
Now why does that matter?
Supernovae come from multiple sources, most
people are familiar with it as an old giant
star exploding, but a type Ia supernova is
one that occurs when a binary star system
with one of the stars having already died
and turned into a white dwarf star begins
sucking up matter from its neighbor.
Once that white dwarf sucks up enough matter,
to become about one and a half times more
massive than our own sun, it explodes as a
supernova.
There is a maximum amount of mass a white
dwarf can have, this varies a bit on its composition
and spin rate, but once it hits that mass
limit it will erupt as a Supernova.
This tends to release about the same amount
of energy each time, about 1 to 2 x 10^44
Joules, and with similar spectral characteristics,
so it makes an excellent Standard Candle.
That being an object that we can look at and
say ‘ah, this must be such and such a distance
away, with such and such a redshift, and therefore
speed away from us’.
Now no two Supernovae are exactly the same
but these white dwarf stars exploding as supernovae
is a fairly small window, and of course they
are quite bright so we can see them billions
of light years off.
This is not a video on Supernova, but as a
fun fact, the classification system for Supernova,
sometimes called the Minkowski-Zwicky system,
takes that name from astronomer Rudolph Minkowski,
who was the nephew of Hermann Minkowski, one
of Einstein’s teachers, and the same Fritz
Zwicky who coined the term Dark Matter and
the term Supernova and found around 120 of
them himself, a record only surpassed about
7 years ago.
In any event as we catalogued more and more
of these standard candles it began getting
pretty obvious that the expansion of the Universe
was not slowing down.
We would expect that it would, as gravity
began pulling things back together.
What we saw instead was that it was speeding
up.
How do we know this?
Redshift is how much light shifts to longer
wavelengths based on how fast the object is
moving away from us.
Everything in the Universe besides our galaxy
and its nearest neighbors is red shifting
away from us, meaning it is moving away from
us, and that is how we got the notion that
the Universe is expanding and presumably once
was much smaller, from whence comes the Big
Bang Theory.
The further away something is, the more red
shifted it is, meaning the faster it is moving
away.
The further out in space you look the more
red-shifted stuff is.
We can also pin down the distance to a type
Ia supernova quite well because they all tend
to be about as bright, so you can calculate
how far away they are based on how much fainter
they are.
This is the same as if I told you passing
airplanes all had 1000 watt light bulbs on
them for navigational lights, you could figure
out how far away they were by how much dimmer
those lights were and from that determine
their speed, simply from knowing how bright
those navigational lights were.
But you would also have some uncertainty because
not every bulb would be exactly the same brightness.
Different manufacturers, ages on the lights
making them dimmer, dust and grime over the
transparent plate covering the bulb, that
sort of thing.
Those would all limit how precise you could
be regardless of how accurate your own equipment
was.
And the same is true of a type Ia supernova.
So we cannot be too precise with each individual
supernova but as we measured more and more
of them we could get an increasingly accurate
picture.
I want to stress that because once the effect
got noticed it took some years of observations
to shrink the margin of uncertainty down enough
to be sure.
As I mentioned, when I first heard of it in
a colloquium right around the turn of the
century those uncertainties were still high
enough it looked likely but hardly certain
the rate of the universe expanding was faster
and faster.
If the Universe’s expansion was constant,
we would expect an object to be at one spot,
whereas if it were getting faster, then it
would have been slower in the past, closer
than constant expansion would produce, while
if gravity was slowing the expansion down
it would have been faster in the past and
the object further away than you would expect.
As you know it turned out to be the former,
that the expansion is increasing in speed.
But I wanted to cover that because people
tend to skip it when talking about Dark Energy.
There is other evidence for Dark Energy but
that was the big one that established that
the Universe was expanding at an accelerating
rate.
We will skip detailing those other methods,
they are handy for an alternative proof or
refining our figures but supernova is how
we determined it and also I think the most
conceptually simple approach.
The others all require discussion of topics
that would need whole episodes to themselves,
which we might do someday.
Now you might be asking, what does the Universe
expanding have to do with Dark Energy?
Well it takes energy to make the universe
expand faster and faster and we call that
energy Dark Energy.
It is the energy expanding the Universe.
Or at least it probably takes energy, so it
is called Dark Energy, rather than just ‘that
weird thing making the universe expand, which
energy would seem the best candidate for’
Matter pulls on other matter by gravity, so
on first inspection you would expect things
moving away from us to start slowing down.
As we just covered, that is what we expected
to find with the Supernova measurements and
did not get.
For this not to be happening it takes some
force or energy.
Now what is strange about this is that it
isn’t getting diluted as space expands.
Everything else does.
Gravity keeps our galaxy together and bound
to our nearest neighbors, so our density has
not particularly changed with time, but the
overall density of the universe is constantly
decreasing as space expands.
Same stuff, more space, lower density.
But not Dark Energy, that seems to be constant
at a bit less than a billionth of a joule
per cubic meter.
That might not sound like much but it means
a cubic light year has more energy in it than
all the energy the sun has emitted during
human history.
It’s a lot of energy, and it is everywhere,
every cubic light year, be it in our solar
system or outside our galaxy or even those
giant voids, which actually are not that empty
of normal matter either.
Voids are a topic for another time too but
they are one of the other evidences for Dark
Energy.
And it isn’t like normal matter that likes
to clump together into stars and planets and
people, or like dark matter, which as we discussed
last time at least tends to clump up at the
galactic scale.
It is everywhere, evenly spread.
Now that should be tripping some alarm bells
in your head because I just said it is like
that everywhere and not getting diluted, while
the Universe is expanding.
Same density of energy, even while the Universe
gets bigger, and that means more energy.
If I expand the Earth, we would expect its
density to decrease, if it is not it is getting
matter from somewhere.
If I am expanding the Universe and it is keeping
the same energy density while I do that, I
am getting new energy from somewhere.
That would seem to be a blatant violation
of Conservation of Energy, one of the most
bedrock laws of science.
And it might well be, but Energy is a pretty
ill-defined concept in general relativity,
probably not too surprising since the unit
of energy, the joule, is made of the units
for mass, space, and time which you know also
act weird in general relativity.
You can read some wonderful arguments about
whether or not we should say energy is conserved
in General Relativity or Dark Energy, but
it is important to emphasize, I think, that
they are actually arguments of whether or
not we should ‘say’ it is.
The argument is not really about what is going
on but how to phrase it to folks who are not
physicists or mathematicians.
I, personally, tend to agree with Cosmologist
Sean Carroll that it is just easier to say
that energy is not conserved when space time
is changing.
This seems intuitively straight forward then
in this case, as the Universe ages and pumps
out more and more brand new space from seemingly
nowhere this new space brings energy with
it.
We do not know where Dark Energy or this new
space comes from, but if you wanted to think
of it as leaking in from somewhere else I
would not say that was wrong.
It also rather neatly circumvents the whole
conservation issue anyway, since we already
know no system is being conserved when it
is not closed because something is pumping
more stuff into it from the outside.
I will include a blog post from Sean Carroll
discussing this conservation of energy issue
in more detail in the episode’s description.
As a last note on that aspect of things though,
if we do have space and energy leaking in
from elsewhere that makes folks wonder what
that place would be.
Indeed Dark Energy does often come up in regards
to the higher-dimensional aspects of String
Theory, or in the idea of Multiverses, or
the Fine-Tuning Argument in general.
However, I like to remind people that we already
had this problem with the Big Bang itself,
with space, time, and energy just coming out
of nowhere.
So I do not consider it strong evidence for
any of those.
I just do not think we know enough yet to
speculate in that regard.
Speculation is always good, but such things
tend to be impossible to experimentally verify
so to me they are the places you go when you
exhaust all other alternatives.
One of the popular ideas though is that there
is an energy cost for space to exist, so that
Dark Energy is constant everywhere and evenly
distributed in space because it is the actual
energy of space.
It is kind of like saying that water is evenly
distributed throughout the ocean.
You can dump more water in the ocean but any
given bit of it will have the same amount
of water as another.
Water, like most liquids, is incompressible,
or very nearly so, that is how hydraulics
works.
A kilogram of water takes up a liter of space,
or one gram per cubic centimeter, whether
it is at the bottom of the ocean or the top.
Dark Energy appears to be a lot like that,
it is just the basic minimum energy needed
for space to exist, or the minimum energy
a space will have perhaps.
It takes a gram of water, or 9 x 10^13 Joules
of energy, to make a cubic centimeter of ocean
exist.
Well it takes about 10^-29 grams of matter
or 10^-15 joules, a femtojoule, to make a
cubic centimeter of space exist.
And again space and time and energy are all
pretty thoroughly connected at a fundamental
level, that is not exactly new and deep thinking,
so if you have more space, from the Universe
expanding, it is not a big leap to assume
there was energy connected to doing that.
One of the big candidates for Dark Energy
is a familiar term, Vacuum Energy, and it
is more or less the same concept as Zero Point
Energy, a popular one in science fiction.
Like I mentioned there is not much dark energy
in a tiny bit of space, but there is an awful
lot of space, so it adds up.
Tapping that for power is, of course, incredibly
tempting and has become a common theme in
sci-fi.
I have never personally heard a good scheme
for how you could do this and I tend to be
of the opinion you cannot.
Hypothetically if you could suck in a chunk
of space, leaving it missing, you maybe would
get some energy from doing that, but how you
do that is a complete mystery to me.
Anyway vacuum energy is full of all sorts
of virtual particles constantly popping in
and out of existence, or some sort of existence
anyway, we talked about those some episodes
back when discussing them and micro-black
holes and Hawking Radiation.
Zero Point Energy itself is the lowest possible
energy that a quantum mechanical physical
system may have, essentially that even if
I took a box full of particles and reduced
it to absolute zero it would still have some
energy.
Now to the best of our knowledge you cannot
reduce anything to Absolute Zero, but even
if you could it would still have this Zero
Point energy leftover.
This is the energy that is still there even
after you have extracted everything else so
it is sort of counter-intuitive how you would
get more energy out of it.
I would say the key thing to take out of that
though is that any given volume or space has
energy associated to it, even if it is empty
of normal matter and does not have photons
passing through it.
This does bring up the Vacuum Catastrophe
though because when we calculate the amount
of energy Quantum Field Theory tells us should
be in a given chunk of space we get one value
but when we check that experimentally – this
energy should exert gravity after all – we
get nothing like that.
As I mentioned earlier when we calculate this
energy based off the gravity it should be
exerting we come up with something like a
billionth of a joule per cubic meter or less.
This is what we get from observing the Universe.
But when we run the numbers that Quantum Field
Theory offers us, by looking at the subatomic
scale rather than the intergalactic scale,
the values it gives us are not tiny fractions
of a joule per cubic meter but more than the
entire mass energy of the Universe squeezed
into a spot smaller than a single proton.
You can see then why this is called the Vacuum
Catastrophe or the worst prediction in the
history of physics.
I will attach an article by theorist Matt
Strassler in the episode description if you
want a good walkthrough of this and Zero-point
energy in general with a minimum of math.
Okay, so the idea that Dark Energy is just
the energy of space is a pretty popular one
right now, but the evidence is hardly conclusive
and there are lots of other candidates.
I want to cover a few more and also hit on
some terms you will encounter a lot if you
explore this more on your own, which I hope
you will, as it is one of the greatest mysteries
of modern times.
Another popular idea is that dark energy is
not energy at all, but just evidence our understanding
of gravity needs some more work, which is
certainly true.
While gravity was the first of the physical
forces we discovered it remains arguably the
worst understood one.
We know that gravity falls off as inverse
square to distance, double your distance,
quarter the force of gravity, get ten times
further away and it is one hundred times weaker.
But we cannot actually be sure it precisely
follows that law even at huge distances and
as I mentioned in the Dark Matter episode
the idea that it might get weaker at the intergalactic
scale was one of the more popular explanations
for dark matter though most evidence these
days strongly points against that.
We also cannot rule out that Gravity is repulsive
at cosmic scales.
Gravity is the only one of the forces with
no repulsive aspect, it just attracts, and
is way weaker than the other forces, electromagnetic
and the weak and strong nuclear forces.
To the best of our knowledge it is strictly
attractive, and has no repulsive aspect like
the other forces do.
However, it could have a repulsive aspect
at the extreme scale that results in this
expansion of the universe.
As you get further away gravity gets weaker,
and if there was a repulsive force that began
to get stronger as you got more distant, millions
of light years or more, you would get to a
point where gravity became a net repulsive
force.
Of course if that repulsive aspect did begin
to dominate over the attractive aspect at
large distances you would expect that to mean
that as the universe got bigger and bigger
the repulsive aspect would get stronger and
stronger causing an accelerating expansion.
There is absolutely no proof of this, but
there’s basically no proof of much of anything
to do with Dark Energy anyway.
To get to our next one I think I should go
ahead and introduce the Cosmological Constant.
You will see this along with the Lambda CDM
model a lot in discussion of it and it can
get needlessly confusing.
We use the Greek letter Lambda, for the Cosmological
constant and CDM is short for Cold Dark Matter.
So the Lambda CDM model is just the one where
the Cosmological Constant is being used for
Dark Energy and we assume Dark Matter is cold,
we discussed why temperature matters in the
Dark Matter episode.
It is not the consensus cosmological theory,
there really is not one, we just do not know
enough yet to have one, but it tends to be
the default one that other gets compared to.
That this is a cosmological constant and that
dark matter is real and cold, which is to
say, made of particles that do not move at
high velocities compared to most matter we
see spinning around the galaxy.
The Cosmological Constant is the energy density
of the vacuum of space, or how much energy
a given chunk of empty space has.
We already talked today about Vacuum Energy
and this is essentially that, and you will
often see a version of it expressed as Omega-Lambda,
which is just the ratio of the cosmological
constant to the critical density of the Universe.
The Critical Density of the Universe is defined
as the density the Universe would need to
be to make the Universe eventually stop expanding.
Rather than constantly expressing that as
something like 10 protons per cubic meter
we just say that when Omega is exactly equal
to 1 the Universe would eventually stop expanding
and stay that size.
If it is above 1 it would collapse back in
on itself, the Big Crunch, and if it is less
than 1 it will expand forever.
I assume Omega was picked because of it being
the last letter of the alphabet and those
connotations of it spelling out the end of
the universe and such.
Omega itself would have to equal one, it is
actually the sum of three terms, Omega-Mass,
for classic matter and dark matter, Omega-Relativistic,
for photons and neutrinos, and Omega-Lambda
for the dark energy component where dark energy
is the cosmological constant, or the vacuum
energy of space.
Omega-Lambda is currently estimated to be
about 0.69.
We also have the notion that Dark Energy might
be some fifth fundamental force and energy,
Quintessence.
There’s more than one version of this but
the general notion is that the force driving
the universe apart can change with where and
when you are.
This is nice one since it predicts noticeably
different results than the cosmological constant
does so we should be able to say which one
it is as we gather more data.
Current evidence is not in favor of quintessence
but has not ruled it out either so it deserves
a mention.
Now there are a ton more options, but those
are the only ones I think we have time for today.
Others are either a little too difficult to explain briefly or are maybe a bit too out there.
They might be right of course but our goal today was not really to explain dark energy…
we can’t yet…
but to acquaint ourselves with why we think it exists
and the more common terms and concepts mentioned in regard to it.
One last common thought is using Dark Energy as a power source,
as it is most of the Energy in the Universe and seems to be increasing to boot.
It would without a doubt be an amazing power source if we could harness it.
Better yet, since it seems to be the very energy of space,
if you could for instance suck chunks of space up for their energy
that would make a pretty awesome spaceship.
You could potentially suck up some of the space in front of you,
shortening the way to your destination,
much like the Alcubierre Warp Drive we have discussed before.
The one commonly suggested method would be to take a rope wrapped around an axle
attached to an electrical generator
and tie one end to a spaceship that goes and tows it many millions of light years away.
Obviously this would have to be an impossibly sturdy rope.
Once the end is that far away
Dark Energy should be strong enough to keep pulling it away faster and faster, turning the generator.
You would have to swap a new one in from time to time, tying the new rope to the end of the old one.
Ignoring for the moment that the rope would need to be impossibly strong,
I cannot personally think of any reason why this would not work.
Which does not mean it would, I am no Cosmologist or General Relativity expert.
Also, I would not be surprised if it turned out the mass energy of that rope
turned out to exceed the energy you would gain from this.
To the best of my knowledge though, this method would work, on paper at least.
To seriously speculate about how to use it for power we need to understand how it works
and we just do not know yet.
It is undeniably mysterious stuff, one that may take generations to figure out,
but hopefully by now you have a more down to earth view of what it might be
and why cosmologists feel so confident it exists
and that it is not just some crazy idea that came out of nowhere.
I try to keep the content on the channel as down to earth as I can after all.
Speaking of which, next week we will look at how to destroy the sun!
[laughs]
And I will actually be trying to explain how we can remove matter from stars, called Starlifting,
why this might be quite down to earth and practical,
and why we might do this to get a useful source of matter to build stuff with and to extend that star’s lifetime.
and to extend that star’s lifetime.
We will cover some of the ways this could be done and what you might be able to do with all that matter.
This was the second winner of our Patreon Topic Contest,
and we have one more which I will be picking before that episode comes out,
so the deadline to enter topics for it is Saturday October 2, 2016,
so you can still submit topics until then.
The week after we will look at Cryptocurrency and Blockchain,
doing both a basic introduction and looking at some interesting applications it might have in the future,
along with some of the pros and cons of such things.
That will get followed up on the October 20
with an in-depth look at the Kardashev Scale
and what some of the capabilities and traits of such civilizations would be.
Nothing is determined for after that just yet,
over at the facebook group, science and Futurism with Isaac Arthur,
we have an on-going poll of topics
and that is where most of the videos in November will be getting picked from.
So you might want to head over there and vote for the topics you like or add new ones.
So again, next week is Starlifitng,
don’t forget to subscribe to the channel if you want alerts when that and future videos come out,
and in the meantime you can try out some of the other episodes on the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode don’t forget to like it and share it with others.
Until next week,
thanks for Watching and have a Great Day!
