This episode is brought to by Skillshare.
To fuel our future in space we will need massive
industrial production up in space,
but how will that develop and will the creation
of such industries to help colonize space
also influence how and where that colonization
occurs?
We’ve recently been discussing the development
of industry on the Moon and how that might
serve as a base for expansion into the solar
system and beyond.
Today I thought we might look at how various
regions of the solar system might develop
industrially.
So we’ll be looking at how space around
the Earth and Moon might develop, and what
directions we might go in for the asteroid
belt, Mercury, Mars, and Jupiter, as well.
Indeed, we’ll move out not just to the Kuiper
Belt and Oort Cloud but also take some time
near the end to look at this notion at the
galactic level.
Industrialization of space is a peculiar thing,
since so much space pioneering speculation
and science fiction focuses on Mars or other
off-world colonies, but in truth I’d rather
expect worlds like Mars to be a fairly minor
player in a developing solar economy, and
I’d also expect the space right around Earth
to be where the super-majority of industrial
development and colonization occurs for many
centuries to come.
It’s commonplace to imagine humanity numbering
a trillion people spread over many worlds
in many systems within the next few millennia,
but I don’t think we’d really be all that
spread out in reality.
If I had to guess what the landscape would
be like for humanity when we first hit a trillion
people, while I’d not be surprised if we
had colonies of millions of folks on other
planets and moons and even in other solar
systems, I’d also expect 99% of the human
population to live either on Earth or in orbit
around it.
You could pack a lot more than that rather
comfortably into space habitats orbiting our
pale blue dot – and indeed, you could do
it on Earth itself if you wanted – but while
orbiting habitats might not be as ideal a
place to live as Earth, they will generally
equal or match the comfort you’d find on
any planet that wasn’t a particularly rare
clone of Earth.
We don’t know of any planets that qualify
as true Earth analogues, and the nearest match
is actually Venus, not Mars.
However, while Venus is definitely a candidate
for terraforming as we looked at in Winter
on Venus, that’s not a fast exercise.
Many centuries will be required to get people
on to Venus, if not more, and far longer to
make it anywhere close to Earth-like if you
want to do it that way.
So odds are folks living in space will be
living in a rotating habitat anyway, and one
nice and close to Earth is likely to be the
preferred locale.
It’s also where most of the ‘firsts’
for space development are likely to occur,
so it makes sense to start there first.
Whether it’s a space farm, space port, shipyard,
or a space hotel, some place in low or medium
orbit of Earth would seem where we’d see
the first one built, and probably almost all
of the early ones.
Some might appear on or around the Moon too,
but the Moon orbits Earth so it arguably qualifies,
particularly as the travel time and communication
lag to the Moon is tiny compared to even that
of the nearest planets and asteroids.
And of course it’s even shorter to low orbit,
which is closer to us than most of our neighboring
states or nations, just a few hundred kilometers
up.
It’s an area larger than Earth’s surface,
and it’s also three-dimensional, so you
can pack plenty of stuff in there, and far
more into medium orbit.
Indeed Earth’s Hill Sphere, the volume of
space in which an object would orbit Earth
rather than orbit the Sun, is 1.5 million
kilometers in radius, over 200 times wider
than Earth and containing 11 million times
the volume and 50,000 times the surface area
for the purpose of either collecting solar
energy or radiating away heat.
If we treated that surface area as effective
living room, then if the cloud had a population
density parallel to my own home state of Ohio,
it would house a couple quadrillion people.
Ohio’s hardly densely populated either,
so such a setup could easily be mostly composed
of space farms and nature preserves, and it
could be many times that number without feeling
packed or even vaguely urban.
As to signal lag, even those most distant
parts of it would only be 5 light second away,
permitting a message to be heard and its reply
received just 10 seconds after you sent it.
That’s an irritating pause for live communication
but mostly just irritating, not troublesome
or impractical, whereas all but the closest
planets would need hours to get a message
back and forth.
That’s one of the reasons why this region
would be the one to get developed.
It has proximity to where we are now and where
most things will be for at least several centuries,
not because it has a lot of resources.
Though indeed it does, Earth is the most massive
terrestrial planet, being around the combined
mass of every other rocky planet and moon
and asteroid combined, and Earth’s Moon
is one of the most massive moons in the system,
and indeed out masses the entire asteroid
belt by a factor of about 30.
There’s a reason a lot of businesses and
factories get setup in big cities, not just
because that’s where the workforce is but
because that’s where most of the customers
are.
Earth’s orbital space is likely to be the
same and we’d expect that to repeat around
other planets or places where lots of people
or activity are going on.
The eventual fate of most planets is likely
not to be turned green and visible as blue
and green dots through telescopes, but instead
to appear as far bigger blobs of orbiting
infrastructure gravitationally anchored to
that planet, be it terraformed or not.
They would enclose those worlds like a thin
hazy fog or cloud, almost like a second atmosphere.
Though you can control your orbits of those
habitats to avoid blocking sunlight to the
planet below.
As such places grow they need more infrastructure
and industry, and those will generate their
own growth in other sectors.
After all, if you build a factory and employ
a bunch of people, those folks all have funds
and a desire for restaurants, shops, and schools
nearby, whose own employees need the same,
resulting in more, and so on.
However this might not result in a big spherical
blob but something more like a bracelet or
maybe a ring with a gemstone, we’ll come
back and explain that in a bit.
Now, I should note that as we saw in our Outward
Bound series, colonizing a place does not
necessarily mean a lot of people live there.
You’d expect any major effort to make use
of ball of rock to result in a migration but
a place has to have an appeal to live there
and most folks don’t opt to live in mine
shafts, just work there, and even then the
march of technological progress on automation
means fewer need to work down in that mine
or even necessarily live anywhere nearby.
As various industrial belts and regions in
the solar system develop, we should not assume
that colonization implies a proportional amount
of immigration.
Some massive factory the size of a mountain
with an industrial output that exceeds the
entire current global economy might have a
crew of a few hundred and only a small habitation
drum for a cozy little village.
Or it might be totally unmanned, for a given
value of ‘unmanned’.
It might be manned but not by classic humans,
they might be cyborgs, digital consciousness,
artificial intelligences, or subhuman-intelligence
robots or even genetically engineered creatures
such as we contemplated in the episodes Void
Ecologies & Space Whales.
It is entirely conceivable some system might
reach fully Kardashev-2 development levels
– where one has enclosed an entire star
in what’s called a Dyson Swarm – and still
have virtually everyone living near the homeworld.
A Dyson Swarm might be expected to have a
billion times as many people as we have now
living in it, and yet if most food and industrial
work is imported into the region most folks
live in, it might only need to be about the
size of Earth’s Hill Sphere to allow it
to be big enough to get rid of all the heat
generated by its inhabitants and their basic
services.
Not many folks might need to live outside
this volume, after all, modern farms require
very few workers compared to how many folks
they feed, and a futuristic space farm might
be merely a small village of overseers monitoring
the production of those space farms close
enough to be remotely supervised and overseen,
potentially having a few hundred folks handle
food production for a billion people back
home near Earth.
But let’s get a bit nearer modern Earth,
at least in time.
Our first big industrial effort away from
Earth’s and its satellites – natural or
artificial – is likely to be in the Asteroid
Belt.
Not because it has a ton of resources, there
are couple dozen planets and moons in our
system who have as much or more than the entire
Belt, but because they are so easy to get
access too.
It takes very little fuel to move around the
belt or move material off a given asteroid,
and you needn’t dig much to get access to
any of it.
It just doesn’t take much fuel to access
those resources and that’s what mostly matters.
When we’re talking about raw materials,
time doesn’t matter much in the equation
because they don’t spoil, so long as the
market is reasonably stable you could sell
metals you just mined off an asteroid for
a good price today even if they wouldn’t
arrive at the places that wanted them for
a decade while they traveled along at minimum-fuel
trajectories there.
Of course time does matter, and there’s
the threat of market fluctuations or losing
the cargo or it getting stolen by space pirates,
but like many commodities that have a long
shelf-life their price can fluctuate simply
by a report a new supply of them has been
found, and they can effectively be traded
and sold before the first mining equipment
even arrives there.
They’re fungible, meaning you don’t care
about the individual bit, one chunk of gold
or iron is the same as any other, and effectively
nearly as good as cash.
As we saw in Colonizing Ceres and the Asteroid
Belt, assuming the process is nearly entirely
automated, you’d expect to see this region
develop probably before any other bit of the
solar system excluding Earth’s volume, with
colonists following along to provide food
and other services.
Long-running mines might develop into settlements
and abandoned asteroid full of holes might
get resold to serve as habitats for humanity
as we crammed in rotating habitats and space
farms and other facilities.
But raw resources are never as valuable as
the end products they are turned into, and
such settlements would want manufactured goods
too, plus who wants to ship wealth home to
Earth only to have to spend a lot of it buying
back manufactured goods?
We’d probably begin seeing industries developing
there fairly soon after folks began arriving
for mining.
An interesting parallel might be the gold
rush to California in 1849, and while that
was hardly the only reason folks migrated
to California, it’s a reminder that a century
of development can have some surprising twists
and turns on the original motivations for
going there.
Silicon Valley and Hollywood have no obvious
correlation to gold, and yet California is
far better known for both of those economic
powerhouses than its gold production nowadays.
So too, much of the effort to originally colonize
the United States was driven by wanting to
grow tobacco and some other products, and
while that surely shaped the nation that came,
it’s not really obvious how those early
plantations would lead to becoming a superpower
that has been a driving force of our efforts
to get into space.
For this same reason, while I said earlier
I’d expect most folks to live on or around
Earth for many centuries to come, a place
like the Asteroid Belt could easily become
a major population center, or ring anyway.
Our first Industrial Belt in Space, in a literal
geometric sense at least.
Where else?
Well of course there’s the Kuiper Belt,
the much big brother to the Asteroid Belt
out beyond Neptune, but it’s far away so
we’ll come back to it.
We also have Venus and Mars, and they could
easily develop their own big bubble of industrial
might.
We should not assume gravity wells, and the
fuel costs to climb out of them, is really
that much of an impediment.
After all, we’ll need to get better at that
to realistically get space development going
in the first place, as Earth’s gravity well
is far larger than any other place in the
solar system besides the Gas Giants and the
Sun, which we presumably aren’t planning
to land on.
Though I’d imagine channel regulars already
can guess that we are going to discuss doing
exactly that later in the episode.
Advanced Launch vehicles and structures may
help seriously reduce this cost, you can see
those in our Upward Bound Series, and structures
like the Orbital Ring can potentially make
this rather cheap, even if they have a large
initial cost to construct, much like railroads
or canals.
Similarly, while we lack any material we can
build a space elevator out of at the moment,
that’s only true for Earth, and many of
our larger moons and even planets could have
space elevators built on them using only modern
materials.
We would need to gain access to them eventually
as they are where virtually all the mass and
resources are, but we tend to assume this
need would be long down the road and we’d
start with the low hanging fruit in the low-gravity
asteroids and smaller moons.
However, with sufficient energy abundance
or infrastructure the actual costs of moving
material around off worlds and in-between
might be low enough that gravity wells might
not be a big concern or that minimum-fuel
trajectories for raw materials might not be
worth the cost.
After all, we regularly fly cargo around rather
economically these days instead of shipping
it by slower more energy efficient methods.
The cost isn’t that high compared to the
final product in many cases, and what’s
more, fuel is not the only cost to shipping.
Haste doesn’t always make waste, and if
you’re paying salaries to a crew or for
maintenance on a ship or insurance premiums
against space piracy, it might be cheaper
overall to move the stuff fast or source it
from down a deep gravity well.
That’s particularly true if your gravity
well is in the middle of your marketplace,
so same as Earth might develop a massive swarm
of habitats around it eclipsing its own living
area and population, Mars or Venus might develop
their own swarms around them, causing a growth
boom around them that feeds on itself and
that world below.
Of course in the outer planets this growth
might begin entirely off that planet.
For places like Jupiter and Saturn, where
there’s no land anyway and where there are
many moons, big and small, you might see all
those moons settled fairly quickly.
In many ways these gas giants and their moons
are like little solar systems all their own,
and not that little at that.
Being rather far away from the Sun, solar
power is an option through using cheap thin
mirrors to concentrate the light for collectors,
but I suspect you’d only see major settlement
of such worlds in a fusion-based economy.
Were that the case these moons would have
enough hydrogen or deuterium to run an empire
dwarfing our own civilization in scale and
fueling it for eons to come from those massive
worlds below.
Those Moons themselves are hardly low on resources
either, the largest of Jupiter’s moons,
Ganymede, is roughly twice the mass of our
own moon.
While often less dense than our own from having
more ices, they are still abundant in metals.
Those ices also likely contain other substances
than just water, such as ammonia, a great
source of nitrogen which would be necessary
for building habitats.
These gas giants also have rings, albeit most
far less grand than Saturn’s, and they might
pick up far more grand rings as we settle
around them and fill their orbits with artificial
habitats.
Again these gas giants have the possibility
to become not-so-mini-solar-systems all their
own, and the close proximity of their moons
to each other in distance and fuel needs means
that from the very outset you’d be able
to have robust trade between those worlds,
even very primitive spaceships far inferior
to those we first used to reach orbit could
ply the space lanes between a gas giant’s
moons, and you presumably have far more sophisticated
ones to have settled the region in the first
place.
Indeed if we ever have an interplanetary nation,
one that rules over the entirety of multiple
worlds, it’s likely the first example would
be around these gas giants and their collections
of dozens of moons.
Though in fact they arguably have far more
than that, particularly Jupiter, which will
discuss in a moment.
Far more grand options are available though,
as we discussed in Colonizing Jupiter, it
should be possible to strip away all the gas
around the planet to expose the rocky inner
core, and transport that gas to storage facilities
to be used as needed.
Now in Jupiter’s case you’d not likely
want terraform that core as it’s theorized
to be several times Earth’s mass – indeed
might be a giant diamond – but certainly
the material there is of great worth, likely
containing more metals and heavier elements
than the rest of solar system combined, minus
the Sun of course.
For those other gas giants, their cores are
less massive and might be something you’d
consider terraforming, though they are far
from the Sun.
In theory all that gas makes excellent fuel
and propellant to move a planet inward, using
what we call a Fusion Candle, a massive fusion
thruster, but in practice if you have such
a capability, large scale artificial fusion,
then you can easily make the equivalent of
an artificial star to light that system, which
is certainly preferable to the occasional
suggestion of turning those gas giants into
mini-suns themselves.
See the episode Making Stars for details on
the options there.
Of course you could also simply run fusion
power plants to produce electricity to light
habitats instead.
Or to run large mills to creates mirrors and
dishes to focus sunlight on those moons or
gas giant cores.
The amount of material and energy needed to
make enough of them to light that region to
Earth-levels is immense but tiny compared
to constructing vast number of habitats or
disassembling smaller moons for the resources
to make them.
Let’s return to my remark about Jupiter
having more moons than those directly circling
it.
Every body that orbits a significantly larger
body, be it a planet around a star or a moon
around a planet, creates a quintet of Lagrange
Points, places where an object would move
along with that smaller orbiting body.
Normally objects orbit faster the closer they
are to the primary that they orbit and slower
the further they are, however that’s not
always the case.
There’s one point on each side of the orbiting
body from what it orbits that will stick along
with that orbiting body even though it is
closer or further from the main body itself
and thus should go faster or slower.
The L1 point, which is between the bodies,
and orbits a bit slower than it should at
that distance from the satellite pulling it
away from the primary.
The L2 point, which is behind the satellite,
and things there orbit a bit faster than they
should, with the satellite adding it’s gravity
to the force the primary exerts on that L2
point.
Such points are very handy for placing things
like solar mirrors or lenses.
There’s also the L3 point, which is on the
exact opposite side of the main body from
the satellite.
However we have two other semi-stable points,
the L4 or L5 Lagrange Points also known as
the Trojan Points, which are 60 degrees ahead
and behind of the orbiting body but on the
same orbital path.
You might wonder why these are stable but
essentially, while they are pulled toward
that orbiting body, at the 60 degree mark,
forming an equilateral triangle with the satellite
and primary, the ratio of forces remains the
same and they are stable, or reasonably stable.
Objects on the same orbital path but not at
the L3, L4, or L5 points will end up falling
out of that orbit.
Now we call the L4 and L5 Trojan Points because
out first examples were a cluster of asteroids
and debris in front and behind of Jupiter
on its orbit of the Sun.
Other planets have them too but Jupiter, which
is essentially the Solar System’s vacuum
cleaner, has far more.
Keeping with the mythology we borrowed the
names of Jupiter’s Moons from, we named
those various objects at the L4 and L5 after
characters from the Trojan War, the L4 being
known as the Greek Camp and the L5 the Trojan
Camp, though as our telescopes improved we
found far more of these objects than there
are characters in Homer’s tales to name
them for.
Needless to say these are excellent candidate
for colonization too, as they are spread out
rather widely, and have a total mass about
fifth of the asteroid belt.
It takes very little energy to move between
them or back and forth to Jupiter’s main
moons too.
So this could easily become a second literal
industrial belt, albeit abridged rather than
a full circle, or donut anyway, the asteroid
belt is a rather large volume as is the space
occupied by the Trojans.
And indeed we could do similar setups around
the other gas giants, not that it’s limited
to the gas giants.
However this raises another interesting point.
When we say stable or semi-stable for large
orbits, we’re really only talking about
natural objects performing many orbits over
very long time scales.
If I place an object 6.7 million kilometers
from Earth, in front or behind it on its orbital
path, a bit over 4 times as far away as Earth’s
Hill Sphere boundary, gravity has hardly shut
off.
But 6.7 million kilometers is a thousand times
further from the Earth’s center than the
surface we walk on is, and by the inverse-square
fall off of gravity, an object a thousand
times further away experiences a thousand-squared
or million times less gravity.
We fall toward the Earth on its surface at
9.8 meters per second squared, an object at
that distance would want to fall at 9.8 micrometers
per second squared.
Now over time it is going to pick up a lot
of speed, indeed as tiny at 9.8 micrometers
is, thinner than most hairs, it is only going
to take about a day to have accelerated to
walking speed and within a year be moving
about the speed of sound on Earth.
So on astronomical timelines it’s not stable
at all.
However it’s very easy to provide enough
thrust to keep it there, and indeed even a
fairly small solar sail could be able to give
it enough radiant pressure to stay where you
want it to be.
We call this a Laggite, a body which maintains
an orbital period lower than it ought to for
its distance from the Sun because of using
light pressure to alter the net force the
object experiences.
In this way a space station with a large solar
sail, for power collection for instance, could
be on the same orbital path as a planet and
remain stable without being at a Lagrange
Point.
Indeed it could also be outside that orbital
path, being a bit closer or further from a
Sun or above or below that orbital path too.
Now normally you can only have a ring orbiting
around a body if it’s fairly evenly spread,
such as a planetary ring or asteroid belt
or Kemplerer Rosette, but the Laggite option
allows you to do this even when you have a
large single satellite that would dominate
that orbit and perturb things.
This means that not only could a planet have
a large swarm of orbiting objects inside its
Hill Sphere but it could create a large ring
all the way around that star of artificial
stations.
Indeed they could be literally lashed together
with cable that provided a bit of additional
stabilization and a cable-car path all the
way around a star.
Such a physical connection can also be used
for mass transport of goods and if you’re
timing things right you can use this movement
of cargo to stabilize the ring.
Indeed you could also place very large storage
depots of raw material or fusion fuel – hydrogen
imported from Jupiter for instance, at those
L3, 4, and 5 locations along with the other
two 60 degree increments to effectively create
a Klemperer Rosette, though since these would
need to be Earth Mass you might as well make
shellworlds and the mass involved would make
this a mega-engineering project of planet
building scale.
The ring itself though could be used for mass
transport of food and goods into the Cloud
of habitats around Earth, potentially turning
this whole ring into something like a metropolis
Earth, suburban cloud around Earth, and rural
farming in the ring itself.
It’s almost unimaginable how many folks
could live in such a thing but we’re talking
many quadrillions and most could be on Earth
or its habitat cloud.
I occasionally call this the Terran Ring as
I envision one possible path for our expansion
being a planet swarm around Earth forming
a gemstone with the band as a big ring around
the Sun.
If you wanted to get really elaborate you
could potentially create a super-long thin
rotating habitat along this entire path, what
we call a Topopolis, though such objects might
wrap around a star several times not just
once.
This would mean you could actually walk or
sail or fly all the way around the Sun.
Another version of this might use two of them
with cylinder habitat Rungs in between, looking
like a very long ladder wrapped back around
itself around the Sun, what we call a Rung
World, not to be confused with a Ringworld.
These may be built around a planet too of
course, not just a star, and handily may be
built without any super-strong materials as
a classic Niven Ringworld requires.
I’m not sure I’d call the Terran Ring,
or any other variation on this concept, an
Industrial Belt in Space, but I imagine it
would certainly have a ton of industries on
it or otherwise servicing it, and a Terran
Ring might become another inner Belt, closer
than the Asteroid Belt and of course artificial.
Now you might see this reproduced around every
planet, or others cocked at an angle to the
Ecliptic, this is one path to forming a Dyson
Swarm and we discussed that more in our Dyson
Sphere episode, and of course we might do
something similar out in the Kuiper Belt,
which is more massive than the Asteroid Belt
but far more thinly scattered.
However, the Terran Ring, or one around Venus,
might come much later than another ring or
rings closer to the Sun.
As we discussed in our episodes Colonizing
the Sun and in Starlifting, our Sun contains
about 500 times the mass of the rest of the
solar system, with half of that being in Jupiter.
It similarly contains about that ratio of
metals and heavier elements.
There’s already more than enough metals
in the Planet Mercury to construct a Dyson
Swarm focused on power harvesting but you
need far more heavy elements to produce a
Dyson focused on habitation and industry.
It’s quite probable Mercury would be slowly
harvested to create a ring or sphere around
the Sun focused on power and industry and
it’s possible that its main production would
be the equipment needed for a massive Starlifting
project to begin harvesting those metals in
the Sun.
It’s essentially impossible to express the
industrial might such a Mercury Ring supplied
with power and energy from the Sun would have,
even with modern technology for the output,
but it’s more than sufficient to power the
construction of a Dyson and huge colonial
armadas to venture out to the galaxy.
Now out in the Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud
you might see additional industrial sectors,
particularly in an artificial micro-black
hole powered economy, but there’s not much
matter out there and even less considering
what an immense volume it is distributed across,
and this takes us to our last potential industrial
Belt, the Local Bubble.
A star is an immense thing and even without
its metals, our solar system contains more
than sufficient quantities to build quite
a massive civilization.
But there are scenarios for going far larger
and also, if you want to colonize a galaxy
it can use up some major resources, especially
if you’d like to send some of the giant
colonial armadas we contemplated in the Generation
Ships series.
There are a lot of stars around us though
and with their own planets, what we often
call the local bubble, and while these logically
seem our first colonial targets, we may end
up engaging in massive resource harvesting
of them instead, shipping untold trillions
of tons of raw material home while converting
more into endless armadas and megastructures
to be used in pioneering the galaxy, such
as an Interstellar Laser Highway System.
The notion of shipping raw materials between
stars can seem absurd at first, but for these
kind of projects a few millennia is no time
at all, so shipping materials at low-speed,
low-energy trajectories could actually be
economical to a resource thirsty system, as
humanity’s home solar system might be.
We have discussed scenarios for constructs
far larger than even Dyson Swarms on this
show before and it’s conceivable a Kardashev-2
civilization might decide to keep growing
directly, rather than just seeding new solar
systems, by mass harvesting of extra-solar
resources, potentially thousands or even millions
of solar masses are contained in one mega-dyson
or Birch Planet.
Speaking of millions of solar masses, there
is one last place of note.
The center of most galaxies contains an enormous
supermassive black hole, and as we looked
at in our black hole series, such things represent
the ultimate in efficient energy production,
and could become the focus point of civilizations
whose scale and industrial might can only
be described as astronomical, and one might
end up harvesting an entire galaxy, or even
more than one, to create a massive but compact
civilization that could minimize the problems
of light lag normally facing a galactic civilization.
Although amusingly such an effort might instead
focus around Earth.
It’s popular to suggest we might move our
galactic capital to the center of the galaxy,
but when we’re talking about moving millions
of stars worth of material, you might end
up just moving the center of the galaxy to
Earth instead, or Earth to there.
Such projects would require millions of years,
and industrial and engineering efforts almost
beyond imagining, but then again, we can imagine
a lot and it’s exactly what such massive
industrial belts as we have discussed today
are ideal for.
We were talking about industry and productivity
today and I often get asked how the heck I
manage to write and produce a half hour episode
each week along with getting bonus episodes
done and doing everything else on my plate,
like administering a Primary Election here
in Ohio next week or getting married next
month.
Same as with various creative skills like
writing or graphic design, you really have
to learn your own best approach, especially
when your work is creativity-focused, and
just be constantly trying to figure out where
you’re getting stuck, wasting time, or need
to improve, and also constantly looking at
how other folks manage their workload for
ideas you can borrow or adapt.
If you’re looking for some suggestions and
ideas for either evaluating your productivity
or improving it, I’d recommend Thomas Frank’s
course “Real Productivity: How to Build
Habits that Last” over on Skillshare.
He offers a ton of great suggestions that
are pretty universal, and you can find plenty
more productivity suggestions or courses on
creative work like writing and graphic design
among Skillshare’s catalog of thousands
of classes for creative and curious folks
looking to improve their skills or learn new
ones.
A premium membership is less than $10 a month
and gives you access to that course and all
the rest, and you can try it out for free.
To sign up, visit the link in the description,
and as a special offer, the first 500 people
to use this link will get 2 free months of
Skillshare Premium Membership.
Act now for this special offer, and start
learning today.
So last week we were looking at the Fermi
Paradox and next week we’ll return to that
to contemplate scenarios where alien civilizations
are arising left and right and sending out
signals for all to hear, but we’re not hearing
them and maybe nobody else is either, in “The
Fermi Paradox: Whispers in the Night”.
We also talked a lot today about colonizing
Moons, Asteroids, and lower-gravity planets,
and two weeks from now we’ll ask what Life
on Low-Gravity Planets would be like, be it
naturally evolved there, transplanted and
adapted with time, or even genetically engineered.
We’ll also ask how likely such worlds are
to be able to have favorable conditions for
life emerging, like atmosphere and oceans.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And if you’d like to support future episodes,
visit our website, IsaacArthur.net, to donate
to the channel
or check out some of the awesome SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a Great Week!
