This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
We already know, from the Hitchhikers’ Guide to the Galaxy,
that the answer to life itselfis 42.
And while that’s useful to know, it doesn’t
tell us why life exists in the first place.
Welcome to our 222nd weekly episode of Science and Futurism with Isaac Arthur,
where we  tackle the big questions.
And this episode’s question is so big, it
hasn’t merely vexed the greatest minds of
history, it also won the most recent poll
of what topics SFIA subscribers would like
to hear discussed in an episode.
But a question that’s vexed humankind for
millennia might be a little tricky to fully
answer in a single episode, even a long one,
so first let’s ponder what angle we want
to examine that question from.
“Why” is something of an ambiguous word,
and when we ponder why something is, we have
to ask first if we are expecting it to have
a cause or a purpose.
Imagine if you were watching an intense game
of chess, and a fellow spectator next to you
asked, “Hey, why did Black move his rook
like that?”
This is a perfect example of where you probably
wouldn’t give a causal answer, in terms
of what was going on before the move that
caused it, but a teleological answer, one
in terms of what purpose the move was meant
to accomplish further along in the game.
Technically you could answer in terms of how
Black’s mindset just before making the move
caused the move, but that would still be a
discussion of possible futures Black anticipates,
not about past board states causing the move.
As students of science, we think in terms
of cause and effect, even though some things
in theoretical physics might violate causality
as we currently understand it.
But in practical language we very often talk
about phenomena in these teleological terms,
in which things seem to be pulled by the future
rather than pushed by the past.
This is the most true when we’re pondering
why a manmade device or component was engineered
in a certain way.
It’s built like this in order to accomplish
that….
Really, any time we’re discussing rational
decisions of minimally cognitive beings, a
teleological explanation will tell the story
the most clearly.
But we have to be very careful when we start
discussing non-conscious or non-rational actors
in that same way, lest we create some misunderstandings.
And unfortunately, this language permeates
discussions of the evolution of life.
We hear phrases like, “The birds evolved
longer beaks to get at the nectar in larger
flowers”.
I expect most fans of this channel know that’s
just a shorthand figure of speech, and a more
precise description would be, “The lengths
of birds’ beaks varied by minor mutations,
and in places where large nectar flowers were
more abundant than plants that produce seeds
with husks, long beaks conferred a greater
survival advantage than short chisel beaks,
enabling the long-beaked birds in those regions
to reproduce more, leading to a greater average—”
I think you get the idea, that we’d go mad
if we had to talk that way all the time, so
we abbreviate a bit, though that can sometimes
cause misunderstanding.
While the teleological explanation, in which
a creature evolves a feature to accomplish
a purpose, is convenient and non-maddening,
it can be very misleading.
As we explained in more detail in our Void
Ecology episode, evolution does not engage
in a generations-long process of developing
an expensive new feature that will confer
a survival advantage someday, in the future,
when it’s finished—even if that advantage
will eventually be huge.
Every step along the way needs to confer an
advantage, or at least be sufficiently neutral
that it causes no survival problems.
Something like fur patterns or hair color
might be fairly neutral initially, or even
cause a very minor disadvantage, but eventually
produce something like camouflage patterns
or a color or style more appealing to potential
mates.
It’s all a big statistical survival game
where other factors including luck are in
play, but the key idea is that in Darwinian
evolution each incremental change must enhance
that generation’s survival or at least not
diminish it, but it can’t be explained by
its being part of some longer term goal or
purpose.
So, back to our sub-question.
When we ask why life exists, are we looking
for a cause or a purpose?
Well, it seems to me that a thing only has
a purpose if there was a designer, engineer,
or strategist behind the thing, who had some
goal in mind.
Design and Purpose to life is certainly a
possibility, and plenty of designers and purposes
have been suggested over the years.
The Intelligent Design school of thought these
days includes not just religious creationists
but also alien origin theorists and simulated
universe theorists.
And if you adhere to any of those theories,
then asking the purpose of life is really
just asking what was on the creators’ minds
and what they were out to accomplish.
But while life on Earth indeed might have
been made by aliens who evolved billions of
years earlier, they still have to have originated
themselves, so why do they exist?
The same question would apply to a single
creator.
So that declaring our universe to be a simulation
still requires figuring out who made the Universe
running our simulated Universe.
This is a common problem with origin-of-life
theories, many just kick the time of origin
and “why” further back.
Of course that doesn’t mean they’re wrong
either.
And we can speculate in an at least logically-bounded
way why a creator or simulator might make
a universe, what purpose he/she/they/it had
in mind, where they are now, and why they
exist.
But such things don’t really fit well into
scientific inquiry so we’ll shelve them
and discussion of the purpose of life for
today.
So that leaves us to ponder the cause of life,
to examine how and why unconscious physical
laws governing primordial particles, without
an engineer in sight or any goal in mind,
could turn those particles into amazingly
complex living things.
It can be counter-intuitive at first, that
simple laws governing a simple system can
give rise to extremely complex behaviors.
We call such systems Emergent, as they emerge
from a lower set of rules or principles.
Emergent systems have properties as a collection
that the individual components do not have.
And we usually use the term to imply that
the emergence was unexpected, at least by
us.
And it’s a quite common phenomenon, that
simple systems produce more complex systems
with governing rules that you can discover
and base predictions on, even without understanding
the simpler systems or simpler rules underlying
them.
For example, consider two elements of Newtonian
mechanics: force equals mass times acceleration,
and gravitational force between two bodies
being inversely proportional to their squared
distance.
From just those rules, Kepler’s laws of
planetary motion are logically, mathematically
inevitable.
But remember, Kepler died before Newton was
born.
He gathered those laws of planetary motion
strictly from observation, without ever knowing
that gravity is an inverse square force.
In other words, he figured out the higher
level laws of planetary motion and made accurate
predictions with them without ever knowing
the simpler rules from which his Three Laws
emerged.
And likewise, humanity discovered a great
many laws of chemistry and used them for centuries,
only learning about a century ago that those
rules all emerged from the simpler rules governing
how the components of atoms behave.
The specific ways that nucleons and electrons
attract, repel, and bond give rise directly
to everything in chemistry, from elements
to stable valence shells to atomic bonds to
the unwinding of double helixes.
We have a few mathematical games that beautifully
illustrate emergent behaviors and help make
the concept far more intuitive.
Conway’s Game of Life and Langton’s Ant
being perhaps the two best known.
I’ve included links to both in the description,
because you’ll probably want to go play
with them.
In the Game of Life, created by mathematician
John H. Conway, the world consists of a flat
grid of squares.
Each square is either black or white and interacts
with its eight neighbors.
The squares are periodically updated according
to a simple rule: Turn black if you have three
black neighbors, remain your current color
if you have two black neighbors, turn white
otherwise.
And that’s it, the complete and unabridged
fundamental laws of physics for a simple universe
at the equivalent of the Planck scale, in
one rule.
And yet, as the game allows you to observe,
that simple rule can give rise to structures
that stand, spin, dance, travel, leave trails,
send out streams of travelers, even merge
with other structures and reproduce.
And many of these structures are so simple
they’ll often form accidentally in a world
seeded with some random black squares.
Even more complex structure can form on larger
grids, and it’s quite exciting to see what’s
going to form when traveling structures collide
with one another.
As surprising as the behaviors are, you can
see with certainty that all the complexity
you’re observing emerges inarguably from
that very simple grid update rule.
If you’re having difficulty imagining how
incredibly complex molecular processes like
protein folding and DNA transcription could
come about just from electrons and nucleons
pushing and pulling at each other, play the
Game of Life for a while and ponder emergent
behaviors.
Langton’s Ant is another math game that
somewhat illustrates emergent behaviors but
also illustrates another phenomenon we’ll
need to grasp to discuss why life exists.
In this game, an ant wanders around another
two-dimensional black-and-white grid.
At each time interval, it steps forward one
square.
If the new square is white, it turns the square
black and turns right.
If the new square is black, it turn the square
white and turns left.
And then it repeats.
Again very very simple, and again complex
behavior emerges.
If you start the ant on a blank grid, for
the first few hundred moves it will create
simple geometric patterns that are almost
symmetric.
But then things turn chaotic, and the ant
follows a pseudo-random path.
But then after about 10,000 moves we see the
emergence of what is called a highway, as
the ant begins creating a recurrent pattern
of 104 steps that repeats indefinitely and
carries the ant farther and farther away from
the complex structure it spend 10,000 moves
forming.
It turns out that no matter how you initiate
the grid with black and white squares, the
ant will always eventually form this highway.
This is what we call an attractor state in
chaos theory.
Nature is full of such examples and life itself
is assumed to be one such, though we see attractor
states in everything from actual ant hive
behavior to the weather.
Another thing we see a lot in nature is following
the path of least resistance, and of course
this also applies to the weather.
The path of least or minimum resistance, everything
in nature tends to flow to a low-energy and
stable state, often pausing in lower energy
and fairly stable states on its way to lowest
energy and most stable states.
Indeed all those atoms and molecules are emergent
properties of various smaller and quantum
things following into stable, or fairly stable
states, where fairly stable might be mere
trillionths of a second, an eternity at the
quantum scale, or trillions of years, an eternity
at the human scale.
Emergent properties are a big thing in connecting
the fields of science together.
We would say particle physics consists of
all sorts of little particles that exist as
emergent properties of quantum, and that atomic
physics emerges from that, and chemistry from
that, and microbiology from that, and biology
and botany and zoology and even psychology
and economics and philosophy are emergent
from that too, several times removed in some
cases.
It’s weird to think that Earth’s weather,
and all its patterns, is essentially an emergent
property of hydrogen being able to fuse into
helium at certain rates under certain conditions,
giving us all those bigger atoms like iron,
silicon, and oxygen that form our world and
the sunlight that falls down on it to drive
those weather patterns, as water evaporates,
falls back down, and eventually ends back
up in the ocean as a statistical result of
molecules been banged around by each other
and photons and presumably gravitons as well.
That’s a fairly important point for our
topic because a hidden clause on why life
exists is “Why does life exist in this Universe?”
If you re-arrange the basic properties of
the Universe just a tiny little bit, life
as we know it would simply not occur, and
indeed we’ve got pretty good reasons to
think only a miniscule fraction of possible
universes would have a proper alignment of
physical properties to permit any sort of
life to exist.
Though as we mentioned in Boltzmann Brains
and the Anthropic Principle, the Fine-Tuned
Universe approach to saying life wouldn’t
exist in most possible Universes assumes first,
that those physical properties have randomly
assigned values, and second, only refers to
life emerging and gaining complexity through
a long sequence of random processes headed
toward that most stable state or path of least
resistance.
We typically don’t discuss evolution or
life phrased in quite that way but that’s
essentially what the process is, especially
when generalized beyond Earth-specific biochemistry.
A given organism, in a given environment,
generally represents a pretty stable state,
and successive organisms fall toward ever
more stable states in that environment, and
if that environment remained static, over
a long enough time, you get a most stable
organism.
Environments don’t stay stable though, they
get stirred up a lot, changing that point
of stability, as those environments shift
around approaching more stable states themselves.
Stable in an ecological sense rather than
a quantum or thermodynamic one, which is fine
since ecology is an emergent property of those
two anyway.
If you wait long enough everything will fall
into its ground state, as it were, unfortunately
we live in an entropic universe whose ground
state is pretty much the opposite of life,
what we call the Heat Death of the Universe,
which we’ll be discussing options for postponing
in some weeks.
That can get a bit of raised eyebrows though
as life seems a lot more complicated than
random material, and our planets started off
presumably as exactly that, a bunch of gas
floating around from some nebula that coalesced.
Earth is not a closed system, being driven
by the Sun’s light, and thus can defy entropy
locally, as the Sun is rising in entropy to
produce that light, but forget that for a
moment.
Wondering why life, more complicated than
a random chemical soup it presumably formed
from, can exist in an entropic Universe, overlooks
asking how all that molten material mixed
together in a proto-earth cooled and formed
into complex things like mountains and rivers.
Or why those rivers tend to be shaped like
big long waves water meanders down rather
than straight lines.
You’d think a river would be straight, and
straighter the older it got, as it plowed
through and eroded any rock in its way till
it cut a straight path to the sea.
Quite to the contrary, the older a river gets,
the less straight it becomes, eventually becoming
a sine wave then snapping those curves off
to go straight again, then curving once more
later on.
It’s actually a rather bizarre process that
can create meander scarring and oxbow lakes,
u-shaped lakes that get cut off from the river.
Why that was happening is actually something
Albert Einstein figured out, and it’s a
good example of how complexity can arise as
an emergent property of a very simple-seeming
system, namely that where water is concerned,
what goes up, must come down.
And it does this because it’s the lowest
energy state it can reach, or at least a lower
energy state than it was in.
Very literally in this case too, as objects
have a higher potential energy the higher
up in the air they are, and they fall down
and lose that potential energy.
It converts into kinetic energy on the drop,
but they hit stuff falling down which leeches
some of that energy away, leaving the fallen
object in a lower energy state when it lands.
Now how could this apply to life?
In life’s case it is presumably all about
energy and heat.
Indeed, we have a theory from Jeremy England
of MIT that argues that life popped up because
a group of atoms, when exposed to an external
energy source, like the sun or similar, and
when inside some big heat bath, like an ocean
or atmosphere, will gradually restructure
itself to better dissipate heat.
As we noted earlier, “Life” has some rather
debatable definitions but one trait it has
from a physics perspective is that it’s
much better at capturing energy from around
itself and dissipating it as heat.
Which is an interesting way of saying that
life is way more entropic than inanimate material
by and large, which is one of the common objections
to evolution, that it seems to violate the
laws of thermodynamics by adding complexity
over time rather than decaying into a simpler
form.
It doesn’t, life is hugely entropic, thus
why we need to eat, but it’s an interesting
characterization as it’s saying that the
complexity of life is specifically an emergent
quality of heat dissipation.
Now that is just a theory with some rather
neat math and modeling attached, but it has
an appeal as it’s basing the reason for
life existing, this complex and strange thing
that seems to grow more complex and strange
with time rather than breaking down, on that
very engine of entropy itself.
It’s kind of amusing in a semi-related way
that humans are just about as good as it gets
in nature when it comes to getting rid of
heat and as we mentioned in the Fermi Paradox
Great Filters series, our ability to jog around
all day, by having a really nice heat dissipation
setup compared to other animals, also let
us run that massive brain on our shoulders,
which needs a lot of energy and gives off
a ton of heat that needs to be dissipated.
I suppose there’s something poetic about
life being an emergent property of heat dissipation
and entropy, albeit via complex, organized
mechanisms.
Also a bit grimly amusing, since life is very
good at accelerating entropy, and the more
sophisticated it is, the better it can do
it and the farther it can reach out to do
it.
In this context, if the supposition is correct,
life exists in order to expedite the Heat
Death of the Universe.
Again rather grim, but since I need to do
a video on what we could do to postpone the
heat death of the Universe fairly soon, the
first solution that came to mind was “Die”.
In any event, if the reasoning is sound, we
should expect life to pop up pretty much everywhere
in the Universe and in any other Universe
where complexity was possible and some equivalent
to thermodynamics and entropy applied.
Needless to say this doesn’t tell us anything
about where all that energy came from in the
first place or any actual meaning of life,
assuming it has one.
Of course an alternative view on all of this
is that random luck is why life exists.
This has been the default view on abiogenesis
in a scientific context, that while evolution
from that most basic element of life was selection-driven,
that first element assembled at random.
What that first element is we don’t know,
there are several competing theories and nothing
approaching a consensus on one as a lead candidate,
even ignoring that it would be rather murky
to say what the dividing line was between
something that self-replicated – which crystals
and fire can both do – and something that
was actually alive.
Needless to say, trying to calculate the probability
of that occurring is mostly pointless at the
moment since we don’t know what ‘that’
is to try to model it, when and where it actually
happened, or what the specific chemistry and
energy influx would have been in the primordial
soup it presumably occurred in.
We know it was improbable, since it doesn’t
occur constantly nowadays.
Though as a caveat, it may have happened many
times and those proto-lifeforms simply failed
to gain traction in a world where one had
already gained traction and grown in complexity.
Regardless, it doesn’t happen often enough
that we’ve ever seen it pop up in sterile
labs with the right elements and no competition,
so it’s improbable.
It may be just improbable enough that we’ve
not seen it but still probable enough that
virtually every chemical soup bigger than
a swimming pool with energy influx for more
than a few year spawns one, and so life is
virtually everywhere.
Or it may be so improbable that it’s only
ever happened here, that one time, and nowhere
else in the Universe.
Though complex life, living cells with an
internal method of energy conversion or metabolism,
has occurred at least 3 times on Earth.
Once in plants, another in animals, and again
in a type of seaweed.
But that original self-replicating cell, with
the precursor to RNA and DNA, could be so
improbable that even other Universes like
ours are devoid of life.
This is where the Mediocrity Principle comes
in, the general notion being that if you see
something apparently improbable, but don’t
know the details, you have two ways to look
at it.
You can assume it’s not actually improbable
at all, but likely very probable and rather
mediocre and mundane, and we call that the
Mediocrity Principle and it’s our default
approach to observing new phenomena in a scientific
context, that the first example of something
you see might be a really weird example of
the object or phenomena, but probably isn’t.
The other approach, the Anthropic Principle,
is to assume that it probably is weird but
that there may be a reason why you being able
to see it factors into that.
As an example, as random collections of matter
go, a tree is a fairly improbable one, we
don’t really see them anywhere but on the
very thin layer of Earth’s biosphere, but
we happen to live there and so we see them
all the time, and this is not coincidental.
It’s not coincidental that you’d encounter
other fans of Star Trek or some obscure personal
favorite science fiction in the comments section
of this channel or any of our forums.
Neither the Anthropic or Mediocrity Principles
is right or wrong, and both routinely produce
wrong results, they’re just options for
trying to get a basic handle on some new observation
when you can’t get more information.
Which is pretty much the case at the moment
for the prevalence of life in the Universe.
The Mediocrity Principle says we have one
example and should assume that it’s fairly
normal, the Anthropic Principle says we have
one example and we should ask if us encountering
it is related to us as an observer.
We don’t know if life is incredibly common
or if various alternate universes are devoid
of life, or even exist, we just know that
in any universes where intelligent life doesn’t
exist, no one is sitting around noting that
is the case.
So there could be a trillion-trillion dead
universes for every one with life in it, and
obviously only the ones with life in them
have the option of asking if that’s weird
or not.
Now this perspective gives an easy answer
for why life exists, it’s just random luck,
though again that’s more of why it exists
as it does and when and where it does.
Where a new river exists is random luck, that
rivers will exist but its basic properties
are not.
Although if we’re taking the stance that
there’s an infinite or near-infinite number
of realities, each with randomly assigned
physical properties, then the existence of
rivers would indeed be random.
Additionally, extreme cases like the Boltzmann
Brain are clear examples of life being utterly
random, even thinking life.
Now all this does incidentally is to show
that life can exist randomly, it doesn’t
mean that’s actually the case.
Short of discovering an alien outpost, containing
an observation log of four billion years,
we have no way of knowing if life emerged
on Earth naturally and such a discovery seems
unlikely.
Indeed even if we encountered life on thousands
of other worlds and literally watched it start
in a lab and in an alien sea, we still wouldn’t
know if that’s what happened here for certain,
from a scientific standpoint.
As an example, we used to assume life probably
started in tidal pools on the coast, but now
we tend to think it was deep sea thermal vents
as they look like more probable candidates.
Even if that’s the case, it might have happened
in tidal pools somewhere else, or have happened
in tidal pools here.
And even if we showed it was 99% likely to
have been thermal vents and only 1% likely
to be tidal pools, it might still have been
tidal pools.
It might also have been Aliens who originated
long ago and visited here to engineer life,
or to empty their septic tanks while restocking
on raw materials.
Either case merely kicks the origin of life
back to earlier in the universe, and that’s
arguably true with non-natural or supernatural
cases too.
Life might exist because someone created it
on a computer as a simulation, but you then
have to ask where that someone came from.
This isn’t quite the same as the progenitor
aliens though since they would have come to
exist and developed in our actual Universe
with its specific physical properties.
A simulated Universe might have very different
properties and ones that made the Big Question
really easy to answer, and it’s only murky
to us because our Universe isn’t actually
natural nor are its life forms.
In such cases the reason why life exists,
here anyway, is because they wanted it to,
that programmer or creator, though presumably
they had a reason, everything from the artist’s
desire to create something amazing to the
scientist’s desire to model and experiment,
but regardless we couldn’t speak as to why
they and life in their place exists because
we’d have no way of knowing the parameters
of the reality they emerged from.
With the specific exception of an Ancestor
Simulation, where the simulated Universe by
default closely matches the real one, see
our Simulation Hypothesis or Reality & Simulation
episodes for further discussion of this matter.
The notion we discussed earlier, that life
might be an inevitable consequence of heat
dissipation and entropy, is certainly an attractive
one because it would indicate it can pop up
in a lot of places, though not necessarily
everywhere.
For instance, it’s popular in fiction to
suggest life forms might live inside stars,
or even on the surface of dead neutron stars
as we see in Robert L. Forward’s Dragon’s
Egg, but the whole concept rests on the notion
of chemistry arranging itself to take in energy
and efficiently dissipate it, and there’s
no chemistry happening on the surface of a
neutron star since there are no chemicals
there.
Same, we often see in fiction the ideas of
very slow and long-lived lifeforms, the sentient
glacier in Alastair Reynolds short story,
“Glacial”, which also examines the notion
of emergence, or the Counting Trees in Terry
Pratchett’s Discworld, which having noticed
that people would cut down trees to count
their rings, began growing plaques that said
how many rings they had, and promptly got
cut down to provide address plaques for houses.
Really long slow lifespans don’t allow for
much evolution to complexity, biologically
or culturally, but they generally wouldn’t
indicate something that was, at its core,
a byproduct of a system trying to optimize
energy use and heat dissipation.
Which we’ll use as our closing point.
When contemplating strange hypothetical lifeforms,
the reason why life exists is actually a pretty
important one.
If it’s an artificially created thing, one
needs to ask what the purpose and motive was
for its creation.
If it’s just an initially random process,
then all that matters is the odds of any specific
medium and environment producing a viable
lifeform and how big that medium and environment
is in terms of size and duration.
If it’s driven by physical laws pushing
toward minimum energy and stable states, then
only where that would produce such an entropy-engine
lifeform would we expect to see it.
In the end, we just don’t know yet, and
sometimes I tend to feel the best answer really
is 42.
Of course one popular notion for why life
exists is to simply grow in numbers, and indeed
evolution does seem to encourage that strategy.
It doesn’t really answer the ‘why’ but
certainly describes how it functions well
enough.
For a species to exist it needs to be able
to at least keep up with it’s replacement
levels and if it gets technology it will usually
be able to expand not only how many of its
members survive to adulthood but also how
many it can support in total, it’s carrying
capacity.
Folks often wonder just how many people we
could support on Earth, what its carrying
capacity is, and we’ll examine this in our
new episode “Can we have a Trillion People
on Earth?”, which is out now for early-release
on Nebula.
Nebula, our new subscription streaming service,
was made as a way for education-focused independent
creators to try out new content that might
not work too well on Youtube, where algorithms
might not be too kind to some topics or demonetize
certain ones entirely, or just doesn’t fit
our usual content.
SFIA uses it principally for early releases
of episodes, such as “Can we have a Trillion
People on Earth?” as well as Nebula Exclusives
like our 4-episode Coexistence with Aliens
Series.
If you’d like to get free access to it,
it does come as a free bonus with a subscription
to Curiositystream, which also has thousands
of amazing documentaries you can watch, on
top of the Nebula-exclusive content from myself
and many other creators like CGP Grey, Minute
Physics, and Wendover.
A year of Curiosity Stream is just $19.99,
and it gets you access thousands of documentaries,
as well as complimentary access to Nebula
for as long as you're a subscriber, and use
the link in this episode’s description,
curiositystream.com/isaacarthur.
Where folks might live in the future and how
is a question that’s fairly important in
our discussions here on SFIA, and while Earth
or other worlds are certainly options, one
we suggest a lot is living inside giant rotating
orbital habitats such as the O’Neill Cylinder,
and next week we’ll be taking a look at
what it would be like to live inside one,
in “Life on board an O’Neill Cylinder”
The week after that we’ll look at another
place near Earth folks might live, in “Moon:
Crater Cities”
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And if you’d like to help support future
episodes, visit our website, IsaacArthur.net,
to see ways to donate, or buy some awesome
SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
