The universe provides so much power, yet we
struggle to tap it and crave more.
Instead of being powerless, let’s get off
Earth and conquer space.
So today we continue the Upward Bound series
and our look at how to get into space cheaper
and easier, and what we can do up there once
we can place stuff in orbit more cheaply.
Of course, if you’re up in space for a while
you’ll need a reliable power supply, and
that generally means either solar or atomic.
In terms of the latter, fusion is a good option
if we can ever get it working, but fission
is not something folks want in orbit overhead
in large quantities.
The big weaknesses of ground-based solar are
that it’s useless on cloudy days and at
night, but this is an area where being in
space is actually a major advantage.
When we refer to the dark void of space, we’re
being more poetic than accurate.
Space near Earth is constantly lit brighter
than the noon-time Sun, and indeed you’d
have to get out beyond the Asteroid Belt before
solar stops being as effective there as it
is on most of Earth.
The equivalent of darkness in space depends
on your distance from the Sun, or if something’s
in between you and the Sun, placing you in
the object’s shadow.
While any object in a classic Low Earth orbit
is spending a lot of its time in the relatively
large shadow of the planet, as you get further
away less of your orbital path is in that
shadow.
Additionally, various non-circular obits,
or locations like the Lagrange points, have
little to no time in shadow, eliminating most
or all of the downtime experienced by solar
panels situated on the Earth.
As for wearing down over time, solar panels
on Earth have to contend with dust, rain,
snow, hail, sandstorms, thermal fluctuations
and other weathering, none of which are present
in the vacuum of space - and, needless to
say, there are no clouds there either.
The total benefit is about seven times more
kilowatts-hours per year from a given Photovoltaic
solar panel.
Perpetual lighting also eliminates most of
the need for batteries.
All of which makes solar an excellent choice
for space.
It’s much more attractive than on Earth,
and of course we’re interested in getting
that energy to Earth, whether beamed down
or otherwise, and eventually to other places
in space.
This idea has been looked at a lot for decades,
but is becoming increasingly feasible now
that launch costs are plummeting.
For this to be practical though we have to
overcome certain issues, and we should start
by laying those out.
First and foremost, getting stuff into space
is expensive.
Doing that cheaper is, after all, what this
series is mostly about.
A solar panel in space might be several times
more effective than one on Earth, but if you
needed to spend hundreds of times more money
to get that panel up there, while it remains
useful for powering things up there, it wouldn’t
really make sense to beam it down.
Not when you can far more easily deploy and
maintain conveniently-sized arrays of panels
down here.
But down here you have to add energy storage,
which is several times more expensive than
PV panels, if you want to compare apples to
apples.
Second, there is the question of how you beam
that energy down, and this comes with a lot
of problems.
For instance if you’re beaming down with
a visible-light laser, it still has to go
through all that air and clouds.
There is also an additional effect called
thermal blooming that causes laser light to
be absorbed by the atmosphere over any significant
distance, at least for frequencies that interact
with the atmosphere.
You also lose energy at every stage of the
process, as you convert sunlight to electricity,
then into lasers, then down to Earth through
the atmosphere, into a collector there, and
back into electricity again.
We’ll be looking at these problems, some
solutions, and some alternatives to visible
light today in greater detail.
But that brings up a third issue, which is
safety.
A big giant laser is also known as a death
ray, and with any power-beaming system, you
are directing a lot of energy into a potentially
small place.
This is a serious problem if your beam goes
off target from the collector, and over to
a city, be that as a result of an accident
or deliberate action.
So we will be looking at ways you’d be trying
to make one safe to use.
It is also worth remembering though that a
giant laser in space also has some handy uses,
like blowing up incoming asteroids or space
junk, not to mention it’s a great way to
push spaceships up to high speeds, so we will
also be discussing some of the non-terrestrial
uses of power-satellites later on, though
our main focus is getting energy to Earth.
At this point, we have to start considering
scale.
At present, humanity uses energy, from all
sources combined, at an average power rate
of about 18 terawatts, 18 million megawatts,
not including the solar energy used by photosynthesis
and evaporation.
That’s about 2400 watts per person, day
in and day out, every day, and while we are
getting a lot more efficient with power usage,
we also have a lot of people in developing
regions who don’t use much yet and hopefully
will in the future; hopefully not too much
or too soon though because our main method
of power generation has concerns about heating
up the planet.
We should start with a note there then, as
folks often worry about power satellites heating
the planet by adding more energy, which of
course they do.
The thing is, it isn’t our direct use of
energy that’s heating the planet.
While we use energy at an 18 terawatt rate,
Earth receives about 10 thousand times that
energy from sunlight.
The extra heat we add would be trivial on
its own.
The concern is with greenhouses gases being
released and trapping an additional fraction
of the solar energy, not the extra energy
we consume directly.
However, power satellites are solar-powered,
so were that a concern you could just have
them block incoming light to Earth, cutting
down on how much reaches us.
Not that you’d bother, since you could easily
use a mirror to do the job, which is cheaper,
thinner, and a lot less complex for such a
geoengineering purpose.
18 Terawatts is a huge amount of power, and
even our most efficient experimental solar
panels, those still being worked on in the
lab, would only get about 600 watts per square
meter, in orbit.
To get up to 18 Terawatts, you’d need 30,000
square kilometers of our best panels, or a
single panel 100 kilometers in radius.
That wouldn’t include any losses in transmission
either.
Fortunately, we can assume high-efficiency
panels are used, as the single biggest cost
to deploying a power satellite is launch cost,
which we’ll discuss in a moment.
Solar panels will continue to get lighter,
cheaper, more durable, and more efficient
as times goes on.
But for the moment, if we use our top end
figures for performance, we can do a panel
with thickness as low as 2 millimeters, massing
only about 2 kilograms a square meter and
generating about 600 watts per kilogram in
space, constantly.
To get 18 trillion watts out of 600 watts
per square meter would require 30 billion
square meters or 30,000 square kilometers,
at an approximate mass of 60 billion kilograms.
At current launch costs, that could run nearly
a hundred trillion dollars, and doesn’t
include any losses in transmission or other
associated equipment.
However, these would likely have a lifetime
of 20-30 years, and since the energy sector
is several trillion dollars a year, with estimated
figures varying widely, spread out over 20-30
years this would already be approaching a
competitive cost.
As manufacturing continues to improves and
launch costs drop, this could get us into
the economically feasible zone for power satellites
rather quickly, and now would seem a good
time to start prototyping to see if this can
be made viable as launch costs drop.
However, this is SFIA so we’re less interested
in the next decade then the next century,
and the earlier episodes of this series discuss
many launch systems that we already have the
tech for that can drop launch costs to a tenth
or even a hundredth of what SpaceX’s Falcon
Heavy can do.
As a reminder, stuff like Jim Powell’s StarTram
or Keith Lofstrom’s Launch Loop or Paul
Birch’s Orbital Ring are not all that high
tech, they just have a big upfront cost, many
billions of dollars, which only looks big
since we don’t actually spend our relatively
small space budget on launching truly massive
things.
Our annual ground to space launch volumes
are tiny compared to a single day’s traffic
through any major airport, and same as you
don’t build an international airport next
to a small village, you don’t build these
kind of launch systems till you are ready
to up your game and a launch a lot more, not
because they are particularly high-tech.
When you are thinking about replacing a multi-trillion
dollar sector of the economy, options like
those launch alternatives suddenly become
much more attractive and profitable.
See those episodes for details, but even the
most expensive of them are offering launch
costs smaller than the production cost of
the power satellites.
It’s also worth noting that much of their
operational cost is electricity, which needless
to say is altered when you’re launching
gigawatt-sized power generators into orbit.
Additionally, most of the weight of a panel
is still silicon, the second most abundant
element on the Moon’s Surface, right after
oxygen.
Nor are solar panels incredibly tricky to
produce, especially when mass and efficiency
isn’t much of an issue, and the moon is
close enough for us to do remote operations,
so any factories there don’t need much personnel
physically present to operate, or sophisticated
artificial intelligence.
Before we move on, I should also note that
photovoltaics, turning photons into electricity
the way a solar panel does, is not the only
way to turn light into electricity.
We could, for instance, just concentrate light
on a liquid in pipes so it heats up, boils,
and turns a turbine… a Thermal Powersat,
like the prize-winning Flowersat design.
This is a viable way of generating power,
provided the light is sufficiently intense,
and sunlight can be made incredibly intense.
Thermal methods are how most power generation
occurs, using an atomic or chemical fuel source
for heat instead of sunlight.
If you can’t make cheaper solar panels,
you can always use a bunch of thin parabolic
mirrors and non-imaging light funnels to focus
light on some substance to heat it and drive
a fairly standard heat engine.
Getting rid of the waste heat during the cycle
is harder, when you can only remove heat from
a system in space by radiating it, but you
can still use cooling by conduction and forced
convection inside it.
The back side of all those mirrors can also
be used for radiating surfaces, too.
Even surfaces exposed to sunlight can potentially
be used to radiate waste heat, by use of wavelength-selective
surfaces.
Okay, so we can collect it up there, but how
do we get it down?
The traditionally suggested method is microwaves,
in a beam, which worries folks a bit since
we all use those to heat up our food and they’ll
heat up a person, or a city, just as well.
We’ll get to the safety issues in a bit.
First, why microwaves?
They are not the only option, but in terms
of our spectrum, the atmosphere does a very
good job keeping out virtually all gamma and
X-ray radiation, and the overwhelming majority
of Ultraviolet too, so they’re not great
wavelengths to use to get our energy past
the atmosphere.
Visible light goes through pretty well, obviously,
but much is still lost even in an open sky,
and clouds obviously are murderous on visible
light transmission.
Don’t discard it just from that though.
Power satellites all around the planet can
just re-target their beams to collectors not
obscured by the clouds, and only on the cloudiest
days would we not have clear sky windows which
some powersats could use to get an angle on
the ground-based collectors.
I should also note that we always want other
power generation methods and energy storage
in any power grid anyway, so that some ground
based collectors being blocked by clouds sometimes
is not really a deal-breaker for visible light.
Nor do you necessarily need to beam light
down as a laser.
A big parabolic dish concentrating light on
ground-based collectors is an option, too,
which gets around thermal blooming that happens
when a high-powered laser enters a medium,
like air, that’s absorbing some if it and
heating up and scattering the beam a lot.
This, by the way, is a really big issue for
using ground-based lasers to intercept missiles
or using lasers for ultra-high-bandwidth data
transmission over long distances.
Since part of the point is to get power down
at night, using the visible range of the spectrum
in broad diffuse beams could cause a lot of
light pollution, though in some places this
might be advantageous.
Of all the spectrum, radio waves are the ones
that basically ignore the atmosphere and clouds
the most over all, and microwaves, which are
shorter than radio waves in wavelength, which
is where the name micro comes from, are quite
good at going through our atmosphere, clouds
or not.
You might wonder about the danger of this,
but if you are accessing this episode over
a wireless network, I should note that those
use microwaves too and the same frequency
as your microwave oven.
There’s nothing very special about that
frequency by the way, it just in a small band
the FCC leaves free for non-broadcast purposes.
Equipment operating at these frequencies is
also pretty efficient at converting between
electricity and microwaves, especially compared
to lasers.
You can do better than 75% with a magnetron
converting electricity into microwaves whereas
laser efficiency, as much as it’s improved,
is still generally more like 50%.
Our best new laser designs can almost match
that, but historically, lasers have been much
less efficient.
Microwaves remain better, but not by the same
overwhelming margin.
Here’s the thing though, a Rectenna, a specialized
type of antenna for absorbing these microwaves
and turning them back into electricity, has
an efficiency of at least 85%, much better
than our best solar panels.
This means that any side-effect environmental
heating from beamed-in microwaves will be
much less as well.
Now as to safety concerns, the general notion
is to beam the energy in at about 100 Watts
per square meter, non-coincidentally what
OSHA says is the maximum safe workplace exposure
amount.
To get 18 Terawatts, and keeping in mind 15%
is lost in conversion by the Rectennas, would
require about 200,000 square kilometers of
rectenna collector surface area.
Sounds big, and indeed it is, that’s about
the size of Nebraska.
Not that you’d be putting them all in the
same place.
More to the point, that doesn’t really seem
much better than covering huge chunks of land
with solar panels.
Of course you could just increase power density,
and fence the place off, but you’d still
be blowing birds away left and right and potentially
have a doomsday weapon.
Though, realistically you could ramp the beam
intensity up an order of magnitude without
producing too much of either problem.
Birds would tend to avoid them as uncomfortable
or be able to swoop through before being hurt.
This is mostly just raw heat damage like being
too near your fireplace, after all.
However, the neat thing about a Rectenna is
that you can use multiple of them to cover
a wide area, and this area is not entirely
lost to you, as a Rectenna is a mesh more
like chicken wire than an opaque glass panel,
and tougher too.
Indeed you could beam it right down on a city
and provide wireless power, though obviously
you’d want to be careful about concentrating
it too much.
Incorporating solar panels into roads and
parking lots obviously has extreme issues
with durability, while sticking a layer of
chicken wire over farm fields or grazing land,
isn’t difficult, nor is it that hard to
concentrate such beams to such sizes and keep
them on target, nor will they torch a fiery
furrow through the landscape as they go.
But the optical considerations of microwaves
mean that rectennas receiving gigawatts will
necessarily be large, usually several kilometers
across.
Safety is easily achieved by having the emitter
and collector handshake, and the beam just
shuts off if it goes off target.
I should probably note that an optical version
of this, using nanotech and metamaterials,
called the Nantenna, shows promise of achieving
a 70% or higher conversion of optical light
frequencies to electricity.
The impact of this emerging technology on
solar panels, ground or space based, might
be immense and very near at hand.
Again though, this is SFIA.
In this series, it’s only been a few episodes
since we were talking about Orbital Rings,
the great big rings around planets for getting
into space once we want to be moving millions
of people and megatons of cargo back and forth
between space and the ground on a daily basis.
An Orbital Ring is far cheaper, kilogram for
kilogram, than any other options and you can
scale it up immensely if you want to, unlike
rockets, where that kind of throughput would
also produce enough pollution and heat to
mess with your climate.
If you want to do a lot of travel from ground
to space, and you love your planet, you should
put a ring on it.
While the massive drop in launch costs is
certainly handy, the orbital ring also brings
some benefits from being directly connected
to the planet below.
You can run tethers and lines down to the
surface without making them of super-materials
like graphene.
Though you may still want to use graphene
in particular, since recent improvements are
being made in producing it in bulk, and it’s
quite a good conductor of electricity.
But the important point is that tethers going
from the ring to the planet need only be reasonably
strong, not space-elevator strong, and don’t
have to be rigid or run in straight lines.
Because of this, they can be built with some
extra features in mind, such as transmitting
power, bringing people or cargo to and from
the cities near the ring, and can do so without
a lot of the hassle of something like a rocket.
You can’t launch a rocket anywhere near
a city, or any sort of spaceship meant for
that kind of speed and acceleration, not without
damaging the city or even killing people,
so you’d have to commute to a launch pad
far from that city and any of its suburbs.
Alternatively an Orbital Ring tether can leave
from any terminal in that city as easily as
a train or subway, allowing direct transport
of people from a city up to the Ring.
And for that matter, they can also transport
up heat, something we might discuss more in
the future, but this is interesting in the
context of Ecumenopolises, planet-wide cities,
or their little brothers, arcologies, in that
it means space based power generation is actually
better than fusion, because a fusion reactor
is still producing a lot of waste heat in
the process of making electricity.
Power plants generally lose over half their
energy to heat loss in making electricity,
even before it hits the power grid, where
even more is lost to resistance on the lines.
But a solar panel in space running electricity
right down a cable to a city, or for that
matter a reactor in space doing the same,
is not producing one extra drop of heat on
Earth that isn’t in the grid.
So no heat is being produced due to electricity
production waste, though of course all that
electricity will end as heat, either in the
wires or at your house, it’s just not leaving
half or more back at the power plant.
Orbital Rings a major investment, and they
also aren’t local, you have to encircle
the whole planet.
We do have another option, which can be done
strictly at one location, and that is to build
Karman space-towers.
I call them that because they reach the Karman
line, which is the generally accepted line
between our atmosphere and space.
Even with our material science today, we can
build such a lightweight structure using Carbon
fiber materials.
We might even squeak by without having to
resort to newer construction techniques too.
As many of you will be aware though, here
at SFIA, we are very much in favour of using
active support systems to build higher and
stronger.
See our episode on space towers, and particularly
the Atlas Pillar, for how to do that.
As a brief recap, we support the tower by
a series of fountains of material propelled
through the tower.
Our Karman towers are lightweight Atlas Pillars
poking above the atmosphere with an energy
collector at the top.
Now, the atmosphere does not abruptly end
as you go into space.
At the Karman line, which is 100 kilometers
up, the air density is about 2.2 million times
less than at the surface.
That's handy for power generation, as we'll
see.
Should you have trouble building quite that
high, much of the advantage remains from going
shorter, but taller is better.
Atlas Pillars take a lot of power to keep
them supported, how much depends on your efficiency
regenerating the momentum of the support material,
in theory that could be a 100% efficient closed
loop but we’re not there yet and these would
use a fair amount of power.
You might ask what is the point of having
a Karman Tower that consumes some of the power
it produces when you could just beam the energy
to ground instead?
The answer is the energy collector is in space.
Having the collector in space handily gets
around a lot of the transmission losses and
other problems we discussed, like thermal
blooming, light pollution, hazards to animals,
and that trade off of concentration for safety.
You can skip a lot of the steps by just having
big mirrors and parabolic dishes that can
point at a large array of solar collectors
fanned out on top of that tower and flood
the panels with as much light as they can
handle, and those mirrors can bounce light
to night side collectors just fine as well
as filter out any frequencies we can’t use
well or which might degrade the panels.
You stick one just north of a city so it never
shadows it and run a low resistance power
line down it and now that city has a good
power supply and a popular tourism spot, since
looking down from 100 kilometers up gives
a breathtaking view of everything for a thousand
kilometers around.
It also has virtually no footprint on the
ground, is very safe if there’s a power
loss, offers ultra-high efficiency power transfer,
and provides direct access to space and a
launch system.
See the Space Towers episode for more on this.
Another thing that having a direct connection
between space and the ground gives us is an
ability to deal with the heat produced at
the converter.
In space, the only way to get rid of heat
is to radiate it away, which requires giant
radiators.
It's also less efficient than using convection
and conduction, which are cooling options
only available on the ground.
If we pipe the heat back to Earth, we can
much more easily dissipate it.
We can also use the heat as a source of power
in its own right, or use it as a way of desalinating
water with coastal Karman Towers.
Come to think of it, I like the idea of a
steampunk solution.
We generate steam at the collector and use
the steam pressure as part of the active support
of the tower itself.
We also tap it for energy using turbine generators
and then pump the cooled fluid back up to
the collector.
The entire structure could be a giant steam
engine converting the steam to electricity
as we go.
Traditionally you do this with magnets, launching
material up a mass driver that’s slowed
down and deflected back by a receiver up top,
but in theory any flow of matter works.
So power satellites seems a much more attractive
option, and a potential gateway to space as
launch costs drop.
We’ve talked about many industries that
might fuel a snowball effect to help us get
into space, science, tourism, even filmmaking,
but which of these can match energy?
A market making up roughly 10% of our global
economy, and the biggest bottleneck on greater
prosperity for humanity in this modern era.
Get power satellite operations down to even
just near the price per kilowatt-hour of other
existing sources, and it not only could power
our homes here on Earth, but our efforts to
make homes off Earth.
And certainly the power demands to manufacture
space habitats will be much higher than that
sized for the habitat’s ongoing domestic
consumption.
So, even if power generation was the first
piece of infrastructure built, additional
power could be beamed to construction projects
as needed - or even as emergency power later.
Indeed temporary beamed power for space projects,
such as mining and construction could be a
major space industry in itself.
And its applications aren’t just for Earth
and near Earth.
As we’ll see next week, when we continue
our discussion of generation ships to colonize
distant stars, one of the hardest parts about
traveling in deep space is getting up to the
speeds necessary to do it on reasonable timelines
and to provide power to those ships, far from
the Sun, but still needing to keep warm and
lit for those who dwell inside.
You can beam power out quite a long way, and
you can use it to help ships get up to speed.
Of course slowing down is another matter,
and one we’ll discuss next week in “Exodus
Fleet”.
Electricity is the life’s blood of all of
our science and industry here on Earth, and
will be for those ships too, and fundamentally,
as launch costs drop and solar panels efficiency
rises, power satellites can offer us a virtually
unlimited supply of electricity without the
ecological problems or supply bottlenecks
of our current energy options.
We had to gloss over a lot of discussion of
the basics of electromagnetism, induction,
current, heat engines, and other core topics
that explain how power generation and transmission
is actually done, and why some of the methods
we looked at today are better than others.
If you’d like to learn more about those
topics or just brush up on them, then I’d
recommend the Regents Physics Reviews.
Those courses step through basic physics and
some more advanced material in a detailed
and professional fashion, never skipping over
terms by assuming folks already know them,
but also not dumbing things down either.
Those are available over at Skillshare, an
online learning community that focuses on
assembling classes on technology and has courses
on everything from basic sciences to a lot
of modern software, and I’ve been using
a lot of their classes on video production,
audio engineering, and animations to improve
the content here on the channel.
If you want to improve your skills, unlock
new opportunities, and do the work you love,
give Skillshare a try, and a Premium Membership
gives you unlimited access to classes like
those.
If you want to join me and the millions of
other students already learning on Skillshare,
we have a special offer just for my listeners:
Get 2 months of Skillshare for free.
To sign up, go to S-K-L-dot-S-H slash Isaac.
Again, go to S-K-L-dot-S-H slash Isaac to
get 2 months of unlimited access to over 20,000
classes for free.
Act now for this special offer, and start
learning today.
As mentioned, next week we’ll be returning
to our topic of Generation Ships to look at
ways to provide them the power they need to
cover huge interstellar distances in reasonable
times and to keep their crew alive during
those voyages through the empty ocean of space.
The week after that we’ll be teaming up
again with Joe Scott of Answers with Joe to
look at some of the potential catastrophes
humanity might have to deal with before we
can get out and settle the galaxy, and ways
we might avoid those, mitigate the damage,
or recover afterwards.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button, and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
