We often look out into the galaxy and 
wonder where all the civilizations are,  
but could it be that we don't see them 
because they have all chosen to exist  
in fortress star systems, surrounded by 
despoiled deserts of their own making?
When we look up at the night sky and see thousands 
of stars, it naturally raises the question of if  
any of those might be home to other peoples, 
distant kindred of ours, spiritually if not  
genetically. When we found out the galaxy 
is so much bigger than even what we see,  
and itself is but a pinprick in the Universe, 
it's natural to ask the question of why we  
don’t seem to see other alien civilizations.
This is what we call the Fermi Paradox,  
the seeming contradiction between our observations 
of how big and ancient our Universe is,  
how full of life our planet is, and how absent 
the rest of the universe seems to be of that  
life. The universe is throwing the ultimate silent 
party, and Earth didn't get the memo. Either that  
or our invitation got lost in the cosmic mail.
One option, that we explored a couple months back,  
is that life is quite common and that it 
just rarely gets very complex. Only for a  
fraction of the time Earth has had life on 
it has it had any real plants or animals,  
so perhaps we are an anomaly and the universe 
is full of worlds that are full of slime  
and algae and not much else. Of course, this 
suggests that in the grand scheme of things,  
cosmic evolution might have a penchant for the 
simple life over the drama of higher intelligence! 
Or even that higher intelligence and 
consciousness is temporary or self-deleting,  
and we’ll explore the option in more detail in 
our Fermi Paradox: Timebombs episode next month. 
Another option, that we explored last month, were 
various Cronus Scenarios, where the homeworld  
of species either chooses not to colonize 
space or does but, like Cronus of mythology,  
comes to view its children as a dangerous 
threat and consumes them or wipes them out. 
The hypothesis we’re be looking at today draws on 
both, as well as the better known Zoo Hypothesis  
line of reasoning, to explain why we can even 
look up at the night sky and see any stars at all,  
rather than Dyson swarms, or overwhelmingly 
loud broadcast of colonized systems,  
or some fake zoo-like reality, while offering 
us the possibility that intelligent alien  
life may be modestly common and not 
inevitably prone to self-destruction. 
This is the Interdiction Hypothesis, the idea 
that civilizations only expand so far and leave a  
buffer space between each other, and we’ll examine 
both the basic theory and what it looks like in  
the more grim perspective of the Cronus Scenarios. 
As we’ll see, it can get rather grim indeed. 
As usual for our Fermi Paradox discussions, 
there’s a lot to discuss so we’ll be here  
for a bit, and you might want to grab 
a drink and a snack, and don’t forget  
to hit those like and subscribe buttons.
Now basic Interdiction Hypothesis is a bit  
like Zoo Hypothesis but with a flavor of mutual 
Self-Quarantine, and is the notion that space  
faring civilizations don’t expand quickly and slam 
into each other because they agree to large buffer  
zones. In the absence of FTL, faster than light 
travel or communication, they can’t do much to  
contain or de-escalate any border crisis because 
their mutual border might be a few hundred light  
years away and they need that long to even hear 
about some dispute, by which time it might have  
broken out into a multi-system war and one 
where neighbors might often feel obliged to  
initiate pre-emptive strikes because all of their 
intel is constantly vague and out of date. In a  
universe without FTL, 'social distancing' takes on 
a whole new meaning. Civilizations might maintain  
buffer zones not because they're antisocial, but 
because their messages take too long to RSVP. 
So they don’t want their colonies anywhere near 
each other and they want large volumes of empty  
space between them as a buffer so that if someone 
decides to colonize something anyway they have  
lots of time to react, because there might be 
hundreds or even thousands of empty systems  
in that neutral zone and any rogue elements 
that colonize into there are still unlikely  
to be seen as a big threat to the status quo 
that requires immediate and decisive action. 
A Star Trek series based on the Interdiction 
Hypothesis would start an episode with, “Space,  
the final frontier, where civilizations say, 
'Good fences make good neighbors. And by fences,  
we mean buffer zones of empty star 
systems.'” Somehow, it doesn’t quite  
have the same ring to it. Nonetheless we 
see a neutral zone between the Federation  
and Romulans in Star Trek and the reasoning 
discussed for it on the show is plausible. 
Those neutral volumes might still have 
large numbers of civilizations inside them,  
potentially many trillions of people, but 
they’re small and quiet groups trying not  
to agitate the bigger powers who they originated 
from many centuries or millennia ago so as not  
to encourage some sort of policing action, 
or extermination protocol for that matter. 
In that context, those living in those buffer 
zones might pass under the radar for the Fermi  
Paradox, so that if we happened to live in 
such a buffer region ourselves, we wouldn’t  
necessarily know it. The first, and last, we 
might know about it is when Vogons show up to  
let us know we failed to file a valid permit for 
occupation and they were here to deconstruct us. 
When it comes to nearby alien splinter 
civilizations, or their parent civilization,  
not talking to us, from a Fermi Paradox 
perspective all we need is something plausible  
because it doesn't have to be a universe-wide 
policy, just the one true in our local bubble  
of space between the two or more major polities 
bordering it. Thus, even if this was a rarity and  
most other alien empires crushed right up against 
each other, so long as it is not super uncommon,  
it could explain the universe we see. 
Or so that reasoning goes, we’ll return  
to that in a bit to question how sound it is.
This is an important consideration because of what  
we call exclusivity and non-exclusivity under the 
Fermi Paradox, and that’s where we have solutions  
that assume everybody acts in a certain way and 
otherwise the proposed solution does not work,  
and it’s ‌the weakest point of most fermi paradox 
solutions I’ve encountered. If a given behavior  
isn’t exclusive to spacefaring races, it’s 
probably not a good one, and my default example  
is to point out that since the Space Race was 
between the capitalist US and communist USSR,  
and both clearly made impressive successes in 
that race, while one may be better at space  
than the other, we can’t assume space travel 
is exclusively the province of civilizations  
which are capitalist or communist, or neither.
Alternatively, you can make the argument that  
space travel is exclusive to civilizations that 
understand rocket science, since it would be hard  
to have a spacefaring civilization without that 
skill, and thus is always exclusive to a decent  
understanding of mathematics and basic physics. 
Which makes them easier to communicate with since  
they and we would both know that and presumably 
attempt to imbed that in our hello signals or  
expect that to be the case. So we should be able 
to talk to them, at least about science and math. 
Of course, we could encounter a space-born 
cow-like species as well, which might make  
communication hard and not particularly valuable, 
where the most useful interaction comes down  
to them ruminating about where to get the best 
tasting tholins in the Kuiper belt. So while it’s  
good to have rational assumptions, it always pays 
to remember the universe is large enough to have  
a good laugh at us and our assumptions too. It’s 
not that an alien isn’t likely to know the value  
of the speed of light in a vacuum or Planck’s 
Constant or Pi or powers of 2 or 10, it’s that  
they might not have thought it a good basis for 
composing a Rosetta Stone or cracking a language. 
As to why non-cow aliens don’t talk to us, 
many options are possible. Maybe they're  
just not that into us? Or they took one look at 
our internet and decided we're already too weird  
to handle. One that we’ll get back to later 
is that about all they have in common with  
us is math and science and they frankly find us 
disgusting and every other alien they’ve met too,  
and vice versa. They’re not hostile, 
they just don’t think we’ll get along  
and have good reason to believe that. And since 
there’s probably a finite amount of math and  
science applicable to this universe, it’s quite 
likely that even that point of mutual interest  
doesn’t imply much conversation back and forth.
Or maybe they don’t talk to other low-tech races  
because they’ve agreed not to because they don’t 
want their potential rivals or enemies poisoning  
the primitives’ minds about them, and they 
think conflict is best resolved by avoidance. 
And if we are in such a buffer zone, then 
occasional minimal violations by rogue actors  
or the alien police force chasing them may be the 
source of apparent UFO sightings on Earth. While  
I’m quite skeptical about those in general, they 
can’t be casually dismissed either and not too  
many solutions to the fermi paradox handle them 
turning out to be true very well, this one does. 
The philosophy is stay away from aliens, you can 
never wipe them all out, everyone will know if you  
try and reply in kind. You’re always surrounded 
by potential enemies who have every motivation  
to attack you back if you try it. You will end 
up warring constantly, at the galactic scale,  
and even if you win those it just means that 
when you expand out to claim that new territory,  
you add way more border that you can hope to 
realistically guard, and which territory has  
fresh new enemies who have every reason to view 
you with hostility. Plus the places behind you,  
your divergent kindred, might represent 
a threat now too, enemies on every side. 
Even if you weren’t the aggressor, they 
may not believe you, especially if it has  
happened repeatedly. And again, there’s also 
the reality that all those colonies of yours,  
separated by many centuries or even 
millennia of communication time,  
aren't really you anymore and potentially are 
an enemy waiting to happen, and one that does  
not benefit you by its existence either. You’re 
probably not getting taxes or resources from  
some colony 1000 light years away and yet you 
might be getting doomsday weapons, rogue AI,  
or hegemonizing swarms from them when they mess 
up, or getting drawn into a war they started  
with some other civilization that now doesn't see 
the nuanced differences between your troublesome  
colony and you and keeps on attacking you.
So it's easier to expand to an agreed on size,  
leaving buffers, and get along with minimal 
contact. Everyone agrees to keep themselves  
pretty small so nobody has a motive or ability 
to go to war. And since their own descendants  
are likely to be pretty alien if diverged far 
enough by space and time, they may see no reason  
to go butt heads with actual aliens just to 
make room for distant mutant cousins. Indeed,  
they may just as prefer not to have any cousins 
who are very distant and mutant, so may not need  
much encouragement to keep their civilization 
to a relatively small and contained sphere. 
Interdiction doesn’t assume any particular 
alien motivation besides caution, which doesn’t  
necessarily violate Exclusivity. We can assume 
that like curiosity, caution is a trait probably  
shared by all technological civilizations, 
and if not, then probably a very common one  
with a few weird exceptions. There’s also a good 
reason to enforce that buffer, to avoid getting  
drawn into fights, which at least in our history 
are way more common when you’re staring at each  
other from two feet away. When your borders 
touch with no real buffer, you’re essentially  
never further away from a conflict than your 
most provocative citizen or your worst day. 
It’s easier to enforce it with all that buffer 
space rather than direct borders. That buffer  
space gives you a bit of time to come to your 
senses and retrieve weapons you fired at your  
nemesis in a hot-headed moment, all while firmly 
telling their ambassador, “nothing to see here,  
just stay on your side of the line!”
This is not an instant fix for all  
alien diplomatic problems. You still have 
the issue of newly emerged spacefarers  
like us getting angry nobody gave them 
technology and resenting that they were  
left to face endless disasters when a few easy 
bits of help would have saved untold millions. 
When pressed, the aliens might reply, “Actually, 
we’re not really so high-minded to believe that  
interfering with primitives is beneath us, even 
to save them from asteroid strikes or plagues.”  
They then wave their prehensile eye-limbs in a 
sign of embarrassment saying, “Rather, you see,  
we agreed to this treaty. It's been around 
for a very long time, even before we entered  
the galactic stage, and even if we didn’t think 
it was a good idea to keep it, we don’t want to  
suffer the consequences of violating it. If 
you feel otherwise, you go right ahead, and  
if you’re still around and feel that way in a few 
more millenia, we’ll send you an apology letter.” 
We might discover the treaty is self-enforcing 
because it’s not Empire A and Empire B,  
it’s two or more meta-civilization blobs 
that may themselves be composed of hundreds  
of different multi-planetary empires, so 
you might be as likely to get a forceful  
response from your colonizing cousins than the 
aliens on the other side of that buffer zone. 
The other big objection to Interdiction tends 
to be that it is implying we can’t all just  
get along and be friends, which flies in the 
face of our Star Trek ideals of seeking out  
new civilizations and getting to know them and 
be made better for it. An objective look at the  
risk posed in the various‌ TV series actually 
makes the case for not “boldly going” because  
of how badly that notion can go wrong! Real life 
isn’t a TV drama, and inviting yourself into a  
battlefield or isolationist advanced civilization 
will probably get you explosively uninvited. 
The captain won’t save the day, especially as 
his dissociated cooling atoms and those of the  
ship and crew are making a tiny expanding volume 
of their own, and now you’ve got some diplomatic  
headaches and explaining to do. So, the 
Trek concept isn’t the best objection to  
the Interdiction concept, but rubs some folks the 
wrong way because they figure we ought to be able  
to talk to anyone, and be friends with everyone.
That’s not to say that Interdiction requires  
complete isolation. You can chat a bit, 
have regular communiques between your  
diplomats and anthropologists, or scientists 
and mathematicians. Just that it's kept formal,  
controlled, distant and minimal. Realistically 
getting along and tolerating other cultures  
is one of our cultural ideals that perhaps 
isn’t necessarily too grounded in reality. 
Humans share common culture and biology, but still 
have a lot of cultural traits and traditions that  
infuriate or disgust each other. And that’s not 
necessarily wrong. An example I often use for  
this is the idea that we probably don’t want to 
go to war with an alien civilization just because  
they have some very different views on the value 
of life than we do. Familiarity breeds contempt,  
and the more familiar we become in close proximity 
to them, the less we will tolerate their morals,  
traditions, habits and ideals that jar with 
our own. Consider that most countries with  
political divides of, say, two parties, often 
agree with each other on more points than they  
would a foreign party, and yet often have immense 
hostility for each other due to their proximity  
and regular interactions. This probably would 
only be made worse if that proximity remained  
but the differences in views were sharper.
Humans don’t have many kids, so they are  
precious to us and we consider that a virtue, 
so we expect aliens to have that view too. But  
maybe they give birth to large litters of children 
who rapidly grow to fertile age but not wisdom,  
and would double their population in under a year 
when left to their normal breeding rates. Even  
ignoring that they would run out of arable land 
in mere years, far faster than they could invent  
better farming tech, if they basically have their 
kids hitting mental maturity closer to our age but  
physical maturity in just a couple years, if they 
didn't control that growth, they will always have  
over 90% of their population in an infantile or 
juvenile state. That juvenile state might not be  
something they view as very cute either. Little 
kids are cute, but teenagers are competition. 
In that context, the aliens might have 
adopted a policy long before they had  
science and advanced medicine that amounts 
to weeding everybody out when they’re kids,  
culling their own numbers to something manageable 
and only keeping children exhibiting the best  
traits of whatever they consider desirable. They 
might even treat hunting down their children as a  
sport, as explored in Iain M. Banks’ book, 
The Algebraist, looking at the Dwellers. 
That might be a bedrock of their society and 
ethics, so they would be horrified if you  
suggested changing it up using birth control. 
They don’t view it as wrong to meticulously  
cull 90% of their children. After all, it 
allows them to select the best individuals  
to serve their society, so they wouldn’t see any 
point in switching to some new medical method,  
one that might carry health and societal 
risks to use. In all other matters,  
they may be admirable and entirely humane 
- for a relative extension of that term. 
For my part, I find that culling notion abominable 
and obviously wrote it with that in mind,  
to illustrate the idea that we can’t always be 
everybody’s good friend simply by getting to know  
them better. Your mileage may vary, but by default 
this strikes me as a civilization we don’t really  
want to be close neighbors with. We don’t want 
to be their enemies and maybe we can be mutually  
beneficial in sending science and knowledge 
between us, but not much is gained by proximity,  
where we might have a neighboring colony that just 
couldn't stand seeing that policy being enacted  
on its doorstep, and the next thing you know a 
galactic war is going on over it. Or maybe they  
declare it on us for some behavior they find 
atrocious that we don’t even think about. An  
extra century of travel time, between them and us, 
lets cooler heads prevail, discourages crusades,  
and gives the originating civilization 
time to send out official condemnation or  
even chase that crusading fleet down and 
force it to turn around or be fired on. 
Perhaps you do decide that you can't 
share the universe with these people,  
and join that fleet with reinforcements, 
but at least it was a decision made with  
time and reason and by your civilization, not 
a handful of hotheads living on the border who  
may have reacted to unintentional provocation.
Now the reason I tend not to think Interdiction  
Hypothesis is a good Fermi Paradox solution 
normally is because the easiest way to enforce  
this policy would be to loudly broadcast that an 
Interdiction policy is in force to everyone nearby  
as soon as they could hear and comprehend 
it. There should be some galactic beacons  
up proclaiming the policy, and we should be 
able to hear them, along with long messages  
of self-justification from this or that 
empire proclaiming how awesome they are,  
but don’t you dare go there to find out for 
yourselves, or they’ll show you how they  
deal with uninvited guests. Given how closely 
this mimics the behaviors of critters marking  
territory and trumpeting about themselves, I 
find this behavior much more believable than  
complete silence. Especially given that 
many might choose silence and others not,  
and still have tons of such communications, while 
everyone deciding to be silent seems dubious. 
We could rebut by saying such beacons do exist, 
but they’re in some high-tech FTL communication  
methods or possibly a more subtle one we’ll get 
to in a bit, but as we were discussing in the  
Galactic Beacons Nebula-Exclusive last month, 
when it comes to warnings, sooner is better.  
If you don’t want folks producing dangerous AI, 
you send that message out in a fashion they can  
hear before they have AI. So too, if you want to 
have a system that people mostly voluntarily obey,  
inform them of it before it spoils their dreams.
We’ve been imagining interstellar colonization  
for over a century now and hanging out with 
cool aliens on strange new worlds, and that  
means we are going to object if tomorrow we get 
a beacon saying no, we can’t do that. Trust me,  
I’ve spent years raining on people’s favorite 
sci fi concepts and they rarely thank me for it,  
and those who do usually phrase it as 
a thanks for doing it in detailed and  
polite fashion compared to others, they’re not 
really thanking me for wrecking their daydream. 
It’s a lot easier to change people’s minds and 
with less resentment if you establish a rule  
from the outset. So you might as well broadcast 
that signal to be heard as soon as they invent  
all those radio telescopes that will let them 
see how huge and ancient the universe is. That  
way they think you’re being really generous when 
you offer them a million planets, which sounds  
like a lot but is less than a millionth of the 
planets in this galaxy and probably only a bubble  
of a few hundred light years out from Earth.
That’s the basic theory of Interdiction and  
its major strengths and weaknesses, but 
let’s expand the discussion in light of  
the Cronus Scenarios from last month and some 
of the conversation on the Fermi Paradox and  
hypothetical aliens we’ve had since our 3 hour 
compendium of Fermi Paradox solutions last year. 
If you’re a channel regular then you probably know 
my preferred solution to the Fermi Paradox, which  
is to say, I don’t think any of the solutions seem 
to quite fit the evidence. The one with the least  
flaws to me is the idea that intelligent life is 
rare and those that get space-faring technology  
are very rare, either because life overall 
is rare, or because it just doesn't get smart  
often or does but doesn’t get technology. This is 
a variation of the wider camp known as Rare Earth,  
that Earth is not a boring and mundane example, 
but rather a remarkable lottery winner in some  
way or combination of ways. We’ve discussed all 
those options before in our great filter series. 
I don’t view the Zoo Hypothesis and 
Simulation Hypothesis scenarios as  
falsifiable. A hypothesis is scientifically 
credible only if it is inherently falsifiable.  
This means that the hypothesis must be 
capable of being tested and proven wrong,  
which you can’t do for many of the hypotheses 
we discuss. Albeit they may still be right, but  
if something isn’t falsifiable or can only be so 
by acts outside our control, like the simulators  
or zookeepers choosing to let us see the Matrix, 
then we’re limited to just laying out some  
discussion and logical reasoning for or against.
Instead, my go-to for Rare Earth being wrong  
is that something kicks in to make an 
ever-expanding civilization sprawling  
over the entire galaxy, or even beyond, just 
not function. As long as a civilization isn’t  
expanding out until it runs into other 
civilizations, either peacefully or not,  
there’s no real problem with us not seeing aliens 
just so long as they’re not insanely common,  
so any conditions that prevent that represent a 
plausible Fermi Paradox scenario. We generally  
call these late filters, things that interrupt 
that progression toward filling the Universe up  
so thoroughly that you can’t miss signs of life.
By default, the late filters are that we blow  
ourselves up before getting into space or 
that we find space travel impossible or at  
least impractical, and this was the opinion of 
Enrico Fermi after whom the paradox is named,  
and the alternate solution I just described, 
that life inevitably will spread out if it can  
is the viewpoint of Michael Hart, the biologist 
who coined the term Fermi Paradox in the 1970s.  
I don’t tend to think of self-destruction as being 
inevitable, even if 9 out of 10 civilizations get  
wiped out you still get a galaxy sprawling 
civilization spread out from that survivor. 
I don’t view interstellar travel as impossible 
or likely to be impractical either, even if your  
civilization needs to spend a century working 
itself up to send a new colony ark ship out  
and even if half of those fail and the successful 
ones need ten thousand years to grow enough to be  
willing and able send out one of their own, 
you still get a civilization that’s growing  
to spread over a whole galaxy in a relatively 
short period compared to the age of that galaxy. 
So for me, any solution in this late filter area 
has to explain why a civilization could have the  
technology to engage in space travel and still not 
spread out in a way that is self-perpetuating. And  
again, that doesn't require that every planet or 
civilization does it. Earth might cheerfully send  
expeditions to the tens of thousands of stars 
within about a couple light-centuries of us,  
then decide it was done doing that, too much 
effort, took too much time to keep it interesting,  
too little gain in expanding, and the smattering 
of distant cousins that came back from those  
missions were very strange indeed, and not 
people you’d invite to a family gathering. 
However, that doesn’t mean some colony of 
ours near the periphery doesn’t grow up  
and continue that in ten millennia or so. The 
tribes hanging around northeast Siberia didn’t  
write home to Africa to see if humanity should 
spread over that landbridge into the Americas. 
So one of the most common answers given for 
the Fermi Paradox is that civilizations just  
don't keep expanding, and the reason is that at 
a certain point this doesn't really benefit that  
homeworld anymore. And again, this is fine 
enough, but makes the mistake of assuming  
the homeworld is the part doing the expanding. 
In the absence of FTL, it’s a safe bet anyone  
a thousand light years from their homeworld 
isn’t very connected to that place anymore. 
In any event, we have some decent reasons 
why expansion might grind out and we've  
been examining those since the Compendium. 
The Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis is one,  
and reasons that at a certain point technology 
is so good that people don’t need the complex  
supply chains of large civilizations, they’ve got 
something like Wikipedia and Star Trek Replicators  
and emergency medical holograms going for them, 
while the more people they’re around, the higher  
the danger one of those people is a murderous 
lunatic, who also has access to a replicator  
or advanced 3D printer for making doomsday 
devices with. So everybody packs up in small  
groups or singly and flees, and if it turns out 
they’re right, civilization eventually detonates  
wherever it establishes itself so we don’t see 
those big sprawling empires or Dyson swarms. 
The reverse position to that is the Cronus 
Scenarios, where they start colonizing and  
those colonies start showing signs of being 
an inevitable trouble, places where rebels  
can plot or rogue elements can whip up doomsday 
devices or rogue AI, far from regulatory control. 
So they either wipe them out while they’re still 
overwhelmingly strong, or they wipe out any beyond  
a certain distance. Talk about taking the concept 
of tough love to a whole new interstellar level.  
'Sorry, kids, but it’s for the greater good of 
the galaxy.' Much as Cronus feared his children  
because he had usurped his own father, if that 
homeworld loses its fight against its dangerous  
offspring, those offspring now have evidence 
of how dangerous any of their colonies could  
be to them and they know better than to wait.
Where this merges into Interdiction is that  
it contemplates a plausible in-between state. 
Your civilization believes, possibly through  
rigorous modeling and calculation, possibly by 
trial and bloody error, that it can safely run  
a civilization, say, 100 light years in radius. 
And all it colonies are aware of this and entirely  
understand that if they try to set themselves up 
as a new hub for an expanding sphere of their own,  
their neighbors and the homeworld will 
crush them, and even they succeed,  
they’re just setting themselves up to be in the 
same position down the road but now potentially  
surrounded by others who emulated them and a 
very chaotic bunch of merged blobs of expansion. 
And this is what we expect anyway, it's not like 
in a no-FTL Universe you get a peaceful eternal  
expansion of the grand old republic back home, 
every colony eventually flips its homeworld the  
bird then gets it in turn from its own colonies.
But we’re not usually assuming those colonies are  
inevitably dangerous when we think about this 
in classic space opera science fiction terms,  
and as we saw in Cronus Scenarios, we probably 
should be and more importantly, we probably  
should assume our descendants and most spacefaring 
alien civilizations will be worried about that. 
Personally, I think they’ll do it anyway, 
but that’s where Interdiction comes in as a  
sort of soft-Cronus scenario. By this time, with 
colonies spreading over dozens of light years,  
if aliens are even a little common, we have 
spotted them, and since they aren’t expanding  
have probably determined why and it probably 
applies to us too. It would be very easy to  
imagine that if we spot a lot of civilizations 
around a light century across, and none bigger,  
that we would pay that heed, even in the absence 
of a beacon clarifying that this was some galactic  
rule. If you’ve got a few hundred interstellar 
colonies set up and a number of your major and  
minor planets in your own system settled, odds are 
good you have run into at least some troubles with  
them and maybe noted that the further away they 
are, the more trouble they tend to be. The ones  
on your doorstep and sharing your own house are 
trouble too, but you’re kinda stuck with them. 
But the thing is, when someone says “Hey, that’s 
just part of growth, your children go their own  
way” people might reply back - especially in 
civilizations with medical life extension - “No,  
a well-behaved colony on a distant planet 
100 light years from here offer us nothing  
but another symbolic victory, one more plaque on 
the monument of settled stars. No new technology,  
no particularly original art or literature, no 
taxes or resources, too far to really trade or  
import form, one more occupied border to guard. 
That’s our best case scenario from this colony,  
little to nothing. Our worst case scenario is 
they invade us or unleash some technological  
nightmare by accident or design. Or we 
don’t allow a colony there. Option 1,  
little to no gain, option 2, possible 
self-destruction. Leave that planet be,  
or send automated dumb harvesters there 
to pick the system clean. By doing that  
we make it harder for any rogue element to 
establish a colony there in the future.” 
I can't say I agree with this line of reasoning 
and surely don’t like it, but it is one I’d expect  
to hear and not one easily rebutted. And the 
Universe doesn’t care what I want to be true. 
If true, this results in self-quarantining, even 
without an explicit beacon from an alien warning  
you should or must quarantine. You just figure out 
what your safe bubble is, figure out how big your  
automated harvesting bubble is, and build inside 
the former while strip mining the latter. And  
you create a decent buffer state that way, and if 
anyone builds there, they are not in a very good  
position to resist you coming by to get them. They 
don’t have the resources to get big and don’t want  
to risk it. You send fleets of loyal ships out 
with crews on ice for the duration to scan around  
those picked over star systems and head home.
As I mentioned earlier, there might be a subtle  
Interdiction beacon. If we ever find a cluster of 
picked-clean star systems and given that’s what we  
expect from the Interdiction Hypothesis, we should 
have a pretty good idea of what that represents.  
We should probably take this as a sign that we 
should be cautious about going any further. As old  
seafarers would say when they got to unexplored 
areas on the map, “Thar be dragons!” Except,  
in this case, there might actually be dragons.
Spaceships are not covert vehicles either, so  
they’re not setting off from your controlled space 
unnoticed, they’re as subtle as a volcano erupting  
and most easily seen from the rear where their 
engines are pointing, which makes them very easy  
to pursue and track. If one succeeds anyway, they 
aren’t stopping till they’re really far away and  
presumably by the time they arrive somewhere safe, 
thousands of years away, and colonize and grow,  
they are quite likely to simply do exactly what 
everyone else is doing, growing to a set size and  
then banning further expansion. You get a lot 
of bubbles of civilization with wider stripped  
out bubbles around them that are intentionally 
unappealing to anyone thinking of settling there,  
you surround your fortress oasis with a desert.
And everybody else does too, and when someone  
decides they don’t want to, the effect plays out 
naturally that way after various internal wars,  
where you might end up with a dozen smaller 
star kingdoms inside a slightly larger than  
average bubble, all with buffer spaces between, 
just buffers that might have once been settled  
systems and now are not. Or are but are very 
decimated and kept that way. Though mind you,  
that might mean they still had billions of 
occupants in such a system, it’s just far smaller  
than the typical system in the core worlds.
So a few obvious questions come to mind,  
the first being why we don’t see this?
And the answer is that we wouldn’t unless it  
was nearby. Basic Interdiction Hypothesis really 
should have beacons up warning people of the rules  
and who are not inherently xenophobic, some might 
be, others might not, so some should be chatty,  
but this variation we just described assumes we 
live in a grimmer reality. One where everybody  
has deduced by modeling or direct experience that 
their own colonies are a danger beyond a certain  
size and that doesn’t require that you actively 
dislike interacting with distant civilizations,  
but it tends to set a stage where 
that’s not preferable. You’re not  
expecting distant civilizations to offer 
you anything beneficial. If they had been,  
you wouldn’t have enacted that policy of drawing a 
maximum size on your own empire and pillaging the  
frontier to make sure it was useless to others. 
Where you keep sending out automated miners until  
it's no longer even a break-even proposition to 
mine there just so nobody else can down the road. 
But that probably wouldn’t include active 
star-lifting, where we set a complex and  
massive device around a star to harvest 
metals from it magnetically, because that’s  
not an operation anyone can accomplish fast 
or covertly, even at the interstellar scale,  
so if you see it getting set up you go send a 
fleet over to have a not-so-quiet word with them.  
So a system someone did this ransacking to really 
wouldn’t stand out much, especially to us now. We  
could easily have looked at pillaged systems 
and since most of what we see are gas giants,  
not smaller exoplanets, we wouldn’t notice 
if they’d gone through and removed all the  
low-hanging fruit and asteroids and just swing 
telescopes on all the bigger objects occasionally  
to make sure they’re more or less the same.
As we say about Dyson Swarms or Spheres,  
it's not that they are covert either, they are 
just as bright as the original star just in some  
wavelength of infrared light instead of visible, 
and a good deal wider but dimmer. We could look  
at one tomorrow and not recognize it if we 
weren’t paying attention and while we can see  
stars thousands of light years away, most of the 
ones we look at are really big and bright giants,  
or ones acting exceptionally weird and anomalous 
in a way we lucked out and noticed. When we talk  
about not being able to miss Kardashev Scale 
civilizations like that, it is because we are  
assuming they keep on expanding till we can’t 
miss the giant imperial blob of vanishing stars. 
But while we just semi-arbitrarily picked 
a light-century as maximum radius for these  
interdiction bubbles, I’m not sure we’d see 
a civilization of that scale even in our own  
galaxy unless we lucked out, and that’s assuming 
they were all Dyson swarms and to that radius. 
In practice, I think you might allow only your 
core system to Dyson-up, in favor of importing  
building material from your outer realm. A Dyson 
Swarm with a good supply of raw materials can  
house a billion times what a planet can, so 
if you’re keeping yourself as the only one,  
that lets you maintain a stranglehold over those 
colonies and also gives you a place to put people.  
You’re not saying they can’t live, instead that 
they need to do it in the inner-system. And since  
they probably have fusion technology, they could 
just expand into their own Kuiper Belt or Oort  
Cloud for more elbow room. We also might not 
notice if they were slowly star-lifting those  
neighboring systems for a billion-year stockpiling 
effort. And if they have to follow any sort of  
budget or limit for work, which seems likely, then 
it's hard to justify pumping your neighbor stars  
for spare fuel on a timeline vastly shorter 
than the natural lifetime of your own sun. 
If that was what it tended to look like, some 
Dyson swarm that was slowly mining around it and  
settling only its immediate vicinity, then that 
would be the sort of phenomena everybody would be  
able to easily spot once they knew what to look 
for, but that’s very different than meaning we  
would spot it now, and we could potentially have 
a thousand of these in our galaxy alone without  
it sticking out like a sore thumb to us even now.
Does this modified version of interdiction work?  
Well, yes and no, I think it revives the idea of 
interdiction as a much more robust stance than  
the default premise, but it still has its flaws, 
and I’m sure there’s others I haven’t thought of  
either. Every Fermi Paradox solution I know of 
has some issues, most overtly fatal flaws too,  
but this doesn’t seem to have any of 
those, at least that I’ve noticed. 
The biggest flaw is that it assumes a state of 
the Universe that we can’t confirm yet and which  
I hope isn’t true either, that interstellar 
colonization is so clearly detrimental to  
civilizations that they all inevitably ban it 
beyond a certain radius and enforce it ruthlessly.  
The strength of this modified version is that 
they can do this and there’s a logical path to why  
they might, but it requires that the detrimental 
nature be so clear and unavoidable that everybody  
does this, including civilizations that aren’t 
particularly xenophobic or tyrannic. They’re doing  
it to survive, not because they’re selfish, 
and they leave places like us to ourselves,  
because we’re far from them and they think it 
inevitable we’ll just build our own bubble like  
them and everyone else. But for that to be 
true, it has to mean it is as the point of  
being a mathematical and scientific certainty, 
psycho historical inevitability, or so on. 
If it isn’t, it falls apart, and I think it might 
anyway since such civilizations still have every  
reason to watch for other civilizations popping 
up, new species or fled colonists setting up in  
a distant sector of the galaxy, and I feel 
that means they would know we are here and  
I think we have a non-exclusivity issue at 
that point, because there’s no overwhelming  
reason why a given Interdiction Bubble 
Civilization - which we’ll call an IBC,  
should be worried about sending messages to other 
IBCs or emerging ones far from them. I could  
believe most would think it pointless or turn 
pretty xenophobic, but I see nothing compelling  
an overwhelming majority to that attitude.
So maybe 9 out of 10 IBCs don’t send hellos  
or warnings or smugly schadenfreude-laden messages 
about how we too will have to become an IBC. That  
still leaves one of those 10 transmitting, and 
they may intermittently change their policy on it,  
again they have to be stable for millions of years 
for it to really work as a Fermi Paradox solution,  
so there’s plenty of time for policy changes. They 
only get stuck in their bubble because they burned  
their proverbial ships at the shore by ransacking 
the shell of worlds right beyond that bubble. 
That prior pillaging might discourage a 
later attempt at expansion if they changed  
their minds but is overcomeable, it's more 
that it discourages long enough for them to  
remember why they did this, which again we 
are assuming means because they reached a  
mathematical certainty this was the wise path.
Also, while I keep describing this as grim,  
they’re not stuck inside some shell desperate for 
resources, they are an empire of hundreds or even  
thousands of systems with stockpiles to support 
themselves in luxury for trillions of years.  
It’s grim because of their attitude, and why they 
have that attitude, not their actual standard of  
living. Nothing about an IBC setup particularly 
implies it’s unavoidably some despotic dystopia,  
brutally murdering and pillaging its outlying 
colonies. If it is mathematical necessity it  
probably means everybody sane and rational agrees 
to abide by it, and interstellar colonization is  
not easy, so not something a small handful 
of crazy loons might do on their own. Even  
if they did, spaceships aren’t stealthy, and 
they would be easily detected and run down,  
and potentially without having to blow 
them up in favor of detaining them. 
No, to me it’s bleak because it says the Universe 
isn’t a friendly place and one where we can meet  
aliens or distant cousins and come to call them 
friends, and I grew up on the same sci fi as  
everyone else, so it’s not the reality I’d like to 
be true. And we explore the other scenario, lots  
of aliens and us trying to talk with them and live 
near them in this weekend’s scifi Sunday episode  
Alien Embassies, as the opposite of today’s case.
But we don’t get a vote on what’s true or not -  
probably, see our episode Reality Manipulation 
for alternatives - so it doesn't really matter  
if we like the Interdiction Hypothesis or Zoo 
Hypothesis or Simulation Hypothesis, they either  
are or aren’t the case. Fortunately, while we 
can’t rule Interdiction out, I don’t think the  
case for it is particularly overwhelming either.
But what do you think? Is our destiny to be space  
hermits, waving at distant neighbors from the 
safety of our cosmic front porch? Or will we throw  
caution to the solar winds? Should we explore 
strange new worlds and make them our homes,  
or is doing so just seeding them with potential 
future enemies? Let me know in the comments below.
One of our themes was if civilizations will 
learn the right lessons as we head out into  
space or if they’ll have to repeat and 
relearn them a lot, and that’s a thing  
to keep in mind as we head toward the end of 
another school year. If you or a loved one is  
about to head off for summer break, I strongly 
encourage you to have a plan for keeping all the  
knowledge fresh that was worked for so hard.
Even just a handful of minutes every day can  
not only prevent backward steps, but let you 
keep moving forward, and that’s something our  
friends at Brilliant understand all too well. 
Learning a little every day is one of the most  
important things you can do, both for personal 
and professional growth. Brilliant helps you  
build real knowledge in minutes a day—with 
fun lessons you can do whenever you have  
time. Learn through problem solving and doing, 
with hands on interactive content that’s fun,  
immersive, effective, and intuitive.
Brilliant also recently launched a  
ton of new content in data, all of which 
uses real-world data to train you to see  
trends and make better-informed decisions.
You can try everything Brilliant has to  
offer for free for a full 30 days, just 
visit brilliant.org/isaacarthur or click  
on the link in the description. You’ll also 
get 20% off an annual premium subscription.
That’s it for today but I hope you’ll 
join us this weekend, Sunday May 12th,  
for a look at the reverse case of Interdiction,  
where civilizations sprawl near each other 
and set up alien embassies. After that,  
it's on to the idea of massive galactic empires 
and the enormous cosmic capitals that might  
oversee them. Then we’ll look at a different 
kind of alien mind, one much closer to hand,  
such as animal brains, as we examine Alternative 
Intelligence, the other AI. Then we’ll take an  
extended look at Space Freighters, what they’ll 
carry and who will crew them, on Sunday May 26th. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can 
also help support the show by becoming a member  
here on Youtube or Patreon, or checkout 
other ways to help at IsaacArthur.net.  
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes 
early and ad free on our streaming service,  
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content like 
Machine Monitors, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
