This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
Contrary to popular belief, nuclear energy
doesn’t give you superpowers, which is a
bit disappointing.
As a consolation prize though it does offer
a near unlimited supply
 of clean and safe energy.
So today we’re back to discussing the future
of nuclear energy to focus in on Thorium,
an energy source often heralded as the cleaner
and safer successor to traditional nuclear
power and the gateway to humanity’s independence
from fuels that are short in supply or environmentally
dangerous.
Many others view Thorium as little more than
a pipedream, or even a dangerous distraction
from pursuing other options like solar or
wind or geothermal.
Some argue it even distracts from improvements
to more traditional nuclear fission or its
long awaited upgrade, nuclear fusion.
So which of these is right?
Is it a Miracle power source, an over-hyped
alternative, or a dangerous distraction?
We will be exploring the science of thorium
power and its future today, here on Science
& Futurism with Isaac Arthur, and I am your
host, the aforementioned Isaac Arthur.
Today’s gonna be a lengthy and maybe a bit
of a technical discussion, so you may want
to get a drink and snack, and don’t forget
to hit the like and subscribe buttons while
you’re at it.
So we should probably start with the basics
first, like what is Thorium, and what brought
it into the public eye?
Well Thorium, named for Thor, the God of Thunder
and Lightning, is probably a good name for
a substance that offers vast amounts of energy,
and maybe also new atomic weapons if we’re
not careful.
And while many things helped popularize discussion
of it as a future power source, sadly one
of those was an old meme about a thorium powered
car.
I suspect that’s also what got this power
source some of the cynicism often directed
at it being over-hyped.
It is actually possible to make a nuclear-powered
car, in a variety of ways, but none really
stand out as economically sound or physically
safe options.
Of those that are it would probably be a RTG
running on passive nuclear decay and charging
the car’s batteries continuously, or some
fission engine that did the same, could be
throttled, and probably also ran on some super-rare
transuranic isotope like Americium-242, which
could permit a 5 kilogram reactor running
on 700 grams of Americium.
Such elements don’t naturally occur as they
have a half-life vastly shorter than the age
of Earth; in the case of Americium-242, just
432 years.
Nonetheless, such elements and reactors could
see a role even in personal vehicles in a
century or two if the civilization is a post-scarcity
civilization, with energy abundance and medical
nanotechnology removing any health concerns
about radiation, and on this show this is
something we would expect to be true for the
22nd century, so a nuclear car running on
rare isotopes is not off the table.
It just won’t be getting served for dinner
any time soon.
See these isotopes aren’t so much rare as
non-existent.
We have to make these isotopes, and typically
with a breeder reactor.
Which is also part of the process for using
Thorium as a power source, but unlike Plutonium
and the other Transuranic elements, thorium
isotopes typically have half-lives similar
to or longer than uranium.
While its shortest lived isotope, Thorium-227,
has a half-life of only 19 days, its longest
lived isotope, Thorium-232, has a half-life
of 14 billion years, the approximate age of
the Universe, and about 3 times longer than
Uranium’s longest-lived isotope, Uranium-238,
which comes in at 4.5 billion years and is
roughly the age of the Earth.
This is the primary reason why Thorium is
three times more abundant than uranium on
Earth, indeed roughly as common lead, and
almost all Thorium is Thorium-232, the element
that interests us, whereas uranium is virtually
all U-238, with a modest amount of the shorter
lived U-235, which is fissile and has a half
life of 700 million years, and also little
bit of Uranium-234, about 50 parts per million,
but with a half life of only a quarter of
a million years.
Why there is any U-234 naturally occurring
matters a lot for why Thorium should be useful
to us.
Now you have probably heard that Earth was
created by a Supernova causing our solar system
to form and most of our heavy elements are
thought to have come from that Supernova.
But not all would have, some coming from older
ones or even from supernova remnants we have
since passed through, and furthermore we cannot
assume all supernovae produce equal amounts
of each isotope of a given element.
Nonetheless we can say there were a great
deal more equal amounts of the various isotopes
of Uranium when they were made, and the date
for that is usually put at about 6 billion
years ago, well before Earth itself formed.
So Thorium’s longest lived Isotope after
232, Thorium-230, only lives about 75000 years,
which would be 80,000 half-lives in a 6 billion
year period, If you cut something in half
80,000 times you end up with a number so small
that even if every atom in the Universe had
been composed of that substance initially
it would be astronomically improbable a single
atom of it was still around, anywhere in the
entire Universe.
Alternatively Thorium-232, with a half-life
14 billion years, would only have had about
a quarter of its atoms decay in that time.
Which gets us to why there is any Uranium-234
at all, since it’s only about three times
longer-lived than Thorium-230, and indeed
that is what Uranium-234 decays into.
Both have such a short half-life, in geological
and astronomical timelines, that even though
Uranium-234 decays into Thorium-230, so many
half-lives have passed that there shouldn’t
be a single iota of either anywhere on this
planet, and yet both are around in non-minuscule
quantities.
This is because Uranium-238, with its half-life
equal to Earth’s age, turns into Uranium-234,
then Thorium-230, then on to Radium and Radon,
then to Polonium, and finally on to Lead.
In the grand scheme of things all those in-between
decays represent only a tiny fraction of time
compared to that spent first as Uranium-238,
or afterwards as Lead, but it’s enough that
we actually have some Uranium-234 and Thorium-230
on the planet, even though none of either
would have still been around when the Earth
formed, having decayed while making the journey
from the Supernova or neutron star collision
that formed them.
Now something’s half-life is pretty indicative
of how dangerous it is in terms of radiation,
and so you need not concern yourself that
there’s tons of Uranium and Thorium in your
backyard.
The stuff is chemically toxic if swallowed
in large enough quantities, and its powdered
metallic form is pyrophoric, meaning it ignites
spontaneously in air.
But you’ve got about 40 micrograms of Thorium
in your body, and eat about 3 micrograms a
day.
You have also got about 20 micrograms of Uranium
in you too if you’re curious.
Anyway, beyond that Thorium is pretty safe
stuff to handle in its natural form, but it
is still radioactive, even the ultra-long-lived
Thorium 232, so while I agree with folks who
say Thorium has advantages over Uranium as
being a safer substance in terms of both handling
and weaponization concerns, it’s still not
something to casually play around with either.
The big concern, and potential, comes from
fission, and specifically from breeder reactions.
Same as an unstable atom can decay into a
different atom spontaneously, we can slap
it with something, typically a neutron, and
have it break apart, and some of these substances
will break apart in a way that emits more
of whatever broke it in the first place, typically
meaning it spat out a few neutrons after being
hit by one.
This can be used to send those neutrons to
repeat the process on neighboring atoms and
cause a chain reaction, and substances that
are capable of this are known as fissile.
Uranium-235 is Fissile; so is Plutonium-239,
but it only has a half-life of 25,000 years
so it isn’t naturally occurring either.
Plutonium-241 is also fissile and has a half-life
of just 14 years.
Uranium-233 is also fissile, and does better
than plutonium at a half-life of 160,000 years,
but that’s still not long enough to be naturally
occurring.
So we’ve got to make them.
This is why Uranium-235 is so useful for reactors
and bombs, it is fissile and it is decently
common, 0.72% of natural uranium.
And since U-235 is slightly less dense than
U-238, we can run it through a centrifuge
to separate the two or at least produce a
more concentrated selection of it; an enriched
one.
Though this is usually still mostly made of
U-238.
This results in the remaining part being somewhat
depleted of U-235, usually half or more having
been removed.
Neither natural or depleted Uranium is particularly
dangerous to handle, much the same as Thorium.
Here’s the key bit though, while a material
is fissile if it can absorb a neutron and
break up to spit out more neutrons, causing
a chain reaction, a lot of materials will
just absorb a neutron and do nothing but sit
there’s as a slightly different isotope
of themselves, often a stable one too.
One of the things that makes lead handy as
a radiation shield is that its three major
isotopes, Lead 206, 207, and 208, can absorb
a neutron and just become lead 207, 208, and
209 respectively, though Lead-209 will beta
decay into ultra-long-lived Bismuth shortly
thereafter.
Beta decays are low-powered and basically
harmless.
Anyway, we don’t want these neutron absorbers
in our reactor, or bomb, because they poison
the fission process by sucking up some neutrons
without spitting others out.
However some substances do spit stuff out
later.
For light elements we generally see an equal
number of protons and neutrons, or close to
it, but the bigger on the scale you go, the
higher the ratio of neutrons to protons, and
this permits very large numbers of variously
stable isotopes.
One example of which is Uranium-239, what
you get when one of the many remaining U-238
atoms in an enriched Uranium fuel rod absorbs
a neutron.
Now U-239 is not a common word, mostly because
it’s very short lived, and after 23 minutes
turns into Neptunium-239 for a couple days,
and then into Plutonium-239, one of our other
fissile isotopes.
Incidentally there are Uranium isotopes all
the way from Uranium-214 to 242, but none
of the first dozen last longer than a second.
Plutonium-241 is also fissile but is made
by hitting Plutonium-239 with a neutron to
become 240, then doing it again to become
241, so it’s not a great way to make fuel,
though Plutonium 241 has a better neutron
absorption cross section than 239.
Absorption cross section is the likelihood
a passing neutron will be absorbed, more is
better for fission.
As a side note, in general, isotopes with
an odd number of neutrons are both more likely
to absorb neutrons and undergo fission when
they do.
Thorium, Uranium, Plutonium, and Curium have
90, 92, 94, and 96 protons respectively, each
an even number, so their isotope numbers indicate
an odd number of neutrons when they’re odd,
like Thorium-231, Uranium-233 and 235, Plutonium
239 and 241, Curium 243 and 245, each of which
represent an odd number of neutrons and each
of which is fissile and will have a lower
bare critical mass for use as a bomb.
Alternatively Americium-242 is the isotope
of Americium, 95 protons, with an odd number
of neutrons and its critical mass is put at
around 9-18 kilograms, versus 50-155 kilograms
for Americium-243.
Folks more familiar with Thorium, who are
probably getting impatient with me walking
through this process, might be going “hey,
I thought Thorium didn’t have any fissile
isotopes” while others might be saying “See
you can make a bomb out of it.”
A thing to keep in mind for instance is that
Thorium-231 has a half life of a day, and
is principally made by the decay of Uranium-235,
which is vastly more abundant and vastly more
fissile.
Lots of isotopes are technically fissile,
but most are barely so, and often very short-lived.
That’s where Uranium-233 energy comes in,
better known incorrectly as Thorium energy,
which I say because we don’t sit around
referring to bombs or reactors running on
Plutonium-239 as being Uranium bombs or reactors.
Thorium-232 is hyper abundant, being virtually
all naturally available thorium atoms, and
can absorb neutrons, but it doesn’t undergo
fission.
Instead it turns into Thorium-233, which still
doesn’t undergo fission.
It could absorb another neutron and become
Thorium-234 in theory, but that has a short
half-life of 22 minutes, after which it will
decay into Protactinium-233, which has a 27
day half-life, then becomes Uranium-233, which
is fissile.
Technically it can decay into Thorium-229
at this point, continuing the chain, but Uranium-233
has a half-life of 160,000 years.
So our Thorium-232, which is busy absorbing
neutrons, will have that atom spend a bit
of time in those three mid-points before settling
into Uranium-233.
This is the Thorium Fuel Cycle, except we
haven’t produced much power yet.
Uranium-233 absorbs a neutron and sometimes
turns into Uranium-234, about 6% of the time,
which is good at capturing neutrons and will
at some point do so and become U-235, which
is of course quite fissile.
Most of the time though, in 94% of interactions,
the U-233 will fission from the neutron hitting
it and break up into two smaller atoms, such
as Xenon-137 and Strontium-94, plus 3 more
neutrons, permitting the chain reaction as
one of those neutrons might hit a neighboring
U-233 to spit 3 more neutrons out, while another
might be absorbed by some neighboring Thorium-232,
starting the Thorium Cycle off again.
Incidentally, fission byproducts aren’t
as uniform as decay products are.
Most isotopes with a half-life decay in one
specific fashion or perhaps two with a clear
set percentage; fission is messier and can
depend a lot on the speed or energy of the
neutron hitting it.
It’s also not perfectly documented, especially
for these irregular processes like Uranium-233,
since we basically have to pull all the materials
out of the reactor and carefully scrutinize
it for all isotopes, often in concentrations
way less than one part per billion, and often
track it backward by seeing some daughter
isotope that’s a decay product of a fission
byproduct.
Much hunting for needles in haystacks, except
atomic nuclei are very tiny needles.
One other note on this, we also have what
we call parasites, sort of the opposite of
fertile materials like Thorium-232, Uranium-234,
and Uranium-238 which can absorb neutrons
and end up as something fissile.
During the production of Uranium-233 you inevitably
get some Uranium-232 instead.
This mostly happens when the Protactinium
phase absorbs a neutron but can actually happen
through multiple channels, both during the
normal Thorium Fuel Cycle or even off the
tiny amount of Thorium-230 rather than 232
in any given Thorium sample.
U-232 has a good neutron absorption cross
section for fission, which you would think
would be good for a fission reactor, but mostly
it interferes with the Thorium Fuel Cycle
and also is highly radioactive, with a mere
70 year half-life and being a powerful gamma
ray emitter.
This is one of the big problems with Thorium
as a power source, once it’s irradiated
– which is to say, once we start blasting
it with neutrons: that U-232 starts emerging
and represents a significant handling and
safety burden.
Another problem is that it isn’t really
ideal for a fast reactor, and of course requires
us to explain what a fast reactor is.
Most neutrons coming out of these reactions
are moving very, very fast, frequently a couple
percent of light speed, or thousands of kilometers
per second, one of the reasons we like it
for spaceship drives, see our episode “The
Nuclear Option”.
We often slow these neutrons down to a thousandth
that speed, something more like what a fighter
jet might move at, via neutron moderation.
This is where we have a space between the
fuel rods filled with something like water
or graphite that neutrons can whack around
and slow down by hitting the molecules, but
generally don’t get absorbed by them.
This heats that moderator up and often allows
us to generate power by moving that moderator
through a standard heat engine or for safety’s
sake, using it to heat up something which
heats up another fluid to avoid radiation
getting out.
That’s how what we call a “Thermal Neutron
reactor” works, the neutrons are slowed
to speeds of hot materials rather than fast
relativistic ones.
A “fast reactor” uses those fast relativistic
ones, being short for “Fast Neutron reactor.”
But some materials can absorb even a high-speed
neutron, called fast neutron absorption, and
that’s ideal for the typical breeder reactor
where you absorb neutrons to make a new substance
rather than direct fission, which is what
we do with Thorium and what we do with Uranium
to make Plutonium, and the latter cycle is
better at that.
That’s a downside but not a fatal one, but
reminds us that while U-235, the workhorse
of fission reactors, is pretty rare compared
to Thorium-232, U-238 is more than a hundred
times more common than U-235, and like Thorium-232
has a breeder cycle, going to Plutonium-239,
which cuts into the often proclaimed edge
of Thorium as vastly more abundant.
It is more abundant than Uranium-238 but not
that much more so, but U-238 is for making
Plutonium which is quite easy to weaponize,
which Thorium is often proclaimed not to be.
Of course you can weaponize thorium power.
U-233 can be made into a bomb for instance,
which the U.S. experimented with once during
the 1950’s, but it is arguably more proliferation
resistant.
As I often say on the show though, power is
power, and you can weaponize any power, even
if just by generating it to run your bomb
factories or your economy to afford more and
better armed troops.
The main path for weaponizing this is to be
cycling the reactor fuel to remove the Protactinium
from the Neutron Flux for a few months until
it’s decayed into U-233, preventing most
of the U-232 formation that makes U-233 non-ideal
as a nuclear bomb, and Protactinium can be
chemically separated from the Uranium and
Thorium.
However, hijacking lots of small thorium reactors
to get that fuel to separate the tiny amount
of Protactinium out is a lot of effort to
get a bomb.
And while I dislike folks calling Thorium
safe from weaponization, I really haven’t
heard of a good method for weaponizing it,
albeit in all fairness that might be because
it’s classified.
Even if the reactors were all over the place,
that doesn’t seem any easier than sourcing
material for a regular atomic bomb, though
folks can be surprisingly inventive so we
shouldn’t write it off.
Especially given that one of the more popular
thorium reactor designs relies on molten liquid
salt in the core, not the typical image of
hard metal rods or pellets, which is handy
in large part because it allows us to chemically
separate out fission byproducts.
Incidentally it’s important to remember
that while you can separate isotopes of the
same element by centrifuging them, all isotopes
of an element act the same chemically, so
a process that dissolves Uranium works on
U-235 and U-238 or U-233, same for separating
out Protactinium from Uranium and Thorium,
which would let you get purer Uranium-233.
A pure Uranium-233 is much better for making
bombs out of.
For anyone who is curious, narrating a script
full of Isotopes is a worse tongue twister
than that time I helped Peter Piper pick a
Peck of Pickled Peppers.
So yes, Thorium is somewhat proliferation-resistant,
compared to U-235 or Plutonium, but I don’t
like to tout Thorium for this reason because
I think it is surrendering to the flawed premise
that controlling one particular style of weapon
or attack at the cost of a major economic
or environmental advantage is a good deal.
Not that I would encourage folks to get blasé
about radiation or atomic weapons but if you
are a channel regular then you are familiar
with the wide array of doomsday devices potentially
available to us in the not-too-distant future.
So those are two often-cited advantages to
Thorium I feel need caveats; the weapon proliferation
edge isn’t maybe that advantageous, and
Thorium’s abundance as a big edge only matters
for classic U-235 reactors.
Truth is, there’s more than enough U-238
to keep our civilization running on Uranium-Plutonium
breeder reactors for centuries even without
extracting the multi-million year supply of
it in our oceans and seabeds, let alone extreme
mining of our mantle or space, and Uranium
is valuable enough in terms of energy density
to make mining it from space profitable, especially
with the sort of nuclear propulsion systems
we looked at in our episode “The Nuclear
Option.”
Again, Thorium is more abundant in our crust
but both are quite abundant enough, and uranium
is much more abundant in our seawater which
is currently a bit pricey to extract in terms
of energy, though not too bad compared to
normal mining.
But if you’re running an economy on Uranium
and Thorium it’s a pretty minimal extra
cost and would work well with both coastal
plants’ cooling towers, and nuclear power
for water desalination.
However, realistically, if we haven’t worked
out fusion in a few centuries when easily
available Uranium might be running low, then
buying ourselves three times the supply by
switching to Thorium is not really a winning
policy, in favor of something a bit more long
term renewable like solar.
Though again keep in mind we can access millions
of years worth of either Thorium or Uranium,
it's just the Sun lives for billions of years
and gives off way more power.
Two downsides of Thorium often cited that
I’d dispute though are that it is tricky
to handle, and we aren’t as experienced
with it.
Both are true, we do have way more experience
with other types of reactors and uranium as
a fuel of course.
Needless to say that’s only a temporary
downside and not a good reason to avoid it
as a fuel, but it is to countries or companies
that need make power now, and on a budget,
so it’s valid but manageable by putting
effort into it, same as we did for solar,
which was a horrible power supply economically
until this last decade, but is now the cheapest
option in many parts of the world.
Also needless to say, with other power options
besides traditional nuclear to compete with,
taking a lot of time to learn to better handle
and work with Thorium in terms of practical
experience is a real downside.
Thorium is tricky to handle too, if not ridiculously
so.
As I mentioned earlier, thorium can be pyrophoric,
burning when exposed to air, and needs temperatures
higher than uranium to melt and purify.
But again this doesn’t really seem like
a big limitation so much as a matter of developing
the tools and infrastructure to do it.
A big part of the issue with time is the simple
licensing process for an entirely new fuel
source, which could take a decade or more.
Years of modelling in computers has to be
done, alongside physical tests, and then it
takes years to review the license applications
for different parts of the process.
If one avoided any and all regulations, you
could probably do it pretty quick, but that’s
not exactly ideal for safety or the environment.
On the other hand, some might argue that risk
is small compared to current damage being
done from other power sources.
Personally, the Thorium-Uranium power production
process I like the most at the moment is with
MSRs or Molten Salt Reactors.
Sometimes called a Molten Salt Fueled Reactor
to differentiate them from those using molten
salts as the coolant or working fluid, here
the fission fuel is in the molten salt.
I mentioned moderators earlier to slow neutrons
down for capture, and that’s not limited
to water.
A big stream of molten matter cycling through
your core is advantageous for many reasons,
some of which we discussed in our recent episode
on the Future of Fission, but one is that
you can keep everything lower pressure and
you can cycle it out so that you don’t need
to load your reactor up with a ton of fissile
material to keep the reactor operating a long
time.
That allows for much smaller reactors when
it comes to shielding and containment; it’s
not some giant pressure cooker full of tons
of superhot radioactive material.
This is where the LFTR or ‘Lifter’ Liquid
Fluoride Thorium Reactor comes in, and it’s
probably the most touted Thorium reactor concept.
It’s got some variations too, and isn’t
limited to Thorium designs.
Fluoride melts at 135 Celsius, or 275 Fahrenheit,
not that much above water’s boiling temperature,
which is part of why it's appealing as the
medium.
Also when Fluorine atoms absorb a neutron
they just turn into Neon-20, which is stable
and a Noble Gas so obviously very easy to
remove.
Fluorine also bonds to Uranium to create uranium
tetrafluoride, sometimes called green salt,
which becomes our core material doing the
fission.
Its melting point is 1036 Celsius and it is
insoluble in water which means if your reactor
gets mashed you’re not spraying the vicinity
with superhot radioactive and toxic gas or
something which can dissolve in rain or water
to run all over the place.
MSRs – thorium or uranium – have a lot
of engineering upsides and downsides we will
bypass today, but we’re discussing what
we have thus far in terms of the mechanics
to clarify why Thorium often gets discussed
as usable in small reactors.
If it helps conceptually it’s a lot like
why your smart phone does not have a gas engine,
even though that would be vastly better than
a battery, and why even though electric cars
are finally making it into market as real
competitors, nobody is mass manufacturing
battery run planes or freight trucks (or at
least not yet).
Thorium is not in any way more energy dense
than Uranium; they’re about the same.
Most of that compactness is coming from the
MSR design, not whether it runs on thorium-232
or uranium-238.
Critically though, Thorium allows Thermal
Breeding, or slow neutron breeding, in the
context of those neutrons only moving at hot
thermal speeds of atoms and not a fraction
of light speed like fast neutrons do.
Which means the amount of fissile material
you have to put in to start the process up
is lower, though Fast Breeders always make
more fissile material as they have better
neutron economy, which is a plus for Uranium-Plutonium
over Thorium-Uranium.
And while these are small but not super small,
there are other technologies which might allow
even tinier ones.
As an example in our Death Rays episode I
mentioned how a neutron reflective substance
would be great for making neutron beams, which
was our lead candidate for a solid death ray,
and that same sort of material or metamaterial,
if we found one, would utterly alter the fission
landscape and start letting us contemplate
man-portable reactors, maybe even pocket-sized
stuff, and there are other technologies that
might permit similar advantages for thorium.
So thorium holds a lot of promise and might
have other chances to shine as other new technologies
emerge.
Though of course the reverse is true too;
we’re only one miracle technology away from
working fusion, or ultra-cheap space-based
solar panels, or extremely high-performing
batteries.
Is there a future for Thorium?
I think so, I think the path forward for humanity
for this century at least is to rely on a
mix of nuclear and solar as our two principal
power sources – though not exclusive, just
principal.
In that context I think with a bit of work
Thorium MSRs like LFTR offer one of the better
routes for rapidly mass producing and deploying
these reactors in the longer term, maybe for
replacing the reactors we already have with
safer options.
They may not be the miracle power source many
claim, partially because we have so many other
impressive power options getting explored
and prototyped too, but they do offer a lot
of advantages.
In the end, an economically abundant and ecologically
safe power source would be a miracle all by
itself, and while we can debate if other power
sources might be as good or better in that
regard as Thorium, there is no doubt Thorium
could fill that role.
So the future of thorium might be a bright
one, and if it is, it will make for a bright
future for humanity.
If you’re looking to learn more about nuclear
energy and nuclear reactors, a hands on approach
is always best but with radioactive materials
we need to be a bit more metaphorical about
handson, and there’s some excellent lessons
on those topics in Brilliant’s Course Physics
of the Everyday.
I want to stress that though because hands
on learning and interactive learning, are
simply the best approach to learning a topic,
any topic, and Brilliant is a website and
app built off the principle of active problem
solving — because it takes more to learn
something than just watching it — to really
learn something, you have to do it.
Over the last year, Brilliant has built a
whole new platform for their courses that
takes interactivity to the next level.
To see examples of that, check out their courses
on Pre-Algebra, Mathematical Fundamentals,
Algorithm Fundamentals, and the newly released
course on Scientific Thinking, with many more
under construction.
They are simply the best online learning platform
I’ve ever seen for Math, Science, and Computer
Science, and there’s no secret to why: You
learn best while doing and solving in real-time,
not by long lectures or memorising formulas
and facts, and Brilliant understands that
and has something for everybody — whether
you want to start at the basics of math, science,
and computer science, or go straight to advanced
material.
If you'd like to join me and a community of
8 million learners and educators today, click
the link in the episode description down below
or visit: brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
So I recently had the chance to give a presentation
on Human-Machine Teaming at MIT Lincoln Labs
and that was a fun and exciting honor to speak
to that group as well as to pick their brains
for more information.
Preparing for that as well as the feedback
from the Q&A afterward has given us some episode
topics, and next week we’ll have the first
of those episodes, Human-Machine Teaming,
and the second, Criminal AI, will be out toward
the end of October.
In a somewhat similar vein, we often discuss
the difficulty of hiding civilization or even
spacecraft in regard to the Fermi Paradox,
and in three weeks we’ll dive into that
in detail in Fermi Paradox Hidden Civilizations
but before that we’ll have our mid-month
scifi Sunday episode on Stealth Spaceships
on September 12.
Then we’ll celebrate the 7th anniversary
of our original episode on Megastructures
with a look at Megastructure Death on September
16th.
Then we’ll close the Month out by asking
if it is possible for a civilization to exist
without money and what that might look like.
Now if you want to make sure you get notified
when those episodes come out, make sure subscribe
to the channel, and if you enjoyed the episode,
don’t forget to hit the like button and
share it with other.
If you’d like to help support future episodes,
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website,
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode
description below, along with all of our various
social media forums where you can get updates
and chat with others about the concepts in
the episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
