A key criticism of our search for extraterrestrial 
intelligence, or SETI, is that we might be looking  
in the wrong places. The wrong type of stars 
or planets, or that we should be investigating  
sightings here on Earth. But what if the easiest 
place to find aliens is to look in the mirror?
So today is our monthly Sci-Fi Sunday here on 
SFIA, where we look at concepts better known  
from sci-fi than science and ask how realistic 
they are or if science allows any pathway to a  
given technology or situation. And today we 
are also making a long-awaited return to our  
Alien Civilizations Series, as it’s been over 
40 episodes since our last entry in the series,  
Hungry Aliens, back in the spring. So, I thought 
it was past time for a return, and when one of our  
audience members suggested this to me, I didn’t 
even put it in one of our audience image polls,  
I just stuck it right on the schedule, because 
it’s a topic that’s long overdue. Because there’s  
very few topics that come up in regard to aliens 
more often than that we are in some way related  
to them, that we’re a lost colony or that they 
visited us and bred with us, or that they’re  
doing it now to create some hybrid race, and 
we will discuss those all today and more.. 
Now our Alien Civs Series is a somewhat tongue in 
cheek twin to our Fermi Paradox series, as what  
we do in Alien Civs is mostly to take a proposed 
behavior of aliens and try to figure out why they  
would be doing it, and if a given motivation 
might have easier approaches. For instance,  
an alien invader might want Earth’s resources, 
aliens wanting Earth’s mineral wealth or water  
supply pops up a lot as plot motivation in sci-fi 
but doesn’t make any sense when there are so many  
more easily accessed or abundant supplies. And 
since astronomy tell us, very emphatically,  
that those supplies are still around us in every 
direction, it would seem like an invader would  
have chosen to bypass several rivers and lakes 
and unguarded jewelry stores in order to come  
to a small oasis to steal a tiny pond’s worth of 
water and the cheap pair of gold-plated earrings  
one resident had. From that we deduce that if 
aliens were invading Earth for some resource, it  
would be because they wanted something only Earth 
had, like unique biological specimens or art. 
Of course, they could just park in orbit and 
say “Hey earthling, we’ll trade you a digital  
copy of all your art and literature for this 
clunky old fusion reactor design of ours. Also,  
we have a couple other technologies we’ll file 
patents on and use the cash to fund an embassy  
and a bunch of biologists to collect samples 
for us. Deal?” and we’d be making that deal so  
fast they would think we had FTL, even if 
they were demanding the physical contents  
of the Smithsonian and Louvre as part of trade.
It’s a good deal since they can also presumably  
take it by force, unless there’s other big actors 
on the galactic stage who’d get them if they got  
us. There’s always the option of aliens among 
us too, that they’re hiding here, and decided  
to take over, as we see with Skrulls and Nick Fury 
in the recent Disney version of Secret Invasion.  
There’s definitely some plot holes there in the 
reasoning but one could imagine aliens sneaking  
to hide among Earth as a protected planet from 
some enemy that hunted them and over time just  
melded into the population. Indeed, their disguise 
might be rigorous, shape might be fluid in some  
more advanced or post-biological civilizations 
and they might be perfectly fine with cramming  
their brains into cloned up human bodies. They 
might not be planning to steal our planet either,  
and view themselves as paying their rent by 
slowly feeding us technology, possibly with the  
ulterior motive of turning us into an eventual 
ally against whoever forced them into hiding. 
That deal and the one I just mentioned 
before it of tech for cultural data,  
would both be examples of Technological 
Uplifting, giving a primitive species more  
advanced technology. Our other two types are 
Physiological Uplifting, which would include  
something like giving a critter some opposable 
thumbs, so they can manipulate objects better,  
and Neurological Uplifting, which is making them 
smarter or otherwise adjusting their brain to  
be more suited for civilization. More debatable 
examples might be altering their genetics so they  
bred fewer kids and didn’t rapidly overpopulate 
or were less aggressive so they didn’t go to war  
with each other constantly – or other aliens 
once they became spacefaring themselves. For  
more on the concept see our two-part episode 
on Uplifting with John Michael Godier, or David  
Brin’s amazing scifi classic, the Uplift Saga.
And this falls into another major category of  
reasons aliens might be coming here. That they are 
interested in us specifically, or because they’re  
chasing someone who came here either because 
they were interested in us or to hide among the  
primitives. One example of all-of-the-above would 
be an alien scientist coming here because it was  
curious about the primitive apes a probe spotted, 
and wanted to experiment on us and uplift us,  
and its own species was coming here hunting 
for him, or it, maybe because they wanted to  
give it a medal, or put it in front of firing 
squad, or possibly both at once. For the crime  
of tampering with a poor primitive species and 
making them into mutants, or, alternatively,  
for creating a competitor race they now have 
to decide if they need to kill off or not. 
Or maybe they think humans look 
pretty good and want to get to  
know them better, if you know what I mean.
History or mythology, and modern sighting  
testimony, is full of accounts of beings on 
high coming here to have kids with humans,  
the example of the Nephilim from Genesis 
being perhaps best known, along with Zeus,  
who virtually every major character in Greek 
Mythology seems to be a son or daughter of,  
but I’m not sure if I know of a single religion 
that doesn’t have half-human demigods in it. 
One notion is that these are literally true, 
and angels or gods bred with humans, after all  
there are a ton of witnesses and claims, so surely 
they can’t all be wrong, and while I don’t agree,  
that is nonetheless a reasonable stance 
to take. People claim something a lot,  
it is reasonable to consider that it might 
be true. Another perspective is that these  
are so prevalent in mythology not because they 
are real, but because the human mind likes to  
ascribe ever more mighty deeds to its heroes 
as the stories grow, and many a leader finds  
it useful to claim godhood. So, you get a pantheon 
built around this growing pool of quasi-historical  
figures that were not superhuman in that way, 
but which people believe were, and again this is  
reasonable perspective to take and thus not one 
that it’s surprising to find popped up all over  
the world in many different times and cultures.
Now the third option, and one of the points of  
interest for today, is very appropriately a 
hybrid of the first two, in that’s assuming  
the beings from on high are aliens from outer 
space rather than a supernatural being from a  
higher place of reality. Or sometimes both, and 
the line between very high tech and supernatural  
powers can get blurry, as with Arthur C. Clarke’s 
famous observation that any sufficiently advanced  
technology is indistinguishable from 
magic. And on this show, we refer to  
technology like that as Clarketech, in his honor.
And again, this is a reasonable enough position.  
Science has inclined us to expect natural 
answers are the norm and the whole point of  
the Fermi Paradox is that life arising naturally 
is probably normal and the Universe is so huge  
and ancient there’s probably more ancient galactic 
empires throughout it than trees in a forest. Or  
maybe grains of sand on a beach, as the Universe 
is really, really big, and really, really old.  
If they are around and were around back when 
humanity was younger, there is no surprise  
some of them might have visited our planet and 
gotten interested in us. That their behaviors and  
actions would seem strange and majestic and be the 
stuff of stories and legends to later generations. 
So again, all three points are reasonable with 
coherent logical arguments at their foundations,  
and we have no way of disproving any of them, but 
we can start asking some questions… and some have  
surprising answers that can be used to support 
the idea that aliens might have mixed in with us. 
First off, the big one is that you 
and I couldn’t breed with an animal,  
let alone a tree, so the idea that some alien 
evolved on another planet might be able to mix  
genes with us is absurd. Except, it isn’t. I 
don’t mean because of convergent evolution,  
we looked at that in its own episode two years 
back and while the basic premise of convergent  
evolution has its strong points, this extends 
to ideas like aliens also developing eyeballs  
or fingers and thumbs. It doesn’t imply it’s any 
more compatible with our biology than we are with  
an octopus just because we both have eyeballs, or 
that a program would run on two different computer  
operating systems without any modification.
This needs a few caveats though. First,  
we don’t really know how alien reproduction 
works, and most lifeforms on this planet do  
not use sexual reproduction. They use mitosis, 
the organism grows and eventually divides itself  
and all its internal bits and pieces, in a 
process that’s more like cellular divorce  
than marriage. There’s a lot of ways and reasons 
two cells might come to mix DNA – or whatever they  
use for that purpose – much as why they might 
band together into multicellular organisms or  
communities. One path might be to grab a cell 
and hijack it, replacing its DNA with yours,  
and it would be plausible enough that this could 
result in a mix-and-match stalemate where hybrids  
pop up too, or that on same alien world the way 
life works there might allow for large crossings  
of genetic data, so that half-human half-animal 
hybrids were very common on their world. 
They also might have more parasitic approaches 
to reproduction, not just laying eggs in another  
organism like a wasp does, but something more 
elaborate such as an organism that just laid  
an egg in the head of any large animal and it 
grew into a new brain there. Or even something  
like a second lobe of their brain and over time 
this evolves to be more symbiotic and more like  
neurological uplifting than body stealing. The 
organism remembers its early life in a haze, and  
begins growing smarter, in a case reminiscent of 
Algernon or Charlie Gordon from the story Flowers  
for Algernon, though without the sad ending.
Our first reaction to a case like this is disgust  
at a parasite, but let us instead contemplate a 
hypothetical alien, the Gordonites, whose race way  
back in the early days was nothing but parasites 
but as they began getting more clever to handle  
their various prey getting smarter at evading or 
neutralizing them, they developed a strong ability  
at empathy to help predict their prey and fit 
in among them covertly. Over time they grew more  
civilized, and began caring for their prey and 
raising them, much as humans did with livestock  
and beasts of burden, particularly with those 
beasts of burden. Eventually it got a lot closer  
to a pet relationship too, because every Gordonite 
dimly recalls their own time as a little alien  
horse or puppy frolicking around the mushroom 
forest and pasture of their homeworld before  
their Gordonite spore was implanted and grew them 
into a smart alien horse or dog, one that often  
cared for and help tend their youthful 
companions who weren’t chosen for pairing. 
And the Gordonites came to view themselves 
as doing those critters a serious favor since  
all of them used to be one of those critters. 
So, when the Gordonites get to space and start  
encountering primitive aliens, and discussing 
whether or not uplifting primitives is ethical,  
it’s a no brainer for them, time to 
give these aliens some bigger brains. 
Now they may simply use their vast knowledge of 
genetics and other sciences to do this since it  
wouldn’t be terribly likely they could jump into 
any body, no matter how alien its physiology,  
and just hijack or merge with it. A giant 
squid has a donut-shaped brain for instance,  
arachnids keep part of their brain in their 
legs, and it would seem a stretch to imagine  
any organism could become that versatile in 
puppeteering entirely new body architecture.  
Possible though, but more importantly, humans 
don't have the ability to magically grow hair  
for cold climates or longer arms for reaching 
high objects. We build tools and principally  
around enhancing activities important to us.
The Gordonites entire technology base is  
founded on making them better and faster and 
more versatile at hijacking or integrating  
into a strange host organism. One of their big 
quasi-historical or mythological figure is Beluga,  
the Gordonite who first figured out 
how to integrate into sea mammals of  
their world and from which all the submarine 
Gordonites claim descent. There is also Cetus,  
the Gordonite who first integrated into one of 
their big flying sky whales that could migrate  
back and forth to the large and close moon 
their planet has as an effective double planet,  
and Cetus is regarded as the Gordonite equivalent 
of a combination of Icarus and Neil Armstrong. 
Those sky whales and their cousins had carried 
simple life to every larger planet and icy body  
in their native solar system over a billion 
years since they evolved, and as a result,  
the Gordonites’ first forays into their 
own solar system found countless examples  
of simple ecologies with very diverse animal 
life in them, often with animals big enough for  
them to try integrating with. A lot of times that 
wasn’t possible, and more so as they got to other  
planets, but to them the normal reproduction 
method was not inherently special or romantic,  
so it was just a fine in their eyes to study 
that life and find a way to change their DNA  
a little to result in a locally natural 
intelligence arising. And some of them,  
using their superior tech, either built android 
bodies for themselves or hijacked a recently dead  
proto-human to fit in and refine their art.
A symbolic and metaphorical integration. And  
if early Gordonites seemed superhuman, that 
was merely all the personal tech they have,  
same as any modern human might compared to a 
primitive. Unfortunately, for the Gordonites, the  
process they used here was not terribly effective 
or stable, and because of how fluid their own body  
shape tends to be from hosting inside hundreds 
of different large animal types, they don’t  
standardize their personal tech much in favor of 
custom jobs. They never can buy clothes off the  
rack, so to speak, or gadgets, it’s all tailored. 
So when the already delayed messages from the  
Gordonite homeworld, 1000 light years away, 
arrived telling of a large schism and civil war,  
the Gordonites here were on their own and couldn’t 
reproduce because they only had those androids and  
revivified bodies, the process they were using 
on proto humans was making those proto-humans  
smarter, not actually making more Gordonites 
or humans smart enough for technology yet. 
They weren’t very numerous and slowly died off and 
when their home civilization finally got itself  
put back together again and investigated this 
planet, more than a hundred thousand years later,  
they weren’t too sure what they were 
looking at and what’s more, the empire  
they had formed had broken into an awful lot 
of factions, including some that, like humans,  
were only spiritual descendants and not really 
interested in any integrated empire with them,  
but nobody wants an interstellar war, 
that’s just a nightmare scenario all around,  
so they have a lot treaties and some give Earth a 
bit of blanket protection. So, some factions are  
on Earth trying to tinker with our DNA to make us 
compatible hosts, some are interfering with that,  
many are pursuing other agendas entirely. 
One of the factions’ intelligence agencies  
pronounced the confused and conspiratorial 
situation on Earth “Even weirder and more  
convoluted than the conspiracy theories they 
have about Unidentified saucer shaped Skywhales  
crewed by little gray bipedal Gordonites”.
This gives us a good reminder, as absurd as a  
half-human, half-alien character like Spock or 
Deanna Troi might seem in a normal biological  
context, with sufficient technology you can 
brute-force make that happen. Even if your  
half-human, half-tentacle-monster love-child 
is the equivalent of an android using an  
artificial fusion or reimagining of human and 
tentacle-monster mind and body that can hatch  
from it’s techno-womb and latch onto mom’s spine 
and brain stem for safety and nourishment and  
nurturing, like all good little tentacle monsters 
do, till it's old enough to go to daycare. 
As I like to say, the main point of technology 
is to be able to have your cake and eat it  
too. Something the Gordonites are fond of 
saying too, though the literal translation  
of their versions is about brains not cake… 
but to each his, her, or its own, I suppose. 
The thing is, while I would have dismissed this 
in past times as technically possible but rare,  
one thing the internet has taught us, in its full 
and traumatizing glory, is that tastes vary. And  
while we wouldn’t normally have to worry much 
about the dozen or so folks on our whole planet  
who might happen to find marrying a giant leech 
or starfish compelling, the situation changes  
drastically when we start adding in post-scarcity, 
post-biological, or Kardashev-scale civilizations  
into the mix. When you have a star system 
of quintillions of people, not billions,  
those dozen or so folks proportionally become 
12 billion in number, half again as many  
people as currently alive. That’s definitely 
a big fan club and funding base for going to  
visit earlier Earth and meet some Neanderthals.
So too, post-scarcity civilizations are those  
that permit someone to decide the following, 
instead of dressing as a dragon for Halloween,  
they’re going to have their brain surgically 
implanted into an artificial one for the day  
instead. Post-biological ones are the kind where 
someone might dwell in virtual worlds in which  
normal physics, let alone biology, doesn’t 
even apply. So you start mixing in all those  
together and our normal assumptions move a bit. 
You may already have a weirder collection of  
humans or human-descendant entities in just 
one solar system than anything you’d find in  
an entire universal catalog of critters 
who made it to human-level intelligence  
by their planet’s normal Darwinian evolution.
What’s more, interstellar space is so big and  
slow to travel that you are almost bound to have 
colonies near some other critters’ territory that  
are pretty focused on those critters. If 
you’re near the Klingons, those colonies  
closest to them might be mostly indifferent, 
with some hating them, and some loving them,  
and none of that really being a true fringe 
element because their proximity keeps it forefront  
in minds. In that regard, finding out that a lot 
of anthropologists wanted to get implanted into  
androids or bio-duplicates of the primitive 
aliens on some newly discovered world and  
eventually went native is just not that hard to 
believe. Indeed we see a parallel case to that in  
Adrian Tchaikovsky’s excellent novel Children 
of Ruin from his Children of Time series. 
There’s many more scenarios for this sort 
of mixing behavior. They may even have vast  
numbers of space habitats or virtual worlds back 
in their home system that were some mix of nature  
preserve and historical reenactment of our world, 
possibly massively exceeding Earth’s own size too. 
In the end, this really is a sequence of 
alien behavior on Earth that is not really  
implausible. So, what’s the hole in the reasoning?
Well there’s quite a few of the normal variety  
though most can be answered plausibly. But they 
too get problematic and in conjunction make it  
a tough sell. For instance, when we ask what 
happened to the aliens who visited us long ago,  
where’s their big empire that should only have 
grown in size since, it can get tempting to point  
out that simply assuming aliens are very rare 
is no stranger than thinking they are extinct.  
But in this case, you’re already assuming 
aliens were rare, as if they were common,  
someone new would just show up and visit even if 
the prior folks died off or ascended or whatever,  
and now you’re stacking on the additional 
improbability that they managed to wreck their  
whole interstellar civilization, or get wrecked by 
someone who then disappeared too, and we discussed  
how unlikely that would be to happen in our Fermi 
Paradox: Fallen Empires episode two months back. 
So you’re replacing a seemingly improbable set of 
circumstances with that same set of circumstances  
plus another one on top of it, life is very rare 
and dies off a lot, but not until it’s spread out  
a bunch to go visit and guide other worlds for 
whole centuries at a time. Remember our three  
default perspectives on the Fermi Paradox beyond 
intelligent life just being insanely rare is that  
there isn’t a paradox, aliens are hanging out 
here now, or there isn’t a paradox, space travel  
and colonization is very hard, or there isn’t a 
paradox, intelligent life just doesn’t occur much  
and blows itself up before it can colonize much.
For this sort of theory, that humans are an alien  
colony or hybrid, it requires all of those, 
and stretches each further. Life is very rare  
but space travel is practical, enough to let 
someone reasonably near us in our own galaxy  
have visited Earth in a big way, and yet so prone 
to blowing itself up that it did, and blew itself  
up on every world it had colonies or outposts, 
but not until after being spacefaring for many  
centuries at least. Super self-destructive 
in inclination and capability but lucked  
out for millenia. Possible but really improbable.
Now an alternative is that we are aliens but from  
4 billion years ago, and either simple microbes 
permeate space in a Panspermia scenario,  
seeding worlds naturally, or some 
alien visited us 4 billion years ago  
and accidentally vented some microbes who then 
colonized the world, rather than those aliens. 
The issue here is that the Universe has been 
growing more hospitable to life in general as  
it aged, with more heavy elements and planets 
forming, and with each of those planets having  
more time for life to begin and to develop. 
So to assume someone was flying around the  
galaxy in spaceships 4 billion years ago is 
fine, but then it strongly implies we should  
have exponentially more of them popping up since 
then, who all also do space travel. Which again is  
requiring a sequence of events that is stacking 
up unrelated improbable scenarios in a way that  
Occam’s Razor will tend to cut to shreds.
Though to be fair, we have lot of question  
marks in our fossil record that take for granted 
that a given hazy step did actually occur, when  
in reality it might have been life was here and 2 
billion years ago a clumsy xenobiologist studying  
it forgot to sterilize their suit and introduced 
alien microbes to the existing environment,  
wiping out everything that was here back when 
life was still primitive enough that we couldn’t  
really show a definitive linkage between this 
existing terrestrial amoeba and some utterly alien  
microbe of a similar general design, microbial 
convergent evolution is reasonably plausible,  
especially when that convergence need not 
be much more than the general shape it  
had and it’s approximate chemical composition.
We don’t have any DNA from anything much older  
than our own recorded history, so technically 
an alien war might have flat out sterilized  
the planet and the victors felt bad about 
the collateral damage that they had their  
scientists’ guesstimate the ecosystem and 
biology from video clips and bones. Do not  
assume such an environment was even pyrotechnic, 
as we discussed in Fallen Empires, they might have  
unleashed a swarm intelligence that literally 
surgically disassembled anything big enough to  
hold a sentient intelligence - which might be a 
bacteria if we’re talking post-biological life. 
But I think if they were in that league, 
it’s not that they couldn’t have done that,  
it is more that they are probably good enough to 
genuinely put humpty-dumpty back together again,  
since they probably were transmitting extreme 
levels of details to command and control during  
the process, where even the take out of single 
rat – or it’s proto-mammalian ancestor – might  
have gigabytes of reports on what went down.
Which raises the option that they might have  
done that rebuilding in a virtual world. 
As we’ve often noted, if you’re already  
post-biological yourself and don’t hate 
other aliens, just don’t want to share the  
Universe with them in a way that requires 
you constantly looking over your shoulder,  
you can just murder them all, copy their brains, 
and convert their planet into a giant computer  
able to run their simulated world and many more 
for trillions of years. It’s not really ethical  
but it’s a strategically decent move and a lot 
less evil than just killing them. Or maybe you’ve  
got the tech to dump them into a pocket Universe 
rather than a computer simulation, arguably the  
same difference. And if you even feel a need to 
justify the apparently empty universe they see,  
you can just tweak a few astronomical details 
to make the Fermi Paradox seem less paradoxical. 
In the end there’s no issue with motivation here 
being implausible, as we usually have with the  
topics of the Alien Civilizations series, it’s 
just that these options all require the aliens  
to have shown up and done stuff and left, 
and no one to have come by since then. Maybe  
they set us up well as children they loved but 
wanted to let us finish growing up on our own,  
though that would seem a stretch since that 
analogy is implying abandoning your kids at  
some point is a healthy choice, but maybe they 
left us a big inheritance, a small cluster of  
stars of our of own to settle nearby and 
a million star fortresses concealed around  
the solar system to protect us from predators.
Still sounds like bad parenting though. Of course,  
they could be keeping their distance for 
fear of getting hit with a species-scale  
paternity suit in the galactic courts, they 
owed us money, and a hundred thousand years  
of compound interest and late fees might 
bring down even the mightiest star empire.
Speaking of Star empires and getting 
out into the cosmos, a moment ago I was  
talking about how things might look if some 
advanced civilization had seeded our planet  
at some point and the idea of seeding life 
and seeing it grow all the way up to being  
a civilization is one that’s always intrigued me.
If it intrigues you too, there’s an excellent and  
free-to-play science-based game called Cell to 
Singularity that walks you up the evolutionary  
and tech trees from that first moment all the 
way through a technological singularity and  
settling neighboring worlds, and I’m particularly 
glad to say that Cell to Singularity’s developers  
are part of our audience, so it also explores 
many concepts and themes we’ve discussed and  
the game is accurate and based on real science 
and research, even though it has wonderful sci  
fi theme too. Explore from Early Earth out to 
among the stars, in a game that fits easily  
into your busy day and again is free to play. 
Try it out on Steam or on your phone, available  
on iOS and Google Play, and start building your 
civilization up from Cell to Singularity today.
So that will wrap us up for another Sci Fi Sunday 
and next month’s episode will continue our look  
at alien civilizations with Nihilistic aliens, 
civilizations that may have decided that purpose  
in life and free will didn’t exist. But we have 
plenty of episodes before then, starting this  
Thursday with how to build domes on Mars, and 
if we should compared to underground habitats,  
and we will see the construction options and weigh 
the pros and Cons next Thursday, November 16th,  
2023. Then we’ll examine the astronomy of Double 
Planets, where the big object in the sky isn’t  
a moon but a much larger and bluer and greener 
planet, and ask if life might be able to arise  
on such worlds and migrate between them. Then our 
monthly livestream Q&A is canceled this month,  
and indeed next month will be our last Livestream 
for the foreseeable future, but we will still  
be having a short episode that day on Space 
Hygiene, our most recent poll-winning topic,  
before closing the Month out on November 30th 
with Agriworlds, and a discussion of how you  
could farm an entire planet. And if you didn’t 
catch it already, our feature length episode,  
the Fermi Paradox Compendium of Terms 
and Solutions came out earlier this week.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
