This Episode is brought to you by Squarespace
We now know pretty much all we need to know
about aging in order to develop medicines
that can keep people truly youthful in old
age, and if only we realized that, we’d
be doing that development a whole lot faster.
We often discuss the impact that a longer
human lifespan might have on future societies,
and even did an episode devoted entirely to
Life Extension and its impacts on civilization
if we get it working.
Today though, we’ll be more focused on the
science of aging and how we might actually
treat it.
There’s always a lot of skepticism toward
Life Extension, which is a big problem when
discussing and researching the topic.
Although, it isn’t quite right to call it
skepticism, because that’s not quite what
it is.
Pessimism and cynicism often masquerade as
proper skepticism these days but it’s not
really that either.
Some technologies enjoy more optimism then
they probably merit, others less, but for
life extension it’s more akin to an attitude
of fear to contemplate it.
Taken apart, almost no one’s view of aging
is grounded in the details of the medical
challenges required to develop therapies against
aging, but a built-in acceptance that growing
old and dying is somehow natural and necessary.
People, sometimes even experts in medicine,
simply wave the challenge aside as a problem
we can't tackle, or not for a long time.
This makes it a good topic for us here at
SFIA, since we often deal with problems and
challenges of the distant future, but something
we’ll see today is that in this case, life
extension isn’t something of the far future,
or even of the future at all.
It’s just an extension into the next frontier
of things we’ve been successfully doing
for quite some time.
We have to understand that the topic tends
to invite blanket statements and proclamations
abouts its viability because aging itself
is quite a blanket term.
Many of the concepts we associate with old
age, are no longer viewed as natural causes
of death, even though this is likely a mistake.
We’ll be looking at Strategies for Engineered
Negligible Senescence of organisms, which
is quite a mouthful, so it’s abbreviated
to SENS.
What it means is researching ways to repair
the damage to the cells and functional molecules
in our bodies that drives us into disease
and debility in old age.
We’ll be covering seven main categories
of SENS, all suffixed by that term, SENS,
and I’ll introduce them in turn as we go.
Cancer is viewed by many as the primary scourge
of humanity going forward.
Many folks in our current world die from cancers
or its associated complications, so let’s
get that big one out of the way first.
Cancer is addressed under the heading of OncoSENS,
which is derived from the same Greek word
as “oncology”, a branch of medicine that
deals with the prevention, diagnosis, and
treatment of cancer.
Cells, to be part of complex multicellular
organisms, need to replicate in a very controlled
way, and that includes dying when they break
down.
Cell senescence, the deterioration of a cell
to the point at which it can no longer successfully
divide, is one form of cellular aging.
On the other hand, cancer is where a cell
begins to divide uncontrollably.
This can happen at any age, but it grows increasingly
likely with time and exposure to certain risk
factors.
This means that if we extend the average human
lifespan we’re likely to see an increase
in mortality resulting from cancer.
So addressing cancer is part of the equation
for achieving life extension.
Our bodies already do this too, so we just
need to help them out.
One of the mechanisms we’ve evolved for
fighting cancer is Telomere shortening.
Your DNA has non-coding end caps on it called
telomeres that get shorter each time a cell
divides; this process acts like a fuse or
timer against mutation After a cell has divided
100 times or so, it is probably too mutated
and damaged to make further copies of, so
it gets shut down, replicative cell senescence.
This end cap can begin longer or shorter,
which is usually associated with cell-type.
Longer ones divide more times before shutting
down, which has both advantages and disadvantages.
Our reproductive cells and adult stem cells
have an enzyme called Telomerase that builds
telomere length back up in them, otherwise
every species with this timer would just die
off.
Unfortunately, this is a double-edged sword
since cell senescence is only a defense against
cancer in the short term.
And longer lived cells have a higher risk
of becoming mutated to ignore signals to senesce,
which can actually promote cancer in the long
term.
Dealing with these mutants will be one of
the strategies we discuss later.
However, there are two key concepts that need
to be addressed before we get into too much
more detail here.
First, some folks are skeptical as to whether
or not stopping or slowing aging is an ethically
and morally right thing to do.
Such skepticism is, however, unjustified when
we realize that the so-called diseases of
old age like cancer are actually byproducts
of aging.
For example, cancer is part of aging and we
treat that, and should too.
I don’t want to die from cancer and I don’t
know anyone who does, or who doesn’t favor
treating it; and most people would feel the
same way about the other age-related problems
which we’ll be discussing in this episode.
There will be a lot of consequences to our
civilization if we master aging, not all of
them good.
We discussed that more in the Life Extension
episode last year and in other episodes too.
But that decision has already been made, in
the sense that we extend life every time we
give a treatment, perform a surgery, or administer
therapy.
The second key point relates not just to cancer,
but to all medicine.
Virtually every aspect of medicine is designed
to either extend life or improve our comfort.
As we age those become harder to manage and
generally we deteriorate faster if we’re
not managing our health as we go.
Again, we all take as a given that you should
actively seek to maintain your health throughout
life, with the intention of living longer
and enjoying a better quality of life in the
process.
So even if one argues that fighting aging
may be ethically dubious, it would appear
to be a choice we already make every day.
For all of our general skepticism about prolonging
the human lifespan or even extending it indefinitely,
we have consistently embraced every technology
and practice which has been demonstrated to
extend how long we live.
Well, almost every practice.
While available data indicates that castration
may significantly extend our lifespan, not
many gentlemen would be interested in that
option.
So it’s also good to remember that quality
of life is as important as duration of our
lives, and the various methods we’re discussing
today are intended to extend our vitality
too, not just how long we’ll live.
For the most part, modern medical practices
are not just extending how long people live
on average, but how long they are healthy
and vigorous too.
This new medicine will be unambiguously good
for our vitality, since it will extend our
lives precisely because it keeps us young
and healthy, thereby forestalling the diseases
and debilities of aging.
For the most part, twentieth century medicine
drastically reduced causes of mortality early
in life.
This had the effect of significantly increasing
the average lifespan.
However, since people were living longer,
we saw an increase in many, previously uncommon
forms of late-life mortality.
As a result, in the past several decades medical
science began focusing on the treatment and
prevention of geriatric illnesses.
While this doesn’t raise the average lifespan
quite as much as preventing fetal mortality,
it leads to generally healthier older people.
This ties into a concept we usually call Longevity
Takeoff or Escape Velocity.
The notion that the lifespan keeps increasing
a little bit here and there, until eventually
you have people being born who will not die
of old age because we’re improving things
throughout their life, extending that life,
until you get a generation who never quite
dies and lives long enough to enjoy something
regenerative.
A lot of us feel we may have already hit that
point, and that there are people alive today
who will live to see an end to aging, or at
least vastly extended lifespans of centuries
or millennia.
So I mentioned various strategies for studying
and fighting biological aging, again SENS,
and we already covered one, cancer, or OncoSENS.
But what are the others?
The next we’ll hit, amusingly, is addressing
issues with symbiotic bacteria-like organisms
living in the cells of our own bodies, mitochondria.
We tend to think of bacteria as nasty invasive
diseases, and often they are, but not in this
case.
Mitochondria are like a disease we all catch
from our mothers.
It originated as an entirely separate organism,
with its own DNA, or mtDNA, which is separate
from the DNA of the rest of the cell.
Some distant ancestor of most complex life
absorbed them somewhere way back in the early
days of evolution.
They are the powerhouses of our cellular metabolism
and we couldn’t survive without them.
However, they’re vulnerable to damage, especially
from oxidation, and their DNA is not well
shielded like our own.
Irritatingly, like any organism, they produce
waste, and this waste includes free radicals,
typically an oxygen atom wandering around
looking for a new molecular dance partner.
Oxygen, despite its usefulness for metabolism,
is very reactive and does a lot of damage
to cells.
Indeed, for much of the history of life on
Earth, it was a toxic byproduct of almost
all life, and organisms in the primordial
oceans generated so much of it that two-and-a-half
billion years ago they poisoned themselves,
resulting in the extinction of most species.
The most successful of the survivors began
using oxygen in metabolic processes, but that
doesn’t change how reactive or dangerous
it can be to life.
Those little oxygen atoms slam around inside
a cell till they bond with something, which
can damage stuff like the mitochondria’s
own unshielded DNA, causing degradation and
mutation.
Incidentally, this issue with oxygen and free
radicals in general are why antioxidants are
often recommended these days.
Unfortunately, they don’t reach the places
like the mitochondria, where free radicals
are being generated, in time to stop them
from doing damage.
But the fact that so many people take these
pills hoping that they will work is another
reminder that while it's still in the early
stages, much like cybernetics, we’re already
embracing the goal of life extension.
For cybernetics, one of our other options
for combating aging, that ship also already
sailed when we started embracing prosthetics,
pacemakers, cochlear implants, and arguably
even tooth fillings.
I say that because, if you look at the mummies
of the ancient Egyptians, tooth abscesses
have been implicated in many of their deaths.
Progress on these technologies can often get
ignored because existing successful examples
are now considered mundane and everyday.
So the mitochondria start getting damaged
and when they do, they produce less energy
and enter into an abnormal metabolic state,
and they and their mutant offspring eventually
take over the aging cell and make it toxic
to its neighbors.
The notion that this may be the major cause
of aging in people is generally called the
Mitochondrial Free Radical theory of aging.
We can’t be sure yet if it is the principle
cause, but it’s certainly one of them and
fixing this problem is called MitoSENS in
the SENS schema.
If we can find a way to replace damaged mitochondria,
or even just kill the mutants, so non-mutants
can reproduce instead, it’s possible that
we could see a massive benefit to our lifespans
and health.
This treatment is making a lot of progress
too, on top of maybe being the most effective
at slowing aging, and it is one of the reasons
for a boom in optimism on the subject in recent
years.
mtDNA contains instructions for building just
13 proteins mitochondria need, but historically
had about a thousand such genes.
Those genes still exist, and evolution has
apparently been slowly moving them into the
more safe nucleus, away from the damaging
free radical production spots.
So, given time - a lot of time admittedly
- this might have been solved on its own.
But it suggests a pathway to a solution which
is already in progress.
There’s no magic here, we just identify
the problem, free radicals causing a cascade
of damage to mitochondria who produce them.
How do we limit their accumulation, keep mitochondria
protected from them, or remove any mitochondria
that mutate to produce more free radicals?
Channel regulars are probably thinking nanobots
would be great for that, and indeed they would,
as well as the other problem areas identified
by SENS we’ll discuss, and its why I often
say nanotech almost instantly solves a lot
of our problems, much as commercial fusion
power does.
It’s just important to note that if we never
get those or they’re further off than we
might hope, we still have a ton of options
on the table that can be implemented with
biotechnologies that may be closer to hand.
Among these is the option of cleaning up the
junk inside of our cells.
Our bodies are pretty good at breaking down,
digesting, or removing stuff so it doesn’t
accumulate too much.
One of these cleanup mechanisms is the lysosome,
and we call this area of research LysoSENS.
Your lysosomes are very good at their job,
they’re basically big trash recyclers.
They use enzymes to digest stuff, but some
materials are resistant to these enzymes.
The approach suggested here would be to re-arm
them with additional enzymes.
We know which things our current lysosome
enzymes can’t handle, so we find enzymes
in other organisms that can handle them and
give them that ammunition.
And we know those enzymes exist since, if
they didn’t, we’d be ankle deep in such
waste products by now, left over from the
dead bodies of hundreds of millions of years
of life on earth.
We’ve also got some good early work on enzymes
to treat congenital diseases, like Gaucher’s,
caused by mutations that prevent victims from
degrading accumulated lysosomal wastes that
the rest of us already handle easily, via
enzyme replacement therapy, which is essentially
just giving them the missing enzyme in some
form able to penetrate a cell’s membrane,
enzymes they don’t happen to have.
The other junk is outside of cells, extracellular
waste.
The most well-known form of extracellular
waste is beta-amyloid, a web-like material
that forms plaques in the brains of patients
with Alzheimer's, and everyone else’s too,
just not as much.
It’s not just limited to mental degeneration:
other kinds of extracellular junk are related
to Type II Diabetes, certain kinds of heart
failure, and many other conditions.
Most of these extracellular bits of garbage
are amyloids; hence, we call this area AmyloSENS.
You’ll occasionally see people talk about
a maximum lifespan folks might have that gets
us all even if we survive everything else,
and this might be one of those causes.
We don’t have an awful lot of folks who
live past 110 years of age to build a nice
sample from, but there’s some decent indicators
most people who make it past 110 die from
senile cardiac amyloidosis, a disorder caused
by deposits of amyloid protein in the heart
tissue.
Needless to say we want to deal with amyloidosis,
it’s both a killer and a quality of life
issue.
Again there’s a lot of ways to potentially
clean up such garbage, same as there’s a
lot of ways to clean a clogged water or sewage
pipe.
You can manually clean a pipe, you can make
one that stuff sticks to less, you can flush
it with something that dissolves the build-up,
you can remove and replace the pipe, and so
on.
Unsurprisingly, our bodies already do have
a way of dealing with this, via our immune
systems, so one approach being looked at is
to simply augment our bodies’ existing immunological
clean-up system.
Our immune system goes after amyloids, and
we’d like to give them catalytic antibodies
to better break those amyloids down into manageable
bits.
This is one of the most promising new areas
of Alzheimer’s research and, if successful,
ought to be adaptable to other amyloids.
Several promising antibodies have already
been shown to remove such amyloids from the
brain in human clinical trials; we’re now
waiting to see what their effects are in keeping
the brain alive and healthy in Alzheimer’s
patients.
So we’ve hit OncoSens – cancer basically,
MitoSens – fixing our internal powerplants
so they stop trashing themselves when they
break down a bit, Lyso and AmyloSens, junk
removal and fighting ailments and conditions
like Macular Degeneration, and Alzheimer’s.
The next we’ll discuss is RepleniSENS.
Some of our cells either can’t be replaced
or do so very slowly.
The muscles in our heart as well as our skeletal
muscles are good examples of this.
Needless to say, we might be able to go the
machine or clone route here and give yourself
a new mechanical or cloned heart.
This would be a lot harder to do with something
like neurons however, which is where stem
cell research comes in.
Our pathways here though, in terms of current
research, are in the treatments of diseases
like Parkinson’s and continued improvements
with transplants, both for supply and rejection
concerns, our ideal organ replacement is one
that matches the original, and while a close
relative often fits that bill, you do better
with organs genetically identical to your
own.
It’s also worth remembering that even the
best cell therapy or regenerative medicine
won’t help if you get in an accident that
severely damages a major organ.
You might still have a youthful body when
you’re 100, but that’s a bit wasted if
you get stabbed in the kidney and we can’t
replace that because we haven’t got any
spares or you keep rejecting them.
Again, all medicine is life extension, and
being able to replace these organs or cells,
or slow down how quickly they die, is one
way to seriously extend average lifespans.
Of course, sometimes we want cells to die,
again part of the core issue of cancer or
OncoSens, but we also have ApoptoSENS.
Senescence is when a cell stops dividing like
it’s supposed to, but sometimes they just
stop dividing and don’t die either.
They’re basically dead wood, still taking
up space and nutrients, producing waste, but
not doing what they’re meant to.
If they were to die, a healthy cell of the
same type would divide to fill that spot.
However they just sit there, and need to be
removed.
Health problems caused by such cells include
joint degeneration, type II diabetes, and
aspects of cardiovascular disease and skin
aging… think about what happens to our skin
as we age, so research into this area could
be funded for cosmetic reasons.
Killing cells is easy of course.
But killing only specific cells and not other
ones, especially ones of the same type that
are healthy, is harder.
It’s probably easier than assassinating
bad mitochondria would be though, since whatever
you’re using can target a whole cell, and
it need not be something small enough to sneak
into a cell to go after mitochondria individually.
Options again are nanobots, specialized vaccines,
targeted viruses, specialized toxins that
bind only to non-functioning cells, and so
on.
Most excitingly, there are already drugs that
have been shown to selectively kill senescent
cells in animal studies, and one of these
has already begun human clinical testing.
Our last one is a bit tricky.
Our cells often need to link up and stay properly
meshed to each other using a web work of extracellular
proteins.
These either never get replaced and recycled,
or do so very slowly.
Functioning properly, they are responsible
for everything from giving the lenses of your
eyes or your arteries flexibility to keeping
your ligaments strong.
As they start to lose their elasticity, you
can get problems like increasingly rigid arteries
and higher blood pressure, not to mention
any resulting organ damage.
The problem is caused by these various connecting
and crosslinking proteins developing too many
connections, often by interacting with blood
sugar or other molecules floating about, but
the sugar gives us our last treatment name,
GlycoSENS.
Specifically in humans it appears to be a
molecule called Glucosepane, there were some
setbacks early in this area because lab rats
have a different and simpler molecule that
causes most of their equivalent issues, one
that can be broken up by medications more
easily than than the comparatively complex
glucosepane.
Options suggested thus far would be to find
a drug or enzyme that does it, or hit people
with large doses of a protein that broke up
these crosslinks and could then be easily
digested in turn.
None of these solutions are going to be a
simple fix, and as you can see, they’ve
got a lot of overlap with areas we are working
at, and making progress towards addressing.
Patience is needed, but optimism is not inappropriate
here either.
Quite to the contrary, it’s that weird cynicism
about being able to cure aging that is irrational,
and why it’s important to realize that it’s
a blanket concept for mostly unrelated issues.
Indeed, if we nail down all seven, people
might live centuries, and we might find seven
more that only cause problems after centuries.
Those might prove to be easier as a result
of our experience, or may prove even more
difficult due to their novelty.
Evolution, after all, has no reason to work
on design problems that only get fatal after
a few centuries.
One has to acknowledge, a machine that works
constantly for many decades before breaking
down is hardly one deserving much criticism
given that not many of our devices last that
long.
Now, does this mean we’ll all live to a
thousand years, to match or exceed Methuselah?
No — at least, not without a lot of work,
not right away, and not from these therapies
alone.
Again there’s a lot of work to be done and
we’ve really only just gotten started.
We can’t be sure our picture of aging is
correct.
There are many theories, each with decent
supporting evidence and adherents.
We need to know which one, if any, is right,
and we need to abandon the notion that this
is a subject we can never master, even if
it takes several centuries.
I don’t see any reason to think that’s
so, but even if it were, we’ve never been
afraid of challenges and this would be a bizarre
one to suddenly shy away from.
And even if we’re wrong and it truly does
turn out impossible for some reason, I’d
rather have still tried anyway.
Everyone’s got a right to their own perspective
but the usual reasons for not trying are that
it’s unethical to extend our lives, because
it’s unnatural, or that we’ll get bored.
Frankly I consider both fairly dubious assertions,
we’ve been doing life extension for a long
time already and threw natural out the window
the moment we started growing crops.
If we hadn’t, I’d be chasing a mammoth
with a spear right now instead of sitting
at my desk pressing strange square buttons
to communicate with people living on other
continents.
As to boredom, I personally can’t ever imagine
getting bored enough to want my life to end.
Heck the backlist of books I’ve been meaning
to read alone would set me up for a decade
or two at this point, but there is a pretty
obvious solution for how one can cease to
be bored with life, and I’d much rather
get to pick when that happens.
And in any case, ask yourself: would you rather
be bored to death at 150, or have Parkinson’s
disease at age 70?
I’ve never understood either set of reasoning
and fortunately many other folks don’t and
I think an increasing number won’t either
as life extension becomes more and more foreseeable.
One of the groups leading the way on this
is SENS Research Foundation, and I’ve mentioned
them a few times before on the channel.
Indeed we did a very successful fundraising
drive for them last year, so when the time
came to do this episode I sat down with two
of their founders, Aubrey de Grey and Mike
Kope, and picked their brains on the topic.
One of the first things that struck me, as
we chatted, was how we all constantly encountered
that sort of strange resistance to the concept
people often have.
I suspect that here at SFIA, that’s less
prevalent since we’re generally focused
on the future and are optimistic about it.
Hopefully you now share our optimism on the
topic, and see now that it’s an area that’s
certainly full of challenges, but probably
manageable ones if we’re determined enough.
There are other groups looking into this,
other approaches, some of which we’ve discussed
before too, but there was so much information
just for the SENS approach alone that I wanted
to focus on them today and to thank them for
their help.
For our folks living on the eastern side of
the Atlantic, they are having a conference
in Berlin early in the upcoming spring.
I lived in Germany for some years during my
time with the Army and haven’t been back
since but meant to, so I might go myself.
If you can’t go or want to know more now,
I’d really suggest their website, SENS.org,
which I’ll link below.
They’ve got some phenomenal resources, from
introductory material to more advanced materials
which gets into much deeper detail than we
could in one episode.
I’m particularly fond of a short video series
they did that’s got some wonderful animations,
some of which they loaned to us for today,
and were narrated by Edward James Olmos, best
known for Battlestar Galactica, or my favorite
film, Blade Runner, which was one of my inspiring
influences growing up for this topic and many
others.
There’s a lot of resources on that website
to learn more, so make sure to check it out.
And if you really want a deep dive into the
science of SENS, check out Ending Aging, a
full-length book on the subject by Aubrey
de Grey and his research assistant Michael
Rae.
Speaking of websites, even in these days of
social media the importance of a good website
can’t be underestimated to any operation,
be it a scientific institute like SENS or
an educational channel like SFIA, or your
own business.
Hiring a web designer can be quite expensive
and in many cases that can make it cost prohibitive.
At the same time that website is a must have
and that’s Squarespace comes in.
They have beautiful templates by world class-designers
that make it easy to create your own website
that showcases your work, and really stands
out.
And with built-in search engine optimization,
they help make sure your site will be seen.
Squarespace’s aims to make it easy for you
to make a website on your own, but they also
have 24/7 award winning customer service ready
to help you out.
If you’d like to let Squarespace help you
make your dream website a reality, you can
get 10% off by going to http://squarespace.com/isaacarthur
All right, next week we’ll be back to the
Earth 2.0 series.
When we last visited there we were discussing
colonizing the oceans and trying to live surrounded
by water, in next week’s episode we’ll
do the reverse, and look at how we might bring
water to the deserts in “Reclaiming the
Deserts”.
The week after that, we’ll be visiting a
place more barren than even our harshest deserts,
as we return to the Moon to look at how things
may play out as colonization proceeds and
we begin getting some serious civilizations
up there, in “Battle for the Moon”, and
we’ll take a look at our Book of the Month,
“Artemis”, the newest novel by Andy Weir,
author of “The Martian”.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and hit the notification bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
