This episode is sponsored by Audible
Space is awesome, and newer and better telescopes
show us more of its wonders every day.
How much cooler would it be to see them with
your own eyes?
This year will mark the 50th Anniversary of
the first time a human ever set foot on any
celestial body besides the Earth.
It wasn’t that much earlier that we even
reached orbit, just a few hundred kilometers
above our planet, a thousandth the distance
to the Moon, and a millionth the distance
to other planets.
We’ve spent a lot of time talking about
getting off Earth and colonizing new worlds,
and I thought it was time to talk about some
of the other reasons to get out there.
One of which is to see the place, take some
photos, and go home so you can rave about
it to your friends, family, and any captive
audience.
The solar system has a lot of wonders to attract
tourism, and we’ll look at some of those,
but our focus will also be on how the science,
technology, and economics of space travel
are likely to alter space tourism from conventional
modern tourism, where travel is quite quick,
and how that would shift with costs dropping.
The first place we’re likely to see mass
tourism because we’re already seeing the
start of it, is right in low orbit.
This is what most folks mean by space tourism,
going up to a station and floating around
in zero-gravity.
Neat place to be for the view too, as you
can see the Earth quite clearly in a way ‘eagle-eye
view’ doesn’t begin to express, since
the eagles are flying way, way below us.
I suspect most space stations in orbit will
feature a down facing port window, where you
could literally hover over the world, weightless,
and watch it spin below you.
The Sun also rises and sets every couple hours
up there, so I’d imagine one of the first
tourist restaurants on a space station will
take advantage of that, possibly a sunrise
cafe.
We should expect most space stations, particularly
in the early period, to be simple rotating
habitats with a zero-g hub, like the design
from the Gateway Foundation we looked at in
Space Ports.
Tourists, particularly in the early period,
will probably be most eager to play in zero-g.
Problem is, it’s actually rather tricky
to prepare food, eat food, or get rid of already-digested
food in zero-g—tricky to do those things
neatly anyway—so I suspect the novelty of
zero-g would wear off quickly, and the off-axis
sections will be the desirable spots when
playtime is over.
These needn’t have normal earth gravity,
just enough to make sure things fall down,
especially for eating and sleeping.
While being in zero-gravity is likely to be
something folks only want to experience for
a few hours at a time, zero-g sports and activities
are likely to be a huge new thing for us that
will stay huge for the rest of human history.
Going on a trip to play or watch a team in
person is one motive for space travel, but
also a good reminder that a lot of tourism
is about seeing things humanity has built,
not naturally occurring wonders.
Activities you can only do in space will be
a good way to fill some of the long travel
time to see those wonders.
And as modern cruise ships prove, often the
journey is as important than the destination.
And yes for the folks who keep asking, we
will do an episode on Space Sports sometime
this year.
Yet those natural wonders will drive early
tourism away from Earth, and there are a lot
of natural wonders out there.
We mentioned how on a space station the sun
rose and set every couple hours, not once
a day, but in a way that’s not a very good
sunrise to watch.
Very quick, but up on the Moon, the days last
a month, so that’s not a few minutes of
wonder but many hours.
Unfortunately there’s no air there, so it’s
not really very pretty, just a giant burning
orb you dare not look upon.
Similarly, while looking at the Earth would
be neat, the Earth doesn’t rise or set on
the Moon, as the moon is tidally locked to
Earth, so it just sits there in the same place
in the sky turning slowly and having the day-night
terminator creep across it.
Where is the sunrise most awesome in our solar
system?
The Sun is just a blinding white death ball
on the airless Moon, and it’s even worse
on Mercury.
Mars?
Well yes, there’s enough air there for a
real sunset, and the day’s about the same
length as here, and it will be different shades
too, butterscotch skies in the day, blue near
the sun for sunsets, rather the opposite of
Earth.
So it’s worth making a stop for, maybe.
How about the Moons of the Gas Giants?
Titan’s the only one with a real atmosphere,
indeed a very thick one, and the Sun is still
bright enough to give rather excellent and
very long ones, as it’s day is a couple
weeks long.
Plus you get to see the rings of Saturn.
The Gas Giants all have rings, though none
compare to Saturn’s, and they all have moons
that would be wonders to behold, though in
truth the view of those planets and their
rings from their moons is likely to be an
even better sight, and from those moons you
will often be able to see the sun rise or
set on the planet they orbit.
But the true queen for sunsets is likely to
be Venus, whose thick atmosphere and clouds,
and freakishly long day, would make the event
a true sight to behold and last a very long
while.
Not from the ground mind you, but from floating
cities far above the molten wasteland of the
surface, which would be quite the tourist
attraction themselves.
You might also go hang-gliding, though you’d
need to wear a breathing mask and acid-resistant
suit, as it does rain acid there, and while
those clouds would make for spectacular sunsets,
they themselves aren’t made of water.
Speaking of hang-gliding, lots of folks like
to visits the Grand Canyon or other gorges
and some of those do hang-gliding, but even
though most of our canyons on Earth are cut
by rivers, and lakes, rivers, and oceans aren’t
too common off Earth, there are some amazing
canyons out there.
Valles Marineris on Mars is 4000 kilometers
long, and up to 200 wide and 7 deep.
Indeed, while Mars atmosphere is thin, flight
is possible there, and any early terraforming
efforts would see the atmosphere become thickest
in those canyons.
Pluto’s Moon Charon has many chasms itself,
the biggest of which is Argo Chasma, not too
mention vast ice fields, geysers, and cryovolcanoes.
Mars possesses a few more impressive valleys
too, though it should be noted there are some
others throughout the solar system, often
on various moons, including our own.
Ithaca Chasma on Saturn’s Moon Tethys, which
at 2000 kilometers long and 100 kilometers
wide, runs nearly the circumference of the
whole moon, cutting a shallow slash across
Tethys.
Just across the way on Pluto is Sleipnir Fossa,
one of the massive spider cracks of the Tartarus
Dorsa.
So someone wanting to tour the grand canyons
of the solar system will have no shortage,
though Earth itself has many of the best.
But if one is hang gliding on Mars in the
Mariner Valley, they might instead start on
the Mountains of Tharsis, not all that far
away.
For a mountain climber, Mars is the ultimate
challenge though, besides having several of
the tallest mountains, including Olympus Mons
itself, it’s lower gravity helps with climbing
but you have to bring your air with you, or
some suit able to create it, which will negate
that low gravity, as that would get heavy.
Not the most challenging climb, as it has
a very mild slope on top of the low gravity,
but it makes up for it in sheer height.
For the casual climber, low gravity and a
lack of erosion means there are many mountains
of breathtaking height you might scale scattered
around the other planets, moons, and asteroids.
The tallest on the Moon, Mons Huygens and
Mons Hadley, rival Mount Everest, though height
is tricky to define when there’s no sea
level, and you’d likely drive a rover up
them rather than climb.
Indeed you can see a great shot of Mons Hadley
in the background of the Apollo 15 mission.
I imagine many will too, historical landmarks
will be popular for tourism, and in the solar
system, the Apollo landing sites are guaranteed
to be the most ancient of these, unless we
find some abandoned alien base on the dark
side of the moon, of course.
That does raise the question of preservation,
some tourist stepping on Neil Armstrong’s
one small step and erasing his footprint would
likely cause a hue and cry so loud you could
hear it even in the vacuum of space.
How do you go about making sure people can
get up close and feel part of our priceless
history without damaging that history?
Ownership of those sites matters a lot too,
while for the Apollo missions in the short
term at least, those would presumably be something
few would dispute belonged to the US to at
least administer, property in space is at
best a poorly defined concept thus far and
likely to be a huge political and legal feud
in centuries to come, especially where there’s
revenue to be had.
Olympus Mons on Mars is bound to be something
a lot of folks would like to own or have the
contract to maintain.
Preservation in the face of tourist damage,
property disputes, and funding issues is nothing
new to us of course, but space is likely to
put a whole new spin on it.
Plus you might lose many of these if you decide
to terraform those worlds.
And how do you compete with alternatives?
Used to be if you wanted to see something
you had to go there, nowadays you have the
option for photos and when those were new,
folks did object to making those publicly
available of sites and art lest it damage
visitors.
Indeed a lot of old radio and TV was made
when there were objections to recording it,
as the actors were used to doing a show many
times and getting paid each time.
Same though, being able to see photos of things
often whets the appetite to be there in person,
which arguably drives more tourism than it
prevents.
But this was all before virtual reality, and
if that’s good enough, some might see no
reason to go to the Moon even if it was a
one-day trip that cost the equivalent a couple
days’ wages.
With good enough VR you can not only visit
the place but touch it without a spacesuit,
or even relive the memory and emotions of
the first person who went there.
Indeed with advanced enough tech, a lot of
tourism might become that form, or more dramatized
equivalents like we see in the film Total
Recall.
Visiting the Moon is awesome, visiting it
as the first explorer or while genuinely believing
you were that explorer or on a vital mission
to save humanity is probably even cooler.
Against that we have the reality of space
travel.
Nowadays only the very richest could afford
even a trip to orbit, but even if that falls
to the bargain prices we contemplate in the
Upward Bound series, it’s likely to still
be fairly pricey and more important, very
time consuming.
Virtual reality or making the trip remotely
via download into some android might be an
option, though the tech implied for the latter
would probably mean the virtual reality was
beyond merely good.
Lots of travel time.
Even with an inexhaustible fuel supply, if
you’re limited to one-gee of acceleration,
experiencing the equivalent of normal Earth
gravity on the voyage, the Moon can be reached
in a few hours, but even Mars at its closest,
just under 60 million kilometers, would take
a day of full thrust to reach the turnover
point and the same to slow down.
Fortunately under constant acceleration travel
times rise with the square root of distance,
so quadruple the distance, double the travel
time, meaning even distant places like Pluto
might be reached in a few weeks.
Of course, even in an energy-rich economy,
that sort of casual expenditure of fuel is
unlikely to be approved of, and such an economy
is still a long way off, so more likely these
would be slower moving ships and modeled more
on cruise ships than airplanes.
This also means a big focus of the tourism
would be on those ships, especially in the
early days when those ports of call might
not have many luxuries, so you’re relaxing
on the ship while you venture to see solar
system.
I doubt we’d ever see any real tourism until
ships could achieve enough speed to be making
the journeys without plotting minimum-energy
Hohmann Transfer orbits, which would make
any trip take years, but interplanetary voyages
of weeks or months certainly would still attract
a lot of people, especially if the ship was
accommodating.
Alternatively, we need to remember this solar
system is not just its handful of planets.
Or even their moons, though a place like Jupiter
or Saturn with so many moons would be an ideal
archipelago for a space cruise ship to amble
around rather cheaply and with modest travel
times.
In the Asteroid Belt, for all that it’s
nothing like as dense as we see in science
fiction, things are pretty close and need
virtually no thrust to travel between, and
we have discussed previously how the Asteroid
Belt is likely to be the first place we settle
after the Moon, possibly even before Mars
or Venus.
Many of those features – awesome canyons
and mountains and craters – are abundant
in the Belt, and one could easily imagine
cruise ships that slowly circled throughout
major ports of call in the Belt, on decade
long journeys that people simply joined for
a few ports here or there.
There are endless canyons, caverns, lavatubes,
and craters you can go spelunking around in
the solar system, many of vast size, as gravity
and erosion don’t collapse them often, and
it’s safer to crawl around inside them for
the same reason.
Man of these might be pressurized by us too,
so that you could float through them, or walk
and climb in low gravity.
Interesting alternative though, since much
of that settlement might be small mining colonies,
and in Colonizing Ceres and Pluto we talked
about how bigger settlements might send circuit
caravans for trade around the Asteroid Belt
or Kuiper Belt.
They might do that for tourism too.
A lot of tourism trailblazers here on Earth
were about legitimate business in some remote
area and merely told others about things they
saw, inspiring others to follow suit.
We picture miners coming to visit those bigger
colonies to trade their goods and get some
R&R, but it might go the other way.
Maybe big cruise ships would be visiting ports
of call not just to pick up and drop off passengers
but be more like a traveling fair or carnival;
which paints an interesting image of future
Asteroid Belt spaceships as an interesting
mix of freighter, retail store, sports arena,
hotel, casino, and resort.
At least in those early days, for those early
colonies.
As things develop you’d see more specialization
and more travel, going to Europa to SCUBA
dive in the subsurface oceans, but as things
grow the ratio of natural wonders to manmade
stuff for tourism will alter too.
You’re going to start collecting new wonders,
multi-kilometer wide domes over craters, terraformed
Lunar Lava Tubes, canyon cities in Mariner
Valley on Mars, Cloud Cities on Venus, and
probably all sorts of megastructures.
Those could be something fairly mundane like
enormous O’Neill Cylinders, of which we’d
expect to ultimately build billions of in
our solar system, and each probably aiming
to be a bit unique.
Or the rather flashy and bizarre, like some
asteroid carved into a giant head like Mount
Rushmore or Easter Island.
Further ahead in time you might see true artificial
worlds, some a mundane spherical shellworld
and others the more peculiar, like a Flat
Earth Discworld, where the whole thing was
many snaky beach islands.
Or a Hoopworld, where the sheer rate of spin
means gravity varied over the surface, from
either of its two equators – highest on
the outer and lowest on the inner, to what
we call the poles, even though they are actually
circles not points.
The weather on a Flat Earth is quite ideal
amusingly, but a Hoopworld has decidedly crazy
weather, and either might easily do well for
tourist traps.
Or we might see the belt shift from big rocks
to many artificial cylinder habitats to a
giant Topopolis or Rungworld, huge rings around
the Sun of incomprehensibly large habitable
areas, and in a Topopolis, one might take
a classic cruise Ship down the World River.
Topolosises are incredibly long and skinny,
so that it’s essentially one long stretch
of skinny land, and I always picture them
having some single long river that makes it
akin to how ancient civilization on the Nile
was, a nation you could see across in one
direction but spend weeks crossing the long
way.
Of course in a Topopolis, even a single layer
one, the river isn’t going to be thousand
kilometers long but more like a billion.
You could spend your whole life traveling
down the river to a new town every day and
take tens of thousands of years to get back
to where you left.
So voyages in space for tourism do not necessarily
require very long times of thumb-twiddling
on a ship, as the solar system might fill
up fairly rapidly.
As we’ve often said of Dyson Swarms, they
are nothing like the packed and crowded image
we get when contemplating a Dyson Shell, but
travel time between various neighboring habitats
would be on an order of minutes and hours,
not weeks, at very low speeds and energies.
Of course high speeds don’t necessarily
mean high energies, and not just in the sense
that people might travel as information, uploading
to bodies at their destination, riding beams
of light.
There’s more than one way to do that and
we’ve talked many a time of using beaming
technologies to push ships to huge speeds
as we discussed in Interstellar Laser Highways
and Beam-Powered Ships.
That still costs energy, though less than
if you have to carry your fuel, and moreover,
it can be reclaimed.
It costs energy to move something up to high
speed and more to slow it down, but if that
energy is just light bouncing off a big sail,
you can bounce it back to be reclaimed, and
while you’ll never break even on this process,
ships moving down lanes pushed by energy beams,
to speed up or slow down, can be done for
a lot less total power loss than what you
put in.
Similarly, habitats on the same orbital path
can be connected by tethers where such a crossing
requires virtually no energy, and without
atmospheric drag, allow quite high speeds
too.
This begins to paint a future, maybe even
just a handful of centuries from now, where
a truly enormous solar system overflowing
with natural and manmade sights could see
billions of tourists traveling to and fro
every day, at great speed but not in great
haste, nor at great cost.
A billion worlds all each their own unique
place with a unique history and unique sights,
all there for anyone to see and live on and
share.
Such a time is quite a ways off, but in the
short term, as these things go, I suspect
we’ll begin seeing genuine space hotels
in the next generation or so, and hopefully
by century’s end some on the Moon and those
in orbit numerous and cheap enough, and us
as a civilization prosperous enough, that
anyone who really wants to can afford to make
the voyage.
In this regard, tourism is one of the last
stages of development, as it comes after you’ve
explored, pioneered, and developed a place.
The fact that we can only see a fraction of
our own planet in a normal lifetime, reinforces
my bemusement at people worrying that radical
life extension will be bad because life will
become boring.
Going SCUBA diving in Europa’s hidden seas
or skiing on the frosty slopes of all the
outer moons and dwarf planets doesn’t strike
me as boring.
It will be a quite a while before we get there,
but not so long before we get to float in
zero-g or strap on some wings and fly around
bubbles of air orbiting above our pale blue
dot.
I don’t doubt that as we get out and colonize
our solar system we’ll find many more wonders
and make even more, but if you’re interestested
in touring our solar system today, I’d recommend
the Grand Tour series by Dr. Ben Bova.
Bova is one of science fiction’s most prolific
authors, as well as science fact, and has
authored over a hundred works, about two dozen
of which are in his Grand Tour series, focusing
on the colonization of our solar system.
While there are overall story arcs connecting
the works, you can begin almost anywhere in
the series, much like our Outward Bound series
here on SFIA, and I myself started with Mercury,
which is about halfway through the official
chronology, which begins with Powersats, written
that same year.
Or you could start with Mars, the first one
he wrote.
Where ever you want to start, all those books
are available on Audible, and most are narrated
by Stefan Rudnicki, one of my favorite readers.
Wherever you choose to start in the series,
you can get a free copy of that first book
at Audible.com/Isaac or text Isaac to 500-500.
Audible offer a 30 day free trial, but each
month you’re a member you now get a free
audiobook and 2 audible originals, and those
credits rollover to the next month or year
and stay yours, along with any books you got,
even if you later discontinue your membership.
And with their convenient app, you can listen
on any of your devices and seamlessly pick
up where you left off, whether you’re listening
at home, commuting, running errands or off
jogging or at the gym.
Audible makes it cheap and easy to access
a vast collection of amazing stories.
Also if you’re an Amazon Prime member, for
a limited time, you can start an Audible membership
and save 66% on your first 3 months–a total
of $30 off.
That’s like getting 3 months for the price
of one.
You’ll pay just $4.95 per month for the
first 3 months.
After that, it’s only $14.95 per month,
and the offer is valid till July 31st.
We were talking about wonders we might find
in the solar system or create today, and next
week we’ll start our examination of one
such, ecologies which might naturally occur
or be created in space, Void Ecologies, and
we’ll look at the popular notion of living
ships, in Space Whales and Bioships.
Such natural void ecologies might occur in
distant alien systems we may visit, and the
week after that we’ll return to our alien
civilizations series to consider aliens who
might visit us, though not for friendly reasons
or tourism, in Invasive Aliens.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
