So today’s video is on Interstellar Colonization,
and it’s been a year-long trip getting here
as we covered other subjects to build up to
this.
This seems kind of appropriate since as we’ll
see today Interstellar Colonization is a process
that involves a lot of year-long trips.
Around a year ago when this channel was very
new we discussed a concept called the Dyson
Dilemma.
In a nutshell it assumes that technological
civilizations will be prone to expand and
that if they do so we should be unable to
miss that expansion even galaxies away.
You don’t need to have seen that, or any
of the other videos, before watching this
but there’s some tied together material
and I will occasionally reference it.
It matters today only because we’ll be talking
about how technological civilizations can
expand.
The ins and outs of that are a long subject
and we had to lay a lot of groundwork to get
here today to discuss it.
Future videos will be able to be a lot more
self-contained but this one, as mentioned,
is a bit of final chapter to our first year
so catching those other videos might be helpful
if not absolutely necessary.
Usually when I’m referencing one of those
prior videos you’ll see a thumbnail picture
pop up in a white or yellow box, clicking
on those will pause this video and open that
video up in a new window.
I try to make these videos as self-contained
as possible so first time watchers aren’t
getting left behind.
This isn’t supposed to be book ten of some
series where if you haven’t read the prior
ones you have no idea what’s going on, but
I also don’t want to lengthen this already
lengthy video rehashing material we’ve already
covered.
So if you’re new here and feel yourself
losing traction on a subject you might want
to watch the suggested videos and come back
to this one.
Also if you’re new to this channel by now
you’d have noticed a speech impediment,
to help with that these videos always include
closed captions you can turn on with the transcript
of the video.
So intro complete, let’s get to what is
essentially the epilogue of this channel’s
first year.
And we’ll do that with a bit of prologue
to the notion of interstellar travel.
Prior to the last couple centuries, with some
noticeable exceptions, planets around other
stars wasn’t given much consideration, let
alone travel to them.
During the 19th century the idea that our
planet might be truly ancient, millions or
even billions of years old, was beginning
to settle into public awareness.
At the same time the idea that the Universe
was itself almost inconceivably old and huge
and full of stars that might host equally
ancient planets.
Even our word for this, extraterrestrial,
references terrestrial, our Earth, because
most early notions of aliens reference other
planets in our own solar system like Mars
and Martians, as seen in H.G. Wells War of
the Worlds or Edgar Rice Burrough’s Barsoom
Series.
We didn’t say Extra-Solarian, meaning outside
our solar system, we said extra-terrestrial,
meaning not from Earth and this wasn’t an
accident.
We just weren’t seriously considering traveling
between stars and there being worlds like
our own around them.
Early science fiction on this emerged quite
slowly and often didn’t do well with audiences.
H.P.
Lovecraft, famous sci-fi horror writer today,
a century after he started writing, never
caught on in his own time and probably because
his work centers so much around the existential
dread associated to contemplating just how
old and huge our Universe is.
This concept, that humanity occupied a tiny
chunk of the Universe for an eyeblink of time,
hadn’t really got its claws into our collective
awareness yet.
Not the first to deal with the concepts, but
probably the one who most inspired others
to think and write about them was Olaf Stapledon,
who writing in the 1930s about long term civilizations,
aliens, megaengineering, genetic engineering,
and terraforming proceeded to open the doors
of the imagination for many others.
Immediately after that we saw an explosion
in science fiction as a genre, the oft-called
golden age of science fiction, in the late
30s and 40s when this stuff started really
getting traction on people’s minds and with
the Space Race of the late 50s and 60s it
has stayed there.
A generation after science fiction began popularizing
the notion of alien planets we landed men
on our own moon and landed probes on Mars
shortly thereafter.
Unfortunately that’s where it stayed, because
our Moon is around a hundred times closer
than other planets, and while we could send
people to Mars and could have for some decades
the cost and risks of associated to doing
that have remained a bit too high for anyone
to authorize what would by and large amount
to a very expensive photo op.
Similarly a permanent moon base hasn’t happened
yet either.
And the moon, the furthest place any human
has traveled, a mere couple of light seconds
from home, is nearly a hundred million times
closer than the nearest stars.
For comparison, if Earth was on the palm of
your hand and the moon was sitting on the
tip of your finger, Mars would be in your
neighbor’s yard and our nearest neighboring
star would be on a different continent.
So to seriously contemplate interstellar travel
we have to have a way to get there and on
a timeline people can survive.
Over the years we’ve spent a lot of a time
contemplating these and so let’s review
some of the one’s a bit more grounded in
current science.
Wormholes and faster than light travel would
be nice, and we’ll look at those concepts
in the future, but today we’ll assume we
haven’t got them other than to note that
if you do have them not much changes other
than that things get much easier.
We can skip chemical rockets.
Traditional rockets just can’t deliver a
big enough payload to any speed that would
get you to another star in less time than
human civilization has already existed.
That leaves us two options, a better rocket
fuel or not using rocket fuel at all.
Do we have a better rocket fuel?
Yes.
Even before we landed on the moon we were
already considering how to use Nuclear Power
for propulsion, some of the popular efforts
being Project Orion, Project Daedelus, and
Project Longshot.
In a nutshell, though each design is different,
the loose concept is to explode nuclear bombs
behind a ship in series and let the explosions
keep pushing the ship to higher and higher
speeds, then at the end of the trip to flip
over and shoot off nukes in front of you to
slow down.
That sounds incredibly unsafe but rocketry
always involves terrifyingly huge explosions
so this is just scaling up a bit.
They also scale up a lot in size, since the
big issue is that you can’t really make
very small nuclear bombs especially not ones
that are particularly energy efficient.
Loosely speaking a complete bomb, including
conventional explosives, fissile material,
and fusionable material in H-bombs, pack more
punch per pound the bigger they are.
So you might as well go with a big space ship
since you can only absorb so much of the blast
with a smaller one.
These nuclear ship designs gave us our first
hint that we could get to other stars because
they can send very large ships through space
at around ten percent of light speed ideally,
and you can do a bit better if you’ve got
actual fusion like we discussed in the video
on that.
They also presumably have nuclear power plants
on board to handle life support for crews.
Of course ten percent of light speed still
means the nearest stars are decades of travel
away.
There’s some hypothetical ways of going
faster we’ll get to but first let’s consider
those early ship designs.
If the trip is going to take decades, or centuries,
to get to another star but can have very large
payloads we can get people there.
Except most will have died of old age by then.
There’s been several approaches to this
and I’m going to borrow a classification
system by Steve Bowers, a friend of mine whose
space artwork you’ve seen a lot of especially
on this channel.
Steve breaks the ships, these arks, into five
categories.
The first are Methuselah ships, named for
the ancient biblical patriarch who lived longest
in the Bible’s chronology so you can guess
why we call these ships this.
These ships assume the crew is conscious the
whole trip and simply live the whole journey
because people age slower or not at all.
We’ve not really discussed biological immortality
or transhumanism much on this channel but
suffice it to say the notion of people living
a lot longer is viewed by many in the sciences
as not only doable, but quite probably a lot
sooner on the horizon than regular manned
interplanetary travel let alone interstellar
travel so it’s not that far out there.
Unlike faster-than-light travel it doesn’t
violate or seriously bend any known laws of
science either.
The big problem with Methuselah ships is usually
seen as boredom, even on a big ark ship able
to hold a couple hundred people living on
recycled air and water and hydroponically
grown food powered by fission or fusion you’re
going to get pretty bored as the years roll
by.
Now there’s no real maximum size on such
ships, except that if you double your population
you presumably need to double all your fuel
and supplies, so you could send many thousands
of people instead.
As to boredom, well we get a lot of our entertainment
digitally these days so it’s not like they’d
be limited to carry a small library of films
or books, and they’d keep receiving new
stuff from home, even if it was increasingly
delayed.
So I don’t think boredom is a project-killer
but it probably would be hard to keep enthusiasm
going for centuries.
This gets us into the second and better known
version, Hibernation Ships, often called Sleeper
Ships.
We freeze you and wake you up later.
Either running the ship automatically or with
a small crew being thawed for short shifts
before being re-frozen.
This might be pretty attractive even if you
were functionally immortal and it’s certainly
a concept we’ve seen a lot of in fiction.
We still don’t have cryogenics or cryonics,
in a way that lets us freeze people and bring
them back yet.
A lot of people gamble we’ll figure out
the ‘bring you back’ option eventually
and get frozen even today, it’s not just
Walt Disney, and it doesn’t actually cost
much more than a sports car and is fairly
comparable a lot of treatment processes for
nastier ailments.
Heck even traditional burials can be pretty
pricy, so as prospects look better and cost
come down it might get to be as common as
burial or cremation.
It might get pretty common even in a biologically
immortal society as people might opt to bounce
forward to more interesting times.
I can easily see modern day equivalents to
the pyramids just stuffed full of frozen bodies
to maximize security and minimize costs.
Sleeper Ship and Hibernation ship being kind
of inaccurate, since you are definitely dead,
not asleep, make me think pyramids aren’t
a half bad comparison since they amount to
giant crypts like the pyramids were.
This area, in regard to spaceships, doesn’t
require much consideration except the concern
over whether or not you’d even want a conscious
crew.
Usually we figure on small team being awake
just in case the automation fails but when
you consider it, with decent automation, odds
are probably lower of that automation screwing
up by some internal failure or external variable
then of a conscious crew member going ax-crazy
and murdering everyone.
You wouldn’t send off a sleeper ships unless
you’d gold-plated your automation so the
risk of someone going nuts probably would
exceed the odds of a failure.
If you haven’t got immortality or cryonics
you can do the next category, Generation Ships.
Here it isn’t people leaving Earth to land
on an alien world, but rather their descendants
doing so.
The crew lives, eats, breathes, and breeds
their whole life on a ship.
Inside you simulate a decent living environment
by having a rotating section, as we discussed
in heavy detail in the Rotating Habitats video.
Now classically people figure you need a big
population for this so you don’t get inbreeding
and genetic bottlenecking, and the same for
your eventual colony, but while we can’t
freeze and thaw people yet we can freeze and
thaw sperm and eggs and implant them into
people.
We do this a lot already.
And while there is a half-life on such things,
they can’t currently be stored indefinitely,
we also have DNA printing, where we can take
a digital record of a piece of DNA and print
it into a real strand of DNA which can then
be implanted into an egg.
Digital files not only keep longer, and can
be redundantly backed up, but can be transmitted
at light speed.
So colonization issues worrying about genetic
bottlenecking can be brushed aside with existing
technology.
So an Arkship of the generational variety
probably just needs enough people to maintain
a decently sane society, not a genepool, and
as hunter-gatherers in origin we already have
a concept for a tribe.
Also a concept called Dunbar’s number, about
160, that contemplates the idea of active
social structures.
Dunbar’s number is a pretty popular figure
to be used when discussing decently long-lasting
but stable micro-civilizations because its
small enough you can know everyone but large
enough that you can have a wide selection
of not just skill specializations but also
of social options.
Lots of selections for friends and romance
and big enough that you can avoid people who
you absolutely hate.
And again you don’t have to worry about
every potential partner being your cousin
since you’ve got all that frozen or digitally
stored genetic material to avoid the problem.
The idea of freezing or printing genetic data,
along with heavily automated Hibernation Ships
brings us to our next type, which are Seed
Ships.
These are seen as the solution for when you
don’t want to use a lot of mass and fuel
for each trip.
You send a very small ship that’s heavily
automated, able to replicate machinery via
3D printing and such, and could for instance
print an artificial womb.
Seed ships arrive at their destination and
seed the place.
Automated terraforming including with plants
and animals, and maybe even people.
Classically you’d often send a seed ship
ahead of a generation ship or hibernation
ship so that the planet was part way ready
when people arrived, since the seed ship could
travel faster, but if you’ve got really
good artificial wombs and automated child
care and teaching programs you could grow
your colonists there.
The idea of children born in tanks from frozen
or printed genetic material and raised by
machines is pretty disturbing at first but
we really have no way of knowing that this
would result in total failure or a bunch of
maladjusted antisocial lunatics.
It just depends on how good your artificial
intelligence is and if it’s as smart as
a human it probably can raise a totally normal
healthy kid, there’s no reason it couldn’t
simulate normal human emotions or that they’d
even be simulations.
This option doesn’t tend to be appealing
to many people though.
Partially because if you’ve got Artificial
Intelligence that good, and automation that
good, it makes some wonder why you’d send
people at all, or humans anyway.
And that’s category five, Dataships, or
basically very small ships with huge data
packets that arrive at the destination and
unpack themselves using local material.
Up to and including unpacking people since
it’s often assumed you could store human
minds digitally and just upload them into
cloned or cybernetic bodies built on the spot.
These can presumably be very small and fast,
potentially storing billons of minds on something
no bigger than a soda bottle.
These are often seen as a type of seed ship
or hibernation ship themselves, and it should
be noted that if you’ve gone all digital
with people’s mind you can do light speed
travel by just sending the data once a receiver
has arrived.
Needless to say this concept is very popular
with fans of mind uploading and singularity
but not so much with anyone who isn’t.
So that’s our five types of ships, and they
can all get the job done if you’ve got the
right technology to run them.
Right now we’ve got the technology to build
a nuclear ship and run a generational ark,
though actually paying to build one is beyond
us right now and colonizing a planet is too.
Colonizing is the big thing, but before jumping
into that I want to give quick overview of
some other propulsion systems that we’ll
look at more in the future.
I already touched on Fusion Drive, or Fusion
Torch Ships, in the Fusion video, they’re
basically nuclear powered ships that can go
decently faster and let you have more cargo
and don’t require nearly depleting our supply
of fissionable materials like uranium just
to launch one ship.
They still have a limited fuel supply though
and you need to use a lot not just to speed
up but also to slow back down again.
One version of this you might have heard of
is called a Bussard Ramjet and it gets around
the fuel issue by sucking in gases floating
around space as fuel or propellant.
It’s the basis of the ship that was the
central theme for the sci-fi classic Tau Zero.
Unfortunately it doesn’t look like this
is going to be feasible since you’d probably
lose more speed and energy pulling the matter
in then you’d get out of it but we haven’t
ruled it out entirely just yet.
This is still seen as the most probable means
for ships that don’t need fueling and can
get up to arbitrarily high speeds or at least
to fractions of the speed of light where you
might not need to worry about how your crew
spends the travel time because special relativity
kicks in to seriously shorten it.
However, its apparent tendency to use more
energy than it produces, thus actually slowing
the ship down instead of speeding it up, would
still make it useful.
Ships don’t just need fuel to speed up,
they need it to slow back down again, I would
say they need the same amount except that
you really do need more to speed up since
part of what you’re speeding up is the fuel
you need to slow down again.
If you can use a Bussard Ramjet, or similar
device, to slow a ship down you don’t just
save your slow down fuel, you get all the
fuel back, or cargo space back, that you’d
have had to use to store that slow-down fuel
since you can decelerate using fuel you didn’t
have to bring from home.
And there’s a few other ways you can probably
do this too we’ll look at another time.
Bussard Ramjet’s aren’t the only way to
get near light speed without coming up with
some new science though.
Another is using antimatter instead of fission
or fusion.
With antimatter you get total mass to energy
conversion, that whole E=MC-squared thingy,
and that lets you get way higher speeds.
Project Valkyrie, a design for an antimatter
powered ship, can get up to a very good percentage
of the speed of light.
Of course we have the big issue that we can’t
manufacture antimatter in large quantities.
That we use millions of times more energy
to make antimatter than is in that antimatter,
and that we have only some basic notions for
how to store the stuff safely.
On a similar scale we have black-hole powered
ships, which aren’t quite as good as antimatter
in truth but are pretty neat ideas we’ll
look at another time.
Summary form you use small artificial blackholes
that are evaporating and giving off Hawking
Radiation as your propellant, letting that
radiation push your ship.
The other side of the house is stuff that
carries no fuel, or no more than is needed
for running life support and doing some maneuvering.
Rockets aren’t the only way to push things
along, nor is slapping them from behind with
a nuclear detonation.
If you’ve ever seen a light mill, a Crookes
Radiometer, then you know the concept.
Take a fan setup in a vacuum painted white
on one side and black on the other and it
will spin like a water wheel as light bounces
off the white side and gets absorbed by the
dark side.
Light has momentum and if it gets absorbed
by something it passes that momentum to the
object.
If it gets reflected away it passes even more
momentum.
It’s not a lot of momentum but this is the
basic concept of a light sail, also called
a photon sail or more commonly a solar sail.
Solar sails aren’t great for interstellar
travel because the further you get from the
sun the weaker your push.
New materials like graphene, than can in theory
be made so thin you could sit on a stack a
billion sheets thick before your feet started
dangling, make this more attractive than materials
like gold or aluminum which can’t be made
nearly as thin and still be reflective and
hold together.
But you can still only get so fast before
the weakening solar push meets up with the
increasing drag of running through gases in
space which keep it from being a total vacuum,
achieving terminal velocity just like an object
falling on Earth.
Same concept as a parachute, your solar sail
will make that happen at a much slower speed
and then you’ve got to pack the thing up,
though you can unpack it as you near your
destination to slow down.
You also have to repair and replace damaged
sections since slamming through space involves
hitting a lot small objects when your sail
is a billionth of a meter thick but millions
of meter across.
There is an alternative though, you can hit
the sail with lasers instead, or microwaves,
masers.
This lets you concentrate the energy on a
much smaller target, needing a smaller sail,
and laser beams don’t weaken over distance
as inverse square the way sunlight does.
You’ve also got no way to slow down unless
you have a laser at the other end, but as
I mentioned we do have some tricks for slowing
down and even if you had to carry fuel to
slow down in whole or part that’s a lot
better than having to carry all the fuel to
speed up and to speed up your slow-down fuel
too.
So light sails, or laser sails, are pretty
promising.
The down side is that while we can predict
the location of a ship moving through a near
vacuum very accurately, it isn’t a pure
vacuum so you can’t predict it exactly.
And the degree of imprecision is going to
keep getting bigger the further away it is
and the longer you have to wait for a signal
to get back telling you definitively where
it last was.
Your laser also is slowly diffusing as the
beams aren’t actually perfect cylinders
and they are also running into space dust
which weakens them to so you have to make
your sail bigger and bigger to be accurately
aimed at as you get further away.
At best the size of your sail is going to
need to scale up linear to the distance from
the transmitter, double the distance, double
the sail size, and that’s being unrealistically
optimistic.
If you’re having problems picturing the
difference between this and a classic wind
sail, imagine a guy with a catcher’s mitt
and ice skates on a long smooth sheet of ice.
You keep throwing him baseballs and he speeds
up every time he catches one.
Eventually though he’s too far away to catch
your throws.
He can also speed up more by bouncing the
ball off his mitt instead of catching it and
he can steer by bouncing it in a slightly
different direction, which works with photons
just as well as baseballs.
Realistically the only way to get around this
problem, to get really high speeds, would
be to have a long chain of laser emitters
along the way that could pick up where the
last laser left off, like the guy on the sheet
of ice who leaves the range of the first pitcher
and passes a second pitcher who begins tossing
to him, on to a third, onto a fourth, and
so on.
If the line is long enough pitcher down the
road can start slowing him down too by throwing
to him as he approaches them rather than as
he’s leaving them behind.
If you saw the fusion video and rogue planet
video and rotating habitat video you can probably
guess where this is going.
Interstellar space is lousy with little rocks
and comets, and not so little rocks and comets.
It’s nowhere near as dense as stuff in our
solar system but it doesn’t have to be.
You can set up tons of pusher stations along
the way to another star, automated or populated,
and basically make yourself a long highway
through space that let you shove ships pretty
fast, at highly relativistic speeds potentially,
and you could build your way out there sort
of like building a railroad.
This is also much easier if you’ve got a
free method of breaking like a bussard ramjet
or mag sail but at a minimum it’s easier
to carry your deceleration fuel but if you
don’t have to carry the fuel to accelerate
you’ve way more than halved your onboard
fuel needs.
Once you get to the target the first time,
and you can build stations down the whole
length, you don’t need to carry any fuel
except for some maneuvering.
It probably requires a lot more effort and
time than a single one way trip with a nuclear
powered ship but once you’ve got it in place
you can hurl way more material back and forth
faster and cheaper between two star systems.
That’s important as we move into the actual
colonization section of the video because
as we’ll see, while all these methods let
you colonize planets, none of these methods
really make for a sane way to do migration
if you’re trying to deal with an overpopulation
problem.
So we’ve looked at most of the ways of getting
to alien worlds, what do you do when you get
there?
We discussed terraforming worlds in the terraforming
video but while most stars probably have planets,
even planets that we could terraform, most
won’t have ones that are particularly like
Earth and it seems a shame to waste a perfectly
good solar system.
Then too, New Earth probably isn’t going
to be your first destination or sole destination
on arriving, even if it is amazingly Earth
like.
Let’s think about our generation ship as
it slows down and enters a system.
It’s essentially a rotating habitat, like
we discussed in that video, but as I mentioned
rotating habitats aren’t great for space
travel because an ideal habitat is very Earth-like
and that tends to imply it carries a lot more
dirt and water on board than is really necessary
for a real spaceship where every pound counts.
Difference between a luxury houseboat or freighter
and a speedboat.
But there’s going to be darn few planets
sitting around in the galaxy that conveniently
have earth-breathable air mixtures, lighting,
and so on so you probably don’t want to
be just piling down from your spaceship, where
people have been comfortably living for generations,
onto the probably barren hellish wasteland
of your new world.
You’re also probably bingo on fuel.
And unlike setting up a space based infrastructure
from down on Earth it’s a lot easier to
build one when you’re already up there.
So destination one is probably not going to
be the planet, it’s going to be one or more
small rocky or icy asteroids or comets you
can intercept easily and basically dock right
on top of and snatch resources from.
Then you go to a planet, probably leaving
one or more asteroid bases behind you.
If you’ve got something strong enough to
make a space elevator from, especially if
you can synthesize that from local asteroids
since they are very heavy, you do that.
Heck you could coil the elevator around the
outside of you ship during the flight as extra
radiation shielding but making it on the spot
is easier.
Now you don’t have a generation ship, you’ve
got a full blown rotating habitat that can
handily serve as spaceport and comfortable
living area, more comfortable than you traveled
on, parked around your destination planet.
If you’ve got the elevator than you can
unload easier but also reload too, so people
aren’t stuck in domes the whole time.
This makes terraforming a lot easier, especially
if the process calls for material not found
in great quantity on the planet.
But realistically, with Earth-like planets
around Earth-like suns likely being the minority
of solar systems in most cases you won’t
even try terraforming planets in favor of
basically terraform small moons and asteroids,
again as discussed in the Rotating Habitats
video.
They’re not truly planets but they actually
will approximate Earth in most respects better
than most planets you’ll find.
The other issue is that colonizing planets,
and just planets, is a damnably inefficient
way of spreading out your civilization.
It’s not just all the solar systems you’re
bypassing to find nice planets either.
Let’s walk through some quick math.
To avoid relativistic calculations and rocketry
I’m going to assume real quick that these
ships always travel at around a tenth of light
speed and are insanely efficient.
That they let you transport a human and everything
he or she needs as though he were just two
tons of material magically given the appropriate
kinetic energy to be at about 10% of light
speed and didn’t need to slow down.
Kinetic energy being half the mass times the
square of velocity, and the velocity being
about a tenth of light speed, we get about
10^18 Joules of energy.
This is almost absurdly generous but we’ll
go with it anyway.
If you remember the video on Fusion, we talked
about how you could easily and luxurious support
a person for one year trillion joules of energy
a year, or 10^12 Joules, one millionth of
or way over optimistic figure for getting
someone to another star system.
You could support a thousand people for a
thousand years for the energy cost of moving
one person to another solar system at a tenth
of light speed.
If you want to get them there twice as fast,
it will take at least quadruple the energy.
So if you’ve want more people, and you need
more space, it makes way more sense to build
a rotating habitat in our own solar system
able to support a thousand people for a thousand
years in luxury than to cram one person on
a ship.
Particularly considering you’ve already
got a star on hand pumping out a billion times
more energy than we use on Earth all going
to waste.
Send people slower, at say 1% of light speed,
and it costs about a hundredth the power as
10% light speed, again assuming very amazingly
efficient propulsion and life support.
That’s still all the juice you need to support
one person for 10,000 years as opposed to
sending one person to another solar system.
This doesn’t mean you can’t colonize,
it just means it isn’t a particularly sane
way to get rid of surplus populations.
Just like colonizing some new continent, you
don’t ship half your population there, you
send small colonies and wait for them to grow.
Of course if you’ve got a whole star’s
excess energy to play with, while you’re
building up the inevitable Dyson Sphere or
Dyson Swarm you can use all that extra energy
to power laser sails.
So you don’t have to pick and choose because
the star is pumping out absurd amounts of
otherwise wasted energy the whole time and
it’s a lot easier to build solar panels
than effectively fake micro-planets.
Hopefully you have fusion but you can beam
power around out from your star, losing some
at each step, but just like the beaming stations
for possible laser sails you can feed your
solar power outwards with reasonable efficiency
if you need to run operations too far from
the sun for natural sunlight to power them,
and if you haven’t got fusion.
So, here we are at the end, and we’ve got
a bit of a callback to the original Dyson
Dilemma video of the Fermi Paradox.
In that I proposed that you’d expect to
see alien civilizations expanding outwards
constantly by swallowing stars into wave upon
wave of Dyson Swarms, massive cloudlike constructs
of artificial habitats and solar collectors.
Here we see a slight alteration on that theme.
Instead of jumping from G-type yellow star
to star, settling a few Earth-like planets
in the classic science fiction setup, or even
swallowing every star inside giant Dyson Swarms,
we’d probably expect civilizations like
our own to slowly roll out.
They’d Dyson up their star, like giant cities,
but they’d settle small rocks in the outer
solar system and run those on fusion obtained
from gas giants, in a sort of wide disc.
Think of these as suburbs.
From their they’d roll out into their own
Oort Cloud and interstellar space and grabbing
the rare rocks and turning them into habitats
powered by fusion.
This becomes your rural areas, and the stretches
along the way to various nearby solar systems
become your highways, possibly pushing ships
along or slowing them down and allowing much
higher bandwidths of information transfer
between solar systems since the beams can
be kept nice and narrow and high density with
all the relays, these enter the developing
suburbs of another solar system’s outer
areas and the emerging Dyson Swarm near the
Star, another city on the grow, of course
these cities have trillions of times more
people in them then modern earth cities, and
the rural areas are trillions of times less
dense than our own, but the analogy holds
and is probably way more likely to be how
we’d settle the galaxy then we tend to envision
in classic science fiction setup.
And in this kind of setup you can also migrate
people a lot cheaper, because they don’t
have to move very fast to avoid boredom and
you can start employing methods that let you
recover some or even most of your kinetic
energy used for transport, like a mass driver
that shoots you from one habitat toward another
one which catches you using the reverse process
and sucks your kinetic out to power another
launch.
Or bouncing the pushing laser beam off the
mirror on the back of the ship to be reabsorbed
by a large solar panel array back at the station.
Someone wanting to leave Earth for new worlds
just slowly bounces from place to place, every
outward, always with some new place to see,
at slower speeds and thus using less energy
travel.
If they’re biologically immortal they’ve
got all the time in the world to see a place,
hop on board slow freighter to something much
closer than the next star, see that place,
and move on, slowly working outward.
If not, if like you and me they age, then
they settle somewhere not too far from earth
and their kids continue the journey.
You mosey outward to the galaxy at say an
average speed of a thousandth the speed of
light and you get to the edge of the galaxy
in a hundred million years, about one percent
of the age of the Universe currently and it’s
pretty young still.
You can do it faster of course, as we’ve
seen.
Now at the edge galaxy you stop right?
Well, nope, you don’t have to cross endless
empty space to the next galaxy because it
isn’t empty space, just emptier.
Like Interstellar space compared to interplanetary
space it’s got a lot of stuff in it just
more spread out.
Some estimates suggests as many as half the
stars in the Universe are between galaxies
not in them, and galaxies aren’t spaced
out like solar systems are.
Galaxies are only about an order of magnitude,
ten times, further apart from each other than
they are wide.
So you’d have to travel a lot further to
get to the next star roughly along the way
to that new galaxy but we’re talking hundreds
or thousands of light years not millions,
each one serving as a new beachhead.
And that’s interstellar and intergalactic
colonization for you.
And that’s it for year one of this channel,
we’ll have a channel update video sometime
soon then press ahead with some of our other
megastructures and habitable planets subjects
but now we can broaden out and look at other
subjects because we’ve come full circle
with the Dyson Dilemma and Fermi Paradox.
Back in that we encountered the problem that
we just couldn’t see how any technological
civilization even a little like our own wouldn’t
expand out constantly if it could expand reasonably,
and how we shouldn’t be able to miss seeing
them even if they were galaxies away if they’d
been doing that.
Now we’ve taken the long road to explain
how that could be done without needing any
truly groundbreaking, paradigm shifting science
and technology.
Leaving us right back at the question, if
aliens are out there, why haven’t we seen
them yet?
And an answer, not a definite one but an increasingly
likely one, that if there are other intelligent
alien civilizations like our own out there
they are so rare that you’d probably need
to search a million galaxies just to find
one.
The Dyson Dilemma of the Fermi Paradox, if
there were any older civilizations nearby
us we would see them simply by the absence
of any stars in the night sky.
Thanks for joining me on this year long trip,
if you’ve arrived here from all the older
videos, it’s been a fun time and there will
be more ahead.
If this was your first video on the channel,
hopefully not seeing the others yet didn’t
make this too information dense and compressed,
but you might want to go try those other videos
now.
If you liked the video, hit the like button,
share it with others, and subscribe for alerts
when new videos come out.
Questions and comments are welcome, I try
to reply to as many as I can.
As always, thanks for watching, hope you’ve
had a great year, and good bye for now.
