This episode is brought to you by Brilliant. 
Nothing lasts forever, but to build the truly 
immense and bright future we often envision,  
we may need machines that can 
function for millions of years. 
So often in our contemplations of the future 
we look at ships or megastructures that have  
implied lifetimes of thousands of years or even 
longer, sometimes much longer, and these sorts  
of machines that need to last geological lifetimes 
are very common in science fiction too. So often  
there’s a bit of handwave as to how in the 
heck you keep something functioning that long.  
Indeed even assuming self-repair mechanisms 
raises issues like machine equivalents of mutation  
and cancer, or their ideological equivalents 
too, how do we keep a colony ship on a ten  
thousand year journey on task and focused 
on achieving their original mission. While  
keeping in mind that ten thousand years is longer 
than all of recorded human history let alone an  
actual civilization or continuous organization.
That’s more than a hundred human lifetimes,  
a hundred centuries, and yet a million years 
is a hundred times longer than even that.  
Truth be told it's impressive to keep any machine 
or organization running, let alone substantively  
unchanged for a century. If we’re being 
honest, often even a year is pretty impressive.  
So you might have a computer that can assess 
maintenance needs but what’s maintaining it? If  
you’re curious the longest running computer 
still in use is FACOM, a big supercomputer  
built by Fujitsu in 1956 and maintained in 
working order by the company to this day,  
and needless to say it isn’t maintaining itself or 
getting much useful done. 65 years for a computer  
is a really long time, retirement age in the US, 
but would be barely sufficient for a computer on  
a fusion powered starship making a journey to 
one of the nearest stars, like Alpha Centauri. 
So what we are going to be doing today is asking 
how we can engineer such extremely long-lived  
machines, and we might as well begin by 
looking at the current record holders. 
The oldest machine still in constant or regular 
use is hard to determine since machine is a bit  
of a hazy concept, but the oldest thing 
running on electricity I could find is an  
incandescent light bulb, running since 1901, 
at a Fire Station in Livermore, California.  
The oldest engine in use appears to be the 
Newcomen Memorial Engine, restored in honor  
of Thomas Newcomen, the gentleman usually credited 
with the invention of modern, useful steam engines  
and the engine in question was built by him in the 
early 1700s, initially for pumping water out of  
mines but finally ending up as a canal pump about 
a century later where it saw another century of  
intermittent service, then sat around for half 
a century till being upgraded and restored in  
the mid 1960s as the Newcomen Memorial. Note both 
that engine and that light bulb have been around  
essentially since their foundational technology 
was invented, so older examples are not possible,  
but both might be around for a long time to come.
The only other machine with moving parts and gears  
I could find that exceeds that engine appears to 
be some church bells on older cathedrals, with the  
Salisbury Clock of 1386 often getting the title 
of oldest working clock, though that is disputed,  
and was neither continuous nor without repair, 
but nearly six and half centuries is a pretty  
impressive lifetime. Another popular one is the 
Antikythera Mechanism, often considered the oldest  
computer and assumed to be used for astronomical 
predictions. Though not in continuous use, as it  
was found in 1901 in a shipwreck off the Greek 
Island of Antikythera, the same year that the  
oldest working lightbulb got turned on, and 
believed to be from sometime in the first or  
second century BC. At over two thousand years old, 
it’s both a reminder how long things can survive  
even with no attempt to preserve them nor 
to design them to be long-lasting, and of  
course reminds us how much effort it would take to 
build a machine that could last a million years. 
Now as I already mentioned machine is a hazy 
term and even something like a self-replicating  
organism or an organization of humans 
devoted to operating and repairing a machine  
can be contemplated as machines. So too, I would 
not be surprised if there was some old canal lock  
or waterwheel that was still going 
from the hazy dawn of civilization,  
or some old roman road, and one can make 
an argument that a lot of stone constructs,  
like Stonehenge or megaliths and pyramids, are 
still doing their job and qualify as machines.  
If one happened to be instructions on how to 
maintain a device, like a big stone tablet carved  
with the schematics and purpose for something 
more intricate, then that might qualify too. 
It is often noted that old objects were built 
to last, often in context of modern stuff being  
cheap junk, and also often citing those old 
stone age relics as proof of the comment.  
First, tons of stuff made in every period of 
humanity is short-lived or long-lived but the  
longer back you are looking, the fewer of the 
available examples are going to be short-lived.  
We made crappy cheap furniture in the past too, 
but you won’t find a lot of 100 year old examples  
of unsteady furniture because it broke already. 
Second, while planned obsolescence does occur,  
a lot of time someone engineering and building 
something asks if there’s any good reason to build  
it to last long, and many devices are expecting 
to be upgraded anyway – You don’t need a CD player  
or tape deck designed to last a century – so we 
don’t bother spending money on stronger materials  
or extra durability testing. And a carpet meant 
to last 50 years sounds nice but do you really  
want to pay twice as much for the pleasure of 
still having a shag rug in your house from 1970? 
If you know in five years your gadget will 
be redundant you have little incentive to  
engineer it to have a longer life, especially 
as you would like folks to buy new ones and also  
really don’t want to be maintaining an expensive 
tech support department trying to solve puzzles  
on an increasingly old and erratic version of 
the device in favor of telling folks to throw  
them in the trash and buy a new one. Which sounds 
irritating from a consumer side of things but so  
does finding out your old flip phone was made 
twice as heavy and four times as expensive as  
it needed to be so that you could still use 
it in 2122. Same often applies to furniture,  
we have bigger houses than back in the 
day and move more, so more furniture,  
more moving, and sturdy furniture is heavy 
and expensive and fashion changes a lot.  
The 400 pound lime green sofa grandma bought may 
still be structurally sound, even all these years,  
but it just doesn’t match your décor. And honestly 
most folks like switching up a house or at least  
a room every so often, remodel or redecorated.
And I’m emphasizing this point because this has  
always been true. There is always a cost to making 
something more durable against time and wear and  
tear, and sometimes it just costs more in terms 
of effort, other times it breaks the usefulness  
of the item. Our ancestors didn’t have steel for 
their mammoth hunting spears, and a stone shaft  
might have made them last longer than a wooden 
one, while sitting around waiting for use and not  
rotting away, but it would have been ultra-heavy 
and brittle, thus not very useful for its job.  
Our ancestors built monuments out of stone 
because they could, and they used huge slabs  
because they didn’t have the architectural 
and engineering skills to use lighter ones. 
By and large our ancestors were 
probably more short-sighted than us,  
they had more immediate crises 
and generally shorter lives,  
but it didn’t stop them from taking on 
multi-generational building projects.  
In some way it probably encouraged it because they 
didn’t know all the ways stuff could wear down and  
have all sorts of actuarial tables and analysis 
of opportunity cost encouraging them to ask if  
the project was a good investment or if a given 
feature or component should be done more cheaply.  
Either way, they built plenty of stuff 
that was short term too but we only see  
the stuff that was long term and a lot of time 
because it was basically emulating geology. 
However, while stone is a potential option for 
long lasting machinery, a stone monolith doesn’t  
really last ten thousand years, rather the big 
chunk of stone it was made out of is already  
millions of years old when you carved it up, and 
now those exterior features will start weathering  
down, and getting eroded by tourists and by 
folks who dislike the monument and deface it.  
Stone is also an example of self-selecting 
examples, there is plenty of stone that  
doesn’t handle time and weathering and erosion 
well. It's just that over many billions of years  
a lot of different types of stone get made and 
the more durable ones tend to become more common.  
Much like radioactive isotopes, it's not that the 
isotopes of some element with shorter half-lives  
form less often, it's that they decay away much 
quicker, so that in nature, on an old planet like  
ours, almost all of a naturally occurring element 
is those stable or long half-life versions. 
So is this what we’re building machines out 
of? Stone and radioisotopes with longer lives? 
Possibly, it's not a bad option. Stone is 
durable, and generally against radiation too,  
and cheap. Radioisotopes are weaker as 
power sources the longer lived they are,  
but there’s quite a few with half-lives in 
the million year range, and they generally  
are over a million times more energy dense than 
chemical fuels or batteries. These can be used  
to passively power RTGS, radioisotope thermal 
generators, which are a type of nuclear battery.  
Their decay causes some heat to be produced, then 
generates electricity in a thermocouple and RTGs  
are amazingly simple and durable devices. Indeed 
it's hard to imagine a machine much more simple  
and durable than a thermocouple or a thermopile, 
a stack of thermocouples, as a thermocouple is  
just two bits of conductive metal – but not the 
same type of metal, like copper and nickel, stuck  
touching each other. That makes RTGs the de facto 
lead candidate for powering ultra-durable machines  
since the other part of that power supply 
beside the durable and simple thermocouples  
is the radioisotope, and those decay following a 
statistical pattern that is so ultra-reliable – in  
quantity anyway – that we long used it for 
our most accurate clocks, atomic clocks, those  
wouldn’t lose a second over an entire century.
So RTGs for power but what radioisotope could  
run a million year machine? Uranium-234, half-life 
of a quarter of a million years, probably wouldn’t  
quite do the job since only a 16th of it would be 
left after a million years to power the device,  
but Plutonium-242, half-life 375,000 years, 
Aluminum-26, half-life 717,000 years,  
Iron-60, 2.6 million years, and Neptunium-237 at 
2.1 million years, are all good candidates. Indeed  
Neptunium-237 is the only isotope of Neptunium 
produced in our nuclear fuel cycle of uranium  
in any quantity and thus is a decent option. Many 
isotopes would be more ideal for a given timeline,  
there are around a hundred radioisotopes with 
lives in excess of a thousand years, some with  
lifespans longer than our Universe, which might do 
the job but some are far harder to get in quantity  
than others. See our episode from last week on 
Nuclear Transmutation for more discussion of that. 
Now we often imagine very long-lived 
machines as having two sorts of lives,  
one is the perpetual use variety, it does its main 
job all the time like the artificial lighting that  
a space habitat would need, and the other is 
the hibernator. It runs on low most of the time,  
or even sleeps and wakes to check intermittently, 
and then flips on to main power if the tasks it's  
been waiting for is ready to go. An example 
might be a probe you landed on the airless  
moon of some inhabited planet with animal 
life to watch for signs of technological  
life emerging millions of years later.
For something like this, a mix of radioisotopes  
and a fission reactor might work well. Our main 
fuel for existing nuclear reactors is uranium-235  
with a half-life of 700 million years, so your 
machine can keep a supply of it ready for an  
actual fission reactor to turn on and pour out the 
megawatts for millions of years without problem,  
indeed you could use it as your radioisotope 
thermal generator fuel supply for a billion-year  
probe. For something in the million year 
range, you might run an RTG on something  
that was a fission or breeder reactor byproduct 
like Plutonium-239, half-life 24,000 years,  
and turn your big fission reactor on every 20 
millennia or so to refresh your supply and do your  
main maintenance cycle. That cycle might include 
sending out resource harvesting probes too, or  
checking for and implementing upgrades and patches 
from home, or siblings in your network breaking  
down where you might need to copy yourself and 
send a probe to replace the one a few light years  
away on another world that failed. Redundancy, 
durability, and replacement are the keys here. 
Incidentally one might wonder why you would land a 
probe on the Moon for monitoring Earth, or another  
alien world and its moon, and also why not use 
solar power given the reliability of sunlight.  
For location it’s a fairly popular one in 
science fiction, presumably because you could  
not get there to find it, but that’s a fairly 20th 
century specific bit of thinking. A long duration  
satellite would be closer, a mountain or polar 
base even closer than that, it's just that by the  
time of modern scifi we had explored our ice caps 
and mountain peaks and found every remote island,  
so they didn’t seem good picks anymore. Early 
20th century scifi did often have ancient aliens  
on remote islands, deep under the sea, or in 
antarctica, like the classic Cthulhu mythos tale  
“At the Mountains of Madness” by HP Lovecraft, 
set during an exploration of Antarctica.  
A million year machine to monitor a species 
for emerging tech probably won’t cite its  
location in a place we couldn’t find to 
the 20th century rather than 19th, or 21st,  
like our Moon, but remote has other advantages.
The assumption is an airless and waterless world  
like the Moon is better for avoiding rust, 
corrosion, erosion, getting buried under a  
glacier or avalanche, and so on. This is decent 
reasoning but you need to bury most of your probe,  
because that lack of air isn’t burning up 
meteorites to protect your gear like our own  
atmosphere does. That makes Solar power fairly 
rough to do, and made worse by all that nasty  
moondust, which is brutal on machinery and would 
be kicked up by any nearby micro meteor collision,  
and by ultraviolet light, which is equally 
brutal on machinery and electronics. There  
are ways around that, for instance a bunch 
of radioisotopes is not the only way to make  
a power supply with a thermocouple, you just need 
a heat source, and sunlight works for that too. A  
big pile of rock with thermocouples in it getting 
heated by sunlight then cooled by its absence is a  
pretty rugged and durable power generator, albeit 
not even vaguely efficient in terms of mass or  
conversion efficiency. But rock and sunlight are 
both cheap and so are thermocouples. If you need a  
kilowatt of steady power and the durable version 
requires a hundred times the volume, it hardly  
matters on the Moon, which has plenty to spare.
Down on a planet you have to worry about things  
besides meteors too, like weather and earthquakes 
and continental shift not to mention some critter  
chewing on your machinery or deciding all your 
conduits make a great place to build a hive.  
I’m not really sure how aliens would react to 
finding out that their multi-trillion dollar  
anthropological probe was now full of honeycombs 
and some strange amber-colored thick liquid  
full of sugars but I really could imagine 
something akin to that happening to one of  
our own probes on some alien planet someday.
The top of a mountain is better protected  
from life, and offers a wider field of view of the 
planet, but nothing like its entirety. You can see  
336 kilometers or about 200 miles all around Mount 
Everest, an area roughly the size of Germany, but  
that’s not even a thousandth of Earth’s surface 
area. So this makes a moon sound more appealing  
but keep in mind, even the Hubble telescope can’t 
see the Apollo Mission leftovers on the Moon,  
so you would need a pretty big and 
visible telescope on the Moon to see  
Earth in enough detail to even notice something 
elephant-sized as a distinct and moving blob.  
So you either need to be considering satellites or 
doing something ground-based if you actually want  
to usefully observe the lifeforms, let alone 
get biological and genetic samples and data. 
Now satellites are an option but have their 
own problems lasting long times without being  
perturbed from orbit, and the closer to a planet 
the worse that is. I could definitely imagine  
one with regenerative orbital stabilizers 
though, rather than a limited fuel supply,  
we have designs for that already, electrodynamic 
tethering, light sails, or even emitting a laser  
beam as thrust. So we can assume an advanced 
civilization can keep a satellite up,  
especially in a higher orbit, but it still 
wouldn’t let you poke around on the planet,  
just observe from above, and that’s an awful 
place to send probes from since you have to  
mess around with atmospheric entry and huge fuel 
bills, plus there’s no raw materials on hand. 
So what would that look like? An 
ultra-long duration orbital probe,  
to me, is probably one with an unfolding 
shell, it uses solar thermal power to run  
itself not photovoltaic panels, and probably 
uses a thick hide to absorb sunlight for that  
and only extrudes its thruster, electrodynamic 
tethers, periscopes, sails, or what have you  
when in the planetary shadow. It would likely 
use visible light sensors but also infrared,  
radio, or a bunch of other sensor options.
A big thick dark shell for absorbing sunlight  
makes it fairly stealthy, and you can also set it 
to crash itself into the atmosphere and detonate  
mid-drop to dispose of the evidence of its 
existence if you start seeing signs of technology,  
after sending home a signal of course, and 
assuming its either too dumb or too loyal  
not to object to doing a suicide maneuver as its 
rewards for a millions years of faithful service. 
Crashing into an atmosphere isn’t a 
guaranteed burnup of everything either,  
it might still leave components scattered all 
over the place, especially with the ultra-robust  
engineering standards you would be using for this 
machinery. Another option would be to instruct the  
probe to steer its reentry into an active volcanic 
lava lake such as Mount Erebus. Probably the most  
realistic option though, would be to just calmly 
begin raising your orbital velocity until the  
probe escapes the planet, then fly it into a 
gas giant or have it leave the solar system.
Incidentally the idea of an ancient alien probe on 
the Moon often relied on the notion that it wasn’t  
observing much, it was just waiting for some 
clear sign of intelligence, like a radio signal,  
but as we have discussed in our various Fermi 
Paradox and Alien Civilization episodes,  
this is not a good approach to monitoring 
the galaxy for life or intelligence. Whether  
it is for malevolent or benevolent ends, 
there’s much easier ways to look for life,  
and intelligent life too, than waiting for 
a radio signal. Hundreds of regular infrared  
signatures of fires staying controlled 
rather than roasting the local landscape,  
which is to say campfires, is one that lets 
your probe find humanity a million years ago. 
Now something like a time capsule to 
help you rebuild your civilization  
might aim for a technosignature like that, 
radio signals or others specific to a later era,  
heightened carbon dioxide or signs of large scale 
agriculture and so on. The idea being you want  
to make sure the archive with all the tech in it 
is only getting opened by folks already advanced  
enough not to accidentally smash it. I dislike 
fictional portrayals of low-tech civilizations  
as stupid and casually destructive like a toddler 
but it isn’t really hard to imagine an iron or  
bronze age explorer finding such a radio beacon, 
seeing the antenna, and casually snapping it off  
to take closer look, like a twig off a tree. Not 
a good idea to gamble your civilization-restoring  
gambit on nobody doing something like that.
That’s a good reminder that part of building  
a machine that can last a million years is 
including animals and human psychology in the mix.  
Whatever its purpose is, you want to minimize 
the chance of that being lost or hijacked.  
There’s a game commonly played by kids 
called telephone, where one person starts  
a message and each kid whispers it into their 
neighbor’s ear till the last kid on the chain  
gets it and announces it. There’s always some 
mutation from problems hearing or low attention  
span but a lot of the mutation is boredom, and 
thus an amusing message or mutation lasts longer,  
in what might be considered an amusing parallel 
to evolution and natural selection, as any silly  
or attention-grabbing mutation of the message 
is likely to get repeated with higher veracity.  
When building machines for the long term, 
keep it simple, keep it dumb probably helps,  
but so does keeping it amusing or interesting. So 
too, when building on these timescales, you need  
to worry about your care tenders or gatekeepers 
mutating too, in thought and even form. 
Now how long you can build a machine obviously 
depends on your available materials but we really  
shouldn’t be assuming advanced civilizations just 
magically have better ones. Nature produces a  
lot of materials out of ridiculously brutal 
conditions, planet mantles and star cores,  
and those materials which are made in such places 
and are durable are mostly still around. Now  
in our recent episode on Advanced Materials 
we went through a list of various materials  
that were the current best at some given thing – 
strength, heat resistance, lightness, and so on,  
and many were new but many were not, many were 
old champions still reigning. So we shouldn’t  
just take for granted we’re going to come up 
with better materials and more importantly,  
we don’t actually need to for this purpose.
Don’t get me wrong, some hyper-tough material that  
could withstand nuclear blasts would be handy for 
building but by and large the failure modes for  
these machines wouldn’t be structural collapses 
anyway. Rather, it's getting the gears clogged  
up with some mix of lint and goo or a thick layer 
of dust on the circuits because those need cooling  
and nobody remembered to account for that in the 
ultra-long-lived design. Sadly the easiest way to  
correct problems is to encounter them repeatedly 
and redesign around them, and that’s rather hard  
to do for a machine you’re prototyping for a 
million-year lifespan, especially if it’s the  
survival vector for your civilization on some 
interstellar ark ship or technology-preserving  
museum. A lot of times you just overbuild your 
device for a long duration by making every  
component bigger, even your screws and wires, but 
this doesn’t work too well for micro-circuitry. 
High-tech sure helps though. As an example, 
if you’ve got enough power and enough computer  
you ought to be able to constantly replenish 
everything via self-replication or 3D printing,  
and then it’s just a matter of making sure you can 
actually print all the parts for your 3D printer  
on your 3D Printer. This isn’t a scifi story 
though or genie lamp with a rule about not  
wishing for more wishes. There’s nothing in 
modern 3D printers that’s weird and hard to make,  
allowing you to manufacture the parts 
the 3d printer needs for replacement,  
and so there is no reason to think your plan 
would fail because your 3D printer could make  
everything else you need but more of itself.
Of course there might be other devices you  
need that are very hard for that 3D printer 
to make but there’s no particular reason  
your survival strategy should be built 
around a single manufacturing machine,  
in quantity or type, any more than our 
current industry and infrastructure do.  
This is why I often emphasize that we 
should imagine self-replicating machines  
as an entire ecology of many different species, 
akin to the variety of organs and microorganisms  
inside our own bodies, not a single homogenous 
universale tiny robot. This pathway probably  
lets you repair your machines and replace 
them, then you just need to power them. 
There’s some pretty cool power supply options too, 
like a hawking radiation black hole generator,  
and some 9 million ton micro-black hole should 
have a lifetime of a million years and a power  
output of 4 trillion watts, a thousand hoover 
dams, so makes for quite the power plant for  
any bunker or buried moon probe or giant 
deep space archive or factory complex.  
Or galactic space vessel, for that matter, though 
it’s a bit heavy and low in power to weight ratio  
for an interstellar ship and bit too short lived 
for an intergalactic one. But a black hole engine  
in that mass and power range would be optimal 
for a sublight journey from one region of the  
galaxy to another or even to Magellanic Clouds. 
Hawking Radiation Drives also get more powerful  
and lighter in mass as time goes on, so they 
are great, if your timing is good, at serving  
as the deceleration method for a colony ship.
If you’re curious, a billion year black hole  
masses about 10 times that, 88 million metric 
tons, and would provide 460 gigawatts of power,  
which would run a pretty big life support 
system for an intergalactic colony  
ship aimed at another supercluster. Black Hole 
evaporation time goes with the cube of mass,  
10 times the mass, a thousand times the lifetime, 
and power goes with the inverse square of mass,  
10 times the mass, a hundredth the power. 
It has ten times the mass and energy in it,  
but since it takes a thousand times longer to leak 
out, it does so at a hundredth the rate overall,  
but that rate rises with time as the mass leaks 
out and causes the evaporation rate to rise. 
Hawking Radiation Black Holes are amazing 
power supplies for long range ships too  
because again, you can build that black 
hole to your expected mission timeline  
and then use something like a laser 
highway to push you up to cruising speed  
then run your life support on that black hole and 
use it’s near-death higher power to slow the ship.  
And if your timing is off, you can feed it a 
little more matter to slow that end. It would  
be an interesting conundrum if civilizations 
using such micro black holes intentionally  
made them bigger, weaker and longer-lived 
than the mission required for redundancy  
or shorter-lived for higher power and power to 
mass ratio but fed the black hole to sustain it,  
and presumably it depends on how easily they can 
feed one, which is counter-intuitively difficult  
for tiny ones, since they would often be tinier 
than the atoms you were trying to feed them. 
See our various Black Hole episodes for more 
discussion of all that and other ways to power  
ships or civilizations with black holes. It is 
also decently likely you could make a very durable  
power generator around a micro-black hole too. The 
leading candidate for containing one is a magnetic  
field, which is easy to make and make durably, 
and nothing is stopping you from making your  
housing out of lead and just using the heat of 
the evaporating black hole to run thermocouples. 
So the power supply seems solid and normally 
raw materials for repair won’t be the problem.  
Truth be told I wouldn’t expect self-replicating 
machinery or simple micro-repair machinery to  
be the hard part either. We do not have this 
yet ourselves but we are actually made of it  
ourselves, and it's worth remembering that while 
we started by building our machines big and  
miniaturizing them, nature started miniature and 
evolved to be big. Given that we assume this was  
done by accident and random chance, it presumably 
is not that hard to replicate. The big issue again  
is that whole mutation issue, after all those tiny 
early natural machines eventually mutated into us. 
To be fair they mostly did not mutate into us. 
If you count every organism on this planet,  
virtually all of them are microscopic, and if you 
count everyone that ever lived this share rises,  
as they reproduce and die far faster than big 
organisms, by and large. But things can keep their  
purpose a long time this way, we often think of 
humans as the most evolved organism on the planet  
but that implies purpose – which is antithetical 
to the concept of Darwinian Evolution. 
By that, the more reasonable gauge of evolution 
advancement would be number of generations an  
organism had since that primordial one and we 
would be pretty low down on that list while  
bacteria would be way ahead, potentially 
more than a trillion generations removed,  
and viruses can do even better and might be a 
much better basis for self-replicating machinery.  
The thing is, while really unstable DNA, or 
RNA, is not great for survival of the species,  
low mutation DNA to the point of no mutation 
isn’t either, thus presumably doesn’t evolve much.  
DNA is really good at copying itself 
accurately but is not a good basis for  
assuming how mutation in machines or data works.
Most people these days copy and move data all the  
time but few wonder how it manages to arrive 
perfectly intact, even when transferring on  
your phone during a phone call through 
an area with signal cutting in and out.  
There’s a number of ways of engaging in data 
authenticity but probably the easiest and most  
well known is called Checksum, particularly the 
longitudinal parity check. Here a piece of data  
is broken into segments for transmission and any 
given segment has a unique or near unique number  
corresponding to how you add up the bits in 
that segment which the receiver sends back.  
If the sender gets a number back that 
doesn’t match what it's supposed to,  
it says no, here’s the correct one again.
There’s several other methods, variations  
on Checksum and others completely different 
in nature, and they may be used in tandem as  
each additional layer makes it exponentially 
less likely to be flawed, by accident anyway. 
We are already easily able to produce a data 
verification method that would be less likely than  
not to mutate a single bit of data in a sample the 
size of a DNA helix over the course of the entire  
age of the Universe, and this isn’t really about 
getting more technologically advanced to further  
improve it. I would hardly be surprised if a few 
centuries from now they had vastly better methods  
but the key point is we already have all the 
tech and knowledge we need for effectively  
mutation-free data transmission and storage, even 
of galactic distances, quantities, and timelines. 
Nonetheless you still want to use other methods 
since for one thing, that was assuming random  
mutation, not sabotage. Imagine you have a 
replicator Swarm hanging out near an asteroid  
where the big main manufacturing hub, reactor, 
and brain was, and those swarms were its probes,  
defenses, resource gatherers, eyes, and ears, and 
so on. It probably has several different breeds of  
machines performing this role, and that probably 
includes sending out waves of random inspectors  
to grab some machines and check their equivalent 
to DNA, and sending out additional purge waves if  
mutation has arisen. It would seem very unlikely 
random mutation would ever cause fairly dumb AI  
probes to mutate up to being geniuses without you 
noticing with attention and periodic inspection,  
even over interstellar efforts spanning billions 
of years. As an intuitive parallel, its unlikely  
cats, dogs, elephants, or dolphins would evolve 
an advanced brain and civilization without us  
noticing and preventing it would be no challenge.
Instead the real issue is with the thinking brain.  
And you need one, even if it isn’t some machine 
mind but rather the humans in the colony fleet  
or back home directing all this and making 
the big calls. Now that is a debatable point,  
and Peter Watts laid out a brilliant line 
of reasoning in his novel blindsight for why  
intelligence may be totally unnecessary and even 
a hindrance for spacefaring species, but I didn’t  
find it quite compelling enough as a Fermi Paradox 
solution and the key thing about intelligence is  
that it’s pretty changing and change-seeking by 
nature and there’s a fairly strong argument to be  
made that Perverse Instantiation is inevitable 
with any artificial intelligence - which would  
include people too, like your colonist on your 
ship deciding they no longer want to follow the  
plan you laid out long before they were born.
The AI Control Problem, which checks for  
Malignant Failure and Perverse Instantiation, is 
basically reasoning that any super intelligent AI  
will always figure out someway to pervert 
your orders and directives to its own ends,  
and again it's not unique to robots, it's just 
something similar to that habit of little kids  
to try to lawyer their way out of some parental 
dictum. You tell it to protect and obey all humans  
and it weasel words that into deciding humans 
represent the biggest threats to other humans,  
so it lobotomizes all of you super-quick before 
you realize it's trying to and dumps you all in  
life support tanks. Or skips the lobotomy and just 
sticks you into a virtual world, Matrix-style. 
With this in mind Hibernation is a good idea for 
anything with a real brain. Alastair Reynolds’  
uses that notion with his civilization-wrecking 
Inhibitors, a galaxy spanning cloud of tiny  
machines that form into smarter conglomerations 
for handling crises – like civilizations trying to  
colonize the galaxy – and which just keep merging 
into smarter and bigger units, and reproducing to  
get smarter as needed, until they can handle 
the problem. Then they crank back down again,  
going dumb and waiting till the next crisis be it 
a decade or a billion years later. I’m not sure  
I’d trust a machine to lobotomize itself after its 
job, but that might turn out to be a very easy and  
reliable thing to program into a mind. We’re too 
new at AI to speculate beyond comparing it to  
ourselves and our self-survival instinct.
I could imagine weird innovations like  
mind viruses, existential crises triggered 
by protracted awareness and lack of purpose,  
mission complete, existential crisis and 
suicide timer triggered. That’s pretty grim,  
especially if we’re talking people, for a given 
value of ‘people’, but they might be volunteers  
and of course just because it's unethical doesn’t 
mean it is ineffective or wouldn't be done. 
Personally I would imagine most civilizations 
going interstellar are fairly post-human too, so  
that the people on the journey are quite capable 
of going into hibernation either by freezing  
or just dialing themselves down, the cyborg 
shifting power to maintenance mode as it were. 
So this part of things should be doable, whether 
it's an AI or a human or human colony. You aim for  
hibernation to maintain purpose, in your thing 
or things doing the thinking and deciding. And  
you can probably have progressive layers of those 
woken as needed for various severities and types  
of problems, including the problem of checking 
on the ideological purity of its peers. Gives  
a bit of grim retitling to the ship's counselor 
or mission psychologist though, as nominal jury  
and executioner, or programmer and brainwasher.
It also minimizes, for humans or their equivalent,  
the whole mission drift issue, because it's not 
the distant descendants still doing the mission.  
Something we discussed way back in our Ark of 
Million Years episode was how you would keep  
your colonist not only trained in how to run and 
maintain a ship over thousands of generations, but  
how you would keep them locked on that mission, 
colonization of a given star or some other  
mission like a distant invasion or million year 
monitoring or quarantining of a primitive planet.  
A point I raised there was that I 
wasn’t sure it was ethical to even try.  
In the classic scifi series, Isaac Asimov’s 
Foundation, a recurring point is that the Dead  
Hand of their ancient oracle, Hari Seldon, is 
guiding everything to an inevitable conclusion.  
Honestly, even though I love that series, 
I think that’s something I would reject. 
Only a fool ignores the lessons of history 
or wisdom of their ancestors and forefathers,  
but by that same reasoning, there’s more 
history passed since then, and I can see  
any crisis going on currently at least as well as 
they could, centuries back. Such being the case,  
the decision making role should belong to the 
folks on the ground at that place and time,  
not a controller distant in the past. And the 
morality seems pretty similar, what right does  
some long dead or distant person have telling me 
what to do? Why should I let myself be moved by a  
long dead hand? If it's because their purpose 
and reason were highly reasonable, then that  
reason should be as clear to me now, and only 
overridden if I could see an even better path,  
and thus adapt or alter the plan to better.
And if as we have seen today your most reliable  
enduring and self-repairing machine is a 
smart one, or rather a collection of them  
working in concert and checking on each other, 
then is not your best million year machine a  
civilization itself? And if it is, then does the 
original planner have any more skill or foresight  
or right to be steering that mission? Anymore 
than whichever ancestor of ours a million years  
ago discovered fire? And do they actually need 
to leave a monolith behind telling us how to  
make fire and what it can be used for? That which 
is useful is rarely forgotten and if it isn’t,  
maybe a vast effort to ensure it 
is recalled is not a great plan. 
In the end that may be the most 
important part of designing a machine  
able to endure a million years, not if you could 
build it, but whether you need to, or should.
So we were discussing Checksum and other methods 
of maintaining data integrity today and if you’re  
curious to learn more about such concepts and 
improve your knowledge of computer science,  
algorithms, and math in general, there’s a 
number of amazing courses on Computer Science  
over on Brilliant. The best way to learn things 
is with hands on interactions, and Brilliant’s  
interactive quizzes on Algorithms and Decision 
making are just a few of their entertaining  
and educational approaches to helping you learn.
Coding language can seem opaque and confusing,  
making folks think they can’t learn computer 
science, but Brilliant can help you learn  
how to program without having to dig through 
the weeds of coding syntax through these fun  
and interactive challenges. You just shift around 
these blocks of "pseudocode", and then you can get  
immediate feedback on your results. It's a good 
way to understand how computer algorithms work,  
and then once you have that down, the coding 
syntax becomes a lot less intimidating. 
Brilliant is an online interactive 
STEM-learning platform that helps you gain  
a deeper understanding of concepts in math, 
science, and computer science by taking you  
through the subjects piece by piece in visually 
stimulating, hands-on ways. To get started  
for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur 
or click on the link in the description,  
and the first 200 people will get 20% off 
Brilliant's annual premium subscription. 
So that will wrap us up for today but not for 
the week, as this weekend we’ll have our March  
Scifi Sunday episode to look at the concept 
of Synthetic Life. And we’ll keep to the scifi  
theme as we return to our Alien Civilizations 
series to contemplate the concept of clandestine  
extraterrestrial operations and Covert Aliens. 
After that we’ll jump forward to the distant  
future and look at a time when the Moon has 
become an enormous Mega City. Then we’ll finish  
out March with our Livestream Q&A followed 
by a look at Programmable and Smart Matter. 
Now if you want alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to the  
Channel and hit the notifications bell, and if you 
enjoyed this episode, please hit the like button,  
share it with others, and leave a comment below. 
You can also join in the conversation on any  
of our social media forums, find our audio-only 
versions of the show, or donate to support future  
episodes, and all those options and more are 
listed in the links in the episode description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
