What we’ll be doing here today is reviewing
some of the more common proposed solutions
to the Fermi Paradox – which is essentially
the question ‘if there are aliens, why can’t
we see them?’ – and look over some of
the strengths and weaknesses of those solutions.
There are a lot of them so we’ll be moving
fairly quickly over each, and we’ll also
loosely categorize them into some groups.
No grouping is really ideal but they are helpful
so here are the ones I’ve selected:
Category 1: Alien Civilizations are Incredibly
Uncommon.
There are no alien civilizations, or they
are so incredibly rare that most galaxies
have never spawned one.
Category 2: They are common but hard to see.
There are alien civilizations but we can’t
hear them.
Category 3: They exist and are not hard to
see.
We interact with them routinely but most or
all don’t realize it.
Category 4: Miscellaneous.
Or in more generalized form, Category 1, we
can’t see aliens because they don’t exist,
Category 2 we can’t see them because we’re
not looking hard enough or in the right way,
category 3 we can’t see them because we’re
being tricked or tricking ourselves, and category
4 we have a massive flaw in our logic where
this paradox is concerned.
Category 1 we’ll cover pretty quickly because
first I recently did a lengthy video discussing
it in enormous detail and second it’s the
camp I loosely align to so I’m not great
at criticizing it.
But inside Category 1 you basically have three
subdivisions.
1A: The conditions needed to achieve complex
life are much less common than we assume.
1B: Intelligence is not a common outcome of
evolution, or Intelligence does not lead to
technological civilizations.
1C: Intelligence in this Universe does not
occur naturally.
Category 1A is fairly broad but essentially
comes down to the notion of Great Filters
and the Rare Earth Hypothesis.
In the Fermi Paradox a Great Filter is something
which assumes a lot of steps on the road to
becoming a technological civilization and
staying there for long enough to be seen and
heard.
Sometimes this is a single filter, like an
assumption all or nearly all civilizations
nuke themselves out of existence within a
century of making a nuclear bomb, but just
as often it can be a series of filters that
each have a large chance of enduring the journey.
1 in 10 stars can host habitable planets,
one in ten of those worlds develop life, one
tenth of those get complex life, one tenth
of those luck out on some cataclysm or change
that wipes out complex life too frequently
to go further or makes it so it can’t continue,
one tenth develop life with significant brains,
one tenth of those achieve intelligence, one
tenth of those develop technology, and one
tenth of those avoid wiping themselves out.
That’s 8 one tenths, or 1 in 100 million.
Which would still result in several thousands
of civilizations in this galaxy alone but
if the odds were one in a hundred each step
that would be less than one per several thousand
galaxies and explain why we hadn’t detected
them.
There’s also potential criteria that might
be uncommon but required for complex life,
like having a large moon or Jupiter to vacuum
up space debris so it doesn’t rain down
on the planet regularly or that conditions
on planets are very prone to toppling out
of habitability.
Here are some of those, and again we won’t
really be challenging these as much as we
will in other categories:
Planetary habitable zones are narrow and move
as stars age.
We classify habitable zones basically as where
liquid water can exist on something of near-Earth
size but that’s a pretty big guess, and
planets don’t move in circular orbits but
ellipses.
Planets might ice over or tilt into runaway
greenhouse effects far more easily then we
currently assume.
Additionally, the luminosity of stars changes
over time, they get brighter, that pushes
the habitable zone outward.
Many also fluctuate in brightness much more
than our Sun, and give off regular deluges
of light, like XUV radiation, which is inimical
to life, not just Earth life but any life
based on regular chemistry.
Jovian planets are rare: The notion that a
planet will get bombarded by asteroids without
some other larger body around to pull those
in is a fairly valid one but this idea has
fallen out of favor as a strong filter because
we’ve detected so many planets in other
solar systems that parallel Jupiter in size
and location to perform the vacuum cleaner
function.
Large moons are rare: Earth’s own moon is
very nearly a double planet and it has a huge
impact on our environment in terms of tides,
weather, our axial tilt, and so on.
It is usually assumed that early land life
evolved from creatures that had evolved to
handle tide pools.
No big moon, no tides.
Geological events have to be just right for
complex life: A planet with no volcanoes or
plate tectonics is going to erode away into
a massive flat mudball or landless sea which
is not well suited for diverse complex life
let alone tool using life.
And we have many others.
Cells with nuclei develop rarely, specialized
organisms with distinct organs are not common,
galaxies are volatile place which often expose
worlds to sterilizing blasts of radiation,
and so on.
Individually one of these might be a Great
Filter that fewer than one in a billion pass
or they may each just be something that just
drops the odds of life by an order or two
of magnitude which adds up to making complex
life rare.
The big ‘flaw’ here is that we really
just don’t know the odds and none of them
seem to work as a single Great Filter.
None of those really seem like one in a billion
type things and many are not even indicated
to be less likely than not, let alone highly
improbable, so stacking them all into a sequence
that makes complex life rare is sort of like
assuming the worst case scenario has happened
each step along the way.
Category 1B: That intelligence or technological
civilizations are rare isn’t necessarily
separate from 1A, since it can just be additional
layers of filtering, but is distinct in that
it argues that technological civilizations
may be a freak anomaly and not an inevitable
end goal of evolution.
Now, of course, evolutions does not have end
goals but it does tend to produce increased
complexity and sophistication and we often
assume intelligence to be one of those and
technology inevitable from that.
The other chunk of 1B is that tech civs might
be uncommon because they inevitably take themselves
out through nukes, biological warfare, runaway
self-replicating machines, and so on.
1B is complicated because ‘intelligence’
is a bit hard to define.
Humans are the only ‘intelligent’ life
on Earth but of course are not.
Besides other primates like chimpanzees we
have cats, dogs, dolphins, elephants, pigs,
raccoons, and many other creatures who we’re
tens of millions of years away from in terms
of common ancestors and yet have clear intelligence,
problem solving abilities, and even tool use
or building skills.
Many have had this level of intelligence for
a very, very long time even on geological
timelines and yet never carried it any further.
Now many assume humans just hit the complex
tool use level first and that if we disappeared
eventually one of them would get there but
our brains, with the large, folded forebrain
and cerebral cortex is a pretty big jump and
there are a lot of little factors in our biology
that probably contributed to our rise as a
technological civilization which are peculiar
or sometimes even harmful to us.
We have large heads with skulls that are soft
so they can expand later, and this is very
dangerous for live birth, additionally that
soft skull probably is a big factor in the
plasticity of our brains which is very associated
to learning, and a need for learning since
you don’t have as many wired instincts.
It’s not just that you can learn, it is
that you must learn.
We are omnivores, cats aren’t, they can
probably never develop specialist societies
because they can’t support a dense population
through agriculture and everything they eat
is terrified of them making it probably fairly
hard to get into tending livestock.
Even if you get the brain, and tool use, which
we’ve had for hundreds of thousands of years,
you might not use technology much.
We have fire, but that might not be popular.
We cook our food, which allows us store meat
longer and also let’s us digest certain
types of it better to derive more nutrient
from it.
A given critter might hate the taste of cooked
food.
Or the oxygen content of their world might
be a little higher making forest fires the
most dreaded bane and the very idea of someone
keeping it around the tribe considered the
equivalent of juggling hand grenades.
Fire’s dangerous as is, but its exponentially
more so as oxygen concentrations rise and
you need it for technology.
Some worlds, from different levels of tectonic
activity or erosion, or just composition,
might not have easy to find copper to make
those first metal tools limiting you to flint
and wood, which can not be used to make some
tools well enough to make them better than
employing old school methods.
Pottery will never develop if you don’t
have fire either.
Planets with no seasons, or very mild ones,
will not require means of preserving food.
Tidally locked worlds will never see the stars
where life can live, so no astrology or astronomy,
or the world might have thin clouds almost
constantly.
The world might not have large deposit of
fossil fuels.
And so on.
So essentially Category 1B challenges the
idea that evolution will inevitably spawn
technology, and throws in the caveat that
technology might also inevitably kill a world
too.
Its big flaw is that we while we know evolution
we really don’t have a clue about the probabilities
involved on given steps nor do we know if
we might stumble across some bit of seemingly
great technology that amounts to signing a
suicide contract by employing it.
Self-replicating robots, a power source that
makes fusion look shoddy but blows up a planet
after a few years of operation, etc.
Category 1C, that Intelligence in this Universe
does not occur naturally, covers more of the
supernatural cases though also includes the
extreme version of 1B that a freak anomaly
had to occur, rather than an improbable but
natural evolutionary jump.
If you’ve ever heard of Boltzmann Brain,
essentially the notion that over a long enough
time in a big enough place random events could
make a computer assemble not through evolution
but just freak odds, that’s basically the
reasoning there.
But this category includes ‘God did it’,
or ‘aliens in a prior universe with different
rules made this one’, or the near equivalent,
that we’re running in a simulation of a
universe where the laws differ from the simulators
and intelligence would not naturally develop
so they tweaked us specifically so it would.
If we wanted to simulate a universe on giant
computers where, say, the speed of light was
10% higher and found out that life could exist
but just couldn’t naturally evolve, that
the steps to get there were just too improbable
to occur, we might just throw them in ready-made
on one world to see what happened afterwards.
1C is not the scientifically popular realm
but in truth many of the other solutions we’ll
see are much akin so leaving it out would
be unfair.
It has the obvious flaw that there’s no
scientific evidence to support and that most
versions are ‘internally unprovable’,
meaning that while an outside force that did
it can come on down and say ‘hi’ you can’t,
inside the box, ever show that’s what’s
going on.
Even in the case of a Boltzmann brain, one
that assembled complete from particles with
no evolutionary steps, it would be on sound
ground to wonder if someone made it rather
than assuming it was an astronomically improbable
fluke event, even though it knows that is
possible.
A clock can assemble naturally, the odds of
this occurring are just very, very low so
outside covert construction isn’t too absurd
if you find one.
So that’s category 1, we don’t see aliens
because they are super rare or don’t even
exist.
Category 2, they are common but hard to see.
There are alien civilizations but we can’t
hear them.
This is where most of the argument goes on
and where we’ll spend most of our time.
It’s harder to break into sub-categories
but here are the major ones:
2A: They’ve got mouths but we lack ears.
Typically that means they just don’t use
radio for communication
2B: There just hasn’t been enough time for
us to hear them.
2C: They don’t talk because they have no
reason to.
2D: They hide, intentionally
The biggest flaws going into category 2 are
the Mediocrity Principle and the idea of Exclusivity.
Mediocrity Principle we know, when you’ve
only got one example of something you should
assume it’s probably a fairly normal, or
mediocre, example of such things.
It comes into category 2 because frequently
this category relies on choices and behavior
of alien civilizations and they probably have
little similarity to humans in many areas,
they are, literally, alien.
However they also just as probably have that
same alien-ness to each other.
A given alien civilization might act in some
way, but others won’t.
Unless that behavior is exclusive.
As an example, we can assume that no species
that ever explores the stars or settles other
worlds hasn’t learned basic Newtonian physics,
you need that to build rockets, you can’t
avoid seeing it in action very simplistically
in space even if you somehow got up there
without it or evolved in an asteroid belt
or deep space instead.
There’s no air friction interfering with
the basic process.
So we can say that space travel is ‘exclusive’
to species who know Newtonian Physics.
However, while many people believe in the
inevitability of social progress to some predetermined
and universal system of behavior, and often
have some good arguments to back that, it’s
pretty obvious that just among humans it is
possible to get up into space with many different
types of culture.
So it is hard to argue that space travel is
exclusive to democracies, or communist civilizations,
or ones which have curbed population growth
or given up war, etc.
Space travel would seem to be non-exclusive
of democracy, or human rights, or unchecked
population growth, or so on.
That last will come up a lot because as we
discussed in the prior video, the Dyson Dilemma,
if a species is prone to keep growing in numbers
and territory, even if it’s a very slow
growth, even if they are fairly rare they
will soon become the super-majority of intelligent
life.
So you’ll hear me reference Non-Exclusivity
with a lot of Category 2 solutions.
2a: They’ve got mouths but we lack ears.
Again, this typically that means they just
don’t use radio for communication.
This could include something faster than light
or even instant, something like neutrinos
that just go right through everything, or
even just that they don’t use omnidirectional
signals, which are pretty wasteful in most
cases especially for long distance communication
between two spots.
Even if you’ve got a hundred colony systems
around your homeworld it makes more sense
to send a tight beam to each system rather
than one big omnidirectional signal.
They talk, but we don’t hear them because
they’re talking in sign language and we’re
listening with our ears basically.
This is a pretty solid argument but it suffers
from a few problems.
First, if we don’t know what kind of new
physics they are using to talk faster than
light we’re not just assuming science we
don’t have, we’re also assuming behavior
based around something we don’t know.
We have light speed communication.
We have the internet but people still use
fax machines and snail mail.
We have TV but AM radio remains strong.
The ability to send instant messages across
the stars could be much more expensive, byte
for byte, then radio and if so you’d still
use that on your planet.
We don’t know how this thing which breaks
known physical laws would operate so it’s
a huge jump to say that’s what’s going
on.
Second, this hits the problem in the Dyson
Dilemma.
We may well not be able to hear signals from
an alien homeworld, even if they were in mundane
radio, but if they are expansionist we don’t
need to listen for their homeworld radio,
we just need to listen for their colonies.
Biological life tends to grow with time, when
it has the resources to do so and no external
pressure stopping them, over a long enough
period you don’t need to look thousands
of light years away for alien radio signals,
you just need to look at any star nearby because
they colonized it or someone else did.
Indeed, there’s no obvious reason you’d
need to listen for radio to see those nearby
worlds either because they will probably be
tapping that star for energy by surrounding
it with solar collectors and artificial habitats.
The Dyson Dilemma basically says it doesn’t
matter if we can hear their phone, because
any pro-growth civilization decently older
than us is going to have surrounded their
star and many nearby ones with Dyson Spheres
or Dyson Swarms and just keep slowly expanding
so you can’t miss them.
And this is where non-exclusivity comes in.
Unless one can show that the ability to engage
in serious expansion of your own planet is
exclusive to species which are no growth or
destined to be no growth not long after, then
it would only take one species, or even on
sub-culture of a species, that was pro-growth
to ensure this expansion happened.
Now, as we mentioned earlier, many people
do believe certain behaviors are inevitable
as a part of social progress, if you believe
that includes no growth even when you can,
then category 2A is quite reasonable, if you
believe it is not inevitable for all intelligent
life, then 2A, and most of category 2, is
shot down.
And again watch the other video if you want
that explained in detail.
This also discusses the problem where civilizations
kill themselves off in short order, which
again hits the idea of Non-Exclusivity unless
you subscribe to that being an inevitable
event by any technological species.
We will assume here that inevitable no growth
or inevitable extinction are NOT the case,
if you feel otherwise category 2 is a good
Fermi Paradox Solution.
Category 2b: There just hasn’t been enough
time for us to hear them.
This theory holds that technological life
is a very recent development, there just hasn’t
been enough time for aliens to develop and
signals to reach us, and we haven’t been
listening long enough to pick up some of the
weaker signals.
Indeed we might be the first intelligent life
form, or if they’re a bit rare, the first
in this galaxy and the guys in Andromeda beat
us to the punch by a hundred thousand years
but no signal or sign of mega-engineering
like Dyson spheres would have gotten here,
two million light years away, yet.
Life couldn’t evolve to intelligence until
relatively recently.
Now the problem here is just scale.
There is good reason to believe that complex
life might be something that could only exist
relatively recently.
It takes several generations of stars to produce
metals, many supernova events, and those same
events can sterilize nearby worlds too.
The problem is that ‘relatively recently’
generally means ‘in the last couple billion
years’.
There are over a million stars within five
hundred light years of us, the whole galaxy
is within a hundred thousand light years of
us, and there a many galaxies a few million
to maybe ten million light years from us.
Those are immense distance with correspondingly
immense times for signals to travel or an
even larger for ships that can’t go faster
than light, or even a good percent of light,
to travel.
But the problem is, as we said, scale.
A thousand years, or million years, or even
ten million years, the often cited figure
for colonizing a whole galaxy without any
major new physics being discovered, is just
a tiny, tiny number compared to even a billion
years which based on what we know of the Universe
and life ought to be the conservative and
late timeline for technological civilizations
to have arisen.
By the Mediocrity principle we must assume
that, barring evidence to the contrary, even
if no worlds that gave birth to life are older
than our star that roughly half will have
beaten us to technology by several million
years at least, and again there’s no reason
we know of why stars a billion years older
but otherwise identical wouldn’t have gotten
technology a billion years ahead of us.
So if we’re not assuming self-destruction
or zero growth are inevitable results of technology
and social progress we just have not justification
for the idea that there’s not been enough
time for signals to have gotten to us yet
because they’ve had a billion years of broadcast
time and a billion years to expand outward
from their homeworld toward us to make those
signals easier to see and with less time lag.
2C: They don’t talk because they have no
reason to
Examples here would be that they just don’t
see a benefit to talking to other aliens,
and maybe consider it harmful.
Maybe they’ve become some single machine
intelligence that gains little from going
elsewhere and sees nothing to gain by chat
except cultural knowledge which it doesn’t
value.
Maybe they’ve all retreated to a simulated
universe, a virtual reality utopia, and its
much more interesting to them then 1000-year
long phone conversations.
Lots of options here for why they wouldn’t
want to talk.
This one encounters the same problems raised
in the Dyson Dilemma, that we don’t need
to hear their phones to see they are there
if they’ve been expanding.
But it also double-dips into Non-Exclusivity
by assuming none of the aliens, who should
all have as radically different behavior from
each other as from us, don’t feel a reason
to chat with other aliens, even just to broadcast
over and over – “This area of space is
ours, stay out, we don’t want to talk to
you, this is ours, stay out and we will leave
you be, come in and we will blow you up, message
repeats”.
It’s already stretching a point to say all
aliens aren’t talkative, but to assume they
don’t even broadcast to deter accidental
invasions is stretching common sense.
Animals routinely mark their territory and
vocally discourage incursions because fighting
if you don’t have to is dangerous and cost
time and resources.
Mediocrity principle tells us that animals
on at least some other worlds probably do
the same and non-Exclusivity would suggest
some aliens ought to have giant omnidirectional
broadcast arrays just screaming ‘stay out’
even if they are otherwise not chatty.
There’s also a reverse example of non-exclusivity
here, of exclusivity, because while we can’t
say that intelligence is exclusive to creatures
with curiosity, common sense would indicate
that curiosity is not likely to be a rarity
among technological civilizations.
It is hard to imagine they wouldn’t be curious
by nature, let alone that this would be the
universal rule.
And unless they are afraid, then it doesn’t
have to be the whole species, just a handful
of them.
We’ve no reason to think aliens are more
homogenous in behavior and outlook then we
ourselves are.
So category 2D, maybe they are afraid.
Aliens don’t talk, just listen, and actively
hide, because they are afraid of being seen
and heard.
This makes a lot of sense.
We have a term called METI, the version of
SETI – the Search for Extra-Terrestrial
Intelligence – which focuses on Messaging
to Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence, also called
active SETI or positive SETI.
METI, in which you intentionally broadcast
to aliens, is unlike SETI which passively
listens.
It is not popular.
It is very controversial.
Many SETI backers outright condemn it, will
not support it, and I’ve even heard people
suggest it should be considered a Crime against
Humanity as its telling potentially hostile
aliens how to find us.
It wouldn’t be too hard to imagine other
aliens do exactly that, ban transmission,
and maybe even hide more so their world looks
uninhabited.
Problem here is that this also hits non-exclusivity.
Now one can argue that all aliens will come
to the conclusion that passive listening rather
than broadcast is the path of wisdom but this
breaks down over time even if true.
Again it has to be every member of every species
doing it, since it would only take a few people
with broadcast equipment.
But worse, they have to keep doing it.
How long do you have to wait before you say
“Look, we’ve been listening to silence
for a million years, hiding here on our one
planet for fear of drawing attention.
Either no one is there or they are like us,
just paranoid and hiding, let’s expand.”
And if someone replies “Well, what if there
is some galaxy-spanning species of xenophobes
waiting to see us and jump on us, or killer
robots in space quietly waiting for intelligence.”
You’d just reply “Then they must be beyond
stupid, because they could easily have investigated
every single planet in the galaxy by now and
even insured no life ever came to be on them
in the first place.
It just isn’t that hard for a determined
species capable of wiping us out to have found
us in the first place.”
And this is pretty solid logic.
Killer xenocidal species or robots make for
good science fiction but also make just about
no sense.
If you were such a species, and could design
long lasting and self-repairing robots to
purge the galaxy of alien life, why would
you settle for leaving a few million outposts
all within a hundred or so light years of
every world to listen for radio?
Why not just sterilize every single world
that could support life, and rinse and repeat
every hundred million years?
Or if it’s just intelligent life, why even
wait for radio signals anyway?
Why not just leave satellite telescopes near
habitable worlds that would sit and stare
at those worlds looking for any patterns at
all.
Pull up Google Earth sometime and zoom out
till you can see many miles at once.
Look at a natural area, like a national park,
then look at any area settled by man, city
or farmland, that is very obvious and requires
no radio signals to see, and you’d be able
to detect civilizations that way long before
they got radios.
Now in the face of that logic, it is hard
to imagine a civilization, having thought
of that, just staying hidden at home for millions
of years especially considering that by expanding
they’d have more resources to deal with
an aggressor.
More scientists to research weapons, more
worlds to build weapons, multiple worlds to
be safeguarded against natural disasters or
surprise attacks.
So while the idea that aliens just listen
and don’t talk is reasonable, the notion
that they all do that and keep doing it for
hundreds of millions of years is not.
That’s it for category 2, again fundamentally
the problems with category 2 is that unless
you believe extinction inevitably results
from technology or that all societies evolve
to act the same, category 2 suffers from Non-exclusivity.
There’s just no reason to think they’d
all act like that especially when there’s
many obvious downsides to doing so.
Category 3: They exist and are not hard to
see.
We interact with them routinely but most or
all don’t realize it.
We’ll break this into subcategories as well:
3A: Aliens walk among us but hide themselves.
[X-files]
3B: Aliens used to walk among us and helped
us get technological [Alien Astronauts]
3C: Aliens are here, but are so unrecognizable
we can’t see them for what they are
3D: We are aliens ourselves
Big flaw in #3 is just lack of evidence, but
as we discussed way back in category 1C, just
because something is very hard or impossible
to prove internally doesn’t mean its wrong.
Many of course believe we do have evidence
of aliens walking among us and while I think
they’re wrong this wouldn’t be complete
if we left out one of the most popular groups
of solutions to the Fermi Paradox nor am I
going to sit around heaping scorn on them.
It’s enough, in my book, to say there’s
no hard evidence to back these solutions with
the caveat that, in fairness, most of the
solutions have the exact same problem, only
difference being that we can actually gather
evidence of stuff here on or near Earth, we
can’t get to other worlds yet to examine
them.
Decent logic with a lack of evidence because
you can’t get it yet get a little more respect
tin my book than those where you can obtain
evidence.
So 3A: They walk covertly among us.
It is impossible to have been raised in modern
times and not know a bunch of TV and movie
examples of this, and again the evidence for
it is either absent or considered by many
to be dubious.
Nothing else to say.
3B: They used to walk among us.
Ancient Alien Astronauts helping us build
the pyramids and similar has shown up in lots
of fiction and again we’re all familiar
with it.
For this subcategory there’s tons of evidence,
such as the pyramids, but that evidence itself
is disputed by arguments that we could and
did build such things on our own.
My only add on to this is two fold.
First, if they were willing to involve themselves
then, what changed to make them stop and why
are all the examples here things we could
have done without any inclusions of stuff
beyond us, like a lighthouse run on passive
nuclear reactors or advanced alloys we couldn’t
have made period?
Second, and its not an evidence argument,
I don’t like 3B because it demeans, in my
eyes, the accomplishments of humanity and
of individuals who’s efforts were a testament
to themselves and humanity, because they didn’t
happen in a vacuum.
That’s not a logic or evidence based argument,
but I think it is one worth mentioning anyway.
3c: Aliens are here, but are so unrecognizable
we can’t see them for what they are
This sub-category would generally include
both aliens who are so non-obviously thinking
entities that we overlook them, like a big
sentient rock that just parked itself here
millennia ago to watch us.
Or an intelligent gaseous entity that floats
around as a cloud and communicates over the
course of days by raining or emitting lightning
bolts in a pattern we just haven’t seen.
It might even think it is talking to us and
getting responses because it rains on drought-struck
areas and we raise around altering that place
to grow plants in certain patterns and it’s
busy trying to figure out what those are supposed
to say.
When we’re talking about really alien life,
physiologically or psychologically, it’s
not that hard to imagine we just don’t even
see each other as alive or it sees us but
cannot figure out how to chat.
The problem with this is that once you abandon
biology or logical behavior as means of detection
you haven’t got much of anything to work
with and maybe never will.
There’s no evidence for or against and you’re
basically left just shrugging and saying ‘Could
be, maybe”
3d: We are aliens
Its often been suggested that human intelligence
is the result of alien tinkering with early
primates or that maybe we’re a lost colony
of aliens, and for that matter the idea – called
Panspermia – that original simple life might
have originated in space and rained down on
planets billions of years ago remains popular
even with many scientists.
The problem with the lost colony notion is
that we share a ridiculous amount of DNA with
other animals and plants on Earth, so we’re
obviously not direct descendants of there’s
except in a near panspermia case, where they
came to a desolate Earth a billion years ago
and left behind some microbes which replaced
life or started it and we descended from them.
The intentional tinkering with smart monkeys
option is essentially the ancient alien astronaut
option, category 3B, over again.
It’s possible but you have to wonder why,
where’s the evidence, and where did they
go.
As to panspermia itself, even if true, of
which there’s no real evidence, one would
have to say ‘so what?’.
If simple life hangs around space raining
down on planets then life ought to be all
over the place and constantly reseeding itself
if a planet gets sterilized by supernova and
gamma ray bursts.
It doesn’t change the Fermi Paradox except
to maybe make it worse.
Like faster than light space ships, if true
it only exacerbates the problem of where all
the aliens are, not solve it.
So that’s category 3.
In category 1, alien civilizations are rare,
we mostly encountered the recurring problem
of there not being any good evidence to support
any given Great Filter or series of Filters
being so effective at preventing life from
moving from basic self-replicating proteins
up to interstellar technological civilizations.
In category 2 we kept tripping over the Mediocrity
Principle and Non-Exclusivity of behavior.
Here in category 3 it was always a lack of
evidence from the one place in the Universe
we can actively gather evidence from.
Each had its strengths and weaknesses, and
you probably have a favorite or ones you think
are especially absurd and unlikely.
Before we finish this video though we’ll
do some miscellaneous ones, some of which
are pretty decent, and many of which are fairly
absurd, at least in my view.
And if you’re wondering what my view is,
or my bias, I haven’t personally locked
on to any of these as my official stance but
I favor Category 1B, that technological civilizations
are just absurdly uncommon.
I don’t think technological civilization
wipe themselves out much, because I consider
that terribly pessimistic, I think to go from
inanimate lifeless rocks to modern human civilization
has a huge number of hurdles in the way and
they really do add up to make technological
civilizations so uncommon that even most galaxies
have never had one yet, but I also figure
there are probably a lot of worlds out there
with life on them so I’m not a Rare Earth
supporter.
So let’s do Category 4:
4A: Technological civilizations hit singularities:
A technological singularity originally just
meant an ever more rapidly increasing rate
of technology till you hit a point where you
had so much of it that your behavior was unpredictable.
This has tended to get used just as frequently
these days for describing some truly super-intelligent
computer mind a trillion times smarter than
us.
By intelligence that’s basically godlike
it is assumed its motives are unknowable.
Problem here, and I discuss this in the Dyson
Dilemma video in more detail, even if this
does occur we can still guess a couple motives.
It will want more energy and raw material
to achieve faster processing and more memory
storage and this should result in interstellar
expansion too, even if it’s just remote
resource mining being brought back to the
original homeworld.
The other problem is non-exclusivity again.
We already have way more computer power than
we need to do interstellar travel and while
computer modeling plays a huge role in discovering
new science and technology that would help
us do that travel it probably isn’t absolutely
necessary.
So non-exclusivity wins the day, we already
know many of us consider Artificial intelligence
or human all cyborged up and transhuman-ified
a bit unnerving.
The Frankenstein complex its sometimes called.
And those fears are not dismissed as superstition
by experts but rather considered very legitimate
concerns.
Presumably some other species will be, by
the mediocrity principle, more or less concerned
then us and some might ban any computers that
could run anything like a human level intelligence.
So beyond the fact that synthetic minds are
not eliminating an intelligent species but
just replacing them, there’s no reason to
think this always happens and in such a way
as to make them non-talkative or non-expansionist.
Again unless you subscribe to the notion of
social progress to a single inevitable type
of behavior.
4B: The Zoo Hypothesis or Quarantine: These
are basically the same thing except the motives
are different.
In the Zoo hypothesis Earth is, surprise,
a giant zoo, they don’t talk to us so as
not to interfere with our behavior and have
wrapped some cloak of deception around the
world so we don’t see them.
In Quarantine they view us as dangerous.
What’s wrong with these?
Well they are a lot like category 1C in that
they have us perceiving a false reality where
a group or individual with vastly more resources
and intelligence is feeding us a line of bullshit.
We can’t prove it internally.
The other problems are, for the Zoo Hypothesis,
we actually do interact with animals at the
zoo, that’s the whole point of zoos originally.
Rare animals brought from faraway you can
see up close.
Note that this is not necessarily benevolent
behavior.
The other point is preservation of those rare
animals and appreciating them, and we do interact
with them and don’t consider it automatically
harmful.
Humans don’t need preserving, we’re not
rare.
For Quarantine, one might ask what thing,
biological or psychological, they would be
so afraid of us for that they would need to
quarantine us, and why they couldn’t fix
it, and why if they couldn’t fix it they
would risk us continue to exist and develop
more 
and more technology.
This comes back to the problem I sometimes
call the ‘Dumb Alien Theory’, where it
assumes behavior by aliens which on examination
is either absolutely stupid or beyond evil.
It is one thing to say ‘well they might
be watching us till we reach a certain technology
level, preventing us from outside harm by
others’.
Sort of like the Star Trek Prime Directive.
Only problem is, if you’re on the receiving
end of that Prime Directive, you have very
good cause to be beyond angry at the people
enforcing it.
Once the shock wears off you’re going to
think of all the members of your species who
died from resource scarcity, disease, old
age, and other things the aliens could have
fixed by just saying ‘hi, here’s some
clean energy and all sorts of engineering
and biological knowledge.’
And if they say ‘well, if you didn’t discover
it on your own you would appreciate its dangers
you could point out that you did not personally
discover the atom bomb, nor in all likelihood
did that particularly alien you’re talking
to, and yet you are quite aware, as are they,
that they are dangerous.
Space elves, or space hippies, who don’t
want to talk to use because we abuse our environment
would likely end up at the end accused of
the worst hypocrisy since they obviously have
figured out how to do so themselves and could
have spared us, and our planet, a lot misery
and extinction but giving us a hand.
4c: Interdiction
This is like Zoo or Quarantine but a little
more plausible.
In Interdiction various alien empires exist
and enforce a no-contact policy with primitive
worlds because xenocide is frowned on and
they do not trust each other not to try to
either exploit primitive civilizations or
try to turn them to their side.
It’s fairly plausible to believe that emerging
alien civilizations on bumping into each other
setup treaties of how far each can expand
that include leaving territory for other civilizations
that will emerge and voluntary accept limits
on their expansion in exchange for that same
limit on everyone else.
There’s a lot of parallels in human history
for that sort of behavior.
In such a case its plausible that emerging
civilizations are interdicted from contact
for those reasons but while this is a bit
better than zoo or quarantine solutions it
still suffers from all the other problems
in sub-category 2D, the one where aliens are
afraid to talk.
4d: Self-imposed Quarantine: This is the notion
that they don’t quarantine us, or even really
hide from each other, but all agree to stay
on their homeworlds or not expand much out,
because they’ve come to realize they have
massive destructive potential and almost any
interaction with any alien could spark wars.
This suffers from a lot of the same problems
as our similar cases but its big flaw is in
it’s strength.
This theory assumes that aliens definitely
do not socially progress towards an inevitable
behavior system, that they do things that
absolutely disgust each other enough to spark
wars when in proximity, and yet by giving
that nod to non-exclusivity it also requires
they all still engage in an exclusive behavior…
of staying the hell away from each other,
rather than, say, some of them being enthusiastic
about genocide.
It also requires the notion of irreconcilable
differences between aliens but ones not bad
enough to initiate crusades to wipe an alien
civilization out.
Just as an example though, it is entirely
possible you might encounter a peaceful and
benevolent species which had a high breeding
rate and routinely killed 90% of their young
off, the equivalent of butchering everyone
in fifth grade who didn’t make the honor
roll, and them being just as disgusted by
use because we actually allow kids who show
any signs of self-destructive behavior or
psychopathy to live even though we have doomsday
weapons they could conceivably get their hands
on.
In such a situation, even though neither species
wants war, they know that clashes or war might
easily happen if they have to interact much
rather than ignore each other from afar.
4e: Intelligent Life got wiped out relatively
recently, replacements have genuinely not
had time to expand much.
This is popular solution in fiction but its
big flaw, besides no evidence, is that it
really couldn’t be limited to just this
galaxy.
The Universe does not end at the edge of the
Milky Way and even if some natural or artificial
catastrophe had occurred to recently for other
galaxies to see it and move in on the fresh
territory, we ought to be able to see them
too, especially if they are engaging in multi-system
Dyson Swarm construction.
One would also have to ask what natural phenomena
just killed intelligent life or why someone
would go around killing intelligent life and
not bother leaving mechanisms in place to
continue that process after the purge and
why they even let it get to a technological
level if they are continuing the purge.
Why not, as we mentioned earlier, leave telescopes
on every system staring at planets looking
for any patterns emerging like roads or canals
or pyramids etc.
4f: Rim Migration
It’s been suggested that if most civilizations
eventually go totally digital, then in order
to deal with all their waste heat they’d
migrate away from the inner galaxy to the
rim where it’s colder.
This would usually imply they built a huge
supercomputer around their sun and moved that
whole star system out to the edge of the galaxy…
this doesn’t even require much technology,
all Dyson Spheres are capable of being modified
into interstellar vehicles by definition,
this is called a Shkadov thruster and we discussed
this in the Dyson Dilemma video.
You just let some light out one side and it
pushes you in the other direction.
Now this isn’t even vaguely covert, you
don’t hide a Shkadov thruster form the inhabitants
of the galaxy it is leaving because it’s
about as realistic to hide that as to hide
an ICBM launch from the farmer living next
to the silo, and since it takes a very long
time, hiding daily launches for millions of
years.
But to be fair, we could easily have missed
that, with our current level of detection
ability, but if this was a regular thing it
is one of the types we’d be able to see
in the not too distant future.
This also has the expansion problem, unless
they’re only doing it to their home system
meaning they don’t colnize other stars then
we ought to see millions of stars constantly
heading out of the galaxy and we wouldn’t
miss that here and we’d see it even in other
galaxies which we actually considered a realistic
possibility for Ring galaxies like Hoag’s
Object for a while.
4g: “They’ve ascended”
A popular idea in science fiction, and not
too dissimilar to technological singularity
models, is the idea that intelligent life
eventually goes post-physical becoming beings
of pure energy or taking off for higher planes
of existence.
There’s really not much to say about this,
it works just fine as a solution to the Fermi
Paradox especially if you get there before
you go interstellar, but there’s no scientific
basis for it and to me at least it sounds
like options from category 1C, or basically
it’s a bit heavy on the mysticism for my
tastes.
I told myself I wouldn’t go through this
video mocking any of the ideas so I’m not
going to say that it’s basically new age
crap for people who didn’t like any of the
legion of perfectly serviceable religions
already around and went in for one produced
by a sci-fi author instead.
Of course that’s absurd since no one would
ever convert to a religion some author just
cobbled together one day.
4h: We haven’t picked a long distance carrier
yet
This one was funnier back when people had
long distance carriers for their phones and
we had long distance phone calls but it also
goes by ‘we need to put a deposit down to
get the signal unscrambled’.
Really just a variant of 2A, they have mouths
but we’ve got no ears, except that by embracing
the idea that we’re not getting reception
because we haven’t picked a carrier or paid
to get the signal unscrambled it gets the
stamp of ‘Dumb Aliens’ from me because
if you’re selling a product you have to
be an utter moron not to advertise it.
Though it matches up decently with the Interdiction
or Self-Imposed Quarantine solutions, it’s
out there, you can get it, but they don’t
advertise because they’re not allowed or
think it’s bad manners.
Still has all the other problems associated
to Non-exclusivity or mediocrity principle
though.
4i: Made out of meat.
If you’re a big Fermi Paradox follower you’re
probably wondering when I was going to mention
Terry Bisson’s short story “They’re
made out of meat” since I’ve just mentioned
a lot of the other popular ‘weird ones’,
and the answer was nearly no, that was covered
in category 3C, aliens are unrecognizable,
and I always considered that a very stupid
one anyway.
The notion that aliens couldn’t recognize
humans as intelligent because we’re made
out of meat trips right on the starting line
by assuming they obviously know what the hell
meat is, a material used to allow animals
to move that implicitly requires a functioning
nervous system.
If they didn’t know what meat was they wouldn’t
call it meat, they’d call it bundles of
proteins and be shocked things used it for
locomotion.
It’s also implied they’ve encountered
plenty of other aliens before and you really
would expect locomotion to be a common trait
of intelligent life and doing it by causing
contractions via electrical stimulus to be
one of the more normal routes.
I saved this one for last because while I
get that any attempt to impress an audience
with the sheer alien-ness of a given alien
can fall flat on deep examination I really
have no idea why this one seems to make so
many Fermi Paradox solution lists.
And yeah, we’re done, I’m sure I missed
a few in their but if you’re newer to the
Fermi Paradox that covers most of the bases.
The companion video, the Dyson Dilemma, is
also worth watching if you’ve made it this
far with being bored to death.
I hope you enjoyed this and thanks for watching!
