This episode is sponsored by Brilliant.
Could the most common future on the horizon
be a future with no horizon?
The O’Neill Cylinder is a massive rotating
space habitat designed to house tens of thousands
of people, or potentially even millions, and
has been one of our most commonly discussed
megastructures here on the channel.
However, while we’ve discussed what an O’Neill
Cylinder is a lot, and even what the environment
and ecology inside one might be like, we’ve
rarely looked at what might motivate folks
to move into one or what their life would
really be like once there.
Partially because that is a bit tricky, when
asking what life inside one would be like,
as the attraction of such habitats is that
they can be made very Earth-like, and ideally
life inside one is just like home.
Yet there will be some differences, and potentially
many.
We should start by reviewing what an O’Neill
Cylinder is.
The O’Neill Cylinder is named for its original
designer, Gerard O’Neill, and its basic
form tends to be a smaller design with two
such habitat drums – our nickname for a
rotating habitat inside a large structure
– often with windows involved to let the
sunlight in.
We often envision no windows on the design
these days, with internal lighting provided
by mirrors through smaller and safer window
ports or simply electrical lighting.
The original space art looks pretty cool and
beautifully illustrates the core concept,
but in practice is not a great design itself,
space is hostile and deadly, you want a lot
of good thick steel between you and it, not
giant windows in the floor.
You then simulate the light or pump it in
via mirrors to make it very Earth-like, assuming
that’s what you want.
For our purposes today we will mostly just
be using the term to describe any such rotating
habitat that’s roughly cylindrical and has
an axial length on an order of magnitude with
its diameter or longer, and has an area of
around 100 to 10,000 square kilometers.
That is to say, big enough to support a reasonably
stable community and ecology but not one of
the giants like the Continent-sized Bishop
ring or McKendree Cylinder, or the true leviathans
like a Banks Orbital, Topopolis, or Niven
Ringworld.
Let me put an emphasis on reasonably stable
community and ecology too.
While even a fairly small rotating habitat
could be made fully self-sufficient for geological
timescales with certain technologies, we don’t
really envision them existing as a closed
system, by and large.
Indeed even the entirety of Earth is not,
and even fairly isolated communities or ecosystems
here on earth usually are getting a lot of
input and change from around them, they are
not static.
For a rotating habitat that needs to be much
more active and designed -- But hopefully
minimally so and mostly in the background.
As said earlier, we’re not too interested
today in the maintenance angle, mechanical
or biological or ecological or digital, as
we examined those more in Environments of
Space Habitats already.
Rather, we might start by asking why anyone
would build such a thing, and not just one
but many thousands of them.
Building a few here and there for space exploration
or novelty or prestige is one thing, and not
a thing we care much about today.
No, we’re interested in what the setup would
be when the average human could at least plausibly
contemplate living in one.
This brings up a lot of questions.
First, is there an incentive to move there
of an artificial kind?
Folks often suggest we might build a lot of
these in orbit around Earth and move into
them, and turn Earth into more of a nature
preserve, which might result in a tax incentive
to move into these habitats or even coercion,
but as I’ve mentioned before, the more logical
strategy for nature preserves is actually
to put them in rotating habitats, as they’re
a lot easier to keep isolated from human interference
or contagion from other ecosystems, and while
humanity is responsible for a lot of extinction,
we’re not solely responsible.
I don’t know about other folks but I want
to preserve species against extinction from
any vector, not just people, I don’t really
care what killed off the Sabretooth Tiger,
Dodo, or Mammoth, natural selection or human
intervention, I just want to keep the critters
we have around or resurrect the ones who already
died off, and an isolated ecosystem tailor-built
for an ecology is easier to make that work
for than Earth.
I also have no idea how you’d get everyone
to move off Earth without using coercion which
would be beyond repugnant to most of us, myself
included.
However, we do need to think of ways we could
get a lot of people to move off Earth into
one of these habitats, and the most obvious
one is new living area.
Planets are big places but a sphere is not
a particularly efficient use of raw materials,
and terraforming can be a very long and expensive
process.
You might need to build a million such rotating
habitats to equal the living area of Earth,
but you can build a trillion of them using
the same mass as Earth has and thus get a
million times the living room.
So overpopulation and general crowding might
be one such motivation.
Getting more elbow room is pretty much the
driving force of migration in nature and human
history, so makes a very good one.
Another reason might be ideological: politically,
religiously, or economically -- similar to
how many of the American colonies started,
and so we’ll spend some time talking about
how these habitats might organize and govern
themselves later on, but even that is fundamentally
about getting more elbow room and space and
these habitats would seem ideal for that.
Of course for that to be true, it means you
need to be able to make these things fairly
cheaply and also make them safe and attractively.
We often show O’Neill cylinders as looking
like giant farms, forest, or parks, but there’s
no reason one couldn’t be a crowded metropolis.
The thing is, you don’t really need more
space for cities on Earth, you can have a
Trillion people on Earth rather easily, in
terms of living area, even with parks, you
need all that space for food production and
general ecology.
That need not be in an O’Neill Cylinder
though.
If you want to preserve ecology, you do that
mostly with dedicated nature preserves or
quasi-dedicated ones, possibly a big cylinder
with a rigid population cap.
If I were doing one like that I might say
it permitted 1000 people, half rangers and
scientists, the other half wealthy folks who
really wanted the big wide open nature space
but would agree to strict ecological measures,
along with some carefully managed tourist
industry.
Doing that keeps the ecology pretty safe while
providing funding.
On the food side, we need a lot of space but
we can keep it cheap.
You don’t need to bother putting that on
your habitation drum, cheap thin cylinders,
potentially almost entirely automated and
devoted to hydroponics, can get you way more
bang for your buck, or grub anyway.
I should note that if you haven’t already
grabbed a drink and a snack, it might be a
good time as we’ll be here for a bit.
Such space farms can export food down to Earth
if it comes to it, see the Space Farming episode,
and can be used in tandem with in-habitat
production to supplement it too.
You could keep your livestock on pasture lands
but supplement them with hay or cereals grown
and bailed on some cheap space farm, assuming
you don’t just produce your meat synthetically.
So too, you might boost your own ecosystems
population density of critters by supplementing
their food from robot-operated space farms.
Either way, your default O’Neil Cylinder
wouldn’t grow food any more than your default
suburban housing development does, which is
to say there’s plenty of gardens and many
do grow food people eat, but it’s not capable
of or intended for main food production.
Transport isn’t an issue either, amusingly
it would be much easier to transport food
from a space farm nearby than to truck it
in from outlying farmland to a city on Earth.
Getting into space is a pain, once you’re
up there though, moving back and forth between
various habitats and stations that are orbiting
the same planet is quite easy.
Which also means that much like nowadays you
can commute around rather easily from such
habitats to some other nearby space station
too, though I’d not expect most folks to
commute to other stations daily much except
for those physically tethered together, which
we’ll discuss more later.
So barring hub ports, nature preserves – public
or private – and dedicated habitats like
some amusement park or resort, we anticipate
more of a suburban to dense rural or exurban
layout for O’Neill Cylinders.
That might change with time, so that one slowly
grew into a metropolis, but my gut says main
production will be to those looking for a
few acres to call their own.
Now considering the cost of building and sustaining
an O’Neill Cylinder, obviously you’re
not doing this until your land costs on Earth
are more or less the same as building and
maintaining an equal amount of land in a space
habitat.
Such Cylinders might be meshed together into
collections of hundreds of them, we could
see pricier land costs in one that was connected
to a major habitat for the same reason land
can be rather pricey outside but near a city
compared to, say, Montana.
By and large though, especially in relatively
early days, the paradigm of ‘location, location,
location’ presumably does not apply since
space is huge and is located mostly next to
nothing.
People are moving there for space, and presumably
are working from home or our habitat needs
to provide jobs.
Of course this assumes employment is anything
like nowadays, and considering the cost of
literally building land, that generally implies
a huge amount of automation.
Indeed so much so that if someone says they’re
a factory worker they probably mean they’re
the guy who oversees, maintains, or programs
the factory robots and possibly may not have
ever even set foot inside the actual factory,
which might be thousands of kilometers from
their home and could be freezing cold or boiling
hot and utterly toxic or a vacuum inside.
So let’s say we’re land developers getting
ready to build such an O’Neill Cylinder.
A big first question has to be theme, what’s
attracting people to our place?
Because while the mundane is nice, it never
commands the best price.
There’s an assumption we’d mass produce
these to standard sizes, and doubtless to
some degree that would be true, but I doubt
you’d see much cookie-cutter arrangement
given the scale, so each would likely include
at least one weird thing, like a giant waterfall
or low gravity forests near the end caps,
which can be cone or bowl shaped.
A question that arises though is if it’s
being commissioned or if you’re building
it with the intent of selling plots and parcels.
My hunch would be that you’d have two major
ways of doing this.
First.
An organization, such as a business or government,
might entirely fund the thing or sell bits
as they go, probably some being sold before
the first hull plating was even being fabricated.
Second, you might have groups of people get
together to build one, each getting a chunk
of land equal to their investment.
Which raises a point on size.
Bigger is better for the natural look, but
we shouldn’t just assume these things always
get built as big as we can economically and
safely produce.
You can potentially add to such habitats over
time if you want, by making them longer, but
in practice you’d just connect them together
with others, so what you build is what you
got.
However, these things do require constant
maintenance like any structure, see the Space
Janitors & Maintaining Megastructures episode
for details.
So abandoning and scrapping one is entirely
viable over just running it for tens of thousands
of years even when you feel it isn’t big
enough anymore, with some interesting implications,
see the Space Derelicts & Trash Worlds episode
for those.
All of which means that while you probably
build with growth in mind, and generational
growth at that, you probably will see many
more commissions of smaller habitable cylinders
than those pressing the boundary of what material
strength permits.
You might get one commissioned by just a few
hundred people, intended for only a few thousand
residents tops, far more often than the juggernauts.
As a hypothetical, your default village of
maybe a thousand folks, most living in or
near town with the rest given over to forest
and garden and so forth, probably only needs
to be 10 square kilometers to be considered
rather ample and spacious, just contrasting
it to several of the towns and villages of
my chunk of semi-rural north east Ohio.
That would equate to a cylinder a kilometer
in diameter and 3.2 kilometers long, about
2500 acres of land and water on the section
under spin-gravity for those more comfortable
thinking of housing in acreage.
Needless to say that’s a pretty arbitrary
figure, you could go smaller or more dense
or bigger or whichever.
I pick that number for population more in
terms of what works nowadays for an effective
semi-isolated community.
Dunbar’s number, around 150 or 160 people,
is a handy population size basis we’ve used
before for discussing this topic or colony
ships, but the minimum optimal size for a
fairly self-contained community is very dependent
on technology and culture.
As an example, if you want to have your own
school for a community, and with modern US
population growth rates, a thousand people
would have about 14 being born to them every
year, not really optimal for class size, just
one class per grade of 14 kids, give or take.
On the other hand, if education shifted to
smaller classes or more remote or one-on-one
formats, that would not be a concern.
It’s hardly the only one where larger community
size helps but it’s a good example insofar
as people tend to look at the schools heavily
when picking a community to settle down and
raise their kids in and if anything, I’d
tend to expect parents in a more prosperous
society to be even more choosy in that regard.
If you want to have a shopping mall inside
your habitat it needs to be either (A) easily
accessible to neighboring habitats, or (B)
have an internal population large enough to
support said shopping mall, which would obviously
require many thousands of people.
Then again, we probably won’t have a lot
of giant shopping malls or plazas in the future
as we transition to more online commerce.
But don’t think of transport between habitats
as super-encumbering.
It’s quite easy to build, with only modern
technology, the equivalent of a personal car
as a spaceship or space bus for public transport.
The delta-v such a thing needs to drive to
a neighboring habitat in the same approximate
orbit around a planet is small enough that
you could commute over larger distance than
folks do now in less time and with less fuel.
Plus you really can lash hundreds if not thousands
of these cylinder habitats together into a
big static glob.
You might need to start using some very strong
or thick tethers or struts if you’re trying
to connect thousands of megatons of habitat
together at several kilometers of distance
but it’s not too big a deal and easier in
higher orbits too.
No two orbital paths are exactly identical
so two objects orbiting a planet next to each
other will drift apart over time, but even
a thin rope would easily keep two houses together
while separated by many meters of distances,
so you just have to scale it up.
Plus with ships presumably constantly leaving
and arriving and likely being coordinated
to avoid collisions and jams, you can strategically
time arrival and departure to provide thrust
in the right direction or station keeping
too.
Most of these habitats rotate around on an
order of a few minutes – part of why windows
for sunlight are non-optimal – so coordinating
arrivals and departures to get free station-keeping
is not introducing major delays.
You also might charge residents a tiny fee
for launching their space-car at the wrong
moment to pay for the wasted momentum, I suppose.
Of course if they’re all lashed together
you can just run monorails between them, and
since it’s in the vacuum of space those
can get moving very, very fast, with no friction
or air drag to worry about and most of the
energy recoverable when it slows down.
Accelerating at 1-gee, so that you felt like
you had normal gravity, such a space train
could get you to a destination hundreds of
kilometers away in mere minutes.
Incidentally these don’t have to be between
objects that are stationary relative to each
other, you could easily shoot grapples at
passing stations on a winch to keep it taut
as you moved around near each other, though
not too fast, and just disconnect it and winch
it in when the transfer was complete, though
I doubt you’d use this approach frequently.
Nor does it have to be tethers.
Connecting rotating habitats together with
an actual corridor filled with air is a bit
of a pain, and doing it with something like
a third connecting skinny rotating habitat
that had its own ecosystem would be a major
pain, but it is doable.
You can take two big nature preserve cylinder
habitats and connect them with a third skinny
tube that allowed migration by air, sea, or
land, though land in particular would be a
serious hassle, especially if you were trying
to keep a consistent earth-normal gravity
on it.
Doing big connection hubs where several cylinders
meet together and stick off at different angles
is best done with no gravity and just a pressurized
interior, and it would obviously be fine for
humans and probably birds too, but you could
get more elaborate if you want.
I suspect you’d often see dozens if not
hundreds or even thousands of these cylinders
connected together to form bigger communities,
possibly with new ones being added or old
ones deciding to leave and join another conglomeration.
Such habitats aren’t really ideal spaceships,
since you don’t build them with much acceleration
in mind, but they are definitely mobile.
So if your community decides it hates the
rules imposed by that bigger conglomeration
community it can up and move.
That’s another reason smaller habitats might
be preferred too, potentially even single
family ones though you can’t build these
too small and keep them feeling very natural.
This would be very different from communities
in the present, which can’t move, so the
“my way or the highway” approach isn’t
really viable today but could become possible
with O’Neill Cylinders, just like it possibly
is with modular seasteading.
Space habitats can move, and so we might see
an entire cylinder move elsewhere if a big
factory or corporation most folks worked at
went belly-up, instead of creating the ghost
town effect we often see nowadays and in recent
centuries.
Of course they might be pretty routinely mobile
too.
A cylinder focused on asteroid mining and
refining might routinely pick up, burrow into
a new asteroid, mine it out, then leave.
Which raises the question of how these might
all be governed.
By default your natural smallest subsidiary
government would be the whole cylinder itself,
though of course larger ones might contain
several village councils, while again you
can potentially have single household units.
If I had to guess, you’d probably see something
like a municipal or town government at the
cylinder level, then something like a county
or district government for a conglomeration,
and then those being woven into something
like a province or a smaller nation consisting
of many such conglomerations.
Odds are such conglomerations would also have
some permanent central hub and tons of ancillary
facilities under low or no rotation, be it
defense platforms, industrial facilities,
space farms, large solar arrays, or what have
you.
Such conglomerations can obviously vary wildly
in size, but let’s imagine one that’s
rather standardized to be 100 conglomerations
each consisting of couple dozen habitats and
support facilities of varying but modest sizes.
Each conglomeration is a county government,
and each habitat a town, village, city, etc,
depending on its configuration.
That 100 conglomeration total might have tens
of millions of people in it, or way more for
that matter, but it’s a fairly plausible
51st state or self-governing nation.
Your default full-sized O’Neill Cylinder
could handle a million folks inside it in
relative luxury for space and a pack of a
dozen of them tied together would obviously
rival most modern nations, the median size
for which is under 10 million people.
A growing humanity might see nations numbers
themselves in the trillions, or even quadrillions,
or it might see a move to micro-nations of
well under a million a piece, and quite possibly
both at once and everywhere in between, but
I’d expect the individual habitat to be
your lowest common subdivision.
This of course assumes democracy and local
rule is more the norm, and while local rule
would probably be the norm especially early
on, you could also have habitats being owned
by individuals or families who basically rented
the land, akin to your basic feudal or aristocratic
setup.
Potentially even getting some futuristic equivalent
to titles like Baron, Count, or Duke, or even
brushing off the old titles for use.
I’m not sure I’d care for living in such
a setup personally but many folks might be
fine with the owner handling most administrative
matters so long as their personal and civil
rights were guaranteed.
And of course flat out tyranny is always an
option too.
So how about living in one, day to day?
Well, they can be tailored to be very Earth-like,
of whichever climate on earth you like, mostly
differing in that the sky is your neighbors
backyard and the horizon curves up.
There’s plenty of techniques for obscuring
that, though you might not always bother,
and indeed you might not always aim for very
earth-like.
You might want habitats with lower gravity
or varying gravity or whose sky was green
or magenta or whichever.
For day to day life, by default, the goal
is to be as like Earth as you can make it,
and you can make it very earthlike indeed,
though again I suspect most would not only
accept some differences for practicality but
engineer even more for uniqueness.
You can, for instance, do sky cities on rotating
habitats relatively easily, a house or village
can just swing from a tether around the middle,
which in some ways is what the whole habitat
is doing anyway, and you can do some rather
peculiar and fun things with the interior
geography and climate too.
Maybe the biggest difference is that, no matter
how secure you make the O’Neill Cylinder
space habitat, there’s always going to be
some fear of a catastrophic puncture, even
if it’s engineered so solidly that the odds
of it are way less than typical earth-based
calamities like earthquakes, hurricanes, tsunami,
or asteroid impacts.
That fear will be there, and would probably
manifest itself as most houses having an automated
lockdown and airtight capacity so they could
act as a lifepod if someone nukes a giant
hole into the side of the habitat.
You might also see a lot of general architecture
and landscaping seeking to segment or contain
areas against such a blowout, hidden diaphragms
or plasma windows, ultra-transparent glass
walls with occasional airlocks dividing the
habitat into wedge or other segments, and
so on.
House basements themselves might poke right
through the skin of the habitat drum too,
to connect to exterior vacuum train monorails
or have a space-car garage there.
Indeed such space-houses might be mobile,
like an RV, and just plug into rented land
parcels, the spaceship being your house, which
you can move to different habitat if you choose,
same as the habitats can move to different
conglomerations.
I tend to assume houses will only get bigger
and more luxurious as technology improves,
and I’d not be surprised if the typical
‘suburban’ family dwelling on one of cylinders
was something between a mansion and buried
skyscraper and spaceship poking out between
the hull on the outside and the ground on
the inside.
This is especially the case considering the
existence of these things implies you’ve
gotten very good at creating artificial green
spaces and adapting to those, and of course
have very good and cheap construction.
An O’Neill Cylinder, while often shown to
be just a surface inside a can, is likely
to be laid out far more three dimensionally
anyway so a certain amount of subterranean
infrastructure is not only likely, but probably
so prevalent that the green space and gardens
inside are less like a plot of land with houses
on it and more like a vast infrastructure
and dock that someone’s dumped dirt and
water on top of, a massive rooftop garden.
Those subterranean levels though might be
just as garden like in some spots as the surface
layer, and in other sections, they would be
utility tunnels, keeping the top layer free
from overhead cables and ensuring everyone
and the habitat proper receives proper data
connectivity, freight tubes and plumbing.
Weather control on these habitats is easily
accomplished too, though the weather might
not always be mild since the inhabitants might
not prefer that.
Now if conglomerations of habitats rather
than isolated ones was the norm, you’d presumably
also start seeing specialized economies in
each chunk of the conglomeration and likely
each specializing in many other ways too,
even ecologically and climatically.
Nothing is really stopping a conglomeration
from containing hundreds or even thousands
of habitats after all.
So you might get rather inhospitable habitats
in a conglomeration just because it was big
enough folks wanted a ski resort or place
where it was cloudy and dark and raining all
the time.
Divergence and specialization have value,
both in abstract and practical economic terms.
So there would be many differences for life
on board an O’Neill Cylinder compared to
living here on Earth, and probably many more
than we’d expect, but again they fundamentally
are meant to be just like home, and where
they won’t be, probably only because they’ve
intentionally been designed to be more comfortable
or interesting.
Which is a good thing, because it’s quite
likely that in the centuries to come these
will start becoming a common place for folks
to live.
And if we stay mostly human, still wanting
a nice house and a lawn, then as we grow to
enclose our Sun and transition towards a Dyson
Swarm, conglomerations of these cylinders
would likely be where the overwhelming majority
of folks lived, not on planets.
In the far future, life on board an O’Neill
Cylinder might be the norm, and everything
else the weird anomaly.
A common source of confusion with rotating
habitats is why you experience gravity, or
something effectively identical to it, and
why you’d fall down to the bottom if you
were hovering in the air.
Fundamentally this comes down to understanding
what we call a rotating frame of reference
and we happen to live on one, the Earth keeps
spinning under you if you jump up, indeed
it spins faster than a passenger jet, but
you land back down at the same place.
If you’d like to get a better understanding
of the physics involved, I’d recommend trying
out the Rotating Reference Frames Quiz in
Brilliant’s Course on Classical Mechanics.
Brilliant is an online learning community
with over 60 interactive courses and many
quizzes and puzzles, plus Daily Challenges
that help get the brain warmed up for the
day.
Those Challenges provide a context and framework
that you need to tackle, so that you learn
the concepts by applying them, which is the
best way to learn new concepts.
Brilliant makes learning fun and easier, and
their online community gives you places to
discuss the material or ask questions, and
their mobile apps offline feature lets you
take courses even when you’re not getting
a good signal.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
So today we looked at living under artificial
gravity in cylinder habitats, and next week
we’ll be contemplating living under low
gravity in crater habitats, as we return to
the Moon with Crater Cities.
The week after that we’ll head deep into
the future to examine the Heat Death of the
Universe and looks for ways to postpone that,
assuming we’re still around in many trillions
of years to need to worry about the problem.
We often worry that we might not be, and one
of the more common concerns for what might
end our civilization is artificial intelligence,
so before we look at Postponing the Heat Death
of the Universe we’ll have a bonus episode
looking at the problem of Coexistence of Humans
and AI.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And if you’d like to support future episodes,
visit our website, IsaacArthur.net, to donate
to the channel or check out some of the awesome
SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a Great Week!
