This episode is sponsored by Raycon.
We spend a lot of time talking about how to
colonize other planets, but not so much about
life for the folks doing it.
What does it take to become a colonist, and
what would life be like as one?
We’ve often looked at colonizing planets,
particularly in our outward bound series,
and some years back we did the Life in a Space
Colony series trying to look more at the process
of getting to those new worlds, in our solar
system or beyond and getting set up.
While both series were very popular, one complaint
I sometimes get is that I never really addressed
what it took to become a colonist, and what
their lives would be like.
So today we’ll be taking a look at life
as a Space Colonist.
That’s a fairly broad topic since we need
to look at everything from selection criteria
and motivations to all the ways life might
be like on all the different worlds we might
colonize.
Life would be very different under the dome
on Mars or the Lava Tubes of the Moon or the
Cloud Cities of Venus, and doubtless every
planet in the galaxy will be unique in some
way.
Of course to experience those unique worlds
you first have to be selected as a colonist
and make the journey there.
It is highly unlikely any planet will have
folks arriving without permission after that
first wave gets in and establishes a radar
array around the planet, which would likely
occur in the earliest of days.
So any ships going there will have permission
to land, unless they’re flat out invading.
You might be able to get on board as a stowaway
but not likely, there’s no air drag in space
so they’d notice even a small difference
in mass, not too mention water and air consumption,
and odds are future cataloging and inventory
systems would note someone hiding in a crate.
For today we’re assuming you got to your
colony openly and with permission.
Now down the road it might be they are in
so desperate need of volunteers that the screening
process for coming is that you have a heartbeat,
can sign your name, and show no obvious signs
of being a psychopath, but it's also rather
likely they’ll be able to be fairly picky,
at least in early days, and possibly forever.
So a pivotal aspect of colonist selection
is going to be a supply and demand issue,
can they pick from the cream of the crop or
do they need to scrape the barrel or incentivize
to get their colonists.
That might depend on the individual colony
too, some paradise planet might have no shortage
of volunteers willing to pay money while some
trash heap of a world might need to offer
big signing bonuses and still take folks most
would not want as neighbors.
Speaking of the money though, it does raise
the issue of what the selection criteria are
when we’re talking about the cream of the
crop.
It might not be too obvious either.
Back when we were looking at how to survive
a doomsday in Evacuation Earth, a point I
made there was that while we often assume
our best and brightest scientists would be
going into the bunker or ark, a civilization
would be better off protecting its remnants
in most cases by bringing some skilled teachers
and a library rather than its best theorists
and experimentalists, as they won’t be doing
much experimenting or theorizing.
Something similar applies to colonization.
You need scientists but they’re not doing
groundbreaking new research or solving problems
in the way we tend to see in scifi shows where
there’s always a science officer figuring
out life and death problems every episode.
So too, a lot of what a new colony needs is
labor and breeding stock, to put it bluntly,
but there’s a good chance virtually all
the labor is going to be robots and the critical
skill in short demand will be people who can
fix and tweak robots.
Maybe the thing any colony is going to need
the most though, if they want to make green
new worlds, is a lot of cold hard green cash.
It doesn’t really matter what their economy
is, more or less like our own or so high-tech
and post-scarcity that money is something
strictly used for very bizarre or unique desires,
starting a colony is going to be far more
resource-intensive than most other daily activities.
Maybe you’ve got self-replicating machines
that can take a blueprint, land on an asteroid,
and convert it into a spaceship complete with
all its colonial gear and journey supplies
ready for ten thousand colonists, but that’s
still more resource-intensive than building
an orbital space settlement, let alone telling
those same robots to build ten thousand houses
and the necessary support infrastructure to
feed and supply their inhabitants.
The energy needs of an interstellar ship just
to get up to speed and back down again will
generally be orders of magnitude higher than
the energy needed to run life support and
hydroponics for that trip’s duration, potentially
a million years or more of what it would take
in terms of energy to keep folks alive on
a stationary settlement.
Once you’ve done that you have a whole new
world or solar system to draw resources from,
but the initial expenditure per colonist is
huge compared to what is needed to sustain
another person staying home.
Maybe the coin isn’t monetary but influence
or prestige, though most likely it's both.
You’ve got to get settlement rights on a
place from whoever controls that.
You’ve got to get the ship built.
You’ve got to support all those colonists
for the trip, and you’ve got to pay for
all the screening and training that comes
with them.
Then there are the support personnel, not
just for the setup and the voyage, but after
it too.
Unless you’re completely cutting ties with
Earth, you’ll need folks who stay behind
and provide continuing support, making sure
you’re getting sent the latest tech updates,
as well as news, movies and books, and warning
you if a shift in politics means that the
next ship coming behind you will be sending
in troops instead of additional colonists.
So that’s one role in a colony we tend not
to think of, the folks who won’t even be
going.
They may outnumber the folks who do go, as
doubtless they will for all our first bases
throughout this solar system, with far more
folks at mission command and attached enterprises
than actually at the base.
However in a lot of cases, if we’re not
thinking of governments establishing colonies,
it’s more likely to be big groups, for ideology
or commerce, much like colonies founded in
the Age of Sail.
Early colonies probably will tend to be founded
by existing terrestrial governments but the
interstellar ones probably not, not after
the first few.
We think of colonies and we think of the first
ones, but while Alpha Centauri might be a
bit over 4 light years away, there are over
a thousand solar systems that are within ten
times that distance, and a thousand times
that within a hundred times the distance.
Of that first thousand stars alone, the inner
core where a message can be sent and replied
to in under a century, how many prestige efforts
by governments would we expect?
And what’s their motivation for doing more?
Barring faster than light travel there is
no realistic scenario for adding them as territory
the way a nation might now, or even might
contemplate for this solar system’s other
worlds.
So most of these in the inner core, within
a century of communication, will probably
not be settled by nations as some sort of
effort to win prestige or expand their turf.
This leaves us groups willing to do it for
its own sake or a profit.
Or because a prophet told them to.
An awful lot of colonies and exoduses down
the years have been motivated by religious
leaders and promised lands, and I’d suspect
a very large number of colonies will be founded
with that in mind, and historically religious
groups are the largest share of charitable
donations.
Fully a third of charitable donations in the
United States are directly to religious organizations
for example.
So if you're having problems finding commercial
opportunities for funding and governments
aren’t funding them beyond the first handful
or some incentivizing, then I’d say the
most obvious pathway for funding would be
religious groups or more broadly ideological
groups.
So that might be your first question on the
colonist screening application.
Are you a member of this group?
Or can you afford to pay in your share for
the expedition?
Sending second and third sons off to find
a new land is certainly a common approach
historically too.
It could easily be both, wealthy individuals
seeking new lands for themselves or their
children, ideological groups funding new colonies,
and of course not-so-wealthy people giving
up their life savings to buy a chunk of currently-desolate
lifeless world.
Now for the individual or family group, this
is potentially a heck of a good investment.
Whether you have life extension to permit
you to see a future world yourself, and possibly
live to see it turn from barren rock to paradise,
or you're aiming for that future for your
descendants, it’s one of exponential growth
if successful.
Just to give some perspective, even if a colony
ship or fleet included fully a million people,
and was only claiming a specific planet, not
an entire solar system, an Earth Analog in
terms of size and land to sea ratio, if evenly
divided, would be 150 square kilometers or
37,000 acres a piece.
As we discussed in the Life in a Space Colony
series, you probably never settle a single
planet when going to a new star system, you
start off settling various moons and asteroids
to get all the infrastructure you need for
terraforming a planet before ever landing
on one.
However, that informs us what the stakes are,
both in terms of the actual land stakes and
what the pay off for the gamble is.
It’s even bigger for something like a Gardener
Ship, the colonization method we introduced
in that series and expanded on in Galactic
Gardeners, where a ship moves from system
to system out toward the edge of the galaxy
colonizing, replacing its numbers in the decades
between stops, and colonizing each new system
with whatever portion of its crew felt like
disembarking.
To be a colonist, if successful, is to be
immortal, or at least very long remembered.
Most towns whose history isn’t buried so
far back in antiquity that it was founded
before written records were common, generally
have a name associated with them, sometimes
accompanied by a plaque, statue, or some other
monument, which serves as a continued legacy
for the person or peoples who were instrumental
in founding it.
Even in situations where person-oriented monuments
are absent, culturally-specific landmarks
typically remain to tell those who come after
what the culture valued: something analogous
to a Rosetta stone, Code of Laws, or Voyager
disc, might serve to ensure that the founding
colonists and their societies were fundamentally
remembered, if or when their individual identities
have been lost.
So there we have our big motivations for interstellar
colonization, the game will be a bit different
for interplanetary colonization or if we invent
faster than light travel or communication,
but for interstellar colonists it means leaving
forever to put your mark on a world for as
long as they keep records.
There are a million mountains on Earth, in
a new world having one named for you would
be a minor item, same for islands and maybe
even continents and future metropolises.
The least colonist, who barely had the funds
or prestige to get a cramped berth on the
ship, is likely to have a statue erected to
them in the town square someday.
For people with more capital, the equivalent
of second sons of powerful families or those
with power who just want to leave, even having
the whole planet named after you is plausible,
or having a whole mountain carved in your
likeness.
Those are powerful incentives.
For ideological groups, it is a chance at
the promised land.
I suspect most folks, even if just in a moment
of passing exasperation, have wished they
lived somewhere composed of folks who agreed
with them.
For those who are really passionate about
it, it’s the chance to found an entire world
that from its inception followed the teachings
of Adam Smith or Karl Marx or Jesus or Buddha.
Potentially a lot more niche than that too,
a specific sect or ideological faction with
maybe a few hundred thousand devoted followers
decides to pack up and ship out some or all
of them to a new world.
They might even get help from others, after
all exile is a classic way to get rid of folks
who your civilization, or at least its leaders,
find irritating and troublesome.
Offering them a grant to get the heck out
of your territory might be an appealing option
for many nations.
Closer to home, in time and space, we might
ask what the criteria for our early colonist
will be?
This is a lot more likely to be government
or company funded ventures since it's close
to hand, strange though that is to say about
places a million times further away from us
than the most backwater and isolated chunk
of Earth from wherever we personally live,
but our solar system is all within hours of
communication time.
Early colonies here on Earth were weeks if
not months away by travel, which also meant
by communication since someone had to carry
word, so every place in this solar system
short of the outer Oort Cloud enjoys an advantage
of faster communication than our historical
colonies.
Because of that, there’s a lot more reason
for nations, banks, investors, and corporations
to take a heavy interest in colonizing our
solar system.
Since they’d be funding the endeavors, or
loaning the money for the enterprises setting
up there, they are in a position to be picky
about colonist selection criteria.
One thing neither they nor interstellar colonies
are likely to care about is genetics, since
we will probably have good gene therapy long
before we’re doing a ton of colonizing,
that’s another common trope of science fiction
that probably won’t hold up, the idea that
we select colonists for best genetics.
Ultimately the big two is did you pay to make
the trip or get paid to, and it is likely
to be a little of both, and if you’re going
there to set up a new life or going principally
for a job.
Do you own a dome of your own or are you a
technician there at a base for a set contract
period?
Let’s imagine you are a Mars colonist and
you’ve purchased 25 square kilometers of
good Martian regolith to call your own.
You’re not on a base, it’s your own place
an hours dune buggy ride from the base.
Did you bring a spouse and kids are you looking
to start a family there?
Maybe it's just you and your cat or dog, or
their robot analogues.
You’ve got your first dome from some pre-assembled
and dropped kit, square in the middle of your
5x5 kilometer or 3x3 mile plot of land.
And since there are no trees, you can see
all your plot.
You’ve got food for a while, water, air,
some machinery.
What kinds of machinery?
Well, probably a 3D printer, hopefully one
much better than modern ones but don’t expect
it to be Star Trek Replicator.
You’ve got some sort of power source, probably
a radioisotope Thermal Generator and some
solar panels.
Are you going to farm?
To terraform?
To Mine?
Are you part of a cottage industry?
All of the above?
Let’s say all of the above.
You have a kiln for making clear dome panels
out of the local regolith.
We’ll say it’s a microwave oven for making
basaltic glasses.
You paid extra to bring along a few hundred
square meters of solar panels to power it
to the tune of 30,000 watts at peak noon production.
At that production rate you can be churning
out around a hundred square meters of glass
panels a day, depending on weight, efficiency,
and type, we will keep it a round figure.
One of your neighbors specializes in making
steel or aluminum struts for the panels, and
it’s basically the business that lets you
both bring in some money to buy other stuff.
Sounds like a lot: every day, you’re turning
out a decent sized greenhouse in terms of
panels, but it would take you 363 Martian
years or nearly 700 Earth years to dome in
your plot of land.
Are you selling most of yours or is it just
your side business to buy things you need,
and if the latter, is doming in your whole
5x5 kilometer plot your goal, essentially
para-terraforming your chunk of Mars?
Who’s making the dirt for the interior of
all those domes?
You can’t use raw Martian regolith.
How about the raw material for the panels?
Are you scooping and refining that yourself,
or buying it from someone else?
While some folks prefer to be self-sufficient,
and others specialize, let's say we’re a
bit of both - since from a practical perspective,
even if something happens to such a person,
someone else can more or less fill that role.
We’ve a neighbor who has vats he dumps regolith
into to process and brew microbes into and
sell to folks building farming domes.
When you don’t need room for plants you
just use some metal sheeting and rocks to
build yourself a big thick structure with
plenty of protection from outside.
But you’ve got to buy your airlocks between
everything, even rooms in the same structure
probably.
You buy air tanks off folks for storage and
you bake your oxygen out of your glass as
you make those panels, maybe you sell excess
oxygen to folks.
You pay a pretty penny for all the nitrogen
you need for those plants and for your water
brought down from the poles.
You spend a lot of time cleaning and polishing
those solar panels, since you’ve got to
keep them free of dust.
Once a week you get in your land crawler and
head into town, a base of a few hundred where
you can get some shopping done, sell some
of your panels and some of the produce you
grow in your domes.
You can call all your neighbors up on the
phone easily enough, you’ve got a satellite
phone and you pay a pretty penny for your
uplink.
There’s probably plenty of social media
and chat rooms, and if you don’t mind the
signal lag of several minutes to an hour,
depending on how close Earth is at the time,
you can chat with friends and family back
home.
But you like going into town to see actual
humans.
There’s probably a restaurant there, probably
a bar, probably some place folks hang out.
You had a good year so you donated some panels
to the community project to build a base garden-park
and there’s talk of getting a football field
built and arguments over if it should be standard
size or adjusted to Martian gravity, and if
so in what way.
You also blew some of your excess money buying
a spacesuit for your dog so Fido could walk
around with you while you were out checking
the solar panels or poking around your tract
of land for signs of valuable minerals.
You’ve added to your solar panel farm and
added some more kilns, and folks often visit
you to buy some and spend the evening having
dinner and playing a board game.
Maybe you’ve built a dome big enough for
some limited livestock, perhaps even large
enough to support a small woodland or orchard.
This is life.
It’s rougher in some ways than being a pioneer
in colonial days, you can’t just get a plot
of land and knock some trees over to build
a house than graze animals on it and grow
crops, not that doing that was ever easy either.
In other ways it is easier, you are never
any more alone than you need to be, with instant
communications planet-wide, and you probably
have far better digital entertainment than
any of us nowadays have.
Endless books and films and games and virtual
reality to spend your free time on, though
you probably have to pay for those too.
One day in town you meet the person of your
dreams and decide to start a family.
Maybe a few new colonists arrive and stay
with you for a time while they set up their
own domes, maybe on a piece of your land you're
renting or selling, maybe on an adjoining
lot.
Or working for you inside your expanding domes.
Probably been buying some robots too.
If you have kids, do they go to school somewhere
or is it all online, some variant of homeschooling
and virtual conferencing maybe?
The town’s growing.
Do they have an appointed leader from back
home or someone you all elect?
Is it important to you or something you find
mildly irritating when you go into town and
have to pay sales taxes and some official
pokes you about paying taxes on all those
panels you make and sell?
The answer will be different on every world,
and probably for every settlement of Mars
too, I’d doubt any one nation from Earth
would succeed in claiming it all for themselves.
What about Venus?
Are they cooling the place down like we looked
at in Winter on Venus or is it all floating
cities.
If the latter, instead of domes do you have
something like a houseboat, your own home
floating in the acidic clouds?
What do you do for work there?
Build more of them?
Refine Nitrogen and sell it on to the nearest
cloud city for export to Mars and Orbital
Habitats?
Maybe you build giant floating solar panels?
Or are you an asteroid miner?
Maybe you have a whole asteroid to yourself
and even signals to your nearest neighbors
take a minute.
Do you have your own spaceship you use to
bring your wares back to a bigger asteroid
settlement for sale or do you refine it on
hand and sell it to passing ships who gather
it for a cut of the value?
Are you an ice miner, out in Kuiper Belt?
Do you live on Europa, Jupiter’s Icy Moon?
If so, are you on the surface or is your home
a submarine prowling its subsurface oceans,
docking to tall skinny cities that slice through
the kilometers of ice between ocean and airless
surface?
Or are you a colonist to Tau Ceti, kept alive
by medical technology for the century long
voyage of a dozen light years and finally
arriving at this new system and its new worlds?
Did you sleep for the trip or spend a century
awake working your passage as part of the
crew?
What would you do if the trade you had in
mind for when you arrived, and on which you
spent most of your funds and cargo allowance,
was rendered obsolete by a tech update from
home during the journey?
Do you trade it all for scrap and spare parts
and become the equivalent of a farm hand for
another colonist till you can earn new land,
or did your fellow colonists pitch in for
you and others rendered redundant to help
you start something new?
Why did you go?
Was it because you wanted to get away from
home or because this colony offered a chance
to live under whatever code or creed you all
thought was right but most of the folks back
home did not?
Was it a communal endeavor?
Maybe you all owned some stock in the corporate
colony with its charter you all agreed to
sign on to.
Was it all equal shares or did most folks
have around a thousand shares while some had
just a hundred, or none at all, or a million?
Did you have a specific assigned job or were
you more of a freeholder?
Do you break you back working or mostly do
office work and programming for the robots
who do the heavy lifting?
Or are the robots so good they don’t need
much or any instruction?
Are they so good that you arrived at a ready
made colony created by a Seed Ship and simply
moved in?
Or maybe you were even grown in an artificial
womb around a distant sun and raised by an
AI?
Or maybe you’re an AI or digitized person
and the world you moved to was a virtual one,
as we explored in Virtual Worlds.
A critical notion here, all of these maybes
and ifs aren’t because we don’t know which
will happen, though of course we don’t,
but rather because we would expect them all
to happen, and each with a thousand variants,
over a million worlds and untold billions
of colonists.
Each leaving Earth in the days, centuries,
and millennia to come.
Each colony founded with a different goal,
each a different and probably unexpected path
to follow, each with unique challenges, and
each colonist with their own.
As to the question of if we’ll be able to
find volunteers, folks willing to pay for
the trip or demanding pay for it, just ask
yourself if any of those scenarios appealed
to you.
If they did, you’ve got your answer.
For me, I don’t know.
I’m a rural kid used to my gardens and forests
and quiet, and married to a farmgirl who raised
six younger siblings in a house she helped
her parents build, and I still don’t think
either of us would be inclined to the pioneering
life.
I remember when driving on our honeymoon we
listened to an audiobook chronicling an English
settler’s life when she and her husband
and children moved to frontier Illinois in
the early 1800s and while I found it captivating,
I can’t see myself personally ever boarding
a spaceship for a colony, for all that I’d
give much to give others the opportunity to
do so and vicariously live their dreams with
them.
How about yourself?
Would you pack up and journey to an alien
world to live and raise a family under an
alien Sun?
We’ve got some announcements, and our upcoming
schedule, but first, a lot of us have had
to adjust recently to increasingly mobile
offices and conducting business over the phone
or via a phone app for conferences, and if
you’ve used many bluetooth headsets or earbuds,
you know how often it can be hard to hear
them in a crowd.
If you’re looking for a good pair of earbuds
with noise isolating features, I’d recommend
trying out Raycon’s Everyday E25 Earbuds.
They fit in snugly and discreetly for a noise-isolating
fit so you can hear them even in a crowd.
Plus they’ve got a good battery life of
6 hours of playtime and a very compact charging
case with its own battery that can recharge
them four times while you’re on the go.
They also make the best kind of holiday gift,
something your friends and family can use
every day.
So if you’re looking for a good pair of
premium earbuds that sounds as amazing as
other top audio brands, but is about half
the price of other premium earbuds, try out
Raycon.
Raycon was founded by Ray J. and is a favorite
of folks like Snoop Dogg and Melissa Etherridge
for their wide range of stylish and fun colors
and super-comfortable fits, and if you’d
like to give them a try, and help support
the show while you’re at it, now’s the
time to get the best prices of the year on
Raycons—but hurry, this offer is available
for a limited time only.
Click the link in the description box or go
to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur to get 20% off
your Raycon purchase!
Also if you’re done binge-watching SFIA
and are looking for something else to listen
to, there’s a new audio drama out, “Dreaming”,
from SFIA’s own Jerry Guern.
Jerry’s one of our long time editors here
and has also co-written around a dozen of
our episodes, and I sometimes help him edit
his own writing and some while back I talked
him into uploading some of his short stories
for folks to listen to and he started up his
own channel for that, Jerry’s Stories, that’s
been growing rapidly the last few months,
and this newest installment, “Dreaming”,
is a first attempt with a full cast of voice
actors, and it came out great, so make sure
to check it out.
Incidentally I often get asked by folks who
mostly listen to our shows if I could release
them audio only, especially for folks listening
on a commute and getting their bandwidth chewed
up by our high definition videos.
If you didn’t know, we do release every
episode as audio-only, in two versions, with
and without music in the background, and those
are always linked in the episode descriptions
here, but are available on iTunes, Spotify,
and Soundcloud for free download.
I often get asked by folks why we never do
a Thanksgiving Special, since we’ve often
done holiday themed episodes before, and if
you’re curious, it’s simply because we
do our episodes on Thursdays and Thanksgiving
is always on a Thursday so doing a Thanksgiving
episode every year would feel kind of redundant.
Nonetheless I’ve always thought of Thanksgiving
as a holiday that’s about remembering that
we have much to be thankful for even when
it's been a fairly hard year, and I suspect
that sums up 2020 pretty well for a lot of
us, and I wanted to thank all of you for tuning
in every week and I hope you’ve got some
things to be thankful for this year too, and
Happy Thanksgiving!
So this was our last episode for November,
but we still have our monthly livestream Q&A
coming up Sunday Afternoon, November 29th,
at 4 pm Eastern Time.
Then we’ll head into December to ask how
we’re going to go about Surviving this Next
Century, and how hopefully we do more than
survive but thrive, including setting up our
first space colonies.
The week after that we’ll ask what it will
take for those colonies to grow from simple
outposts into genuine settlements and cities.
Then we’ll follow that up with a look at
how we’ll terraform these new worlds.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Happy Thanksgiving!
