This episode is sponsored by Curiosity Stream
We’ve spent two hundred episodes discussing
the amazing things that might be possible
in the future,
but what about the impossible?
So today is our 200th Episode here on SFIA!
It’s been quite a journey to get here, and
I thought we’d indulge in some commemoration
of the event, but in deference to any new
watchers here just for this topic, we’ll
save that for the end of the episode, beyond
saying now just how grateful I am to everyone
for making this occasion possible.
We’re also about to hit the fifth anniversary
of the show in just under a month, and I wanted
to thank everyone for all the inspiration
and well wishes over the last five years,
and of course for tuning in every week.
On the one hand, the topic of things which
will never exist seems an odd one for a show
focused on discussing all of the awesome things
which might come to exist in the future, and
I was surprised this topic won our poll for
episode 200, but on the other hand, we do
often emphasize that our goal here is to look
at what might come to be, within the realm
of known science.
We rarely drift outside that and I always
try to announce it loudly when we do, because
the difference between science fiction, science
fantasy, and scientific futurism is that focus
on scientific realism.
Probably some of the best known breaks we
have with science fiction is that in almost
all sci-fi, you tend to have faster than light
travel, artificial or anti-gravity, and force
fields, but these are examples of things we
have discussed in other episodes among our
broad inventory of 200 videos, and I wanted
to cover new material today.
While those last two, gravity manipulation
and force fields, might be possible under
science we just don’t understand yet or
have analogues we might be able to create
under known science, FTL seems to be a different
kind of impossible.
Faster than light travel or communication,
which are tied to time travel as well, take
a while to show how they aren’t just outside
known science, but actually rather contradicted
by common sense as your understanding of the
Universe grows, as they are really the same
as asking why a cause can’t happen before
an effect, why you can’t have 101% of a
pile of rice, or why you can have a negative
dollar in your pocket, or a negative cup of
water.
Of course, you can have these things in mathematics,
but the physical world and the mathematical
world are not the same places.
Check out the FTL series for more details
about why we tend to be skeptical about ever
having FTL or time machines.
But speaking of mathematical worlds brings
up a different sort of impossible: places
which may exist but which we may never be
able to see or visit.
Concepts like string theory and the multiverse
work great in theory, and may indeed exist,
but we have no inkling about how we might
look at or travel to them.
They may indeed not exist outside of the imaginations
of very clever physicists.
There is, after all, no observable evidence
of them; or they may exist and we may figure
out how to observe or even visit them one
day.
If not though, it is an interesting philosophical
quandary if they would actually be real in
any meaningful sense.
But there may be things in our own Universe
just like that.
For instance, you can’t ever see an atom,
because they are smaller than the wavelengths
of visible light.
To really see an object, you need to use a
wavelength equal in size to or smaller than
that object.
The problem is, photons are counter-intuitive
when it comes to density.
Taking some liberties here with the word “size”,
we can imagine a photon as big as or bigger
than a planet, but according to our models
contains just a few trillionths of a trillionth
of a trillionth of a joule, a joule being
the approximate energy needed to lift most
handheld objects from your pocket over your
head.
That infinitesimal fraction is spread over
a region wider than a planet, and would radiate
in the Extremely Low Frequency Radio Bandwidth
range of a mere 30 hertz or so.
The ELF band is used for submarine communications
and is also produced by lighting strikes and
other disturbances of Earth’s magnetic field,
as opposed to the kilohertz and megahertz
ranges we use for listening to the radio.
When you think about how tiny an amount of
energy that is spread over such a vast region,
it’s simply ethereal.
On the completely opposite end of the spectrum,
we have x-rays, whose wavelengths are about
atom sized, and gamma-rays, whose wavelengths
are about atomic nucleus sized - far smaller,
and hugely more energetic.
With these we can image atoms and subatomic
particles, but they have so little mass and
energy themselves, and these photons have
so much, that you are utterly disrupting whatever
you look at with them, even before we consider
quantum uncertainty.
What if something were even smaller?
We don’t know and it’s hard to say, since
we need yet smaller and more energetic photons
to detect them.
A photon with about a joule of energy all
to itself would be an Ultra-high-energy gamma
ray in the exa-electronvolt region, with a
wavelength of just a bit under a trillionth
of a trillionth of a meter, already more than
a billion times smaller than a proton.
And yet it would contain a billion times more
energy than that proton, so it would be like
trying to examine a golf ball by bouncing
a mountain off of it, and anything that small
would presumably be even less massive.
Yet it might one day be done.
However, if you’ve seen our episodes discussing
micro-black holes you know that it is energy
density, not mass, that causes black holes,
and in theory you could have a black hole
a mere 10^-24 meters in radius, a trillionth
of a trillionth of a meter across.
It would weigh about a ton, with all its matter
stuffed in there, and that’s a lot more
than a joule of energy: about a billion, trillion
times more.
By the time you’d get to 10^-36 meters,
as small to an atomic nucleus as that nucleus
is to our planet, a photon of that wavelength
would be carrying around 100,000,000 joules
of energy.
That’s about the same mass-energy a black
hole that size would have, and its expected
life time would be a mere 10^-45 seconds.
How would you detect anything down at that
scale, as small itself to an atom as that
atom to a planet, being hit by something carrying
as much energy as a freight truck on a freeway,
and so dense that our photon actually becomes
a black hole?
If you’ve ever heard of a Planck length
or a Planck time, the so called minimum units
of space and time, that’s what those are
and why, more or less.
We’ve good reason to think that nothing
smaller than that can exist in this universe,
and that indeed maybe even black holes, normally
thought to be point-like at their central
singularity, are actually constrained to be
no smaller than that.
The Planck length is arguably the minimum
size that quantum gravity effects are able
to be established, so nothing smaller than
that is expected to exist because it would
lack the quantum interactions necessary for
it to exist by our definition of existence
anyway.
Also, to observe something smaller than the
Planck length would actually require a photon
of such high energy that is expected to collapse
into its own black hole and disrupt anything
that small we’re trying to measure.
So while such tiny objects might exist, the
physical measurements and interaction of those
objects with systems to detect them are impossible
using our laws of physics.
On balance, though anything smaller than a
Planck Length or a unit of time shorter than
a Planck Time probably can never exist.
Now these Planck units, and there are many
besides distance and time, are non-coincidentally
calculable by using combinations of five physical
constants, the speed of light, the gravitational
constant, the reduced Planck Constant, the
Coulomb Constant, and the Boltzmann Constant.
Planck units are considered our preferred
means of communicating physical properties
to aliens, rather than metric or imperial,
as they are based off these fundamental physical
constants.
But they also often imply hard limits on reality
too, and not always minimums.
For instance Planck Temperature is around
100 million, trillion, trillion degrees.
That’s not only a lot hotter than any star
at its core, and hotter than anything we’ve
done in a lab, and we can outdo stars in a
lab, but it’s thought to be the hottest
anything could be, and probably the temperature
at the Big Bang.
Nothing hotter can ever exist.
Physics breaks down beyond that, as likely
do all the basic physical forces, though if
we ever get a working Quantum Gravity theory
or Grand Unified Theory of Everything, that
might change.
There’s a popular and very flawed notion
of looking at the scale of the universe like
a Matrioshka Doll, comparing atoms to solar
systems and so on, it’s handy for quick
and rough analogies but often gets extrapolated
to imply deep significance.
We just saw the bottom of that scale and how
it breaks down, but it does at the top too.
We don’t know how big the Universe is.
It might be infinite as we can only ever see
events in our Hubble volume, that expanding
sphere around us in our expanding Universe
where things are not moving away faster than
light.
We can and have mapped the Universe significantly
further out by projecting our observations
of distant galaxies that were within our hubble
volume when the light left them billions of
years ago.
The light from these distant galaxies has
only just reached us, but today, the space
between us and these galaxies is expanding
at superluminal velocity.
In the future, when the light leaving those
galaxies is slower than the speed at which
they are moving away from us, they will vanish
from our telescopes.
This is the Observable Universe, currently
47 billion light years in radius, which seems
rather big since the Universe is only 13.7
billion years old, you wouldn’t think we
could see wider than that, but remember everything
is flying apart, when we see a photon arriving
from some source 13.7 billion years ago, we
were a lot closer to that object when it left.
So it will be impossible to send a message
to anyone on opposite sides of the volume
using radio or light, no matter how powerful
you make the signal, because light will never
be able to catch up with the object it is
being aimed at.
The difference between the Observable Universe
and a Hubble Volume is the latter is smaller
and is inside our cosmological event horizon,
meaning we can see events that occurred inside
it.
Out past that, we can see stuff that has happened
but will never get any updates and could never
send a signal or a ship that could reach it.
So our maps of those objects that have passed
beyond our Hubble volume are estimates only.
An accurate map of what the whole universe
looks like will never exist while we are bound
by the postulate of causality.
A critical concept there too, the speed of
light is really the speed of information,
and its information that can’t be allowed
to move faster or backward in time, because
it messes with causality, galaxies expanding
away from each other faster than that speed
doesn’t violate that.
In truth, we can only infer the existence
of regions beyond even that because we can’t
think of any reason why our Universe would
be a sphere exactly that size centered around
Earth.
The whole Universe could be a little bigger,
or a lot bigger, or even infinite.
When it comes to infinity, much like the infinitesimal,
not only can’t we ever get there but we
won’t even get close.
But before you get up to that scale, everything
gets rather plain and homogenous, we call
this the End of Greatness, and that’s only
a few hundred million light years across,
representing volumes not even a percent of
a percent of a percent of the Observable Universe.
This is essentially the zoom point where there’s
nothing really unique anymore, such volumes
are hardly identical to each other, but you
stop having unique objects that can really
be thought of as related and meaningful the
way a galaxy for instance is.
It’s the top of our scale as sub atomic
particles are the bottom, if you want to think
of things in that sense of zooming in or out
and see a smaller or bigger version of the
same thing, which again is wrongheaded and
inaccurate anyway.
Of course if the Universe was infinite, and
you had an impossibly fast spaceship, you
would actually begin to see genuine identical
repetition eventually if you traveled far
enough.
In an infinite system, you will always have
repetition of any pattern, the smaller that
pattern the more often, and if we think of
a Hubble Volume as the maximum meaningful
chunk of space – which would obviously not
be true if you had an FTL ship to be fair
– we’d see that repeat eventually.
See the Infinite Improbability Issues episode
for exploration of this concept, but the sticking
point is that such being the case, you could
never actually know if the Universe was infinite
and repeating randomly or actually a closed
loop of that size, and as we note in that
episode, practically speaking it doesn’t
matter, if the infinite does exist, we can
never actually experience or prove it without
breaking physics as we know it.
This brings us to another thing which will
never exist, and that’s True Immortality.
We talk about life extension a lot here, and
not just of mere centuries, we’ve contemplated
millions of years of life or even outliving
the stars themselves in Civilizations at the
End of Time.
We talked about practical limits on even digital,
backed up minds in Digital Death, where you
effectively get a half-life rather than a
lifespan.
But true immortality requires the infinite,
and even if you could find a work around to
the Heat Death of the Universe, there’s
always a finite chance of death no matter
how robust and sturdy you are or how many
backup copies you have, and over infinite
time, the Grim Reaper will eventually get
you.
Of course with infinite time and space, he’d
spit you back out again too, even if just
as a deluded Boltzmann Brain that coincidentally
had randomly assembled memories identical
to your own at this moment.
A Boltzmann Brain is a self-aware entity that
arises by chance because of random fluctuations.
In an infinite universe with infinite time,
the creation of even the rarest things become
possible.
But continuity can’t be achieved regardless
because you have to be able to store and sort
all those memories and eventually you hit
a wall where you’d need all the mass of
a galaxy to store your memory, or more.
Another thing that can’t actually exist
is what we call the Library of Babel, an extension
of the notion that an infinite number of monkeys
with typewriters will eventually bang out
a copy of Shakespeare’s classics by random
typing.
Of course they’d also have banged out every
other book too, including far more copies
of random gibberish, which together make up
the Library.
There’s simply too many unique combinations
of letters in a book.
A typical thick novel might have a million
characters in it, and even if we limited those
characters to the 26 lowercase letters, a
space, a comma, a period, and an apostrophe,
30 characters, you would have 30^1,000,000
possible combinations.
If those were each in one kilogram hardcover
books on shelves, that library would mass
around 10^1,500,000 kilograms, a mass that
is so meaninglessly huge that it dwarfs the
mass of Observable Universe by far more than
that Universe dwarfs an atom.
Indeed even if you stored each character of
the books on a single atom instead of a bit
of paper, you still would need untold universes
to store the Library of Babel on.
So don’t worry about ever getting bored
from life extension, you’d never run out
of new books to read.
Admittedly most would be utter incomprehensible
garbage, but that’s only a slight step down
in quality from a lot of books I’ve had
the misfortune to read.
Speaking of bad fiction, this is another type
of impossible things which are possible but
just really unlikely in any practical sense,
and we see many in science fiction.
Anthropomorphic portrayals of aliens can be
accurate in a sense of having some similar
thinking, as you’d expect technological
civilizations to need some similarities of
attitude to crop up, like curiosity and teamwork,
but visiting an alien planet where you can
reach up to an alien tree and eat an alien
apple and shake an alien hand is not too likely.
It’s far more likely that if the atmosphere
didn’t kill you that the chemicals in the
food would.
So you might grasp their tentacle while wearing
a hazmat suit and they might reply with their
own traditional greeting of vomiting on you
to share their meal in the spirit of unity
and friendship, but as you’re running back
to the airlock and decontamination shower
at a gallop before the acid eats through your
suit, you’ll probably decide future conversation
can be had remotely.
And indeed probably only through computer-translated
texts, since their equivalent to speech might
not be just sounds you can’t reproduce with
your throat or hear with your ears, but involve
ejecting different flavors and acidities of
spit at you.
And while it’s common for scifi to show
problems for live diplomatic events where
you accidentally insulted some bizarre custom
of theirs, that’s probably an understatement.
I doubt their diplomats and traders would
be any more easily offended than ours, but
they might ask if you could please stop breathing
in public every few seconds, or getting irked
why we seem bothered at them relieving themselves
in the middle of a conversation.
For this same reason I’d say interspecies
romance, a staple of science fiction too,
is off the table, but I never ceased to be
amazed at all the strange stuff people are
into.
This sort of possible but impractical limitation
applies to a lot of other ideas too, not just
light sabres and melee combat, bringing a
knife to a laser gun fight, or giant war robots,
but things like teleportation too, where even
when we’re discussing versions of it that
involve copying a person from some digital
recording, or even just a digital recording
of their mind, the sheer bandwidth involved,
and energies needed for a rapid scan or rapid
print, is likely to often make it infeasible
if technically possible.
Many times even when we say technically possible
we really only mean on paper anyway, and a
perpetual motion machine is for instance possible
on paper, since while we often use that to
mean something that can generate free power,
its basic form is something that just keeps
moving without slowing down, and of course
that’s fine under Newton’s First Law,
the core of physics itself.
An object in motion will stay in motion, unless
acted on by some other force.
But there’s always some other forces around.
Forget about friction on a spinning wheel,
even a sphere turning around in the vacuum
of space will eventually slow down, because
there is no true vacuum, and even in the quantum
sense there’s random stuff popping in and
out of existence all the time.
Interesting side note, since so many classic
scifi space battles involve fighters dogfighting
like jets in an atmosphere, I’ve seen some
fictional settings justify this cleverly with
etheric rudders or similar, and with all that
quantum bubbling going on, it is vaguely conceivable
someone might find a way to interact with
that strongly and thus make a rudder or fin
that could pivot around by plowing through
that.
This might also permit a reactionless spaceship
drive, which could be very handy.
Critically though, even when there’s nothing
there’s always something, something to make
stuff break down or act less efficiently,
so objects built to last a trillion years
without repairs are unlikely, and we spent
last episode just talking about all the extra
maintenance space stations, megastructures,
and spaceships have from wear and tear happening
in empty space.
That applies to another popular notion for
immortality and resurrection, the idea that
a sufficiently powerful computer could reconstruct
the long dead, sort of the reverse case of
predicting the future by predicting every
action or even every particles motion.
A fairly dark example of that is Roko’s
Basilisk, where a technological singularity
quasi-violates causality by threatening people
in the past not to interfere in its eventual
creation or it will resurrect and torment
them.
That’s a pretty crazy notion and some folks
get worked into dread worrying about it, there’s
no need though, no computer could ever do
it.
We explained how the future prediction angle
could never be done, no matter how powerful
the computer, in our episode on Psychohistory,
and for much the same reason that the Library
of Babel can’t exist, even if you kept it
more modest, like only allowing actual words
not random characters or only books a few
pages long.
There’s just too many permutations, even
ignoring quantum, which we can’t.
See, a person buried in the ground doesn’t
stay that way for long.
It’s a bit morbid to say it but your brain
is gonna get eaten, and it’s gonna decay
and outgas, and those bugs are gonna exhale
and inhale and excrete and die and get eaten,
and good luck tracking the vectors on those
particles.
Freeze someone or get them fairly fresh and
sure, but don’t go hoping to ever meet a
resurrected Ben Franklin, I’d give time
travel better odds than that.
That’s not to say we wouldn't cheat if we
ever got the ability to see the past, not
even travel there, but detect all atoms and
energies at a particular place and time.
We could resurrect a copy of Ben Franklin
at the moment of his death, or very soon after.
It wouldn’t be Ben Franklin, but the copy
would stake their life on the fact that they
were, so perhaps it wouldn’t matter.
Ultimately, we can’t of course say what
is or isn’t possible, there’s always room
for surprise, but we can try to look at what
might be possible under known science or how
we can achieve something similar or even better
than the wildest dreams of scifi without needing
radical changes in our understanding of the
Universe.
Or we can speculate on an example of such
a radical change or technology and see what
it might imply, and that’s what we’ve
tried to do over the last 200 episodes and
what I hope we’ll be able to do for another
200.
Certainly there’s no fear of running out
of stuff to talk about, we only scratched
the surface of most of these concepts today,
and the future might not allow anything we
can imagine, but it certainly allows a lot,
and seems to offer us new dreams to explore
every week, so we’ll keep on doing that.
Folks say that when it comes to the future,
the sky’s the limit, but as we say here
on SFIA, it most certainly is not.
So 200 episodes now, each its own documentary
effectively, and I wanted to talk a bit about
that journey, but first, if you have seen
all 200 episodes and can’t wait till next
week, try out Curiosity Stream, with over
2400 documentaries on science and learning
from some of the world’s best filmmakers,
Curiosity Stream offers a vast supply of thought-provoking
videos on many fun, educational, and inspiring
topics.
Given our topic for today, I’d particularly
recommend Journey of the Universe, a chronicle
of humanity’s journey to understand our
universe and the math and physics that helped
us find out what was possible.
You can get unlimited access starting at just
$2.99 a month, and for our audience, the first
30-days are completely free if you sign up
at curiositystream.com/isaacarthur during
the sign-up process.
So I mentioned at the beginning I wanted to
talk a bit about our own journey of the Universe
and 200 episodes after our show today, and
thanks for joining me for this aftershow.
If you’re curious about why we picked today
topics, we ran a series of polls to see what
topic we should commemorate the 200th episode
with, and to my surprise the winning topic
was “Things which will never exist”, given
that we normally focus on awesome things that
might exist in the future.
Perhaps that’s appropriate, and interestingly
the episode was selected from 67 topics the
audience over at our Facebook Group suggested,
with the top 5 being polled here on Youtube.
The topic was actually suggested by our longtime
cover artist, Jakub Grygier, who was the first
person to start helping me out on the show
way back around episode 20 in 2016, about
a year and half since our very first episode
and also about when we started doing weekly
episodes.
Since we started that, we haven’t missed
a single Thursday weekly release yet, and
much of the credit for that goes to many folks
who’ve since joined up to help out making
the show.
I should note though that episode 200 is kind
of debatable.
A couple years back when we started putting
together a large team, I started writing each
episode a couple months in advance to allow
plenty of time for script editing and graphics.
To keep organized, I assigned each episode
a number in order, as the titles often changed
between initial brainstorming and when they
aired, on the episode chronology sheet that
we track that all on and which I’ll link
below.
You’ll note the entry is way past line 200,
and that’s because I eventually started
treating the number as more of the production
week, so bonus episodes, collaboration with
other shows, interviews, and so on all get
the number plus a letter.
And many of those bonus episodes get written
long after the regular episodes which follow
them, so I just squeeze them in to the chronology.
I could think of about 4 different ways to
properly count the episodes, and had long
since decided we’d let the audience pick
our 200th episode, or episodes in a way, so
amusingly this is actually our fourth celebratory
episode in a row, our last three were also
poll selected and last week’s episode was
the poll winner over on our Patreon page.
Let me give them a quick thanks too, the thousand
or so folks whose generous donations fund
this show are one of the biggest reasons we’re
celebrating 200 episodes today.
If you’ve ever wondered why the occasional
extra episodes that throw off the count are
called Bonus Episodes, it’s because the
first few were made specifically to reward
our Patreon Supporters, who normally get charged
for each weekly episode and not those.
I think it speaks a lot to the character of
folks who give up their hard earned money
to support this enterprise that when I offered
the option of having them alone get to see
those bonus episodes first, since they were
my way of thanking them the resounding consensus
was no, let everyone see them right from Day
1.
From years of being on Youtube and getting
to know other channels, I can say that spirit
is not universal by any means, and I am beyond
grateful for having an audience that has a
reputation among other science and education
shows for their enthusiasm, involvement, and
courtesy.
From all the folks who help out on the show
to every discussion on our social media forums
to every comment left on each episode, you
are my inspiration in so many ways.
I want to thank all of you for joining us
every week for the show.
I still remember when I got an email from
Youtube telling me I had a subscriber, and
asking what the heck a subscriber was, and
as a few more rolled in, thinking how neat
it was that there were hundreds of folks who
shared my interest in exploring the future.
Now that the show has hundreds of thousands
of subscribers, all I can say is thank you
for joining us, thank you for making 200 episodes
possible, thank you for inspiring me,
thank you for watching, and we’ll see you next
week!
