This episode is sponsored by Skillshare
We often say that technology offers humanity
a bright new future, but not everyone sees
it that way.
So today we’re back to the Rogue Civilizations
series to look at techno-primitivism, both
the general concept and how it might evolve
into societies on other worlds. This is a
pretty common trope in science fiction, cultures
losing their technology or intentionally limiting
it, and we’ll see today that its one that
might turn out to be fairly common too.
Probably the most common fictional way of
losing technologies unintentionally is after
some sort of cataclysm, but we’ve covered
that topic in the Cyclic Apocalypses episode
so it won’t be our main focus today. Rather
we’ll focus more on examples like Frank
Herbert’s classic Dune series where the
loss was intentional, as well as on some real
world examples and motivations for it.
Dune illustrates one of the most common reasons
in science fiction for abandoning a technology,
concerns about artificial intelligence. There
we have the Butlerian Jihad, which has some
rather contradictory portrayals from the original
series and the Expanded Universe novels written
after Frank Herbert’s death, and each version
is examined a lot in science fiction. Either
artificial intelligence represents a direct
physical threat to humans, becoming sentient
and attempting to wipe us out or enslave us,
as we see with examples like Skynet in the
Terminator franchise, or a more existential
one where the machines are either used to
oppress most humans or to entice and debase
us into a life of idle luxury.
The concern about technology taking our jobs
and replacing us has been with us for a long
while. The various labor-saving devices we’ve
invented down the years are not likely to
attack or conquer us but have often represented
a perceived threat to either our prosperity
or spiritual health. We have a somewhat bad
habit these days of both waving these concerns
aside as short-sighted and exaggerating the
irrationality of those objecting to it. For
instance, the Luddites remembered for objecting
to textile technologies of the 19th century
have become a byword for violent technophobia
but were neither particularly violent nor
technophobic, and mostly concerned about labor
practices and wages associated to rising industry,
and objectively speaking these concerns were
neither new nor baseless.
On this channel we obviously tilt toward techno-optimism
but at the same time we hardly try to paint
new technology as always bringing nothing
but good times. New technology often brings
a whole new array of challenges and hardships,
but generally brings more good than bad, thus
far anyway, and our society has gotten quite
used to technological disruption and does
a better, if hardly ideal, job at smoothing
the integration of new technologies into culture
and preventing those displaced by it from
being too adversely affected. It’s worth
keeping in mind that when a piece of tech
displaced workers in the past, it often did
so very literally, a landowner with a superior
bit of farming technology that required less
labor might kick off surplus laborers from
his estates who might actually starve to death
as a result.
Similarly crafts and skills take many years
to learn, representing a very large investment
of time and resources by both the teacher
and student. A skill made redundant by a new
technology can leave a person not only unable
to practice that skill to support themselves,
but feeling reduced as a person as well, a
central pillar of their life and confidence
has been removed while at the same time their
comfort and survival have been endangered.
It is not too surprising then that folks often
think along the lines that when you create
a machine to do the work of a man, you take
something away from the man, and indeed that’s
a rather memorable quote from the film Star
Trek Insurrection. In that film we get an
example of a post-technological civilization,
the Ba’ku, who having been once technologically
advanced, had reverted to a low technology
existence over concerns of the various physical
and existential dangers technology posed.
Now, that film shows the Ba’ku from the
outset as living in rural simplicity, and
they are portrayed to us as so smugly happy
and downright superior in their low-tech bliss
that a lot of fans, myself included, actively
disliked them even though they’re meant
to be the good guys and victims of the tale.
As my favorite TV and film reviewer, Chuck
Sonnenburg of SF Debris, noted in his review
of the film, “Paradise protests too much”,
that “It tries so hard to make everything
perfect you can see just how impossible this
perfection is.”
We’re shown a simple village that’s is
incredibly clean and prosperous, which matches
no farm ever seen outside a story presumably
written by someone who has never worked on
a farm or lived in a place without a strong
technological infrastructure. Unsurprisingly
many Trek fans, who tend to view technology
as producing utopias, found this a bit grating.
Romantic portrayals of shepherds in idyllic
pastures or blissful simplicity of hunter-gatherer
life are very far from the truth and ignore
all the filth, hardship, misery, oppression,
and brutality that typically made up the often
rather short lives of those people.
And while it should be noted one can go too
far the other way too, in simply assuming
technology solves all problems, automatically
creating a peaceful and enlightened culture,
one is merely indulging in fantasy to think
going back to nature makes life happier and
better.
Part of the problem though is that term ‘going
back to nature’. Any line drawn between
natural and artificial is going to be a bit
arbitrary and blurry, humans are hardly unnatural,
but for the word artificial to mean anything
we essentially have to treat it as meaning
manmade, or more generally, made by intelligence.
We’ve remarked before when discussing cyborgs
how humans are already pretty artificial,
things like clothes and language and tooth
fillings are integral to us and entirely artificial.
However, it overlooks a more fundamental flaw
of this line of reasoning. As mentioned a
bit ago, when someone’s skills and craft
are made redundant by some machine, it represents
the loss of a major investment of time and
resources and a blow to their self-esteem
and sense of self.
That is important to note because if artificial
means something humanmade, there is nothing
we invest more time and resources into making
than new people. Even ignoring all the development
and prototyping and background culture that
forged the specific tools and patterns used
to make the machine that made us, our parents
and grandparents and community, the sheer
amount of effort put into creating you or
I, individually, is enormous.
The fact of the matter is that if you have
a tooth filling, that is one of the least
artificial things about you. After all, it
only took a brief while for the dentist to
craft it and put it in and it merely poorly
mimics something that evolved long ago.
So a total return to nature is not really
on the table, I’d say that ship sailed long
ago, but it did so before we invented sailing
ships. I should probably also note that our
ancestors, whose primitive lives are being
put on a pedestal in such trains of thought
probably, without exception, considered anything
natural to actually be the product of very
skilled artifice. That’s handy to remember,
two different people saying natural is better
can mean two very different concepts, since
one might mean something evolved by natural
selection while the other is assuming it’s
superiority as natural is because it was designed
by a supremely talented creator. Either one
though, working from that premise, is expressing
a concern that we are not skilled enough to
be tinkering casually with something that’s
the byproduct of billions of years of trial
and error focused on functionality and survival,
or the work of a vastly better craftsmen.
And that is a very legitimate concern. It’s
easy for us to dismiss any objection to technology
as irrational technophobia. When you dig into
most examples of it though, modern or historical,
that irrationality is either exaggerated or
absent. Which is not to say it’s right or
a model of solid logic, but in general non-fictional
examples of technophobia that are fairly recorded
or reported usually rest on fairly legitimate
concerns. Technology is dangerous, we do have
an abundance of actual examples of specific
technologies that did more harm than good,
and while it does make life easier as we get
more of it, the level of danger, physical
and existential, rises too. We don’t want
to simply extrapolate from past examples that
the benefits will always outweigh the downsides
and risks, amusingly a very unscientific line
of thought itself but one expounded by technophiles
who claim to analyse everything scientifically.
It is not too hard to imagine that as technology
makes life easier and more prosperous a lot
of folks will say that things are good enough
and we should stop, or at least that they
are getting off at this stop. Indeed we’ve
even speculated in some episodes that a post-scarcity
society might grind to a halt on advancement
simply because life has gotten so easy nobody
feels a personal compulsion to further advance
technology or lacks any inspiration for how
to do so.
That’s not exactly without precedent either,
while debatable, many historians explain the
general slowing or halt of scientific progress
in various previous golden ages on the thinkers
of that time preferring pure logic over empirical
evidence, and disdaining crafts and skills
considered illiberal, which is to say hands-on
manual work. If nothing else, it’s hard
to think up a handy new technology that is
labor saving if you yourself never actually
do any labor.
So the general notion that people are in some
way diminished by having things too easy is
not exactly without basis, nor are other common
concerns about the impact things like video
games or social media have on kids or even
adults less skilled or motivated at more classic
human interactions. Regardless of whether
or not that is actually true or a bad thing,
many folks consider it so, and for our purposes
perception is what matters since it motivates
what folks will actually do. It does not actually
matter if technology is good or bad objectively
if folks think it is bad and decide to start
a low-tech splinter civilization. We mention
all the various reasoning involved in drawing
that conclusion simply because the closer
perception is to reality, or the more solid
the logic behind the reasoning, the more likely
it presumably is that folks will opt for this
path.
Tied up to that is that observation that the
more technology and prosperity you have, the
easier it is to survive comfortably if you
decide more technology, or a specific technology,
is a bad thing. And I’ll note that a lot
of us have individual technologies and conveniences
we personally disdain already or avoid using.
For instance, I’m unable to ignore the irony
that while I keep a lot of my show notes for
this channel on science & futurism on my computer,
when I do write them down, I do so in vintage
leather notebooks with old-school handmade
paper. Certainly many of us, for all that
we rationally know the old, the classic, the
traditional, and the handcrafted is often
of inferior make, still fervently surround
ourselves with such things. Why do we value
old stuff, or facsimiles thereof? I don’t
know, but the antique mystique is certainly
very real and not something I expect to diminish.
As an example, our loose notion of a future
transhuman would be someone pumped to the
gills with nanotech augmenting mind and body,
possessing the physique of an Olympic athlete,
the body of supermodel, and the mind of a
supergenius. Such a person could be living
in a crude hut in genuine comfort, since they
can’t get sick, could easily feed themselves
with no more than a sharpened stick to hunt
and plow with, and hardly needs tons of books
or devices lying around their home since they
probably never forget anything they see and
likely have a vast archive of knowledge and
entertainment wired directly into their brain.
This particular version of primitivism, which
isn’t really primitive, is often called
post-technological. Examples of it in science
fiction can range from various ascended beings
made of pure energy to ones who basically
look primitive even though they are not, like
the Nox from Stargate SG-1, shown to us initially
as simple forest people but with a reveal
at the end of the episodes of having an invisible
giant floating city.
This does break one objection made about the
Ba’ku in Star Trek Insurrection, shown to
be able to fix Commander Data, the pinnacle
of cybernetic technology, even though they
live pre-industrial lifestyles. It’s felt
that technological knowledge would be use-it-or-lose-it,
so they had it in the past and shouldn’t
now, but they themselves do not age in the
film, and some post-technological transhuman
living in a hut might be a thousand years
old with perfect recall. Again if you have
a lot of knowledge, skills, and technology
you do gain the benefits of being very selective
of what bits you feel like using.
This also interferes with one of the more
common objections to planets being colonized
by those who reject a lot technology, with
the assumption being that folks that hate
technology could not bring themselves to get
on board a spaceship or terraform or otherwise
construct a new world. Even ignoring that
such groups are likely to be selective about
which technologies they don’t use and when
it’s okay to use them, we have to factor
in that lesser of evils consideration.
If you are part of some group that believes
technology is bad, and wants to isolate yourselves
from those who feel otherwise, you are probably
going to recognize that staying on Earth isn’t
likely to be the best approach, particularly
considering that even if you are willing to
force others to follow your ways, you will
generally lose a conflict with someone who
has more advanced technology. Unless their
leader subscribes to the Zap Brannigan School
of Strategy, they are likely to realize that
trying to overwhelm your enemy by sheer weight
of numbers and hoping they’ll run out of
bullets is probably not a good plan.
Of course some might but obviously they’re
not founding new off-world colonies. We can
therefore assume techno-primitive colonies
out among the stars either put their prohibitions
on technologies more sophisticated than those
needed for going to new worlds, exempt those
needed for such efforts, or exempt their use
as a necessary evil, either by them or hiring
someone else to handle it.
There’s certainly precedent there, the Amish
and Mennonites are not a homogenous group
in their application of the Ordnung about
what technologies are okay to use and when,
but for those living in my own area of rural
Ohio, usage is often seen as different then
ownership, the latter thought to encourage
bad behaviors, and even then it’s not unusual
for cell phones or power tools to be employed,
as their concern is more about what regular
use of them will have on work ethics and family
relationships. They’re not anti-technology
because they think its evil, merely they believe
routine use of it makes people lazy or immoral.
As best as I can tell, since I’ve not had
occasion to explain terraforming or O’Neill
Cylinders to a practicing member of that community
and ask for their opinion, there would not
actually be a clear prohibition on living
on such a world or being transported there.
And of course, they would not be representative
of some group that decided that 21st century
technology was enough.
Another noteworthy caveat on this, following
the transhuman vein, you could easily have
folks born nowadays still living in the 25th
century who were just fine with spaceships
and terraforming or space habitats but were
simply uncomfortable with the cultures emerging
with more advanced tech. Given that compound
interest and prior ownership works wonders
on wealth when one is immortal, not only could
such folks likely afford to buy planets or
space habitats and the ships to reach them,
but a low-tech Earth might result simply from
them telling all the young folks to conform
or get off their proverbial lawn. High-tech
will tend to curbstomp low-tech in most conflicts,
military or otherwise, but the dynamic shifts
a bit when low-tech also means old and respected.
It’s probably not going to be a good idea
to try to annex and renovate the primitive
village that is essentially a retirement home
full of everyone’s ultra-wealthy great-great-great-grandparents.
Of course speaking of annexation, people reluctant
to even board spaceships might be doing so
at gunpoint, or forced exile, though given
the implied morality of those on the other
end of the gun and them being high-tech, odds
are they’d opt for an option like brainwashing
those folks or tricking them into some virtual
mockup of their homes. A post-biological civilization
dealing with technophobes they regard as criminally
inefficient in their use of land and resources
might just wait till they all went asleep,
scan their brains into a simulated copy of
their community, dump their bodies into a
recycler and clap themselves on their virtual
backs for doing the primitives a favor. So
I wouldn’t think we’d see a lot of forced
exile.
On the other hand I could imagine a lot of
compromise cases, voluntary exile is a fairly
common way to engage in colonization historically.
A government with a group who doesn’t mix
well with their main culture and who has a
place they’d like settled can offer to subsidize
that group going there, effectively ridding
themselves of problematic dissident groups
and getting a colony out of it, very similar
to the prison colony approach we discussed
last time in the series.
We noted there that while it seems like a
bad idea to settle a place with criminals
or dissidents, in practice that generally
did not breed a dysfunctional or hostile daughter
colony. And a group that just doesn’t like
the influence of technology, or certain technologies,
on their civilization is hardly automatically
militantly hostile to their culture. Folks
going and living off the grid or in a cabin
in the woods often have issues with their
main culture but rarely homicidally so. Heck,
I openly loathe metropolises and even suburbs,
preferring my rural area, I don’t dislike
the folks living there or want to burn them
to the ground, I just don’t want to live
there or visit much. Realistically a future
Earth, and any swarms of habitats it may have
orbiting nearby, probably would have tons
of lower tech spots, ranging from the genuine
to the tourist trap equivalent of Renaissance
Fairs to those with lots of technology hiding
under a facade of vintage and period decoration.
The other thing we noted about prison colonies
is that they’d probably be a transition
phase, settled as penal colonies by folks
offered it as an alternative to prison, while
the place is not too hospitable yet, and through
their work and kids and immigrants turned
into just another regular world.
We also need to keep in mind, with colonization,
that we potentially have billions of solar
systems to fill up and once the initial prestige
of space travel wears off, it might be rather
hard to find folks willing to pack up and
leave the comforts of home. In a galaxy without
faster than light travel you are making a
big and pretty permanent sacrifice to leave
behind those comforts and your friends and
family to go settle a barren wasteland after
decades of travel. There has to be a motivation
to do that, and while there are many that
might serve, most will tend to arise from
a dislike of home. If home is a technological
utopia where robots do most of the work and
you can explore any number of virtual paradises
in your tons of free time, a lot of the traditional
historic motivations for going off to a new
colony are not as strong. On the other hand,
a general belief that too much technology
and easy-living is unhealthy for you, and
not something you want your kids exposed to
either, is a very good motivation to pack
up for the frontiers where you’ll live on
your wits and skills and hard work.
In that regard, it’s actually very easy
for me to imagine that an awful lot of future
colonies will be founded by folks who have
some negative views on technology, or certain
technologies, and one would expect them to
tend to group together by which technologies
they dislike and what philosophy motivates
that dislike with the intent of founding a
world that will be governed by that attitude.
Now, that said, I don’t think the future
of a galactic humanity is a billion primitive
worlds, even for a given value of primitive
since the hypothetical technophobes might
regard our modern world as too primitive.
It’s popular in scifi to show colony worlds
abandoning or losing their technology, sometimes
both, like in Anne McCaffrey’s Dragonriders
of Pern series where they meant to be modestly
lower-tech but got forced by disaster to be
even lower tech, I don’t see that happening
much. We worried about generation ships losing
technology en route but that was mostly due
to them being far too small in population
and resources to rediscover anything they
lost or even really have the numbers to maintain
a vast host of specialty skills. A planet
is a bit different, that’s part of why we
suggested them as intergalactic colony ships
in Planet Ships last week, they do have the
space and resources to support a civilization
able to relearn things from scratch.
Indeed any world that goes too primitive isn’t
even going to be able to retain a prohibition
on technology, as we mentioned in Cyclic Apocalypses,
a culture has to work very hard to erase all
signs of technology, and while that’s lessened
on a new world without technological artifacts
left all over the place, you still have to
be able to keep records of why you banned
technology and maintain a global civilization
unified enough to allow an orthodoxy enforcing
those prohibitions, particularly considering
any breakaway culture that re-embraces technology
is going to start gaining benefits that make
them economically and militarily hard to coerce
from outside, and of course folks will rationalize
why this particular new and useful tech should
be an exception to the rules.
The other point about primitivism is if you
are living on a space habitat or even a terraformed
planet there is probably some form of technology
in place that maintains the environment. While
that technology is probably largely self-maintaining,
we currently have no examples of completely
autonomous self-repairing technology that
can exist for millennia. This might necessitate
a base-level of technology required for existence.
So, folks opting for primitivism might donate
their third child to the Temple of Maintainers,
much as people did in years gone by and even
practiced today in some places of donating
children to the higher calling of the church.
The Temple of Maintainers would be tasked
with training technicians and conducting the
rituals of “Keeping the Lights On” in
service to the Machine God. Unlike with other
religious orders of the past, though, if the
temple was abandoned the vengeance of the
Machine God will play out in the form of failing
life support systems and Everyone Dies™
becomes a very real existential problem.
So you probably can’t maintain such a tech
ban for very long beneath a certain level
of technology, and even then it’s likely
to erode over time, and even centuries mean
nothing in the grand scheme of galactic colonization.
Particularly since you’re likely to eventually
get neighbors who show up, and might view
your primitivism as oppressive and unethical,
or just don’t feel obliged to get your permission
to show up and trade knowledge or devices.
They might even do as Admiral Perry did with
Japan, and just show up with a fleet one day,
and in such cases, assuming they didn’t
conquer you overtly, you’re likely to have
internal pressures to modernize to defend
yourselves, a lesser of evils situation again.
Fundamentally, while I can see plenty of colonies
setting up as techno-primitives, at least
relative to their motherland, I can’t see
them staying that way in the long term unless
it turns out too much technology really is
a bad thing, and even then it would be hard
to do. Of course, to be fair, the major motivation
for such places tends to be a belief that
hard work and challenge is fundamental to
being a good human, so they might embrace
that aspect of it. And while neither I, nor
I assume most of my audience is technophobic,
I doubt I’m alone in agreeing with that
basic principle, that those struggles and
challenges and the push to overcome them are
a significant part of what define us and lets
us grow.
For my part though, I remain confident that
at least for the foreseeable future, we’ve
got plenty of character-building hard work
to do, and I don’t think more technology
will change that any time soon, just change
what specific tasks and skills and challenges
we have.
We were talking about skills a lot today and
an important takeaway is realizing that we’ve
always been a skills-based culture, those
skills have just changed a lot over the centuries.
Of course these days they aren’t even changing
with each generation, they change almost every
year. I don’t need to tell anyone here that
having lots of skills and keeping them up
to date is both good for the career and personal
happiness, and we have so many more to choose
from these days. It’s also far easier, with
communities like Skillshare, to learn them
from the comfort of your own home.
Skillshare is an online learning community
with over 20,000 classes covering everything
from practical daily skills to things like
programming, writing, or science. A Premium
Membership gives you unlimited access to high
quality classes on must-know topics, so you
can improve your skills, unlock new opportunities,
and do the work you love.
Join the millions of students already learning
on Skillshare today with a special offer just
for my listeners: Get 2 months of Skillshare
for free. To sign up, visit the link in the
description and the first 500 visitors get
2 months of unlimited access to over 20,000
classes for free. Act now for this special
offer, and start learning today.
So we have some fun episodes coming up for
the next couple of weeks. We spend a lot of
time discussing humanity’s future, but next
Thursday is International Pet Day, and I thought
we’d celebrate that by asking what the future
might have in store for our furry friends.
The week after that, by popular demand, we
are going to look at Giant War Robots and
Power Armor.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please like
it and share it with others. And if you’d
like to support future episodes, you can visit
the donate tab on our website, IsaacArthur.net,
linked in the description below, or try out
some awesome SFIA Merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
