Ganymede is an enormous moon, larger than 
any other we’ve found, including our own,  
and may one day be the centerpiece of 
wider human settlements around Jupiter.
Colonizing Jupiter's moon Ganymede presents a 
fascinating mix of opportunities and challenges  
that we’ll be exploring today. As a basic 
background, Ganymede is the largest moon in our  
solar system, roughly parallel in size to Saturn’s 
largest moon Titan, which is slightly wider if we  
include Titan’s tall atmosphere, but if we just 
go by distance to the surface, Ganymede is a bit  
wider than Titan and also modestly denser and more 
massive. Indeed it is bigger than even Mercury,  
but being a good deal less dense, is a little 
under half of the planet Mercury’s mass and  
a quarter the Mass of Mars. It is also twice as 
massive as our own Moon, though because it is less  
dense, gravity is a bit lower on Ganymede, 14.6% 
of Earth normal compared to the Moon’s 16.6%. 
In this regard we tend to think of it as very like 
our own moon, only without the proximity to Earth,  
or the Sun, so it’s often a less discussed 
colonization option than the major planets,  
or even moons like Titan, with its thick 
atmosphere, or Europa, with its subsurface oceans. 
But Ganymede has some unique characteristics that 
make it an interesting target for colonization  
efforts. Today, we’ll make the case for Ganymede 
by first reviewing some of the key advantages,  
and challenges, associated with such an endeavor.
Now our moon again is mostly of interest as a  
relatively easy place to reach that has 
raw materials for us to use for a base,  
and which can provide fuel or materials 
for missions further from Earth,  
and the same is true for Ganymede, but 
while it is the biggest of Jupiter’s moons,  
that’s also something of a hindrance 
too as it means more gravity.  
And while the gravity at the surface is weaker 
than our own moon, the escape velocity is modestly  
higher, whereas the other Galilean moons all have 
lower escape velocities. The Galilean moons, Io,  
Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto in that order are 
also just 4 of several dozen moons Jupiter has,  
all the remainder of which have trivial escape 
velocities that could be achieved with a rocket  
you could bang together in your garage. Indeed 
for most, simple compressed gas would work. 
Unfortunately, most of them are not going 
to have ready supplies of ice to work with  
exactly because of that low gravity, and that 
is a big advantage Ganymede has. Ganymede has  
a significant amount of water ice. Indeed, we 
think it might have more water on it than all of  
Earth’s oceans combined. While methane and ammonia 
are easier to work with as in-situ fuel sources,  
water broken into hydrogen and oxygen, 
to be recombined during combustion,  
is a superior fuel in terms of specific impulse or 
maximum speed, and not only can water ice be used  
as as a source of drinking water for colonists, 
but by electrolysis we split it into hydrogen  
and oxygen for fuel and breathable air and by a 
very simple and relatively low-energy process.  
The presence of water is, of course, also crucial 
for supporting life and agricultural activities. 
Now this is also true of Europa and Callisto, and 
indeed ice is rather plentiful out in deep space,  
and both Europa and Callisto have a lot going 
for them as settlement sites as well. Indeed,  
part of what makes all three attractive as a 
settlement is their proximity to each other  
and relative ease of moving between them. This 
is why I often suggest the collections of moons  
around gas giants might be your natural alpha 
site for a new star system, rather than our  
default of looking for an Earth-parallel world 
in gravity and lighting that we can terraform.  
You can make fuel abundantly on all three of 
those Galileans moons, all three have modest  
if significant escape velocities, and the delta-v 
and travel time between each other is also modest. 
Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto are all tidally 
locked to Jupiter, meaning one side of them sees  
Jupiter all the time as a massively huge sphere in 
their sky, while the other side never sees Jupiter  
at all. As a result, their day time period is 
the same as their orbital period, of 3.5, 7.3,  
and 16.7 days respectively. That means they all 
have a shorter day length than our own Moon, and  
in Europa and Ganymede’s cases, well inside what 
plants could handle for protracted dark periods. 
The thing is, Europa is very saturated 
by radiation from Jupiter and we normally  
shrug that off because we’re interested 
in exploring its subsurface oceans,  
not its surface area. Ganymede, Jupiter's largest 
moon, is subjected to Jupiter's magnetic field,  
which traps charged particles. This results in 
Ganymede having a radiation level significantly  
higher than Earth's surface. However, Ganymede 
is unique among Jupiter's moons as it has its  
own magnetic field, which provides some degree 
of protection against Jupiter's radiation belts. 
Radiation levels on Ganymede's surface are mainly 
from cosmic rays and charged particles trapped  
in Jupiter's magnetic field. The radiation 
environment is harsh but not as extreme as  
on Europa or Io, Jupiter's other moons closer to 
the planet. Specific measurements of the radiation  
levels can vary, we need to get some probes 
there, but it's understood that the environment is  
hostile not just to biology, but also electronics.
Now we’re not going to be classically terraforming  
Ganymede, it would have an easier time keeping 
an atmosphere than our Moon, and we did discuss  
terraforming our Moon a few months back, but 
the lower levels of sunlight and all that extra  
radiation don’t make it as decent a terraforming 
candidate and as we discussed in that episode,  
terraforming our Moon would probably only happen 
because the Moon is likely to be viewed as the  
biggest jewel in humanity’s interplanetary empire. 
One on which vast resources might be expended for  
improvements. Though as we discussed in Colonizing 
Jupiter many years back, while Jupiter is nowhere  
near massive enough to be a star, it and its 
many moons almost represent a second smaller  
and more compact mini-solar system, of which 
Ganymede would likely be the crown jewel of  
that mini-empire. So maybe classic terraforming, 
or the hybrid of it we discussed in terraforming  
the Moon, might be considered down the road.
In the meantime, any base on Ganymede is likely  
to solve the triple problem of low temperature, 
low sunlight, and high radiation with the same  
approach. Big domes that concentrate light 
onto a smaller area, insulate to help prevent  
air and heat loss, and block out radiation.
Ganymede's surface temperature is extremely low,  
averaging around -160 degrees Celsius or -256 
degrees Fahrenheit. This extreme cold presents  
challenges for human survival, energy use, and 
machinery operation, and it means you want to  
operate under domes or underground whenever 
possible. I do want to emphasize though that  
the radiation on its surface is not super-lethal. 
The figure I usually see for ganymede’s surface is  
about 0.08 Sieverts per day, and we usually place 
the lethal level at 2-10 sieverts, 25 to 250 times  
that amount. And given that you would have to have 
something between you and that surface, which is  
very nearly a vacuum, that spacesuit, vehicle, 
or dome, would further decrease the dose you got.  
It is also very likely that humans on 
Jupiter would benefit from being in an  
era of superior medical technology for 
handling cancer or radiation sickness,  
possibly mitigating or even eliminating the 
concern. I would not expect human mission there  
until at least the late 21st century if not the 
22nd, which is a lot of time to improve medicine. 
In the long term, there are things we could do 
to further decrease the radiation incident on  
Ganymede that we’ve discussed elsewhere, including 
some mega-engineering projects like limiting the  
particles in Jupiter’s magnetosphere in the 
first place or placing an enhanced artificial  
magnetosphere around Ganymede, but let’s keep 
to the more near-term in our discussion for now. 
Ganymede’s surface is a mix of ice and rock, and 
plentiful in craters, so finding a nice spot to  
set up wouldn’t be too hard. That rock contains 
plenty of silicates, so we can easily make glass  
for domes. Or mirrors, and one of your easiest 
ways to deal with radiation and micrometeors,  
as with on the Moon, is to just do a thick and 
high roof on a structure and then have transparent  
walls, or windows, that have mirrors off to the 
side which could reflect light into that habitat. 
And those mirrors could swivel off those windows 
to focus light on solar thermal power generation  
during Ganymede’s long day if you wanted to 
have some night time. If you were breaking its  
orbital period into an artificial single week of 
7 24 and half hour days, where you opaqued your  
windows at night time when the Sun was still 
out, you’d be able to arrange 4 of those days  
to have decent sunlight and 3 where you had to 
use artificial lighting. A week on Ganymede is  
basically on natural Ganymede day and year.
Now, ‘decent sunlight’ is a bit subjective.  
Like Jupiter, Ganymede is just over 5 
times further from the Sun than Earth,  
and during it’s roughly 12 year orbit of the Sun, 
will be getting between 3.4 to 4% as much light as  
reaches Earth’s atmosphere, which absorbs about a 
quarter of our sunlight before it gets down to us,  
including some harsh frequencies of Ultraviolet. 
But that means essentially that it's between a  
twentieth and a twenty-fifth as bright on 
Ganymede as Earth, and that is not dim,  
and would be equivalent to an overcast day 
here, and not a very overcast one either. 
Many plants could survive on that just fine, but 
it would make a lot more sense to be concentrating  
light onto them. Nonetheless, you do not need to 
concentrate 25 times the sunlight to get either  
healthy plants or comfortable temperatures inside 
a dome or mushroom-style habitat, likely even a  
quarter of that would do. It’s also very easy 
to erect towers on low-gravity airless planets,  
so putting mirrors on towers around a crater 
you want to dome and farm is pretty viable. 
This is assuming sunlight and solar power is 
your main way of getting light. Often when  
we contemplate colonizing around Jupiter we are 
assuming we are mining the gas giant for fusion  
reactor fuel. This might be for deuterium or 
even regular hydrogen or helium-3. In which  
case you may circumvent the weak sunlight 
issue and surface domes concerns by simply  
having fusion reactors supply light by 
LEDs for crops and for heating homes,  
all safely buried under rock and ice protection.
Two notes on that though. First, it is very  
likely that even if we get fusion working, it 
would not replace all other power supplies.  
The basic physics of fusion are likely to always 
benefit from bigger being better, so it might be  
something we can really only use on the very large 
scale for reactors supplying millions of people  
or for giant ark ships traveling to deep space.
Second, fusion fuel itself is not terribly likely  
to ever be the lifeblood of trade, anymore than 
water or air are, for all their critical value.  
Even if we assumed we could only use isotopes 
like deuterium and helium-3 for viable fusion,  
not regular hydrogen or helium, it’s still 
incredibly abundant. While only 23 out of a  
million hydrogen atoms at Jupiter are deuterium, 
that still means it has something like 40 trillion  
megatons of deuterium available and just a 
single megaton of that would easily supply  
our entire planet’s current electrical needs for 
several centuries even on a low efficiency rate of  
mass to energy fusion and energy to electricity 
conversion. So you don’t have giant freighters  
leaving Jupiter for Earth every day.
Indeed you probably don’t have any  
freighters carrying deuterium to Earth from 
Jupiter because Earth actually has a higher  
concentration of deuterium in our ocean water 
than Jupiter’s atmosphere has, and we’d have to  
work pretty hard to put a dent in that supply 
on anything less than geological timelines,  
let alone the period of early interplanetary 
economies we’re interested in today. 
What’s more, the reason Earth has a high 
concentration of deuterium is because it is  
slightly heavier than normal hydrogen. We 
used to have way more hydrogen when the  
planet was forming and we’ve lost deuterium 
slower than regular hydrogen, because it is  
heavier and has a harder time escaping a planet.
For similar reasons, a lot of the hydrogen in deep  
system objects like icy moons is still leftover 
from hydrogen stripping processes that Jupiter’s  
sheer mass gave it resistance to, so there’s no 
shortage of deuterium in these places either.  
I just got done mentioning it would be hard to 
use up Earth’s deuterium supply in our oceans,  
and earlier I mentioned that Ganymede is suspected 
to have more water than our oceans contain,  
and while Io is decidedly volcanic, the 
other 2 Galilean Moons, Europa and Callisto,  
also have tons of water and thus tons of 
deuterium. All easier to reach than the  
vastly bigger but more diffuse supply deep 
down inside Jupiter’s enormous gravity well. 
Since helium doesn't bond to much, we have 
precious little of it on Earth, but while  
Jupiter has plenty, indeed more than every 
other planet combined, it is not as accessible  
as the supplies on Uranus and Neptune, and if you 
actually have helium-3 fusion, usually referred  
to as aneutronic fusion, Uranus and Neptune are 
very easy to travel to. This was more or less  
the plot of our episode Colonizing Neptune.
So the reality is nobody is mining Jupiter  
itself for anything in those early solar system 
days. It’s where half the solar system’s mass,  
not including the Sun, is located; so one day 
it does get mined, but it’s basically the last  
place to mine because of its gravity well.
And while we might mine those Galilean moons  
for deuterium, and water and nitrogen among 
other things, it's not really for Earth. It's  
for local use or maybe shipment to the 
asteroid belt, Mars, Mercury, or Venus,  
and Mars doesn’t need deuterium as it has tons 
of ice, at least for power extraction purposes. 
There’s always that question of whether settlement 
of other planets and moons will tend to grow  
out from one or two bases that are cities, or if 
we’ll see a lot of small outposts and homesteads,  
and a large fusion reactor able to supply 
millions might encourage the former, while  
being forced to concentrate sunlight for power 
might lend itself to smaller enclaves. Either way,  
some colony of a thousand on Ganymede might 
have a fusion or even regular fission reactor,  
but my hunch is that they would not.
Why? Well, on most objects in this solar system,  
there’s no atmosphere, there’s no wind or 
dust, so once you roll out some polished,  
reflective metal sheet or parabolic dish, there’s 
not much maintenance to worry about. It doesn’t  
even need to be very sturdy because again, 
no wind, and virtually no gravity either.  
You could take regular aluminum foil and 
line a dish shiny side up and now it's a  
solar concentrator. You don’t even need a dish 
behind it either, because it doesn't need the  
structural support, and indeed even some dish made 
of ice would work, especially with a foil cover. 
So, once you spend the energy to melt some 
metallic rock down into metal foil you get a power  
supply good for half of forever. You might need 
to replace components the light was focused on,  
the actual photovoltaic panel or components in a 
solar thermal plant. But you can concentrate to a  
lot higher power on that panel than solar noon 
here on Earth, and actually get a much better  
performance and lifetime out of that panel on 
Ganymede or wherever because the absence of  
weather isn’t just getting rid of that irritating 
fluctuation in output, it’s also cutting down a  
lot of the wear and tear on that panel. Even more 
so if your reflective panels are not reflective to  
material damaging wavelengths like Ultraviolet, 
and bouncing that onto that sensitive panel. 
You can also use the local supply of methane 
as a simple combustion fuel as a backup or  
mobile energy source, or use excess power 
to create carbon neutral hydrocarbons,  
which takes more energy than they produce, but 
is often preferable to battery storage and serves  
those same backup and mobile energy functions.
There’s bound to be a lot of situations where a  
reactor will be better, and it’s very dependent 
on the actual technology available. Certainly  
if someone cranks out some micro-fusion 
reactor that is rugged, cheap to produce,  
and in the power to weight ratio range of a 
gas generator, then that's what everyone has. 
And I’m hoping that’s the future we get and 
something like that could even happen this  
century, sometimes when tech rolls out it 
avalanches, indeed that’s often the case,  
and if it is something that would be 
permissible under science and engineering,  
we might get there very fast once we make that 
first critical breakthrough. My hunch is that  
bigger is better for fusion and that anything 
at the individual or even small community scale  
will be impractical unless we have ready 
access to antimatter to use for antimatter  
catalyzed fusion. Which requires only small 
amounts so is not so dangerous for storage. 
On the flip side, there’s definitely 
no bar under known science on making  
a machine able to melt down a rock and turn 
it into reflective panels or silicon wafers,  
and I’m betting you could make something the 
size of modern generator in the kilowatts range  
that could unfold into a power collector and 
factory for inserting ore and spewing out the  
key components, with maybe smaller and more 
elaborate bits being brought in from a more  
sophisticated factory elsewhere, allowing you to 
build whatever sized solar power plant you need. 
Once you have a power supply, access to raw 
materials, and some way to fabricate more  
power supply, you have everything you need for a 
self-replicating growth scenario, be that a basic  
biological cell, some clanking self-replicator 
robot, or a human with access to decent automation  
who is hand-crafting their power collector 
from foil or plates made by their auto-refiner  
from rocks they picked up and tossed in.
This is the argument made by Dr. Leonardo Cormier,  
chief geologist of the first human mission 
being sent to Ganymede, launched June 22,  
2153 and set to arrive on March 15, 2156. It’s a 
slow trip but lets them maximize their cargo, and  
they’re going to need it. Until this point every 
spacecraft sent to Jupiter has been a robot, and  
robotic attempts to land on Europa thus far, with 
the intent of probing the subsurface oceans there,  
have been unsuccessful. This is blamed largely 
on signal lag time and restrictions on AI, no  
AI smart enough to definitely get the job done is 
allowed under treaties, especially far from human  
oversight, and Jupiter is a light hour from Earth.
So now the plan is to set up a permanent base  
on Ganymede that can facilitate the growth of 
more bases and settlements in the Jupiter area,  
including on Europa, where they believe they 
could carve in a facility under the ice for  
humans to oversee operations directly. But that 
is a phase 3 project. Phase 1 was the launch of  
cycler craft carrying extra supplies in March 
of 2150 that arrived shortly before the crewed  
mission was set to launch in 2153 as proof 
of concept and to provide lots of redundant  
bulkier supplies. Current launch philosophy is 
always to send supplies in advance on a parallel  
mission to provide redundancy, work out bugs, 
and potentially encounter some unknown-unknowns  
that might endanger the human crew.
Leonardo was selected for the mission  
shortly after that phase 1 launch, as he 
was rather famous for being one of the  
original inhabitants of the Moon, and one of the 
youngest, and often nicknamed by fans, Lunar Leo.  
His family’s efforts at exploring and settling 
the Moon were made famous in the documentary  
“Living in Lava Tubes”, and while several of 
the crew for Operation Galileo are veterans  
of the Moon or orbital operations, Leonardo does 
hold the title of Senior Spacer on the mission. 
While a lot of the crew are focused on the 
eventual Europa Mission to melt through the  
ice and explore the subsurface oceans, Leonardo is 
here for the geology, the Galilean Moons represent  
4 of the 7 largest moons in the solar system, 
and lunar geology is his specialty, and he’ll  
be critical to helping setup those initial mining 
production processes. Fuel production is the day  
1 priority though and will be overseen 
by the only Martian veteran of the crew,  
who helped improve the process at Planum 
Australe Base on the Martian South Pole. 
During the trip, the sun is eternally visible and 
slowly weakening, as they head into deep space far  
from any planet’s shadow, and they begin adjusting 
everyone’s rhythms to the Ganymede ‘week’ of seven  
sub-days lasting just over 24 hours each.
Ganymede was chosen because it was seen as  
the logical first base, where communication 
to the other three moons would be relatively  
quick but the radiation low enough to survive 
a good deal of early surface operations. They  
plan to use as many remote robots as possible, 
but wanted to know they could use humans if  
there are problems and Europa’s own surface 
radiation is at lethal levels in mere days. 
One upside is that humanity has gotten very 
good with cancer treatments, so that they could  
probably survive continuous and multi-year surface 
exposure on Ganymede, but this doesn't mean anyone  
is anxious to get high levels of radiation, 
particularly as while they aim to be principally  
solar-powered, they do have a nuclear reactor on 
the ship and plan to use it on the ground too. 
Operation Galileo and its thirty crew will 
begin by orbiting Ganymede in March of 2156,  
while they rendezvous with the cargo left in 
orbit in the phase 1 robotic mission and confirm  
the primary landing site. During initial landing 
operations, Leonardo is just another pair of hands  
helping manually move cargo or run robots, but 
he’ll be active in later weeks of the mission  
once they’ve secured access to water and shelter.
Leonardo’s main job in base setup is not just  
finding ore deposits to make mirrors or storage 
tanks, but all the minerals they need for running  
hydroponics. Not just for their own uses, they 
brought some, but to get the process of extraction  
and refinement going by late 2056, as the phase 3 
ship carrying more crew and inter-lunar shuttles  
will launch from Earth October 1st of 2056 
and needs to know what they need to pack. 
In their current estimates, in order to 
supply food they need roughly 150 square  
meters of greenhouse per person and ten times that 
in mirrors to give sufficient sunlight for growth,  
for 45,000 square meters or reflective panels, 
and they’ll need just as much for power, heat,  
and fuel production. They estimate they’ll 
need something like 3-400 square meters of  
reflective paneling per person, or 200 by 200 
foot block, especially to add in extra capacity  
like algae as a feedstock for fuels and plastics.
They have those in inventory, manufactured on Luna  
by time-tested processes, but those processes 
will have to be adapted to Ganymede. Part of  
their mission profile is to manufacture their 
own and to get that rolling before Phase 3 has  
to commit on its final payload, and the same 
for supplies of silicon and various macro  
and micronutrients. But Leonardo can’t do much 
roving until fuel production is up and running,  
so he is estimating he’ll only have about 1 month 
window to go out in his rover and investigate his  
list of candidate sites to find which ones 
have what they need and which combination is  
optimal for getting them all the resources 
their fledgling settlement will require. 
He is able to find everything they anticipate 
needing in large quantities in just three sites,  
all within about 10 kilometers of their 
base, and with fuel production running  
and those sites identified, Leonardo is free to 
explore Ganymede's ancient geology. He suspects  
this will easily keep him occupied till phase 3 
arrives, and is hoping to one day set foot on Io. 
Once phase 3 arrives, their production 
of fuel and bulk materials on Ganymede  
allows reusable spaceships to move between 
the Galilean moons in a few days of travel.  
When it comes to sophisticated things, especially 
some items like pharmaceuticals that won’t store  
well for multiple years of transport out to 
Jupiter, they have to balance how much they  
need to have that item versus how hard it is 
to manufacture it here with the very limited  
personnel and materials they have. But this 
is not a new problem and one Mars and various  
asteroid mines have all had to work with, even 
if Jupiter has larger delays in transport. 
The phase 1, 2, and 3 spaceships all are planetary 
cyclers that were dropping off the crew modules  
and cargo at Jupiter and continuing on very 
long elliptical journeys that will carry them  
past Earth and Jupiter in their travels and 
provide a slow if low cost transport system  
for durable goods and passengers going each way. 
Leonardo and the fuel expert from Planum Australe  
are optimistic on being able to get cyclers going 
from Jupiter to the Asteroid Belt to help carry  
water and volatiles to the mines there, and to the 
fledgling colony floating on Venus’s atmosphere,  
and the still-planned Mercury Colony. In 
this way they can help get Ganymede and the  
Galilean economy in general jumpstarted, and 
prove that a spacefaring economy is possible  
without having to rely on Earth for eternal 
subsidy or as the primary client and market.
So how likely is this scenario? Hard to say 
of course, it’s very dependent on the tech,  
they might arrive at fully formed bases erected 
by machines, or just land a spaceship that was a  
habitat module and could just extend telescoping 
or inflatable segments for solar or farming,  
or dig in and run on fission or fusion 
energy. There’s plenty of uranium in the  
solar system and probably on Ganymede, 
and we could imagine it as a source  
for fission fuel for the outer solar system.
Many of the solutions for living on Ganymede  
are those we’ll learn on our own Moon, and will 
translate to other deep systems colony sites,  
like other icy moons or dwarf planets. If the 
gravity is too low for humans and terrestrial  
organisms to adapt to, we find a crater or melt 
into some ice and set up a rotating habitat with  
sloped walls. On lower gravity objects, 
which are most of them, the gravity is so  
low a normal rotating habits works fine and you 
just embed it inside a rock for protection from  
radiation and meteors, but where there's already 
significant gravity, a deep bowl or vase shape  
dug in to existing rock will generate higher 
gravity by combining spin and natural gravity. 
We can bring more light to Ganymede, or 
chosen spots on Ganymede, by use of orbital  
or Lagangrian mirrors, and in theory even add 
more gravity by adding mass drawn from Jupiter,  
or alter its orbital period to a nice multiple 
of 24 hours, or even break its tidal lock with  
Jupiter, using the techniques we discussed in 
the recent episode “Can we Terraform the Moon?” 
Ganymede is the biggest moon in our solar system, 
and very close to 3 of the other largest, so it  
seems only natural we will settle it one day and 
that it would form a close relationship with those  
other 3 moons and the dozens of smaller moons 
nearby. They can supply the raw materials to build  
up robust industry and agriculture to help fuel 
expansion in the asteroid belt and all those other  
worlds further out, and even to the Kuiper Belt.
And for that matter, it may not just be the moons  
of Jupiter that Ganymede helps build up and 
work with, but the huge floating extractors  
and refineries that will likely one day far 
away grace the upper atmosphere or low orbital  
region of Jupiter itself, which while hard to 
reach, still has more mass than every other  
planet and moon and asteroid in our solar system 
combined, see our episode Colonizing Jupiter for  
more discussion of that, but as we saw today, 
Colonizing Ganymede might be one of first and  
boldest steps out into settling space, and 
may not be too far ahead in the future.
We joined some astronauts for a multi-year journey 
to Jupiter’s moon Ganymede today, and talked about  
how they would need to bring in as little as 
possible on their ships and make as much as  
possible on site, or In-Situ, and one example 
of things they probably aren’t going to have  
room for is several years supply of disposable 
razors. Cost might not be as big a factor there,  
but for us, you could easily end up spending 
thousands of dollars per person on disposable  
razors for that sort of mission timeline.
I recently switched to a Henson Razor as it just  
gives a better cut, but I’ve been using a safety 
razor for many years and never missed the drawers  
and garbage cans full of disposable razors waiting 
on use, and emptying my wallet while filling the  
landfills with plastic and razor blades. All 
that gets tossed with a safety razor is one  
easily recyclable, cheap 10-cent razor blade.
The reason why Henson’s gives a better cut is  
because they use precision manufacturing to 
aerospace standards - they helped manufacture  
pieces for a Mars Rover and the Space 
Station, so they get the importance of  
quality. This makes a razor where the blade 
fits in tight, and that stops the vibration  
and flexing of the blade that causes a lot of 
the irritation and razor burn people often get  
from shaving. That tight tolerance on the blade 
position, exposing only 27 microns of razor,  
also makes it easier to adjust to shaving 
with one if you’re new to safety razors. 
Stop wasting money on disposables and elaborate 
5-blade cartridges, one 10-cent blade is all  
you need if it’s held in place by precision 
engineering like Henson shaving offers. Try  
it now though, at henshonshaving.com/isaacarthur, 
and Henson Shaving will throw in a free 100 pack  
of razor blades, if you use promo code IsaacArthur 
at check out. Get a better shave at a fraction of  
the cost, go to hensonshaving.com/isaacarthur.
So that’s it for May, we’ll be back June 1st  
on Nebula with a look at In-Situ Resource 
Utilization, and on Thursday June 2nd we’ll  
look at what sorts of Jobs in Space 
and the Space Industry there are,  
both now and in the future. Then we’ll return 
to the Fermi Paradox and continue last week’s  
discussion on the nature of intelligence to ask 
if our mind’s themselves may be a ticking time  
bomb waiting to inevitably ruin us. After that 
we will have a pair of episodes on Oceanic Moons,  
ones with surface seas, and Paradise Planets, 
places even better than earth for us to live. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can 
also help support the show by becoming a member  
here on Youtube or Patreon, or checkout 
other ways to help at IsaacArthur.net.  
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes 
early and ad free on our streaming service,  
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content like 
Machine Monitors, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
