This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
Sometimes the future’s not so bright ... so
you have to make your own light.
So often on this show we look at vast interstellar
empires or massive megastructures, civilizations
so enormous that they could fill entire planets
just with everyone born in a given minute
of a given day.
So I thought today we would look at a smaller
civilization, those who occupied not planets
around distant stars but the vast gulfs of
space between those stars.
It’s strange to think that our planet occupies
only a very tiny portion of our solar system,
getting less than a billionth of our Sun’s
light, and yet that vast pocket of space warmed
by our Sun to the point it is livable represents
less than a quadrillionth of the volume of
space nominally influenced by our sun, rather
than one of the neighboring stars.
As we go out to colonize the outer solar system,
where the Sun is still quite bright compared
to any other star in the sky, and into the
galaxy to make homes around those stars, and
we consider colonizing those other distant
galaxies, it is so easy to forget that each
of those is but a tiny island in a vast nothingness
of empty space.
And yet it is not actually empty, even if
it is far more barren than any desert or tundra.
Today we will contemplate civilizations that
might choose to dwell in the depths of interstellar
or even intergalactic space, or those who
might be forced to do so.
We estimate that there are roughly a billion-trillion
stars in the Observable Universe, which itself
is almost a hundred billion light years in
diameter, meaning there’s only a few stars
per trillion cubic light years, and that if
stars were evenly distributed Universe-wide,
you’d typically have thousands of light
years between each star.
Inside our galaxy things are far denser, with
even the more sparse parts of it requiring
only tens or perhaps a hundred light years
between stars, while in areas of the galaxy
like our own, a volume of space a thousand
light years across would contain in the vicinity
of a million stars, and some clusters of space,
or the bulge at the galactic center, are even
denser.
And yet even at the center the vast majority
of space is too dimly lit for a planet to
be livable.
Here in our solar system, where the Earth
is habitable just 1 astronomical unit, or
AU, from our Sun, for us to find a place where
our Sun was no longer the brightest star would
require traveling at least a hundred thousand
times farther from our Sun, till one of our
brighter neighbors like Sirius finally outmatched
our Sun’s light.
Indeed, you would have to travel over 600
AU from the Sun simply to reach the point
where our Sun shone only as brightly as our
Full Moon does.
At this radius, over 15 times the distance
to Pluto at its farthest from the Sun and
out beyond even the Kuiper Belt, an object
would still orbit our Sun, but would do so
every 15,000 years, and yet it is still close
enough that it could send a message back to
Earth and get a reply in around a week, while
a message to a neighboring star would take
a decade to get a reply back if not longer.
It would be hard, but not impossible, to run
on solar power way out here, where a mirror
would need to be a kilometer across to focus
in enough light to run your typical household
let alone heat it.
Again, hard but not impossible, and indeed
the ambient star light in this region of the
galaxy is around a microwatt per square meter,
so a square kilometer of mirrors and solar
panels starlight would contribute a single
watt of power - more in denser regions of
the galaxy and less in the halo of the outer
galaxy.
Such tiny trickles of power might be used
to run a civilization, and we will return
to considering that option later, but we need
not limit ourselves to considering a solar
economy.
Indeed it's quite possible those would be
denied folks living that far away from a star
as every star in their area might be a Dyson
Swarm already, its light guzzled up by a trillion
solar collectors and habitats orbiting that
star to form an opaque haze.
However, our larger power plants produce around
a gigawatt, and those billion watts of power
can run a modest sized community, including
artificial lighting where there is no sun,
such as in deep space or inside a rotating
habitat.
This would be true even if they are no more
efficient with its use than we are nowadays,
and far more so for hypothetical civilizations
that might thrive on ultra-cold and ultra-efficient
computing that we’ll discuss later today.
To power this community for 24 hours might
require burning 2 million kilograms of gasoline,
a single kilogram of uranium fuel rods, 100
grams of deuterium/tritium fusion fuel, or
just a couple grams of any old matter if thrown
into a black hole.
The latter could even be hydrogen, the most
common element in the universe, or potentially
dark matter.
And a Gigawatt is about how much sunlight
is on a square kilometer of land at noon,
so something like a large ONeill Cylinder,
which might have around a thousand times that
internal land area and power needs, might
need around 100 kilograms of fusion fuel per
day, ideally hydrogen though right now it's
rarer deuterium or tritium isotopes are better
candidates for fusion .
How hard is it to come up with a hundred kilograms
of hydrogen a day?
Well a single oil tanker might carry a million
times that, enough for a few thousand years
of operation, and as mentioned, this is the
sort of power scale needed to light something
like an O’Neill Cylinder, which might comfortably
house tens or hundreds of thousands of people,
or even more.
If your community can’t find a way to get
a single oil tanker sized ship full of the
most plentiful substance in the Universe every
few thousand years, it probably has bigger
problems.
In context, a civilization limited to simple
fusion who decided to build an O'Neill Cylinder
might keep 100,000 people living on a terawatt
of power inside a Cylinder that massed only
a trillion kilograms, a fairly skinny cylinder
built on sparse amounts of material.
If they had also bought an equal mass of fusion
fuel when sourcing the construction material,
they should have tens of millions of years’
worth of fuel.
Such an island in the void is no bigger in
area or population than your average US county,
and there are thousands of counties, all of
which make up only about a percent of this
planet, our pale blue dot that would be less
than a mote of dust in the eyes of a true
Kardashev-2 Civilization encompassing a star,
which might feature quadrillions of cylinder
habitats, and yet such habitats are hardly
an insignificant thing except in relative
size.
We will continue by contemplating a handful
of scenarios for folks living out in such
voids, from the human to the posthuman, from
those living on the fringes of interstellar
trade to those hiding in the icy cold from
a hunting enemy or even sipping on dark matter
or dark energy beyond the galaxy.
I want to start by focusing on two more near
term scenarios, ice miners in the Oort Cloud
and those helping gather fuel and raw materials
in true interstellar space either to run their
own habitat or help fuel a laser pushing array.
Now we can keep it fairly brief on our ice
miners, here you are collecting large amounts
of ice, potential comets and the like, and
sending them sunward.
They are their own fuel supply and may be
fairly rich in heavier elements too.
An icy body in the outer solar system or even
in deep space is mostly a mix of rocky dust
and frozen water, methane, carbon dioxide,
and ammonia, so there is no shortage of fusion
fuel or life-relevant elements.
It is hardly a gold mine of raw materials
but is likely to provide enough of them for
building a habitat and for trade for items
more easily obtained in the inner system.
Now, we often contemplate shoving a comet
into the inner solar system for use in terraforming
a planet but in practice you might be more
likely to harvest it out there and send in
just the parts you need as you need them.
Access to working fusion reactors would help
with such efforts, but is not necessary, especially
in the Kuiper Belt and Scattered Disc it should
be no problem to beam power out to anyone
doing the mining, but fusion would make it
easier.
It also makes it more likely to make such
operations permanent manned facilities rather
than automated processes.
You get some chunk of rock and ice a kilometer
across out there, then you’ve got yourself
around a trillion kilograms of material, and
that’s enough to build and fuel a respectable
habitat for a long time.
As to what you are paying for other supplies
with, those things you are buying are likely
to be almost all raw materials or equipment
for initial creation of your facilities and
habitat, or subsequent growth of those, for
things you can’t source locally.
If your stake out in the Oort Cloud is some
comet with an estimated million tons of iron
in it and only a hundred thousand tons of
aluminum, you are probably building your habitat
out of steel not aluminum, but that won’t
build you a lot of habitat either.
Very loosely speaking, assume you need around
a ton of construction material for every square
meter of living area inside a rotating habitat,
or a megaton per square kilometer, and that
will only build a thin floor.
In a case like that you might be placing a
bigger effort on using carbon allotropes like
nanotubes or graphene or artificial diamond
for your main construction material.
You might only be buying information and data
from in-system, you might be buying energy
beamed in, but at the end of the day you have
no commodities to sell that are rare so you
are likely to be marginal operations where
self-sufficiency is most important.
Of course it's folks who are prone to self-sufficiency
who are most likely to be considering colonizing
some icy body a billion kilometers from even
the nearest tiny habitat.
How you operate out there depends a lot on
whether you live out there because you like
living in the futuristic version of the log
cabin up on the forested mountain that you
roll your pickup down once a season to hit
the general store or if you are hiding in
the hinterlands to avoid the law, taxes, or
self-replicating kill swarms seeking out signs
of civilization to wipe them out.
Neither one is really a trade focused approach
but we do have another approach that’s trade
focused and we will use that to segue away
from ice mining into gas and dust harvesting.
We have often discussed on the show the possibility
of moving your ships between solar systems,
or even inside solar systems, by using giant
pushing lasers rather than internal rockets,
ships riding rivers of light between the stars.
It is possible to focus a laser over huge
distances, potentially light years, but we
tend to assume if possible you would have
a lot of relays and boosting stations along
the way.
These might be supplied with power from those
lasers, simply refocusing light at a slight
loss and using some of the power for themselves
to run operations, and they might also get
materials and supplies from the ships passing
by who they send beams to push on, but they
are likely to be better off sourcing material
locally too and while they might be able to
find large bodies nearby, be it a hunk of
ice or a full blown rogue planet or brown
dwarf, they might be forced to instead harvest
the Interstellar Medium or ISM.
The Interstellar Medium is the gas and dust
floating between the stars and is divided
into 6 major categories, Molecular Clouds,
Cold Neutral Medium, or CNM, Warm Neutral
Medium, or WNM, Warm Ionized Medium, or WIM,
H-II Regions, and the Hot Ionized Medium,
or HIM, often called Coronal Gas.
Molecular Clouds are only a tiny fraction
of the ISM, they are cold and dense so that
the matter in them is in molecular form, not
lone atoms and ionized particles, and they
can average hundreds of particles per cubic
centimeter all the way up to a million, while
alternatively Coronal Gas is the hottest ISM
and least dense, anywhere from hundreds to
thousands of cubic centimeters per particle.
A Molecular Cloud is often where star formation
is happening and those are stellar nurseries
but not all molecular clouds are forming stars
and this type of ISM is least common but most
rich for mining.
Two notes on that, first it is still very
minimal, a million particles per cubic centimeter
is still millions of times thinner than the
air you are breathing.
Second, while it is estimated to make up less
than 1% of the interstellar medium by volume,
keep in mind that habitable zones of solar
systems, even being very generous in how wide
that is, make up around a quadrillionth of
the Interstellar medium, so there are a trillion
times more Molecular Cloud by volume than
habitable zones.
On the flip side Coronal Gas or Hot Ionized
Matter makes up somewhere between one and
two thirds of the ISM, it’s a little hard
to estimate, and this is actually referring
to the Galactic Corona, or Galactic Halo,
the very thin and hot gases that tend to be
on the outskirts of spiral galaxies.
We are not sure what processes contribute
to the HIM most, be it just solar wind of
a trillion stars or supernovae or what have
you, but lots of gas and dust gets pushed
out away from the galaxy but not quite fast
enough to escape it entirely and falls into
thin, hot clouds around the galaxy.
“Hot” can be a bit misleading in this
context, we tend to think of hot as something
that can burn you but even though we often
have ISM temperatures hotter than any earthly
oven, you’d still freeze to death in them
just because they are so thin that almost
no collisions are happening to transfer heat
to you from them.
In context it mostly means how fast the individual
particles are moving, for instance a lone
hydrogen atom, with a molecular weight of
1, and a temperature of 10 million kelvin,
has a root mean square speed of 500 kilometers
per second, around the escape velocity of
our galaxy.
Alternatively a water molecule, molecular
weight of 18, at just 10 kelvin, in one of
these colder molecular clouds, might only
be moving at 120 meters per second, 4000 times
slower, though still a hundred times faster
than you or I can walk.
That matters a lot for replenishment, if for
instance I am mining in a gas cloud and sweeping
out everything for a million kilometers around,
then one in a molecular cloud might have a
billion times more mass in it than one in
coronal gas, but the former would take around
a year to replenish from drift from neighboring
gas while the latter take more like an hour.
Coronal Gas is also ionized so is a lot easier
to potentially sweep up using electromagnetic
fields.
This is also true of H-II regions, such as
the Orion Nebula, which are nebula in which
star formation has recently occurred, and
thus are pretty hot, around 8000 Kelvin, meaning
they are ionized too, and can range in density
a lot, but like Molecular clouds make up less
than a percent of the galaxy.
If we ignore these tiny regions and the large
Coronal Gas regions of the Halo, that leaves
us 3 main types, the Cold and Warm Neutral
Medium, and the Warm Ionized Medium which
is probably the largest type.
The Cold Medium is only 1-5% percent of the
galaxy, and is fairly dense, at 20-50 particles
per cubic centimeter, but is made of neutral
atomic hydrogen so isn’t too easy to collect.
There’s a lot more Warm Neutral Medium,
10-20% of the ISM, but it contains much less
hydrogen, about 1% the density of the Cold
Neutral Medium.
The Warm Ionized Medium, which makes up between
20-50% of the ISM, is at the same density
as the Warm Neutral Medium but the gas is
ionized and thus can be pulled in, swept up
with electric fields and so on.
I’m not sure what the best way to do this
would be, but at a temperature of 8000 Kelvin
and a molecular weight of 1, those particles
generally move 14 kilometers per second.
So for a given square kilometer of gas collector,
your collector might suck in around 10^-11
kilograms of mass per second or something
around a gram a year, that’s very approximate.
But that would mean you needed something like
100 million of those collectors to fill your
tanks for that 100 kilograms a day fusion
reactor fuel we contemplated for running a
large O’Neill Cylinder… alternatively
some small virtual community of a few hundred
digital folks might easily run on just one
of those collectors.
Now a hundred million kilometer-wide collectors
might sound like a lot but that would be roughly
planet-sized and honestly that’s about the
volume of space the typical full-sized O’Neill
Cylinder might claim as its own in a packed
Dyson Swarm, which are only dense in relative
terms.
A random Cubic Light Year of space would contain
around a billion-billion-billion such pockets.
You wouldn’t want a station in each one
of them, that gas is not an infinite supply
and its essentially like well water replenishing
at a trickle from the volume around it, but
you could easily have stations spaced every
Astronomical Unit throughout interstellar
space sucking in hundreds of times that much
gas each and every day and still not risk
depleting the gas supply even on astronomical
timelines.
They could be selling that gas on to bigger
places serving as major laser highway relay
points or running their own lesser ones.
For that matter they might tend to form long
tubes around the main transit lanes where
they are sweeping up the gas and dust specifically
to keep the laser highway lane clear, which
would allow fastest and safest travel speeds,
and keeping the material as a bonus for trade.
This is potentially possible even in the intergalactic
medium where the density is on an order of
a million times less dense, a particle per
cubic meter, or even in the sparser regions
of the Cosmic Voids.
Indeed if they run themselves on artificial
black holes instead of fusion, they are pulling
off nearly a hundred times better power generation
per unit of matter.
We might also hypothesize that they’ve gotten
their hands on technology able to pull dark
matter in and use it for power, see our Dark
Matter Technologies episode for more discussion
of that.
Dark Matter is even more abundant than hydrogen,
and is evenly spread throughout the galaxy
out to the Halo, so for folks hiding out in
the Halo, either because they want to take
advantage of ultra-cold computing or because
they are actually hiding, dark matter might
be a very tempting power supply.
Dark Energy is also a plausible option, it
seems to be evenly spread everywhere.
I don’t know how you would tap it but if
you could, you could set up shop anywhere
in the Universe.
Now sourcing your power needs is important
but as we can see, not too tricky itself.
Indeed the hard part will be hiding your heat
emissions if you are out in the deep and trying
not to be found, not with coming up with power,
at least not unless the whole galactic civilizations
is running low on power.
Coming up with raw materials shouldn’t be
much harder than trading fusion fuel, if you’re
sourcing either from in-system.
Coming up with fuel or raw materials out in
the void might not be too hard either though.
Not much of the Interstellar medium is dust,
it’s almost all hydrogen and helium, but
it is in there, and for that matter if you
run on fusion it is quite plausible you can
turn lighter elements into heavier elements
at a profit, maybe even very heavy elements
like iron, but you can always use your power
supply to make heavier elements at a loss
too.
The tricky part about fusion for us is doing
it at a gain, but if you’ve got energy abundance
you can mass-produce any element you want,
though that could easily end up running you
energy costs parallel or in excess to bringing
the material in from interstellar distances
at a fraction of light speed.
It would depend a lot on what your technology
allowed.
One example we see in fiction is from Orion’s
Arm, where they have Deep Well Industrial
Zones.
These are usually assumed to be micro-black
holes the mass of a large asteroid stuffed
in orbit of a gas giant that uses that gas
to stuff it down the black hole and use the
accretion disc for nucleosynthesis and power
generation.
It works just as well in deep space if you’re
collecting the gas and bringing it in, but
a micro-black hole in that size range makes
a potentially potent way to turn hydrogen
and helium into heavier and scarcer elements
and do it a lot faster and better than a star
does.
Stars are not fast or efficient generators
of heavy elements, they just do it naturally
and thus for free from our current perspective.
Now I mentioned that the preferred place for
one of these is in orbit of a gas giant and
it is important to remember that while the
interstellar void has gas and dust, it does
actually have objects too.
Brown Dwarfs, which can be thought of as very
large gas giants or very small failed stars,
are very common in this galaxy, and we currently
estimate there may be as many as a hundred
billion of them.
Indeed there’s a red dwarf brown dwarf binary,
Scholz’s Star, about 22 light years from
us that we believe passed through our Oort
Cloud 70,000 years ago, disrupting it a bit.
Incidentally while Alpha Centauri may be our
nearest system currently at 4 light years
away, we generally do pass near another star
as close as a light year or less every million
or so years.
Brown Dwarfs are not proper solar systems
themselves, they produce no visible light
to fuel photosynthesis, but they are rich
territories for any exo-stellar civilization
as they are likely to have their own collections
of planets, moons, and asteroids.
There are also a vast number of rogue planets
out there, not orbiting any sun, likely far
more than there are suns.
You could find an Earth-mass planet out in
the void, give it it’s own artificial micro
Sun orbiting it like we discussed doing in
Making Suns, and thaw the world out for terraforming,
and its quite probably there are more planets
in this mass range than stars though most
would be covered in thick shell of water,
ammonia, and methane ice you would need to
remove first, or drill into and build under
the ice.
For every solar system out there, assume at
least an order of magnitude more rogue objects
big enough to at least qualify as a dwarf
planet in the void, probably more, and each
able to easily support billions if not trillions
of people in the context of being turned into
building material and fuel for rotating habitats.
I just mentioned how we often have stars pass
closer to us than Alpha Centauri is, and we
expect to find many rogue planets out in our
Oort Cloud or drifting between stars, ejected
during planetary formation.
Estimates I’ve seen range from them being
slightly more numerous than stars to thousands
of times more numerous, and presumably depend
a lot on what the cutoff would be in size,
we will not rehash today what the definition
of a planet should be, but a dwarf planet
smaller than Pluto is still an incredible
find able to support billions of people.
As we explored in Colonizing the Oort Cloud
or way back in our episode on Rogue Planets,
these each have the potential to become individual
civilizations that while far smaller than
any Dyson Swarm that might form around a star,
would still eclipse our own modern one.
And if we switch to include the millions if
not billions of kilometer-size objects floating
around Interstellar space between any given
pair of stars, each able to house a decent-sized
city if not more, we start seeing that these
exo-stellar civilizations wouldn’t be too
small at all.
But this all assumes we mean exo-stellar civilizations
as those who live between the stars while
far bigger civilizations live around those
stars, like the rural hinterlands between
the great dyson swarms.
But as we were discussing in our recent episode
Killing Stars, those biggest and brightest
supergiants might make for the best power
supplies, but they’re not efficient and
don’t really benefit us as sources of power
or raw materials except in the sense that
a forest fire is a great way to keep warm
and a great source of charcoal.
You get that for free in the sense it costs
you no labor or time, but to growing civilizations
with access to artificial fusion or to micro
black holes it isn’t a long term good approach.
Civilizations may be able to take stars apart
via star lifting, or barring that, take action
to prevent stars forming and suck up those
materials for controlled use.
In which case we begin seeing all those civilizations
as exo-stellar, and now they simply clump
as close as good resource utilization permits,
since being closer always allows faster and
cheaper movement of people, resources, and
data.
You could end up with a vast dark galaxy composed
entirely of artificial structures, each sitting
on hordes of resources to keep themselves
running while slowly sipping away at the various
gas and dust not yet collected.
These could be rotating habitats internally
lit by artificial power populated with people
and our pets, plants, and parasites, or it
could be an ultra-dark and cold affair where
everyone lives as digital beings inside virtual
realms, a whole galaxy transmuted into a computer
whose scope and processing power dwarfs the
typical Kardashev-3 Civilizations the way
those Dwarf Kardashev-2 civilizations and
those dwarf our current one.
It could be both simultaneously too, see our
Black Hole Trilogy or Civilizations at the
End of Time Series for more discussion of
these approaches, or our episode Virtual Worlds
and Life as a Digital Being for a deeper look
at what those lives would be like.
Before closing out, folks often ask me if
our notion of detecting Dyson swarms or galactic
empires by their star-encompassing infrared
waste heat signatures would be invalidated
by exo-stellar civilizations and the answer
is no.
The concept of the Dyson Dilemma isn’t about
detecting individual Dyson swarms, it's about
the notion that growing civilizations will
put resources to use, and if bound by our
Universe and its current known laws will need
to deal with finite supplies of matter and
energy and growing entropy.
In this context it doesn’t matter if you
are living around a star or living around
a black hole you dump matter into, you can
only pack folks in so tight before they’d
overheat on their waste heat.
Same for if they all had individual fusion
reactors of their own.
They can only be so tight.
They want to be tight because even a fully-packed
Dyson Swarm is way less population-dense than
a desert or tundra and distance just limits
who you can interact with and how quickly
and cheaply.
So they pack into a loose sphere, but a sphere
can only get rid of heat in proportion to
their surface area which grows with the square
of radius, whereas the volume inside grows
with the cube, so if you keep the same density
in a sphere and make it ten times wider, you
now have a thousand times as many folks producing
a thousand times as much heat, with only a
hundred times the heat dissipation.
So if you were already at your max, you would
need your new density to be ten times lower
to keep up the necessary heat dissipation.
This is why large gregarious civilizations
would tend to look like Dyson Spheres, or
rather that both look like big clumps of infrared
illumination.
If they are biologically based their surface
temperature needs to be around what our planet
is, whether they are a hoard of habitats,
a few million in a swarm only a hundred kilometers
across or some mega-dyson like the Birch Planet,
a light year across, and will appear as infrared
light of about 300 Kelvin or wavelength of
about ten micrometers.
If they’re post-biological, they probably
go colder, maybe all the way down to 30 Kelvin
or a peak waste heat wavelength of a single
micrometer, but they can’t get down near
the temperature of the CMB or Cosmic Microwave
Background Radiation, just under 3 Kelvin,
so they still stick out like a big thumb,
and a bigger thumb too since a civilization
ten times cooler needs 10^4 or ten thousand
times more surface area to radiate the same
amount of power, making them 100 times wider.
They do not have to cluster together and doubtless
many would pack up their stuff and flee for
deep space far from others, but you can’t
hide these civilizations by being spread out,
you can only hide them by throttling their
power use way down, and even that isn’t
a good means to hide, just a good way to run
ultra-cold and efficient, and we explored
that more in our episode Sleeping Giants.
In all cases there will tend to be an ideal
temperature they run at and that would correspond
to a peak wavelength you would see, and we
would pick it up out of the background radiation.
However, there are several other background
radiation types with peaks not in the microwave
range but we have more mundane explanations
for them than alien civilizations.
In any event, whether our future is around
alien stars or in the cold depths of deep
space, it has the option of being a very bright
one, and exo-stellar civilizations might begin
as the pioneers on the outskirts sipping at
wisps of interstellar dust and icy rocks,
but they may end as the great empires of the
galaxy.
So regular viewers might have noticed that
today’s episode was a bit longer than we
normally have been doing for our mid-month
bonus episodes.
I’d originally meant for those to be fairly
short 10-15 minutes videos but as regular
viewers probably have also noticed, brevity
isn’t my strong suit.
There’s always stuff that gets left out
of every episode, often in an attempt at brevity,
in this case I’d like to talk a bit more
about what extreme engineering we might see
in a post-stellar galaxy would make things
look like, one where they have the time and
power to rearrange the whole thing.
So today we'll have a Nebula Plus Extended
edition of the episode to discuss that as
an addendum and there’s a couple ways I
try to handle that without doing addendum
episodes which Youtube’s algorithms tend
to be unkind to channels about.
Sadly youtube also doesn’t let us replace
episodes with corrected versions once they’re
released, and they also got rid of annotations
to videos, so I can't even put a note up saying
“Oops, that was 100 square meters not 100
square feet or light years”, so I can’t
really add addendums developed late in production
in case an error slips through.
Indeed that inability to replace videos or
add corrective annotations is a big reason
why episodes tend to get written months in
advance these days, to let us make very sure
the content is right.
For now, the working solution to that is going
to be release addendum material.
Sometimes we can do that as a new episode
of its own - but today’s episode is already
essentially part 4 of a discussion of settling
space without a focus on yellow suns like
our own, 4 episodes where I meant to have
1 - so our other options are for shorter addendums,
doing either an insert into the mid-hour break
of our monthly livestream Q&A or one of our
new Nebula Plus Extended Features, as Youtube’s
algorithm leaves livestreams be and I’m
a confounder of Nebula and thus can replace
videos with corrected versions.
This extended version will be a bit long for
a livestream break, like we did with our episode
on Orbital Bombardments’ asteroid impact
addendum in last month’s livestream.
So today we’re going to have an Extended
episode looking at that post-stellar, compacted
galaxy, over on Nebula.
I often talk about how we built that platform
to give creator’s more control over their
work and we’ll be taking advantage of it
to do that today.
I have to say it’s been fun developing Nebula
and watching it grow, and my thanks to everyone
who signed up for that to help us grow it.
I also want to thank Curiositystream, today’s
sponsor, for their help with that too, they’ve
been offering everyone a deal where they extend
free Nebula Membership to folks who join Curiositystream
using our link in episode descriptions, for
as long as they stay a Curiositystream member,
and it’s such an amazing fit for us because
Curiousitystream’s educational content so
matches our own.
If you haven’t already seen their “A Curious
World” Series, by the way, make sure to
check it out, as its got some great episodes
like “Can We Colonize Mars?” or looking
at the “Nanomedicine Revolution”.
Curiosity Stream has thousands of fun and
educational videos, and they have partnered
up with us at Nebula, our Streamy-Award Nominated
streaming service, to offer Nebula’s content
along with their own, if you sign up at the
link in the episode description.
That means you will not only get Curiosity
Stream, and at a 26% discount, but also lets
you catch SFIA episodes a couple days early
and without ads, and helps support our show
while you’re doing it, not to mention getting
to see our extended version of today’s episode.
And you can get all that for less than $15
by using the link in the episode’s description.
So that will wrap us up for another Scifi
Sunday but stick around the channel afterwards
and head on over to our community tab as we
will be running a poll of 5 possible episode
topics to select an episode we’ll do a few
months from now.
As I was mentioning a couple minutes ago,
our episodes take a while to make which is
why the topics we select now will come out
early in the summer, and please head on over
and vote for the one you would like to see.
We also tend to source these topics from discussions
over in our social media groups, facebook,
patreon, reddit, and discord and I usually
close episodes out after our schedule by reminding
folks they’re welcome to join those for
discussion and possible future episodes and
polls on them is one of our more common topics.
Speaking of that schedule, next week we’ll
be taking a look at how to restore life with
technology, in our Episode “Resurrection”
on March 18th, and two weeks from now we’ll
ask the big question of what Sentience really
is, then close the month out with our Monthly
Livestream Q&A on Sunday, March 28th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us itunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
