This episode is brought to you by Skillshare.
Philosophers have long contemplated the question
of “If the world is real or not?”, but
perhaps the better question is if it actually
matters?
So today we begin our fifth year here on Science
& Futurism with Isaac Arthur, and I am your
host, Isaac Arthur.
I wanted to start by thanking everyone for
tuning in and helping us get to a fifth year.
We’ve covered a lot of fun topics in the
last few years and we’ve got plenty more
to come.
I occasionally get asked if I expect to ever
run out of topics, and the answer is a resounding
“NO”.
In general, our queue of new topics to cover
expands much faster than we cover them, and
of course we often have to revisit topics
to update or expand on them, as even a half
hour show is rarely enough to cover all the
relevant material.
Three of our favorite topics of course are
Colonizing Space, the Fermi Paradox, which
asks why nobody from other worlds seems to
be colonizing space, and the Simulation Hypothesis,
which asks if that space and our universe
is even real.
Today we’ll be looking at all three, and
we’ll start with a common question that
gets asked: “Which world should we visit
and colonize first, the Moon or Mars?
Or maybe even Venus or an asteroid?”
I’m not sure which of those we’ll colonize
first, we’ve discussed the pros and cons
of each route, but as to the first world we’ll
colonize, it’s not very likely to involve
spacesuits and rockets, but goggles or implants.
This is the first episode of our fifth year,
but the first episode of our first year introduced
a concept called the Dyson Dilemma of the
Fermi Paradox, which can be summarized briefly
as saying that in general, if a civilization
can comfortably expand and has a motive to
do so, it probably will.
This raises a concern for the Fermi Paradox,
the apparent contradiction between how old
and vast the Universe is, and how devoid it
seems to be of other civilizations.
The Dilemma being that it does seem to be
practical to colonize the galaxy and there
are some fairly obvious motives, so even if
only a fraction of civilizations ever are
so inclined, you ought to be able to see their
Dyson Swarms everywhere, and we obviously
do not.
The three most obvious conclusions are that
they don’t exist yet, or that such colonization
is not practical, or that there is no motive.
A lot of our episodes focus on showing that
colonization of our solar system and our galaxy
is viable and likely practical in the future,
so we often shift concerns to motives.
You have to have a reason to go to the enormous
effort of sending ships to other stars to
setup civilization, there has to be a gain
to outweigh the costs and risks.
One example where there would not be one is
if we invented a perpetual motion machine,
you don’t need to risk the dangers of the
Oregon Trail to set up a farm on virgin land
if you already get a free lunch at home.
Even ignoring that it violates the Laws of
Thermodynamics, the most ironclad of all our
physical laws thus far, this notion is problematic.
If you have a civilization with virtually
unlimited resources and easy manufacturing,
such as the automated production we discussed
a couple of weeks back in the Santa Claus
Machine, it’s actually very easy for them
to colonize the galaxy, so there’s less
obvious motive but way less cost and risk.
The same applies for Faster Than Light Travel,
crossing the interstellar void just becomes
so easy that you need no more motive for doing
so than for climbing Mount Everest or going
to the South Pole.
Now visiting a place isn’t the same as colonizing
it, but I’m pretty sure someone would build
a house on that mountain or the poles if it
was reasonably possible to do so, indeed we
discussed that latter scenario just a few
weeks back in Colonizing the Arctic.
We have another motive-breaker that gets raised
sometimes too though, and it’s the general
notion that you don’t expand outward because
you’re expanding inward, miniaturizing,
going digital, living in virtual worlds.
I’ve often said this is not a good Fermi
Paradox solution, and we’ll discuss why
later, but as we often see with the Fermi
Paradox, just because a given scenario isn’t
a good solution, doesn’t mean it isn’t
done.
Many civilizations might choose to stay at
home, it’s a bad Fermi Paradox solution
not because we can’t imagine anyone choosing
that, but because we can’t imagine everyone
does, without exception.
That’s what we call Exclusivity or Non-Exclusivity
in discussions of the Fermi Paradox, not if
a scenario is possible or even probable but
if it is so common that all or virtually all
civilizations do it.
The galaxy is old enough and big enough that
even if only a small percent of Earth-like
worlds develop life and technological civilizations,
that there should be millions of them older
than us.
And it only takes one with the ability and
inclination to have colonized the entire galaxy
by now.
So any option implying such civilizations
are common but don’t colonize needs explaining
why this outcome is so inevitable it hasn’t
happened even one single time.
Some unavoidable doomsday scenario or some
inevitable convergence to a cultural outlook
that reviles expansion, that sort of thing.
And we have a candidate in virtual reality,
but for it to truly work, we have to abandon
the notion that it is ‘virtual’.
Such civilizations are not opting to skip
on colonizing the galaxy in favor of living
in hedonistic fantasy, they are opting to
make new worlds and colonize them.
They are building real worlds, because they
will only even considering going exclusively
this direction if they view them as just that.
We’ve a precedent for this in our discussions.
Another of our regular topics is megastructures,
and we often say it’s far more likely we’ll
construct most worlds that humans come to
live on rather than on terraformed planets.
That’s where the “Dyson” part of “Dyson
Dilemma” comes from, you can get a lot more
living space out of a big rock by forging
into a lot cylinder habitats and solar collectors,
millions of times as much, enough to englobe
an entire Star so that it fades from visual
sight into a glow of infrared waste heat.
That you can do this to almost any star and
as long as you’re reliant on matter and
energy and expansionist, you will do this
to every star.
Fundamentally the Dyson Dilemma asks why we
can look up at the night sky and see any stars
in it at all.
In the four years since I introduced the idea,
I’ve kept an eye out for solutions and rebuttals.
It may be my concept but I’m not terribly
fond of its implications if valid, so I keep
hoping someone will smash it.
No luck so far though some decent objections
have been raised and one of those is that
we sees those stars because they are supposed
to be there for us to see, but they’re not
actually there, that this is all just a Simulated
Universe, also known as the Simulation Hypothesis
or Argument.
There’s actually nothing wrong with that
at all, it’s just not helpful since you
can’t prove or disprove you’re in one,
and being in one doesn’t necessarily remove
colonization as an option.
It just depends on the motivations of the
simulators.
Motivations are everything with Simulation
Hypothesis and with Virtual Worlds, because
the other counter-arguments for them don’t
stand up well.
In a basic look at the Simulation Hypothesis
we see three obvious scenarios.
The first is that it isn’t possible to create
a world as detailed as ours appears to be,
or that it is but the path to doing so inevitably
ends in destruction or stagnation before you
get there, but that gets harder and harder
to call likely the more time passes and technology
improves.
The other two are that you can do such simulation
but choose not to, or not too often, or that
you can and you do it often.
Both of which are about motivations and ethics,
not capability.
But capability matters.
We have to rearrange our thinking a bit on
Virtual Reality to something a bit more realistic,
no pun intended.
Even if we assumed near infinite processing
power and energy, which is a big assumption,
there is a limit on creativity and detail.
It takes an insane amount of processing, energy,
and detail to build a simulated world that
would be so realistic that nearly everyone
would find it a completely acceptable substitute
for our world.
They say you can have anything you want in
Virtual Reality but you can’t, the scarcity
simply changes, that’s all.
I have all the air and water I could ever
want, the two things that would kill me quickest
if they disappeared, in about 3 minutes and
3 days respectively.
On the Moon, or Mars, those items are scarce.
Here and there gold is pretty scarce, in a
virtual reality you could easily have a house
built of it as cheaply as wood or stone, and
indeed there are probably worlds out there
that just barely survived a nearby impact
of a pair of neutron stars and got showered
in gold and use it for roof tiles and farmers
clearing fields complain of lumps of worthless
gold in their new fields damaging their plows
and pay folks in potatoes to cart the stuff
off.
Scarcity is relative.
You can’t be king of the world in a virtual
reality because it wouldn’t be much of a
world if you were the only person living in
it, and even assuming everyone is ethically
okay with simulating people in those worlds
so perfectly that they are effectively artificial
sentient people, not facsimiles, that would
take an insane amount of processing power.
We might have that one day but we don’t
now and if we get there, we will do so gradually.
Your first detailed virtual worlds will be
populated with a lot of actual people instead,
they will expand it in detail and design,
and it will become real.
Let me give some examples.
Anyone with a Facebook account can make a
group there, but it has little flavor or depth
until many have taken up residence there.
The channel has one of course, with thousands
of members and hundreds actively participating
and talking and shaping it.
This channel more broadly has a ‘community’,
we call it that, we think of it that way.
It has no physical location, unless you want
to count the actual servers, wherever they
are.
This isn’t internet specific either, the
NFL or FIFA only have locations because football
uses stadiums.
The World Chess Federation, FIDE, does have
a headquarters in Athens but chess clubs don’t
really need locations, even before the internet
you could play by mail or just carry a board
anywhere with someone else to play.
We certainly never question the reality of
such groups.
Physicality and reality are not inextricably
entwined.
There are no atoms of justice, no molecules
of freedom or art, and while there are quarks
of beauty and truth, those names have fallen
out of usage and never meant the concepts
that were constructed of them.
These things are still real, merely abstract
rather than concrete objects with physical
referents.
Even going to those, an apple is a very clear
and real thing, but its properties are kind
of vague.
Not only do they come in many colors, sizes,
and flavors, but there is not a single apple
left from when that word was coined.
They’re all gone, so are the people who
coined the word, yet humans and apples still
exist, another term with a broad spectrum
of meaning, and broader here where we often
have to contemplate people who might be more
cybernetic than flesh, or exist entirely in
a digital world.
Such folks do not yet exist, but I suspect
they’d take issue with the implication they
and their environment were somehow unreal.
And a lot of entirely fictional places already
exist.
We used to argue whether or not Troy was a
real place, till we found it ruins, but we
didn’t really mean the city but rather the
story of it’s Fall which is likely almost
entirely fictional and mythological.
In spite of it, I don’t know a single person
who lives there now or in the past, most of
us don’t, but we know the stories of those
people in Homer’s classic, and who knows
how many millions if not billions of dollars
have been spent or made in the continuance
of that tale?
How many other stories are tributes or expansions
of it?
How many of us read books located in various
fictional settings that have what are called
Expanded Universes?
Ones where several, sometimes hundreds of
people, have added details and new stories?
Often not even very good ones but the place
has become so real to us in its depth that
mediocre is okay, it’s another tale from
a place we’ve come to view as a second home.
Every sequel game or expansion or DLC is such
a thing, every wikia devoted to a franchise
is proof of its effective reality.
Why do we discuss this?
We’re not really interested in philosophical
concepts like “what is real?”, rather
we’re interested in what it shows us for
a progression.
Our individual daydreams or fantasies certainly
give us room to think that in the future most
folks might have some personal virtual world,
indeed you’d almost expect them to the same
as we have our home page or timeline or our
house on Earth.
Tailored to your specifics and where you spend
much time but not all of it and often not
most of it either.
Those earlier worlds, which need design and
expansion and to share processing power and
costs, those are likely to be a lot more detailed
and interesting and get a lot of regulars
and form a community.
Indeed you might have a home there that cost
you money, depending on its location possibly
quite a lot.
There’s likely to be rules about what you
can and cannot do, no knocking over a local
mountain range because it irritates you, no
killing everyone’s favorite innkeeper.
After all, to be fairly real, even if not
sentient, that innkeeper needs memories of
prior interactions and timelines, so you can’t
just easily reboot him if someone stabs him
because you’d have to delete that, delete
it from every other character there, and explain
away the time missing.
Doable but a pain and someone needs to do
that.
No PvP during the ‘town meetings’ to discuss
the Army of White Walkers descending on the
Wall, even if that discussion is mostly about
how the new design patch has resulted in that
army attempting to besiege or climb a spot
twenty meters in front of the Wall, rather
than its actual defense.
Someone has to be in charge of many of these,
and you might get feudal realms run by the
founders who first designed it, or you might
get democracies voting for who is designing
and administering or arbitrating.
You might get arguments about who is a citizen
and how much they get to vote, or other places
stealing aspects of your world to use in theirs,
or if it’s okay to open an easy entry portal
between the worlds of Westeros, Coruscant,
and the Klingon Imperial Capital, and which
versions to use too, if you think canon arguments
are brutal now, just wait until someone retcons
an entire planet people have spent days living
on out of existence.
Such places aren’t free either and so you
can get fees, presumably flat fees or subscriptions
initially, the same for everyone, but that
could easily mutate into something like modern
tax codes.
You could have entire business enterprises
there, I mean we already do.
Many of our larger MMOs already have their
own internal currency people often buy with
Earth currencies and folks who are not in
anyway part of the game design team but make
a business of it.
It would make sense to have an internal sales
tax or income tax on such places, you could
use it to pay the various player-designers
for their efforts, and similarly I’d imagine
the IRS takes interest in such new business
ventures back here on physical Earth.
It would be so very easy to imagine such a
world rebelling against external control and
taxation, having its own currency and legal
system, issuing passports, and even lobbying
various governments over things like internet
taxation, bandwidth throttling, and so on.
We talked some months back about seasteading
and setting up server farms in international
waters, and how they might grow to be their
own nations even, it’s not that hard to
imagine this is where most of their citizens
would actually live.
And this is before we even get into entirely
uploaded minds, who have no body on Earth.
Note that I keep saying “on Earth”, not
the physical world or virtual realities, because
that’s likely to be an increasingly vague
notion and an irrelevant one too.
As we expand into space, one of the things
we expect to see is a slow growing swarm of
habitats orbiting Earth, a Planet Swarm as
we sometimes call it.
Both of these notions are likely to happen
long before we have any significant chunk
of our population on other planets, and they
start to really erode at a lot of what we
mean by classic concepts of land, territory,
and nations.
They also get harder and harder to apply physical
force to, you can blow a habitat out of the
sky easily enough but you don’t have many
other options below that threshold for exerting
coercion and your neighbors are likely to
be rather aghast as you unleash Kessler Syndrome
in Orbit and drop megatons of burning debris
on the planet below, even if they didn’t
object to blowing the habitat up on ethical
grounds.
Similarly, how do you invade a simulated world
where the servers are arbitrary and movable,
and the residents likely do not appear as
they do on Earth or go by that name, and who
could probably hide their access with a VPN
or similar so you can’t track them?
Consider it’s virtual, can you even have
meaningful wars without death?
Or might that become the normal path for resolving
conflicts, have a third party inventory and
referee a virtual war ending in a peace treaty
after no casualties?
Would you have treaties with such places?
Agreements to reveal actual identities?
Extradition?
What did they get in return?
Did they get a vote on the UN?
An Ambassador or consulate?
Does the company that runs the servers for
millions of people’s pocket universes with
their personal home have to obey search and
seizure warrants?
And at what point do such places become so
real and powerful that they can’t be forced
to, but need to be asked, need to sign a treaty?
We were talking some months back about Seasteading,
tiny islands, possibly artificially built,
which might become their own nations, that
would be hard under current diplomatic conditions
but a virtual nation that keeps only limited
maintenance and security personnel in some
server farm at sea, but considers itself to
have millions of citizens, is in a pretty
good position to leverage themselves into
some sort of recognized national status.
It’s quite possibly more of a ‘when not
if’, as such things would likely go through
epochs as they grew more detailed, larger,
more immersive, and potentially transitioned
to people who never really live on Earth,
just keep their body there, or who do not
even do that, digital minds floating around
an immense cloud.
At what point do such places get to be genuinely
real?
Whether you’re a true digital entity or
have implants that can feed your senses or
even just goggles and headphones, when does
it start being normal to ask a gal out on
a date to the Diogenes Club to have dinner
and join Sherlock Holmes and Dr. Watson afterwards
to solve a murder mystery?
To go to the Green Dragon for a beer with
Frodo and Sam and a walk around Hobbiton and
the Bywater?
Or take trip to Mount Doom to get rid of this
pesky ring you’ve being given?
Does one simply walk into Mordor?
Or are you obliged to take the long hard route?
Such places are not really bound by normal
laws of space, or even necessarily of time,
things can be done there that can’t be done
here on Earth, like stepping back to a distant
time or existing in the same place as someone
else, but each of you with the room to yourself.
Are you paying for the whole place to be run
by itself with just you and some friends or
are you taking a discount to be in a version
many are sharing?
Do you intentionally go there because the
interactions and details are better, because
you want to meet fellow enthusiasts?
Did you log onto the wrong server to meet
your date and meet someone else instead?
Did you get married by Gandalf?
Did you get a house in Minas Tirith, and get
a simulated pet?
Did you have a simulated kid even?
Did you join a group determined to get rules
passed on the forum protecting all those prized
and cherished things from harm or change or
vandalism?
That marriage notion is certainly a good comparison,
I remember when internet dating was very new
and weird, now it’s mundane and I am considered
a dinosaur, for still thinking it peculiar.
It’s still rare even in these days of webcams
and high bandwidth for folks to get engaged
or married without meeting in the flesh, but
with sufficiently good virtual reality to
people might easily get married while living
on separate continents, sharing a virtual
home, and they could even conceivably have
a kid, be it a sub-sentient virtual one, a
fully digital human mind, or an artificially
inseminated or tank grown child in the real
world, living with one parent or even neither.
That sort of thing is likely far ahead in
time, but virtual pets, homes and marriages
or kids, not sentient ones of course, are
already a common feature of many MMO or simulation
games and folks can get quite attached to
them.
We could get whole communities existing around
fictional worlds, and that’s hardly new
if far more elaborate and common place these
days.
At what point do these places get so real
that they become real worlds in almost every
meaningful sense?
Could future tourism even go to such places
from other worlds, because light lag prevents
you logging on from Mars so you actually travel
to Earth to log into a well known and popular
virtual world?
Some may even be willing to slow down virtual
reality time to make the light lag less problematic,
where one hour in normal reality is a second
in virtual time.
This we call frame-jacking.
Using that trick, apparently lagless real-time
conversations with Mars become possible.
I can also see that trick being used when
processing bandwidth is an issue due to overheating
or monetary expense.
So, if it takes ten real-world processors
to simulate one second in your virtual reality,
you could instead cheapen that up by having
one processor that simulates one second in
the virtual reality but takes ten real seconds
to do it.
The side effect is that living in your virtual
reality will put you out of sync with the
real world around you.
You could wake up after a year in virtual
reality to discover your kids have grown up
and you’re now a grandparent.
This could go the other way too, accelerated
consciousness where you wake up from a virtual
world you spent a lifetime in, only to find
out mere minutes have passed outside.
And here’s the key thing: these worlds are
very likely to exist and grow into robust
places of their own with large populations
and complexities far sooner than thriving
colonies on other planets, almost certainly
before we might colonize distant stars.
They are quite likely to be the first worlds
we build and name, far more likely to be the
places that set precedents on how new nations
or civilizations form as independent or semi-independent
places.
They may be faster to colonize too, since
they have a unique approach to new worlds
and civil wars.
If you’re running a simulated world whose
citizen start factionalizing too much, they
can literally copy that place, like an amoeba
dividing into two, colonial mitosis.
You could end up with worlds that grouped
up by species or genre, individual states
of larger federations, where there numbers
and power alone weren’t enough to let them
negotiate with Earth-based countries or other
larger virtual nations.
Likely many people would live in more than
one, possibly having a primary above on Earth
or a specific virtual world or a private one,
which might result in some very bizarre arguments
over dual citizenship, where you get to vote,
and who you pay taxes too, you might get some
sort of fractional citizenship concept.
Though I suspect most folks would tend to
shift to a primary abode, even if that might
change with time as it does now when we move.
And it can go one step further, whether you
are entirely digitized in that world or just
accessing it from your body, for the full
experience you might want not to really remember
the outside world.
Even if just while you’re there.
There’s a precedent in our thinking for
this, most of us don’t think we’re in
dreams while having them, we don’t really
need to cut off our memories of life to believe
in it while experiencing it and usually at
most just have a few hazy moments of confusion
when waking up before separating dream from
reality.
That might be a starting point for developing
more immersive experiences that were still
you, and that would be a hugely valuable technology.
Though it raises some bizarre options, even
before we consider things like speeded up
subjective times, or frame jacking.
If you go to sleep each night, or maybe just
spend you lunch breaks in such a world, as
a recurring dream essentially, might you start
to have a divergent personality there?
You on Earth dislike hunting and vote to restrict
it, while you in that other world has developed
a fondness for it and votes to make it easier?
How much of your personality separates to
that place, that group, that existence?
Especially if you don’t really know, while
you’re there, that here even exists?
Many strange options, for the worlds and for
us in them, and being inquisitive by nature,
if we are so into it, would we start trying
to puzzle out the rules and physics of such
places?
Ask weird questions like why there are so
many stars in the night sky that seem uninhabited
and laugh off the notion that they might be
fake because no one would go to such an effort
to make a simulated world?
But I mentioned the Fermi Paradox near the
beginning and how this isn’t a great solution
for it.
That might seem contradictory now that we’ve
just finished looking out how tempting and
possibly even inevitable such places might
be, especially if we could make characters
in them who pass as genuine humans so well
we couldn’t really tell them from other
folks like us logged in there.
And that is why it isn’t a good solution.
However real these places are, and however
real-seeming their inhabitants, indeed possibly
fully sentient and every bit as much a person
as you or I, they still require a physical
substrate made of matter and powered by energy.
The more of both you have, the more such worlds
you can make, the more complex and detailed
they can be, and the longer they can run and
the more inhabitants they could have.
And you want them to run to, even if you died,
even if we all died, we’d want those places
and the people in them to persist, especially
if they were people, fully sentient and intelligent.
And that’s the key, we want more matter
and energy and we do not have to go out in
the Universe ourselves to acquire those if
we can make things smart enough to decently
pass for human.
Every bit of technology you need to immerse
yourself in such places as genuine substitutes
or supplements for this reality builds to
the exact same tech needed to make, for instance,
an automated probe smart enough to be able
to do tasks, like extract metals and build
things such as power collectors, processing
units, and copies of itself.
Honestly it’s child’s play to make a mining
robot as opposed to a believable simulation
of a human character.
Such civilizations might come to view Earth
and our Universe as rather boring.
I suspect though that this would still be
the most interesting bit of the world where
the largest number of people were conscious
at any given time, but even if they did, they
only have to build and program one mining
robot, one time, and would have the capacity
to do so long before they started hitting
those levels of realism that might tempt everyone
to move to those other worlds so unlike home
but so near to hand.
I don’t think this total approach would
be likely, that every single person would
decide to live one foot in simulated worlds
let alone both, but even if they did, they
still have every motivation to keep seeking
more material and resources in our physical
Universe.
As to how big such a thing could get, as we
saw way back in Matrioshka Brains, entire
solar systems turned into computers, a Dyson
Swarm devoted to computation, and we said
there such a thing, based on our best estimates
for maximum processing power and human Whole
Brain Emulation, could host some 10^34 people,
a trillion, trillion times our current population,
a trillion times what our whole galaxy could
hold if we terraformed every plausible planet
to hold current earth populations, and hundreds
of times what the whole galaxy could hold
if we turned every single star into a Dyson
Swarm populated with organic folks.
But if you recall, back in Mega-Earths, we
discussed something called a Birch Planet,
a single massive shellworld around a black
hole, whose absolute maximum size, in terms
of mass, exceeds that of our entire galaxy,
and that was a maximum based on wanting everyone
on the same sphere without that sphere being
swallowed by the black hole’s event horizon.
So you could supersize a Matrioshka Brain
to be even bigger than a Dyson swarm around
one planet by making a Matrioshka Brain Birch
Planet shellworld.
Hybridizing the place, you’d end up with
a vast layered shell world of millions of
solar masses composed of a mix of physical
places and virtual ones, where some folks
lived entirely physically, others entirely
digitally, and many folks in various degrees
of in-between.
There’s no upper limit on such a construct,
in terms of mass, your size limitations come
from dissipating waste heat and avoiding becoming
a black hole by your sheer mass.
Black Hole Event Horizons are a non-issue
until you start getting into millions of solar
masses, even the one at our galaxy’s center
is only a few light seconds in radius, tiny
compared to a solar system, though again that
rises linearly so it becomes a dominant factor
on size once you get into the billion of solar
masses.
Heat dissipation rises with the square of
radius, and as we discussed in the Kardashev
Scale episode, this means population density
of any giant swarm of habitats – organic
or digital – has to drop inverse to population
size.
Make such a mega-dyson-swarm twice as wide
and it has 8 times the volume, but can only
have quadruple the people.
You’re also doubling the time it takes to
talk to those furthest away, but more importantly
are increasing your minimum signal lag in
a local sense, as you have to spread out more.
Neither gives a compelling reason not to build
bigger though.
So for a Fermi Paradox solution this one remains
a no-go, not because I think such scenarios
are unlikely, quite to the contrary I find
them very likely.
However, it only requires a small chunk of
their population wanting to colonize the galaxy
more traditionally for that to happen, and
even if they stick at home they have every
reason to pillage their galaxy and those nearby
for raw materials all the way down to disassembling
the stars for fuel and construction material.
See the Star Lifting and Shkadov Thrusters
episodes for details on how to do that.
It’s not exactly unethical locust behavior
either; you’re pillaging hundreds of star
systems to create countless trillions of worlds,
or a whole galaxy to make so many worlds it
can only be expressed numerically in scientific
notation.
From an astronomy standpoint it just looks
like a very large infrared source though,
quite visible and noticeable, so again not
a good Fermi Paradox Solution.
Probably a big job for the future though,
and not a very distant future at that, designing
artificial worlds already employs a lot of
authors, Hollywood set designers, and graphical
artists, and that will only grow with time,
as we are better able to visualize our dreams
and engage in true worldbuilding…
One thing we can say for certain is that virtual
reality is only going to grow as part of our
world, and will play an increasingly larger
role in entertainment and education in the
coming years.
If you’re interested in learning how virtual
reality works and designing assets, graphics,
and programs for it, maybe even making a career
of it, then you might want to check out some
of the courses on virtual reality at Skillshare.
They are an online community with over 20,000
courses on everything from technical topics
like virtual reality, graphic design, and
computer programming to accounting or culinary
arts.
If you want to improve your skills, unlock
new opportunities, and do the work you love,
you can get a Premium Membership and have
unlimited access to classes on those topics
and many more.
Join the millions of students already learning
on Skillshare today with a special offer just
for my listeners: Get 2 months of Skillshare
for free.
To sign up, go to S-K-L-dot-S-H slash Isaac6.
Again, go to S-K-L-dot-S-H slash Isaac6 to
get 2 months of unlimited access to over 20,000
classes for free.
Act now for this special offer, and start
learning today.
So we started the year off with looking at
new and strange worlds close to home, as opposed
to colonizing distant worlds around alien
suns, next week we’ll look at another peculiar
approach, creating our own suns and stars,
in Making Suns.
The week after that will come back down to
Earth, and keep heading down, to explore the
possibility of Subterranean cities, whole
communities living in side vast artificial
caverns.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please like
it and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
