Early man had few clues to the mysteries of
the universe.
But every night they would be reminded there was much more to the cosmos
than just the Earth, Sun and Moon.
Humanity has been interested in the skies
above for at least as long we’ve had any
sort of civilization able to record anything
and likely far longer.
Even before we invented the telescope we had
a sophisticated and detailed knowledge of
the motion of the stars.
Of course we didn’t understand the science
behind it, but don’t confuse that with stupidity
on our ancestors’ part.
They lacked the tools to get more details
and as soon as they had them, their view of
the Universe changed enormously.
Today, as we discuss some options for making
truly huge telescopes that might actually
let us see planets in far off solar systems,
not just detect the bare essentials of their
existence, it probably behooves us to remember
that we could end up having as big a swing
in our thinking as we had going from Astrology
to Astronomy.
We have discovered countless mysteries and
surprises in our relatively brief survey of
the heavens and should expect many more.
And since that journey of exploration properly
began with the invention of the telescope,
it’s a good place to begin to see how we
can make superior ones in the future.
The basic concept of a magnifying lens is
quite old, and the concept is fairly simple.
Light bends when passing into transparent
materials like glass, and various geometries
with appropriate symmetry will bend that light
to the same place, the focal length of that
particular lens for light coming in perpendicular
to it.
By taking a very large area of incoming light
and concentrating it into a smaller area,
assuming you can keep it even and undistorted,
you can let the eye see things normally too
dim to make out.
This is the very simplest approach but hard
to scale up too much.
That lens needs to be very high quality and
precisely shaped, and you can’t realistically
go making telescopes kilometers across on
a planet.
The early versions were typically only a few
centimeters across.
But it’s worth noting that up in the vast
emptiness of space you can make some pretty
big lenses, potentially a million times wider
than those early ones Galileo used, a megatelescope.
There was quite a variety of designs of those
first telescope of the early 1600s, but they
all used the same basic principle, which we
call a Refracting Telescope.
A refractor uses not one but two lenses, the
objective lens which gathers over its entire
area and focuses it to a point, and the eyepiece
which makes rays of light parallel again.
Of course you also have the tube housing the
lenses, which keeps them a fixed distance
apart and keeps out light coming from other
directions.
And while there’s a lot of variety of lens
types used, this basic design remains quite
common and can be made quite large.
Indeed in 1641, only a generation after the
first ones were developed, Johannes Hevelius
built one with a 46 meter or 150 foot focal
length in Danzig, which was in Poland at the
time, and it’s a good reminder our ancestors
weren’t hesitant to do big projects.
Sadly the observatory was destroyed by a fire
in 1671, though the Kings of both Poland and
France sent him money to continue his work.
Galileo and Kepler rightly get a lot of credit
as fathers of modern astronomy but it is good
to remember there were a lot of other folks
working to advance our knowledge at the time,
and we already skipped a bunch by jumping
to the 1600s.
You don’t absolutely need the tube on a
telescope, at least not for the whole length.
In 1675 Christian and Constantine Huygens
built a tubeless 210 foot aerial telescope,
and bigger ones soon followed with Adrien
Azout proposing one 1000 feet long to observe
animals on the moon.
I always like to point out that intention,
since a lot of folks tend to think erroneously
that life off Earth was some entirely new
idea of strictly modern times.
Now you might think these behemoths let you
see very distant objects indeed, but in truth
they were designed to get around a problem
called chromatic aberration.
Visible light bends when passing from one
medium to another, like from air to glass
or glass to water, but different wavelengths
or colors bend different amounts and split
from each other.
The effect is called dispersion, and it’s
why you get the rainbow effect coming out
of a prism.
You can reduce this problem by building a
long and skinny telescope with lenses of enormous
focal length, hence the behemoths.
Once Isaac Newton explained that chromatic
aberration was caused by dispersion, lensmakers
began figuring how to make achromatic lenses—which
are not quite accurately named because they
reduce the problem, they don’t eliminate
it.
The simplest and still most common achromatic
lens consists of two different kinds of glass
that focus red and blue light to the same
focal length, and the wavelengths in between
are only dispersed somewhat.
The achromatic lens allowed refracting telescopes
to boom once more, and while its invention
saw the end of super long monsters there were
some pretty big ones, both in length and more
importantly in aperture diameter up front.
That culminated with one 49 inches or 1.25
meters wide in 1900, and a slightly smaller
version that is still in service today at
the Yerkes Observatory and helped pioneer
adaptive optics, which we’ll discuss later.
Newton, meanwhile developed his own approach
to solving the chromatic aberration problem,
the reflecting telescope.
Mirrors reflect all wavelengths of light by
the same angle, without dispersion, so reflecting
scopes focus light using a curved mirror rather
than a lens.
The other advantage of reflectors is that
a large mirror is lighter and, for several
reasons, easier to manufacture than a large
lens.
As astronomers built ever larger scopes, the
ubiquitous design was a large parabolic mirror
at the back that gathered and reflected the
light to a flat mirror that reflected it to
an achromatic eyepiece on the side.
This is the favorite of hobbyists even nowadays,
or at least since the 1960s when John Dobson
came up with a particular large, cheap, and
easy to build design which is often referred
to as a Dobsonian Telescope or simply a Light
Bucket.
Another invention of the 1600s was Cassegrain’s
design that also has a mirror at the back,
a parabolic one, but with a hole in it.
That mirror reflects the light coming down
the tube back up to a hyperbolic mirror that
shoots it back down through a hole in the
middle of the rear parabolic mirror and into
an eyepiece.
Remember that parabola though because it will
be important in a minute.
I don’t want to imply that was the end of
major improvements to telescopes, indeed we
could spend several episodes just on the major
ones alone, but those basic designs serve
as a good refresher as we launch into ways
to super-size them.
None of these have actual maximum size limits,
in theory anyway.
If you had ultra stiff materials or were operating
in zero gravity so that your components don’t
deform under their own weight, you can go
ridiculously large.
However gravity can be handy for one trick.
We’ve often discussed creating artificial
gravity by spin and we’ve also mentioned
that you can increase the apparent gravity
on some low-gravity place like the moon by
combining its natural gravity with spin, producing
gravity at an angle rather than down.
If you did this, taking a cylinder and spinning
it around on the moon, then dumped some water
in it, you could watch as that water formed
a parabolic shape at the bottom.
If you used a liquid that was highly reflective,
like mercury, you would have a big parabolic
mirror, which as we mentioned a moment ago
is what forms the back side of a Cassegrain-style
reflecting telescope.
By changing the spin rate of that cylinder
you could alter the steepness of that parabola.
Nothing high tech involved in that, just a
spinning tube with liquid in it, and it’s
also dirt cheap.
There’s one a bit east of Vancouver, the
LZT or Large Zenith Telescope, that is amongst
our largest optical telescopes and only cost
about half a million bucks.
Unfortunately one problem with them is they
can only point straight up, because that mirror
is being made by gravity plus spin and you
can’t change gravity’s direction, hence
the name Zenith Telescope.
Another problem is that of course it needs
gravity to work, so you couldn’t use it
in orbit, but if you put one some place like
the far side of the moon, you could have a
monstrously big telescope that didn’t have
Earth’s atmosphere in the way and blocked
Earth’s reflections, emission, and general
noise.
You could also lower the telescope down into
the moon to protect it when not in use or
if you detected incoming meteors.
Unlike solid-mirror telescopes, a LZT is also
somewhat self-healing, provided you don’t
develop a leak in the container holding the
liquid.
Small dust particles are going to be smoothed
over by the liquid and small pits filled;
so in some ways, it is also more robust than
a standard mirror.
We’ve also talked about O’Neill cylinders
and other rotating habitats a lot on this
channel, which are just monstrous big tubes
when you think about it, and if you built
one into the side of a decently massive asteroid
or moon you could make a telescope like this
many kilometers wide and long.
Indeed you could potentially build pretty
large ones on icy dwarf planets like Pluto
or floating around in the upper atmospheres
of places like Venus.
But we can be tricky and clever.
Just because spinning something creates apparent
gravity in one direction doesn’t mean you
can’t spin it some more.
If you take a spinning tube or bucket and
attach it to a long tether, you can spin it
around on that tether and create a second
spin-gravity force perpendicular to the first,
like gravity was.
Now you can point it any direction you please,
though only briefly as it’s spinning, and
your size is limited by how strong that cable
or cables are.
But you can move it around to any direction
you like.
There’s a couple other geometries for this,
and we could also potentially use magnetics,
rather than gravity, to create that shape.
And since it doesn’t rely on natural gravity
you can put it anywhere, like in orbit, or
way out in deep space.
Speaking of orbiting space telescopes, if
you’re wondering, Hubble is a reflecting
telescope with a 2.4 meter mirror, named for
Edwin Hubble who helped pioneer the notion
of an expanding Universe.
Its big advantage is that being up in space
it doesn’t have to contend with atmospheric
interference.
There are dozens of ground telescope with
larger mirrors, including the Liquid LZT we
just discussed at 6 meters diameter.
The largest single, or monolithic mirror is
the Subaru, Japan’s 8.3 meter leviathan
in Hawaii, that’s held that record for 20
years now.
If you’re curious Subaru is the Japanese
name of the star cluster many of us know as
the Pleiades and also means ‘unite’, folks
tend to ask if the better known car company
sponsored it or assume it’s pronounced differently.
It’s not actually the biggest reflector,
and wasn’t when it was made, just the biggest
with a single mirror.
As I mentioned we have continued improving
telescopes beyond the basic designs from the
16 and 1700s.
There’s 2 terms you’ve probably heard
that are important to discuss.
Adaptive Optics and Active Optics.
Active optics is an alternative approach to
mirrors.
In the past we tended to make them rather
thick to help cut down on deformation of the
mirror from its own weight or wind.
However, we eventually realized we could use
a thin mirror supported by actuators instead,
ones able to push a little here or there under
control of a computer to keep the mirror in
the right shape against sagging, wind, thermal
expansion and so on.
Adaptive optics is an improvement on this,
that allows us to manipulate the mirror quickly
and cause deformations to counter atmospheric
distortion.
The air in the atmosphere is really no different
than glass or water, it bends light too, but
it bends it depending on how dense it is or
how much moisture is present and air turbulence
can make that rapidly change, indeed that’s
what makes the stars twinkle.
Needless to say you need a lot of computers
to do this well so it’s a fairly recent
thing.
We should probably take some time to discuss
astronomy in wavelengths besides the visual
range and interferometry, but we’re going
to mostly bypass that today.
Some things are invisible to normal light
or act differently in other wavelengths, but
the basic physics for the telescope remains
the same.
Unlike mirrors and lenses that everyone is
already very familiar with, and thus easy
to explain how it’s used in astronomy, interferometry
would probably need it’s own video to do
it justice.
Short form: waves can interfere with each
other and two identical but out of phase ones
can cancel out, if they’re not quite identical
you can see the differences when everything
identical has been removed.
For radio astronomy we can use this to take
two antennas and merge their signals to look
at a specific point.
We often see arrays of radio dishes rather
than a single big one, and this comes down
to resolution.
You take a pair of radio dishes separated
from each other, and each still gathers the
same amount of light or radio waves, but the
resolution improves.
This is the key of astronomy, trying to brighten
an object so you can see it by squeezing a
wide cross-section of light down to a small
one, and enhancing resolution so you can make
out details of a distant object so it isn’t
fuzzy or drowned out by noise of other sources
off at different angles.
So one radio dish has less resolution than
two, two has less than three, and so on, especially
if they are spaced apart.
Normally the resolution of a telescope is
controlled by the lens diameter divided by
the wavelength.
That’s fine for an optical telescope because
even a lens half a dozen centimeters across,
like you’d pick up at a store, is a hundred
thousand times larger than the wavelength
being observed.
But radio waves have wavelengths of meters
or even kilometers.
So while a lens as big as your hand allows
potential resolution of visual light of an
arc second, if you wanted the same resolution
for radio waves in the AM radio band, tens
of meters in wavelength rather than hundreds
of nanometers, you’d need a lens a hundred
million times wider.
Or in fact bigger than our planet.
Indeed the AM band is also known as the medium
frequency band, and the extreme low frequency
band has radio waves whose wavelength alone
is already bigger than the planet.
Incidentally that doesn't mean you can't see
anything with a smaller dish, it just wouldn’t
have any resolution, like a computer monitor
showing all the same color, 1p instead of
1080p, you can still tell color or wavelength
and how bright it is.
However if you want any resolution you need
that bigger lens, and we can fake that by
using two dishes that are spread apart but
looking at the same thing, and combining the
signals we receive.
Doesn’t gather much more light, just double,
but does give you that resolution.
Needless to say that recombination is rather
precise and tricky and why two dishes aren’t
just placed on opposite sides of the planet.
But we’ve been getting much better at precision
and calculation as years go by and in this
way we can create a fake giant lens or aperture,
for the purpose of resolution, a synthetic
aperture.
One of the most important innovations over
the past few decades has been use use of interferometry
in astronomy.
This gives us that desired resolution.
Now, it is not only used in traditional radio
telescopes, but also in gravitational wave
detection too.
This is something that we were only recently
able to get right with LIGO, an acronym for
Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory.
I’ll spend a bit of time on this explaining
this technology as it is recent and will probably
tell us a lot more about our universe as sensitivity
and gravitational wave events get detected.
It’s also a good reminder that astronomy
is not only extended to areas of the electromagnetic
spectrum beyond the visible range, but can
also include gravity.
As we’ll see, a LIGO is going to be one
of the first true Megatelescopes in the next
20 years.
We started to detect gravitational waves in
2016 and up until now, we have 6 confirmed
gravitational wave detection events.
The most recent of these was the August 17,
2017 detection of a collision of two neutron
stars, which was neatly simultaneously detected
by optical signals by conventional telescopes.
LIGO makes use of two 4 kilometer vacuum tubes
set at right angles to each other.
Now, 4 kilometers is a much bigger distance
than the diameter of any telescope mirror
that we’ve made, but it doesn’t act in
the same way.
A laser beam is split and reflected off a
mirror at the end of the vacuum tube and detected
again at the source.
The resolution of this telescope is such that
it can detect a distance change between the
two 4 kilometer corridors of less than a ten-thousandth
the charge diameter of a proton.
This is the equivalent of measuring the distance
from Earth to Proxima Centauri with an accuracy
smaller than the width of a human hair, very
impressive!
So how does it get this kind of accuracy?
The answer lies in interferometry.
Light is a wave with peaks and valleys.
The LIGO is designed so that the paths are
tuned so the returned light is exactly inverse
for each path, so if one light beam from the
one tube arrives at the detector as a peak,
the light from the other right angle tube
arrives at the same detector as a valley,
cancelling each other out in destructive interference.
What we read at the detector normally is zero
as the waves perfectly cancel each other out.
This is the magic of an interferometer; it’s
designed to detect something that’s interesting,
otherwise we detect nothing.
If space is warped by a gravitational wave,
one of the vacuum tubes is going to get slightly
longer or shorter and this will cause the
light waves to move out of sync with one another
so destructive interference doesn’t happen
and the detector detects the light.
The more out of sync the waves are, the more
light is detected.
So that’s where our incredible resolution
comes from.
Now, there’s a fair amount of noise in the
system so there are actually two LIGO detectors,
one in Hanford, Washington and the other in
Livingston, Louisiana.
The gravitational wave travels at the speed
of light and the two LIGO observatories are
10 milli light seconds apart, so we can do
some interesting astronomy with these in being
able to tell the direction from where a signal
came from and also eliminate noise by requiring
that a signal be detected by both observatories
before it is a confirmed signal.
Doing gravitational astronomy is challenging
at the moment because the noise levels are
almost at the same levels as the signals being
read; the arms of the LIGO are really very
short for the type of detection they are trying
to do.
If we want to increase the resolution, we
need to increase the arm distances.
True to my heart, the European Space Agency
is going to supersize a LIGO, not on the ground
here on Earth, but in space.
I mentioned that each arm of the current LIGO
observatory is 4 kilometers in length, but
how about supersizing each arm to 2.5 million
kilometers long?
That’s what they’re proposing to launch
in 2034 in a project called LISA, or Laser
Interferometer Space Antenna, which should
give us much better resolution.
Radio telescope arrays also use interferometry
to cancel out signals that are the same and
can get better resolution as a result too.
In much the same way as LIGO, the idea is
to detect waves that are actually different
and travelling so one telescope picks it up
and then another, some milliseconds later.
Anyway, back to optical telescopes.
An arc minute is a sixtieth of a degree and
an arc-second is a sixtieth of an arc-minute,
and there are 1,296,000 of them in a circle.
The human eye is rather high resolution but
we top out at about an arcminute, not an arc
second.
Any star see from Earth is much less wide
than an arcsecond, again you can see it but
only as a single pixel dot of various brightness,
not including twinkle caused by atmospheric
turbulence.
The sun is about 2000 arc seconds and still
appears as blob but that’s simply due to
sheer brightness, the moon has the same angular
width and you can make out some features with
the naked eye.
If we had an Earth-like exoplanet 10 light
years away, one about 13,000 kilometers in
diameter and a distance of 95 trillion kilometers,
it has an angular diameter of just 28 microarcseconds.
So if you wanted a picture of just 28x28 pixels,
one microarcsecond each, able to see blue
and green light enough to make out the existence
of continents and oceans, where each pixel
is 500 kilometers across, you would need a
telescope lens over a hundred kilometers across,
if you wanted to bump that up to a 1080p image,
that lens needs to be the size of a continent,
and that scales up linear to distance, put
it 100 light years away instead of 10 and
you need a lens 10 times bigger.
That’s why I often mention planet-sized
telescopes.
If you want to be able to watch a planet in
another solar systems at nice resolutions,
with a single lens telescope, that’s the
scale you need to be considering.
Needless to say it’s a lot easier to look
at one dot of distant star and see it dim
slightly every 365 days, and infer from that
dimming that some planet passes between us
and it every year, blocking some light, then
figure out its size by how much it blocked
and how long it blocked that much at the distance
a 365 day orbit requires.
Also, needless to say that’s why it's handy
to be able to enhance resolution by spreading
out two telescopes and merging their imaging,
you don’t get much light this way either
which can be fixed in part by long exposure
times.
And we have somewhat parallel examples like
the large binocular telescope and a lot of
the newer telescopes, starting with Keck,
which began using mirror segments in honeycombs
rather than a single large mirror, this being
cheaper and easier to control.
Taken to an extreme, NASA’s been playing
around with taking clouds of glitter, million
of little flecks, and manipulate them to an
overall shape with lasers.
We looked at liquid mirrors earlier and these
are more like a vapor or fog.
It’s also been suggested that a spherical
arrangement of optical telescopes in space,
with their position known down to an accuracy
smaller than the wavelength of light they’re
observing, which is hundreds of nanometers
rather than hundreds of meters like with radio
telescope, could permit something dubbed a
‘Hyper Telescope”, which could potentially
directly image features on exoplanets.
Now, all the things we’ve discussed so far
could be scaled up a lot in deep space, far
from any gravity perturbations or other potential
problems.
What’s more you can do some pretty precise
manufacturing without all the gravity, air,
vibrations, and so on that we have to deal
with down here.
Telescopes could hypothetically be built of
planetary proportions.
We also want to keep in mind that while surface
area, or aperture size, controls how much
light you collect, it’s really the distance
between elements that helps with resolution
and even noise cancellation.
Many telescopes spread far apart looking at
the same thing from different angles can have
their data put together and analyzed to produce
a very accurate picture.
Telescopes bigger than planets are potentially
possible in the distant future but so is spreading
them out over interplanetary or even interstellar
distances.
Such distances also allow unprecedented parallax
for calculating distances with high precision.
There’s really not much limit how big you
can go, with two obvious caveats.
First you need a lot of computer power and
second you obviously can only go so big before
it will collapse under its own weight.
On that computer power front though, it is
worth remembering that the whole point of
a telescope is to take a wide area of light
and crunch it down to a small size that’s
now bright enough for our eye to see, and
retains its original pattern with little distortion.
But hypothetically you could just have a big
sheet of tiny light sensitive cells instead
of a mirror, each reporting what hit it and
letting a computer do the work, fundamentally
not really any different than the aperture
synthesis done with many telescopes, only
scaled way up in number and down in size.
Or potentially also up size.
In the end all that really matters is how
many photons you can catch and if you can
know what angle they came in from.
Needless to say a lot of the options we discussed
a month back in Advanced Metamaterials might
help with this a lot.
Including options like a superlens able to
pass the diffraction limit.
One can easily imagine whole arrays of planet
sized telescopes sheathed in metamaterials
with a planet sized computer running them
which allow you to potentially look at distant
worlds in very high resolution.
The flip side of the interstellar beacons
we discussed a couple weeks back, that let
you transmit messages civilizations could
pick up on the other side of the galaxy, telescopes
that could pick up normal transmissions that
far away.
Now you do have a mass limit to building these
things, under which they’d collapse under
their own weight, and that raises another
example.
You’ve probably heard of gravitational lensing
and a black hole is particularly good at this.
We’ve talked about making artificial black
holes before and one could potentially make
one large and clear its area of any mass that
might cause interference falling in and radiating
as it goes.
We’ve even talked about living around these
things.
Interestingly with gravitational lensing like
this, you don’t have a focus point but a
focus line.
Now that’s maybe not as handy as it sounds,
because diameter is the important thing and
a galaxy for instance produces far more lensing
than a black hole and is far larger.
But thinking of exotic materials for telescopes,
it’s also worth noting that dark matter,
which is far more plentiful than the normal
kind, also doesn’t interact with anything
other than gravity so in a really high tech
civilization you could potentially use it
for making a lens that operated by bending
spacetime, rather than bending light.
Not likely to be practical any time soon,
or maybe ever, but same as we could get away
with tubeless telescopes in the old aerial
telescopes or do away with a lens for a mirror
or multiple mirrors, or even do away with
all of those in favor of light sensitive cells
and a lot of computers, we don’t want to
get rigidly bound to any conventional notion
of a telescope.
Don’t rule out scenarios down the line like
a billion worlds with many telescopes all
feeding their data into a giant Matrioshka
Brain, a computer powered by a whole star,
and pumping out a ridiculously accurate, high
resolution map of space.
Don’t rule out learning to manipulate spacetime
to form a lens made of nothing but warped
spacetime.
We might have problems even detecting something
the size of an entire planet in neighboring
solar systems these days, but one day we might
be able to image those as well as our satellites
can image Earth now.
I think we’ll close out here.
We did have to touch on more math than I usually
like to put in an episode for discussion but
much of it was supplementary, so you could
see how we derived these values rather than
me just saying them.
We also skipped all sorts of tricks we’ve
learned over the last few centuries both in
terms of the technical side of making telescopes
and squeezing more data out of them and using
that to paint a picture of the galaxy and
what its made up of.
Telescopes just let us gather data, figuring
out what it means is a whole different story.
If you’d like to learn more about that I’d
suggest the Astronomy Course at Brilliant.org,
that course walks through practical exercises
on everything from the Atomic Spectra we used
to determine what stars were made of and derived
their energy from to the exoplanets orbiting
them and how we detect them.
It offers a very hands-on active learning
approach and will introduce you to many of
the terms and concepts we see in astronomy
that are often left fairly vague in a of lot
articles and discussions of these topics.
“Effective learning is active” - That’s
one of their 8 principles of learning.
Another of their principles that I strongly
agree with is “Effective learning sparks
questions”.
I not only answer a lot of questions here,
but also encourage folks to think of whole
new ones that follow from the material and
I try to give you some of the tools to find
answers on your own too.
Brilliant’s a great place to expand your
toolbox, both to help you answer many of the
questions you have and help you know what
to ask.
So if you’d like improve your understanding
of math and science, and help support the
channel while you’re at it, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription.
Okay next week we’ll be continuing our look
at futuristic conflicts we began with space
warfare and looking more at the planetary
side of things in Planetary Invasions, and
reviewing our Book of the Month, Robert Heinlein’s
Starship Troopers.
The week after that it’s back to Post Scarcity
Civilizations for a look not just at Virtual
Reality but how people living in such civilizations
might have their basic perception of reality
altered.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
