Einstein once said that “Reality is merely 
an illusion, albeit a very persistent one”  
and if that’s the case, can we alter 
this reality or access a greater one?
I sometimes think of reality as 
a mysterious tapestry woven from  
threads of existence and dreams, that dances 
along the precipice of perception and truth,  
a riddle whispered by the cosmos. Or perhaps a 
shimmering mirage in the desert of our senses,  
our oasis in a greater realm of chaos and madness. 
A realm where the tangible meets the intangible.  
The apparent reality around us is a jigsaw puzzle 
to be solved, a breathtaking mosaic of wonder,  
inviting us to explore the secrets hidden 
beneath the surface of the everyday. 
Which is probably poetic but not very 
scientific, and as a physicist my job  
is fundamentally to help us find out about 
our Universe and how it works, what reality  
truly is and how that extends beyond our normal 
human experience. Long before I was ever born,  
greater minds than mine had already helped us 
realize that the tiniest objects we could see  
were in truth huge landscapes of breathtaking 
complexity and detail, from the cell down to the  
molecule, atom, nucleus or quark, and perhaps even 
beneath that. And we saw above that human scale,  
that our world was but a pale blue dot in our own 
solar system and that but a dot in our galaxy. 
In living memory though we saw that the grand 
cosmos all around us, while ancient and huge, was  
not infinite. The Observable Universe is thought 
to be a million times older than our civilization,  
which itself is breathtaking in scope and history, 
and stretches out in a sphere around us 93 billion  
light years across, a million times wider than 
our own galaxy, a trillion times its mass, and  
a quintillion times its size. We believe it goes 
on for further than that, and possibly forever,  
but we also wonder where this universe came from 
and if it might have cousins, and if our history  
may have a near infinite number of alternate 
timelines, the Multiverse that’s often spoken of. 
This growing knowledge has not only told us more 
about reality, but helped us to manipulate it,  
albeit in very mundane ways, at least, in ways 
that seem mundane to us now. This is our topic  
for today: how we might manipulate reality 
and how various theories about our reality,  
if true, might allow that or prevent that. That 
reality might just be someone else’s opinion,  
or subconscious collective consensus, and 
one we could learn to disagree with. But  
I feel we should begin by recognizing that we can 
manipulate this reality already. If I open a door,  
using my free will, to a room beyond, I allow 
things to flow through from there to here and  
vice-versa. Some might argue that I have 
no free will and I’m merely following a  
predetermined and mechanistic script that moves 
bits around this playing board and that may be so. 
Perhaps I do have free will and in a way that 
overrides local reality, mind over matter as it  
were, and which may come from some higher reality 
as many believe. Or perhaps we can open a door to  
a different reality and then what flows through 
from there to here manipulates this reality.  
Were this so, these may or may not be part of 
some greater but still deterministic reality,  
much as we believed to be true in the late 19th 
century, pre-quantum, when we were beginning  
to document the sheer scope of the Universe 
and the consensus was it was surely infinite. 
I sometimes find it ironic that as we learned 
to see far further away and deeper down with  
better telescopes and microscopes we began 
seeing barriers where we expected infinity,  
edges to space and time and fundamental building 
blocks who seem to have no divisible components. 
To discuss reality manipulation, we must 
first discuss what reality truly means,  
because that sets our stage. If we limit ourselves 
to the clearly and classically physical, we can  
imagine altering time, altering physical constants 
like the speed of light or inertia of an object,  
altering particle lifetimes and possibly making 
new ones. Hardly minor abilities but they are  
just the tip of the iceberg for contemplation, as 
we looked at in our episode Warping Reality last  
year. What we didn’t look at there was what 
reality is, at a deep and fundamental level. 
And this is in part because we 
don’t know, but we have some ideas,  
and that begins with the concepts of Objective 
Reality, Subjective Reality, Consensus Reality,  
and Virtual Reality. Let’s summarize each briefly:
Objective Reality is the perspective which asserts  
that there is an external, objective reality that 
exists independently of human consciousness. This  
is the default perspective of science, though 
traditionally as a matter of pragmatism rather  
than claiming it is proven. It tends to be 
our default perspective in our discussion  
here as well but we do need to be mindful it 
is not proven and honestly is not provable,  
and thus should not be our sole perspective, 
particularly when trying to figure out how  
reality works and how it might be changeable.
But in this view, reality is the same for  
everyone, and it exists whether or not we perceive 
it. So, if I determine Mars is 142 million miles  
from the Sun, then you would determine that 
same thing, at least if we both did it properly.  
Similarly if I measure a particle’s position 
and momentum, you would measure the same thing,  
because it is what really is, and we’re 
just measuring reality, not affecting it. 
Scientific inquiry often operates on 
the assumption of objective reality,  
seeking to understand the world as it exists 
outside of subjective experiences. By now many  
of you probably caught the problems there though, 
because the core concept of special and general  
relativity is that the distance to an object 
truly is dependent on how fast you are moving  
relative to it or what gravitational field you 
are in, and because position and momentum are  
linked and hazy concepts under quantum mechanics 
and the uncertainty principle. A first principle  
of which is that measurement not only alters the 
state of something, but can move it not just from  
unknown to known but from being undetermined 
to determined. We believe that particle was  
not at a specific position until we forced 
it to be by measuring or interacting with it. 
Which takes us to Subjective Reality. This is 
the metaphysical perspective that argues that  
reality is shaped, or even created, by 
individual perception and consciousness.  
According to this view, different people may 
experience or interpret reality in unique ways,  
and there may not be a single, objective reality. 
Indeed, there are some cosmological theories that  
this would be entirely compatible with. For 
instance, multiverses theories around alternate  
timelines branching from each possible future are 
not necessarily limited to many different possible  
futures leading from a given moment, but also 
many possible pasts leading up to that moment. 
Imagine for the moment that your reality is 
of this type. Your consciousness is a real and  
unique thing separate from the specific universe 
you and I happen to occupy at this moment. There  
are a near infinite number of possible pasts and 
future states that could have led to the current  
moment we occupy and your consciousness basically 
moved along one path, and you might be able to  
pick which way you were going, or even which way 
you came from, and alter reality in this way. 
Or alternatively, we could simply assume that 
your mind genuinely does control your reality.  
This need not necessarily imply anything heavy 
on the mystical or solipsistic either. We might  
be in a simulation with cheat codes we could 
find, or which uses a lot of compression and  
is subject to influence by us. You might be a 
paying customer of a virtual reality enjoying  
a seemingly natural existence but one you helped 
program and which responds to your subconscious  
commands though not in a directly obvious fashion. 
You paid for a challenging but normal life and  
whenever things get settled they throw a curveball 
at you. If they don’t, then you might write them  
a bad review or sue them when you wake up.
Or you could be some dreaming mind and this  
is your dream, or you flip between realities in 
those dreams, or any number of other scenarios  
folks suggested in a time before computers and 
brain scans. And those might be a reaction to  
make the dream seem more believable, we’ve 
found whole new lower layers of reality,  
dreamed them up, to convince ourselves this world 
is real and natural. And you can then manipulate  
reality through some parallel to lucid dreaming.
It is important to remember that folks have  
asked if this is all a dream or illusion for many 
centuries and we never in anyway disproved that,  
our reasoning is generally that you can’t prove 
or disprove it in any way, but that there’s no  
obvious advantage to assuming that our reality 
isn’t real. Same as with believing in free will  
or not, whether reality is genuine or you have 
free will seemingly can’t be proved or disproved  
so you may as well ask what the downsides are to 
believing you have free will and this is all real  
if it turns out one or both is wrong. Nonetheless 
isn’t doesn’t make it true, and it is worth noting  
that if this reality is fake, whether your own 
hallucination or a deception by someone else,  
the setup is likely designed to encourage 
you to not waste time contemplating those  
questions too much or too seriously. And it 
throws a warning in there that learning how to  
manipulate reality might open that Pandora’s Box.
The ability to manipulate reality might seem to  
imply there was a higher reality of which were 
but a subset or shadow. Indeed, this is what  
they are called in Roger Zelazny’s classic Amber 
series, which features a family who come from a  
realm of which every other world, including our 
own, is but a reflection or shadow and they can  
walk between these places to any reality they 
desire. The main protagonist of that series,  
Corwin of Amber, spends a lot of time waxing 
philosophically about if they’re going to the  
places or making them and what that says about 
ethics of interacting with those people. Great  
series incidentally, written in the 1970s, and 
one of the strongest influences on this channel,  
which sadly hasn’t stayed as popular in recent 
decades as some other classics, the latter half  
of the series written in the 1980s explore this 
in a computer and virtual reality context and  
is a good analogy for the concept. Indeed one 
of the first and best scifi discussions of it. 
Virtual Reality, if detailed enough, could be 
thought of as a reality, and yet is subject to  
change from this higher reality, and there’s no 
reason this higher and lower layers of reality  
concept need to involve computers specifically. 
The line between the conventional natural and  
the supernatural gets rather hazy and 
arbitrary when we cannot assume physics  
and basic operating principles are the same 
there, in a higher reality. I generally take  
the standpoint that when discussing various 
layers of reality, computer simulation or not,  
that the term ‘real’ is honestly not very helpful.
We have a long history of assuming we are this  
or that divine being’s creation or dream and 
that they exist in some other, greater realm,  
and we don’t usually bother saying that 
this reality is therefore fake as a result,  
so again I don’t think treating virtual reality 
as a fake reality is very helpful, since it's  
really more about quality and breadth of the 
simulation than whether it’s happening on the  
substrate of computer chips, neurons, or whatever 
demiurges use for an analogy to brain matter. 
While contemplation of this topic can often 
get decidedly metaphysical and even mystical,  
we definitely see it get explored more in the New 
Wave era of Science Fiction in the 1960s and 70s,  
which is when we see books like the Chronicles 
of Amber or Samuel Delany’s classic Dhalgren,  
and writers like J.G. Ballard, Michael Moorcock, 
Philip K. Dick, and Frank Herbert’s Dune all tend  
to be far more metaphysical and often sacrificed 
classic physical science in sci fi for more  
mind-bending and reality-warping plots. These 
tend to be heavier on prose and flavored with a  
lot of postmodernism, which often correlates to 
Subjective Reality. Also compared to golden age  
space opera, they are frequently grimmer and 
involve anti-heroes, trope deconstructions,  
and often very Kafkaesque settings.
I should also note that in between  
Objective Reality and Subjective Reality we also 
have Consensus Reality. The idea that reality  
is often shaped by consensus within a particular 
group or society. What is considered real or true  
can be influenced by shared beliefs, values, and 
cultural norms. Consensus reality can vary from  
one culture or community to another. A variation 
of this, to use virtual reality as an example,  
would be a world in which the rules 
and events were not one single person’s  
dream but everyone else’s combined version.
You’re on an interstellar ark ship to a distant  
star and a large portion of the colonists have 
opted to be in a dream-like virtual reality state,  
which they share to maximize resources and being 
maintained by some agreed upon parameters and a  
constant subconscious polling about how 
things should be occurring. Thus you’re  
not really noticing how much reality changes 
according to your wishes because it’s a big  
group brain decision limited by some common 
sense parameters built into to keep folks  
from dreaming up crazy world-ending scenarios.
This isn’t an episode on virtual reality and we’re  
mostly using it as a familar vehicle to explain 
concepts but pre-computers it was a pretty common  
thread in the 20th century to suggest we were 
all a little bit telepathic and part of some  
planetary consciousness that controlled events. 
This could easily be how things worked out though  
if you did have folks who could manipulate 
reality as they might share a world that  
was operating on a consensus of what was real.
Needless to say, it helps to know how reality  
works if you want to manipulate it and if you do 
live in some subjective reality then we might as  
well be talking about magic as much as technology 
as it’s more of a personal technique thing. We  
are going to take the stance for the rest of the 
episode that Objective Reality is the correct one,  
unsurprising I’d imagine since this is 
a science channel, but I wanted to make  
sure we covered those others too and 
to acknowledge that the metaphysical  
reality in which we exist is not something 
we actually understand or are certain of. 
And it needs to be part of our discussion 
because when we just think of warping reality  
in a strictly physical way, we are ignoring 
possible solutions. You want a faster ship,  
you give it a more powerful engine, or you make 
one that pulls energy from nowhere. Or maybe you  
shrink space between point A and B, or maybe you 
just circumvent the need for the ship. You don’t  
need to ship colonists to a new world or bring 
metal back from a distant asteroid mine because  
you simply make your planet larger or rewrite 
the rules so things aren’t used up. Think of  
a virtual location, some fantasy game planet 
from a RPG, and how we would add size to that,  
and we don’t need to mine any other place 
to do it or even follow Euclidean geometry.  
The new maps don’t have to match borders.
It’s not simply a way to casually break the  
rule for a moment like a cheat code, but to 
rewrite the entire game. To forge things we  
could normally only imagine, the sort of strange 
structures we only see in the drawings of M.C.  
Escher or worlds only imagined in fever dreams.
You can do that in a virtual reality, of course,  
your steam engine just keeps running on fumes 
even after you’ve shut off the water and fuel  
because it was told to, but a consequence of doing 
too much of that might be reality breaking down.  
You have a decanter of endless water that 
keeps pouring water on your garden pulled  
from nowhere at all and everybody uses them 
and the planet slowly floods. That’s a fairly  
simplistic example but illustrates the point, the 
changes to reality would presumably tend to have  
consequences, like any other action, but they 
might start stacking or getting contradictory. 
Especially when we start contemplating Ontological 
Weapons, those which don’t simply remove you from  
the universe but attack your existence itself. 
Examples might be a weapon that didn’t just kill  
you but killed you backward in time, deleting your 
actions for the last hour, or day, or year. If you  
imagine many people using that, you could have 
someone killed who was resurrected because you  
blasted their murderer out of existence with 
that weapon. In the Wheel of Time book series,  
which is one of my favorites, they have 
something called balefire that does exactly that,  
and they have a war it gets used in by both sides 
who stop using it because reality is starting to  
fall apart. Later, the side that is crazy-evil 
starts using it again with that destruction of  
the current reality specifically in mind.
An ontological weapon is not necessarily  
related to time travel, retro-causality, or 
para-causality, but technologies involving  
reality manipulation of either space or time would 
tend to inherently do either. And determining what  
came first or is above or below a given layer of 
reality is not necessarily the same as implying  
one can control or dominate the other. We could 
imagine a technology invented in a few centuries  
for making pocket universes and where you could 
have topology where you had a pocket dimension  
only accessible from certain real-space gates 
at certain places or times or both. This is a  
reality which is spawned from our existing one 
and yet which is way more likely to be the place  
you built your capital at, and seems implied 
at times to be the situation with Galifrey,  
the capital of the time lords of Doctor 
Who, though the canon on that show is even  
more scrambled than the timelines of a show 
with casual time travel would normally have. 
Another example and maybe and inspiration for 
that is in Isaac Asimov’s classic novel the  
End of Eternity, we have the Eternals, 
a group of humans who live in a pocket  
space that stretches between the moment 
of its invention to the Death of the Sun,  
and which is itself immune to the time changes 
they routinely enact on the Universe outside,  
which would imply it was dominant reality, and yet 
someone is able to build a device that goes back  
in time in the normal universe before the creation 
of the place and causes it never to be made. 
It’s not clear from the book why this is possible 
and of course it’s a piece of fiction but I think  
it stresses again the idea that if you’re 
playing with reality it tends to imply you  
can tinker with some substrate it rests upon. 
I can rewrite a page of a book and those in  
it can do nothing to stop me. Though in our 
episode Hacking the Simulation we did discuss  
ways you might be able to alter that more 
foundational layer of reality from inside it,  
in this case that a mind inside a simulation 
might be able to affect the outside real world.  
And in the book's case, perhaps a moving passage 
appealing to the writer to give the protagonist  
a happy ending or abandon writing anymore.
What do we truly know about our own reality,  
even assuming an Objective Reality? If this is 
the one true reality, not some shadow or lower  
level or just one more chunk of the multiverse, 
it does beg the question of where the initial  
energy of the Universe came from, and that’s 
a common one and we have no answer but you may  
have heard references to quantum fluctuations 
somehow giving rise to the whole Universe. And  
while I’ver heard folks then say “This is how 
the Universe could have arisen from nothing”  
that’s not what’s being implied there.
If you saw our episode on Zero Point  
Energy & Vacuum Energy a couple months back you 
know that momentum and position are linked under  
the uncertainty principle, and under a certain 
threshold, the more certainly we know its position  
or momentum, or speed, the less we know the 
other. And again, that’s in the context of it  
being unknown because it truly isn’t determined, 
we’ve made something’s speed or momentum less real  
by insisting on knowing its position with greater 
accuracy, or by making its position more real. 
Indeed, if you saw that episode you probably 
recall me referring to our scale and the atomic  
scale and the quantum one below as various 
levels of reality and that wasn’t intended  
as poetic license, I tend to feel that’s a very 
appropriate way to view the situation of massively  
changing scales and emergent systems, as they 
are essentially the substrate the next layer  
up is built upon and from which it’s rule 
derive, every bit as much as how a virtual  
reality on the substrate of a computer works and 
indeed the biology of your own neurons and their  
connectivity and whatever our consciousness is.
That quantum uncertainty is a very weird, real,  
and counterintuitive aspect of reality compared 
to our own and it does leave the door open to  
something seemingly insane like our whole universe 
being a quantum fluctuation. In this universe,  
energy and time have the exact same relationship 
momentum and position do, the better we know the  
one, the less well we know the other. We have a 
layer underneath us, the quantum foam, from which  
material can pop into existence for the briefest 
moment, and the bigger or more energetic it is,  
the shorter that moment of existence. That 
sounds surreal but it is a more fundamental  
reality than this one, that’s built upon it, and 
the existence of these quantum fluctuations is  
about as proven as something can be at this point.
Now anything as energetic as our universe would  
seem then to be able to last only the most 
insanely tiny piece of time, indeed less that  
a Planck time, as such a fluctuation would seem 
to imply about 10^70 Joules of energy and thus  
under the Uncertainty Principle something on an 
order of 10^-114 seconds of duration, which is  
even smaller to a Planck time than a Planck 
Time is compared to the age of the Universe. 
Indeed, this would be even worse as I left out 
dark energy in there and we also assume the  
actual Universe extends well beyond the Observable 
portion. And we obviously have lasted longer than  
that ridiculously tiny time interval I just 
mentioned, but the specific quantum foam we  
refer to is generally assumed to be part of 
this universe and Planck’s constant is quite  
probably specific to our Universe, so their 
local values don’t necessarily matter. They  
are just the physical evidence that something like 
that could happen under the right circumstances. 
You can also make the argument that the Universe 
has net-zero energy, that all the positive energy  
of mass and spacetime is balanced out by the 
negative energy of gravity but I think that  
works better in an assumption that there is an 
underlying reality that we are resting on that  
the big bang is a fluctuation out of, rather 
than the implication we had a huge fluctuation  
from an actual genuine nothingness itself. 
Which might be the case and is the subject  
of some energetic debate inside physics for a long 
while now, but without much evidence to back any  
viewpoint. What can be agreed is that quantum 
fluctuations in this Universe can spawn things  
for a brief moment of time, shorter the more 
energetic, and based off a physical constant,  
Planck’s constant, whose value might be 
different in other times and places, as it were. 
And that’s a good place to wrap up because 
physical constants like that probably have  
their value for some reason but that reason 
could be luck of the draw and might be subject  
to manipulation here too. It has been 
suggested the speed of light might have  
changed over time in this universe, not just 
that it might be different in other Universes. 
If you can alter the speed of light you can travel 
impossibly quick between places, if you can alter  
the gravitational constant or the Hubble constant 
you might be able to build impossible large  
megastructures, slow Hubble expansion, or unravel 
black holes themselves. But if you could alter  
Planck’s Constant, you might be able to create 
new Universes on the spot... or maybe destroy one. 
And if that doesn’t count as reality 
manipulation, I don’t know what would.
One of the things I love about the holiday season 
every year is that it tends to bring out people’s  
kind and generous side, and I’ve rarely regretted 
giving a gift or donation but sometimes found out  
that donation wasn’t well used. There are over 
1.5 million nonprofit organizations in the United  
States, and millions more around the world. How 
do you know which ones can make the biggest impact  
with your donation? GiveWell was founded to help 
donors with that exact question. They pour over  
independent studies and charity data to help 
donors direct their funds to evidence-backed  
organizations that are saving and improving lives.
GiveWell wants as many donors as possible to  
make informed decisions about high-impact 
giving. You can find all of their research  
and recommendations on their site FOR FREE. 
You can make tax-deductible donations to  
their recommended funds or charities and 
GiveWell doesn’t take a cut. GiveWell has  
now spent over 15 years researching charitable 
organizations and only directs funding to a few  
of the HIGHEST-IMPACT opportunities they’ve found.
Over 100,000 donors have used GiveWell to donate  
more than ONE BILLION DOLLARS. Rigorous 
evidence suggests that these donations  
will save over ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND 
lives AND improve the lives of MILLIONS more. 
If you’ve never donated to GiveWell’s recommended 
charities before, you can have your donation  
matched up to ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS before the 
end of the year or as long as matching funds  
last. To claim your match, go to GIVEWELL DOT 
ORG and pick YOUTUBE and enter Isaac Arthur at  
checkout. Make sure they know that you heard about 
GiveWell from Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur  
to get your donation matched. Again, that’s 
GIVEWELL DOT ORG to donate or find out more. 
So that’s it for today but next week we’ll 
look at discussing Silicon based lifeforms on  
December 21st, followed by a bonus episode for 
the holidays where we’ll ask if we truly will  
colonize space. Then we will finish the month 
and year with clearing space debris on the 28th  
and our final Livestream Q&A on Sunday, 
December 31st. And then we’ll move into  
our tenth year here on SFIA with a return to the 
Fermi PAradox and a look at Pancosmorio Theory,  
and the idea that colonizing other planets 
around distant stars may simply be ecologically  
unfeasible. Then we’ll have a bonus episode on 
atypical satellites like the Statite, Lagite,  
and Quasite on Sunday January 7th.
Make sure to hit the like, subscribe,  
and notification buttons to get notified about 
those upcoming episodes. You can also help support  
the show on Patreon, and if you want to donate and 
help in other ways, you can see those options by  
visiting our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can 
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and ad  
free on our streaming service, Nebula, along with 
hours of bonus content, like this month’s Neula  
Exclusive Episode, the Hermit Shoplifter 
Hypothesis at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
