Until recently a planet-wide state of 
quarantine seemed almost unimaginable,  
but in the future could entire planets 
be quarantined from the rest of space,  
and what dreadful causes could 
necessitate such measures?
Welcome back to SFIA for another Sci Fi Sunday, 
where we examine concepts we see in science  
fiction and try to bring some science and realism 
to them. Today our target is Quarantine Worlds, if  
they’d exist and why, how you might enforce such 
quarantines, and what life on one might be like. 
That first question would seem the easiest to 
answer since we are talking about an entire  
inhabited planet, and our only example of that 
is Earth itself, which may not be quarantined  
but on which we can’t exactly escape from yet. 
As we’ll see though, especially when we start  
considering planets under development, or 
inhabited moons or major space habitats,  
that changes quite a lot. And as we contemplated 
in our recent episode on Pancosmorio Theory,  
many planets might be terribly vulnerable 
to being cut off from outside civilization. 
Quarantine Hypothesis is the concept in discussion 
of the Fermi Paradox that Earth might be in a  
Quarantine itself, and it raises the question of 
what sort of motivation of quarantine you have. Of  
course some sort of pandemic is the most obvious 
motivation that comes to mind, to keep the plague  
from spreading, but this could be knowledge of 
the quarantine you wished to prevent spread of,  
so that those under the quarantine didn’t know of 
it, or potentially your own civilization either. 
If we’re under quarantine, we wouldn’t know it, 
and this has overtones of the Star Trek Prime  
Directive of not interfering with primitive 
cultures. So too, if you are quarantining a  
planet with primitive life, say, one composed 
of sentient crystals, you might feel the need  
to keep that secret from your own citizens, so 
they didn’t start showing up to harvest them and  
disrupt that ecology. Something we’ll discuss 
more in next Month’s episode Crystal Aliens. 
A galactic empire also might quarantine 
a planet that had disturbing ideas,  
like freedom and democracy, which has 
been the plot of a story or two. Indeed,  
even ignoring incredibly unethical reasons, we 
might have to contain a planet in which some  
terrifying meme had arisen that drove people to 
crazy behaviors or on which some techno-organic  
virus or nanomachines had gotten loose.
It is even possible that the quarantine is  
not some armada up in orbit but some 
higher-tech-scenario, like placing  
civilizations into pocket Universes or simulation 
civilizations. They may not view it as a big deal  
to stick you in the matrix while your body is 
in suspension, or stick your brain in a jar, or  
even scan someone’s brain, vaporize the body, and 
transfer their uploaded mind into a simulation. 
Indeed, they may not have quarantined that 
whole planet, it might be that just a few  
thousand people from it are being quarantined in 
a simulation and most of the folks they meet are  
simulations, impressive equivalents of NPCs 
and ChatGPT. It may be that the method of  
imprisoning or reforming people would be this 
sort of simulated quarantine and raises the  
other point of who is doing the monitoring. 
It’s a very different thing to monitor for  
blatant transmission or spacecraft compared to 
checking if people have stopped suffering from  
whatever malady of mind or body or ethics they 
had that caused the quarantine. For that matter,  
especially if you’re trying to quarantine an 
idea, just running radar to watch for fleeing  
spacecraft isn’t too effective.
Considering the duration of some types  
of quarantine, like keeping a primitive species 
from being contacted by your own civilization,  
you might want to consider dedicated and 
monomaniacal Artificial Intelligence Machine  
Monitors for the job too. After all, if you 
found some primitive humans playing with fire,  
which we think we discovered over a million 
years ago, that is a pretty long wait. 
There’s quite a cost to maintaining a 
fleet there the entire time too. Also,  
we should ask if it is plausible someone might 
maintain a quarantine for that long. Can you  
imagine your nation’s policies on almost any given 
topic, especially one that needed a big budget,  
lasting unchanged even a century, let alone 10,000 
centuries or more? And what does your fleet do if  
another fleet from home arrives a couple centuries 
later saying policy has changed and you’re going  
to colonize that planet now, screw the population 
below? Or what would your home world do if that  
guardian fleet decided they wanted to settle 
that solar system, either the planet itself  
or some of the barren rocks nearby, and you 
said yes and a few thousand-years later that  
local population on those terraformed planets or 
constructed space habitats says they don’t want  
to be part of your federation or empire anymore.
Nor can we seriously contemplate a single ship or  
weak force left behind. For any quarantine to 
be effective it needs to be able to repel any  
attempt coming in, mindful that in the absence of 
FTL it may be decades before any reinforcements  
could arrive. FTL might change that situation if 
it is somehow possible, but also exacerbates it  
by making it much easier and faster to reach. 
Limited to sub-light, a primitive alien planet  
might have monitors way out in the Oort cloud 
with months or even years to spot and handle  
a threat, not just be in orbit of that planet.
In Arthur C. Clarke’s second Space Odyssey novel,  
2010 the sequel to 2001, the unknown monolith 
building aliens turn Jupiter into a second sun and  
famously say in ALL CAPS, in regard to Jupiter’s 
various moons, “ALL THESE WORLDS ARE YOURS,  
EXCEPT EUROPA. ATTEMPT NO LANDING THERE. USE THEM 
TOGETHER. USE THEM IN PEACE.” And they are shown  
to have seemingly impossible technologies, 
indeed what we often call Clarketech on this  
channel as a hat-tip to Clarke and his comment 
about any sufficiently advanced technology being  
indistinguishable from magic. So, they might 
have impressive options for rapid detection  
and counteraction available. Indeed, they 
might have something weird like time travel  
available to repeal any interference. We could, 
on that note, contemplate quarantining dangerous  
timelines too or parallel universes, and that 
is a plotline of the Loki Television series. 
But I would not count on us being able to 
enforce a quarantine indefinitely with a big  
ominous monolith and a couple commandments carved 
into them or a beacon transmitting them. Indeed,  
in the book series humanity repeatedly ignores 
that warning and attempts landings on Europa,  
they just keep failing. I should note that calling 
the bluff of a more advanced civilization is a  
risky thing to do, especially as it might not be a 
bluff, just slow to respond and with devastatingly  
lethal force, but if you tell folks not to 
try to land and the only result is the probe  
is destroyed, you’re just guaranteeing more get 
sent. Indeed, the primitive Europans we find out  
are living there, under monolith protection, have 
some debris from crashed probes and venerate it. 
On the flip side of that, normally a quarantine 
is about containing a danger under quarantine,  
not protecting those inside from infection. So, 
for instance those Europans might be a threat to  
you if they got out into space, potentially in 
an abstract way of being smarter or faster to  
breed or better at handling new environments 
like space. You might even say you’re trying  
to protect them from you, but in reality, 
at least part of your motivations, even if  
subconscious might be a fear of competition.
Orson Scott Card contemplates this point in  
his classic novel Speaker for the Dead, and it’s 
a fairly strong rebuttal of the classic Star Trek  
Prime Directive. Here they didn’t do much heavy 
quarantine, the people on the planet were a small  
town at a single location when they encountered 
the intelligent aliens and they just stuck up a  
high-tech wall around their encampment and limited 
interaction. They are already confident their  
presence doesn’t represent a microbial doomsday 
to the planet at this point and don’t think they  
need to go beyond this measure and deport the 
people or send in fleets to guard the place. 
Later they do send a fleet – and not for 
quarantine – but that’s another story and one  
Card told so no need for spoilers. And if the 
planet needing quarantined that we’re talking  
about is a chunk of your own civilization, with 
similar technology to you, then even if you have  
a fleet of dozens of mile-long spaceships 
in orbit with entire divisions of marines,  
war machines, and other killamajigs ready 
for deployment, it’s still an entire planet  
you’re contemplating trying to handle.
As we’ve discussed in other episodes like  
Planetary Invasions and Dropships, you might 
have gigaton-scale battlecruisers miles long,  
but the notion that a fleet enjoys the ‘high 
ground’ simply because their weapons can speed  
up flying down to hit you while yours lose 
speed flying up to hit them only makes sense  
if we’re assuming chemical rockets are the 
limit of your spaceship drive technology.  
If they have engines able to economically move 
ships up to interstellar speeds, and you do too,  
neither of you enjoys much tactical advantage from 
gravity, except in the sense that if you’re at the  
bottom of a big gravity well, it’s because there’s 
a ton of mass down there with you. As such, you  
have huge amounts of raw materials to call upon.
Down on that planet, they might have individual  
guns so big that they are sticking up out 
of mountains or giant weapons platforms that  
roam the ocean depths as submarines, rising 
just long enough to hose your fleet. And more  
importantly they can build more stuff too. 
Those might be Blockade Runners assembled on  
the fly from the huge amounts of supplies and 
equipment down on that planet. Alternatively,  
they might build and operate entire underground 
cities worth of mega-factories building ships or  
anti-ship murder missiles and flak cannons that 
fire nukes off at machine gun rates of fire. 
A civilized planet of a spacefaring society also 
likely has a lot of orbital infrastructure too,  
which might include giant defense guns 
or space ports and space habitats home  
to billions of people. Some large space 
habitats like an O’Neill Cylinder is also  
a very different prospect to quarantine than 
a planet. And any or all these assets in orbit  
may or may not be part of that quarantine or 
instead part of maintaining that quarantine. 
From which we can conclude how a quarantine 
goes down is very, very dependent on why a  
place is being quarantined. Let’s 
review some of the common reasons. 
Let’s start with Containment of a 
Pandemic, the most common reason. 
If a highly infectious and deadly disease 
arises, quarantining the planet could be the  
only way to prevent its spread to other 
planets or civilizations. This would be  
particularly important if the disease is unknown 
or untreatable with existing medical technology,  
and this may include non-biological 
or quasi-biological diseases. So too,  
it is very likely quarantines would be common 
for spaceships docking at spaceports in orbit of  
planets or docking rings of space habitats, where 
medical aid could be sent and where everything  
is already under airtight control. In some cases, 
like concerns about a nanobot virus or a computer  
virus, a spaceship might be so quarantined 
that no physical connection or docking was  
allowed and where the ship was placed inside 
a Faraday Cage and targeted constantly with  
nanometer-wavelength detection beams and various 
heavy weapons with unforgiving control protocols. 
Which takes us to Scientific Research, 
since a planet or space facility might  
find itself conducting dangerous research 
that requires lockdown protocols or have  
an accident that necessitated a fleet arrive 
to quarantine it. You might be working with  
dangerously clever artificial intelligence 
and wrap it with a Faraday Cage, nukes, and  
a disconnected outer layer of those unforgiving 
heavy weapons platforms I mentioned a moment ago. 
You could do that to an entire planet, and you 
might have to if it turned out they were monkeying  
with advanced nanobots to help in terraforming 
and it went wrong. Perhaps some rogue group was  
experimenting with Hive Minds instead, and that 
got out and now you have a planet where a growing  
number of people are infected and some fleeing 
it turned out to be carriers or brainwashed  
converts. So, you slapped a quarantine over the 
whole planet. You don’t want to glass the place,  
it is still an intelligent organism, and what’s 
more, there’s probably still tons of unconverted  
people below. Which your quarantine might have 
to throw to the wolves. Or those wolves might  
keep them as hostages to limit things to a 
quarantine rather than a sterilization action,  
precisely so you don’t glass the place with nukes.
It need not be hive mind either. The piece of art  
that inspired this episode and I am using as 
the cover art shows something like a high-tech  
zombie apocalypse down on a planet. It is not too 
hard to imagine those happening in civilization  
with lots of mind augmentation and cybernetics. 
Some element of a civilization is experimenting  
with outright brainwashing by computer virus 
and if things don’t quite work as planned,  
those brainwashed populations would be another 
thing you want to might quarantine. There’s also  
that concern that advanced technology might make 
it virtually impossible for civilizations to exist  
without various lone madmen printing doomsday 
devices in their basement, and one option for  
handling that is to chip everyone so they can’t 
choose to engage in certain extreme crimes. 
There’s a thousand ways that might go 
wrong without even assuming an unethical  
and Orwellian government running it, and 
yet many might believe, rightly or wrongly,  
that it was the lesser of two evils and could 
be kept safe. And if that went wrong, you might  
suddenly need a quarantine. We also might imagine 
a planet or space habitat that volunteered to test  
such a method or was even founded by volunteers 
specifically to do this experiment, and around  
which a lot of monitors and quarantine procedures 
and hardware were placed. For transparency  
of experiment and the safety of those in the 
experiment and the broader civilization outside. 
So too, a planet might be quarantined to preserve 
its unique conditions for scientific study,  
ensuring that external factors do not contaminate 
or influence ongoing experiments or observations.  
If we found life based on silicon or ammonia 
or crystals, we might quarantine it for study. 
This takes us to the Protection of Native 
Ecosystems as a reason for Quarantine. To prevent  
the accidental introduction of invasive species 
that could disrupt or destroy native ecosystems,  
a civilization might quarantine a planet. This is 
akin to how countries on Earth quarantine certain  
goods to prevent the spread of pests and diseases.
From a practical standpoint I can only think of  
this as a temporary quarantine because it would 
only take one shuttle with one person landing  
on that planet and sneezing to potentially set 
up a biological apocalypse. Thankfully planets  
have atmospheres that are likely to burn up 
anything coming in accidentally or as space junk,  
though icy moons like Europa with a subsurface 
ocean below that might hold life would be a  
bit more vulnerable to something crashing 
there from the low atmosphere and gravity.  
The surface is covered in very deep ice and 
often saturated with lethal radiation. Hence,  
most planets will have some natural protection 
from casual infection by outside microbes. 
There’s also a decent chance they wouldn’t 
thrive as well in an alien environment as  
existing organisms evolved to that environment, 
but that’s not a gamble one is wise to take. Nor  
would I take the gamble that people would 
voluntarily and without exception try not  
to land. If you don’t send teams in, scientists 
will be the folks sneaking in and probably more  
skillfully and with more covert support than 
somebody trying to hide there or smuggle alien  
life off the planet. If you do send a science team 
in, it’s only a matter of time till an accident  
rips a suit and unleashes some terrestrial 
microbes into that environment and vice-versa. 
Now we can lower those odds by mostly using 
robots we oven-baked before letting them roam  
the surface, but for that quarantine to work, you 
need indefinite monitors there and one possessed  
of serious weapons. Not just for smugglers and 
ne’er-do-wells, but so that you can flat out glass  
some location that’s been the site of possible 
infection. It’s a bit distasteful to consider  
nuking a spot on a planet that you are trying 
to protect but keep in mind that even burning  
a 1 kilometer-wide swatch of destruction on 
an Earth-sized planet is taking out about  
one-billionth of its surface area and critters. 
It’s brutal, but if planetwide extinctions are  
the alternative, it’s a small price to pay 
and not one you can wait long to enact. 
However, in a more realistic vein, it’s quite 
likely we would have good nanotech and genetic  
engineering by the time we reached any other 
star system and might be able to unleash  
countermeasures that would be able to wipe out any 
given microbe species without touching anything  
else. Conceptually we could imagine some nanobots 
able to search and find terrestrial microbes but  
that were limited to 30 replication cycles 
and had a half-life of a few days each. You  
can always dump more if the infection repeats 
but that’s on the table especially if they have  
safeguards for handling them if they go rogue 
or someone repurposes them as a bioweapon. 
But in any event, it seems an impossible timeline 
to protect this planet and so your scientists  
might just be taking many samples to later put 
into a ton of redundant space habitats designed  
to be nature preserves. Those don’t even have to 
be on that planet, or in that star system. It’s  
entirely possible you just send back the DNA – or 
its alien equivalent – as digital code for storage  
and fifty different redundant and sturdy backups 
– and then grow some of those alien ecosystems on  
nature preserve space habitats back here in the 
Sol System. A lone space habitat is much easier  
to protect and quarantine, so is a hundred of them 
with various biomes from that planet in each and  
a hundred more that are just minor variations of 
copies of those first hundred, and a ton of backup  
digital genetic information and observations.
Thus, you can get away with a temporary quarantine  
to gather data over some decades or centuries, 
and I think you would do this anyway, even if  
planning to keep the quarantine longer, because 
it covers your bases if that quarantine does fail. 
You also might use those archives to 
restore the planet if something happened,  
and ecological restoration is a quarantine option 
too. You quarantine the place while you rebuild  
fragile ecosystems after some damaging event, 
artificial or natural. These aren’t necessarily  
previously quarantined planets either, it might be 
a normal space settlement that just got wrecked.  
Over long periods of time these will tend to 
happen, so a post-event recovery plan is wise  
and likely would include further quarantine.
And this is an indefinite task since life  
presumably wants to continue on that planet 
till its parent star dies, and presumably you  
want to protect that life after that too and 
from all the natural extinction events that  
would wipe things out. I don’t personally care 
what Darwinian Natural Selection decides about  
something’s suitability, it would be like 
respecting the opinion of a set of dice.  
If dinosaurs can be brought back, I’d like to 
do so, and you could just keep their outdated  
alien equivalents in another artificial habitat. 
You might need to reboot this occassionally or  
build a new one with archived DNA every couple 
of million years since evolution doesn’t stop...  
though you can make it do so, of course. You 
might also consider digital replacement too,  
not just digital archives of DNA to print real DNA 
from, but just running vast elaborate simulations  
of the alien ecosystem. No need to worry about 
genetic drift then, unless you programmed that in. 
But for Preservation of Primitive Cultures, we do 
have potential natural graduation points as they  
presumably either get spacefaring or get wiped 
out. We’ve discussed the Star Trek Prime Directive  
before many times, indeed it has its own episode, 
so we’ll skim this topic. But if a planet is home  
to primitive or emerging intelligent life, a more 
advanced civilization might quarantine the planet  
to prevent cultural contamination or to allow 
the native species to develop without external  
interference. Interesting food for thought on 
this one though is that some species might never  
‘graduate’, as intelligent dolphins might never 
learn to make technology without fire or take  
tens of millions of years to do it and might 
need indefinite quarantine for protection. 
Or it might be some primitive faction or 
splinter of your own civilization that you  
are protecting from neighbors. They may be 
a parallel to an Amish or Mennonite group,  
low-tech, and you protect them the same as you 
would a primitive alien civilization. They may  
or may not be aware of you doing this, and so too, 
since this isn’t Star Trek, you might quarantine a  
primitive planet and flat out tell them you’re 
doing it. Complete with handing local tribal  
elders a walkie-talkie to call for help with.
And again, this isn’t a space opera so we don’t  
have to assume villains doing evil things 
for the sake of twirling their mustaches,  
so high-tech civilizations aren’t likely to be 
quarantining a world to use its people for slave  
labor. Nor for some rare element only to be found 
on their planet. We could imagine some biological  
organism unique to a planet that we found very 
valuable and used the locals to extract but again,  
kinda-mustache-twirling. You figure out how 
to grow it elsewhere or synthesize it in a lab  
or build a space habitat just to grow that 
material – which to be fair you might then  
quarantine for safety or profit – and you don’t 
use locals, you use robots. Unless you want their  
specific expertise, the locals know the plant 
or critter that produces the whatever, in which  
case friendship and bribery is probably better 
than coercion since traditionally complex and  
skilled tasks are better performed by the willing.
But again, based on what we know of the Universe,  
there’s not going to be many unique things 
besides biology and art a planet has and  
those can be obtained anyway without 
wrecking the place. Even the spice  
melange from the Dune series is eventually 
replicated for production away from Arrakis. 
Containment of Hazardous Materials 
or Technologies is another quarantine  
scenario that might encompass local biology, 
but we can also imagine quarantine against  
physical danger. In cases where a planet 
is used for the storage or experimentation  
with dangerous materials or technologies, such as 
biological weapons or experimental energy sources,  
quarantining the planet would be a safety 
measure to prevent accidental exposure or misuse. 
This might be overt physical danger like a 
weapon’s research lab or antimatter storage depot,  
or it could be an inherently dangerous place like 
a black hole or neutron star that you’ve got a  
quarantine around to keep folks from entering. 
Not just for their own protection either,  
remember Type 1a supernovae are what happens 
when a white dwarf absorbs enough matter to  
reach its explosive point, and neutron stars and 
black holes can both set off very damaging blasts  
when suddenly giving a lot of new matter 
at once too. This is all the truer if you  
are intentionally trickling feeding a black hole 
matter to obtain power via the Penrose Mechanism,  
which we assume anyone who can get a black hole 
would do, and suddenly having this disrupted  
might be very bad. We’ll look at this more later 
this week in our Black Hole Technologies episode. 
However, you might be quarantining a planet 
because it’s got some insanely dangerous plagues  
on it, or it might be one big pile of grey goo. 
Indeed, a planet that’s been completely gray gooed  
would likely have a constantly churning surface 
layer with smothered and dead bots below over the  
magma layer, potentially making for an interesting 
and evolving ecosystem that you have lots of  
different motivations for quarantining. But ideas 
can be dangerous too and we might quarantine a  
meme, or as we suggested earlier, something like 
a hive mind or brainwashing technology. You could  
have viruses or nanobots that spread ideas too, 
some tailored bug that made you very susceptible  
to a given belief or made you gullible or relaxed 
or homicidally violent. Indeed nature has already  
produced quite a lot of mind-altering 
viruses, bugs, and parasites. We explored  
that more in our episode Parasitic Aliens.
Another option is that your planet might be  
a prison planet – we’ve looked at those 
before too – possibly for just cause,  
and your quarantine is to keep them from escaping 
that planet or moon or space habitat. Possibly for  
dangerous political prisoners with dangerous 
ideas, which might mean you are oppressive  
dictators or might mean they have truly dangerous 
ideas. We could contemplate a universe in which  
Cthulhu-like dark gods existed and some knowledge 
is just truly inherently dangerous or evil, though  
nuking the place seems wiser in such scenarios.
Prison planets are also a place where a temporary  
quarantine could be possible, as we discussed in 
that episode that might be a phase of planetary  
settlement where criminals were given the option 
of probation to dangerous new worlds with the  
understanding that they could settle it and make 
it a good place to live if they worked together.  
You might leave power satellites up in space 
to beam energy down to the settlements that  
also had the ability to function as detectors, 
transmitters, and weapon systems and you’re  
probably not sending mafia leadership or 
supervillains to places like that either. 
As such, your cordon might not need to be very 
impressive or long lasting as this might be  
a minimum-security prison equivalent. 
Escaping a planet is not an easy task,  
or even a moon or asteroid mine. It’s a lot 
harder than getting out of Alcatraz, since  
it's surrounded by a void empty of all but lethal 
radiation. Obviously, a Prison Planet Colony could  
be a fairly unethical scenario even if done 
with fairly honest and honorable intentions,  
but then that’s been the case for a lot of the 
scenarios we looked at today. Power can permit  
abuse, and the ability to quarantine someone 
implies a lot of power, especially over them. 
Each of these reasons we looked at today 
highlights a different aspect of interstellar  
responsibility and ethics, reflecting the complex 
considerations that would be involved in making  
such a significant decision as quarantining 
an entire planet. We didn’t discuss when and  
how those decisions should be made, as I have no 
good answers for that. As everyone here now knows,  
quarantines can happen even in high-tech 
civilizations and are not pleasant things.  
But in the end, they are probably something we 
will see in the future, albeit hopefully not  
very often, not for long, and not for bad reasons.
And again there’s always the possibility that our  
planet and ourselves are already in a quarantine, 
and we simply don’t know it. Were that the case,  
I wonder which, if any, of the cases we discussed 
today would be the reason we were quarantined.
We were talking about quarantine today and 
virus outbreaks are something we all know more  
about than we ever wanted to these days, and not 
just about the biological kind. The internet is  
not a friendly place, and even excluding all the 
robots and people acting out of greed or malice,  
even honest and well-intentioned actors can 
expose you to danger simply by not having  
tight enough security on the data they’ve 
gotten for you. This has gotten way worse  
in recent years for all of us, and part of being 
an online public figure like I am is you really do  
attract hackers and people who just hate you.
This is why I use a VPN, or Virtual Private  
Network, and why I recommend you use NordVPN. 
You do not have to justify why you don’t want  
your privacy infringed, that privacy is not 
just a right, it is your first line of defense  
against snoops and criminals. NordVPN lets you 
surf anonymously from many different secure  
servers around the world while maintaining 
high-speed performance, and has a fast,  
easy to use and intuitive interface that you can 
test out today with a 30-day money back guarantee  
at https://nordvpn.com/IsaacArthur.
One of NordVPN’s best features though is  
NordVPN Proxy Extensions, that lets easily control 
which sites you visit with or without the VPN on,  
split tunneling, so you can log into your bank 
with your real IP while going to other websites  
with the IP of VPN server you’re using. 
And you can set up different VPN servers  
on different browsers, including loaned devices.
Use the web safer and hassle free with NordVPN. Go  
to https://nordvpn.com/IsaacArthur and try it out 
risk-free with Nord’s 30-day money-back guarantee. 
Well that will wrap up another Scifi Sunday 
here on SFIA but we have plenty more coming  
out this month, starting this Thursday, February 
15th, where we’ll explore various technologies  
made possible through black holes, including 
galaxy-wrecking weapons we call quasar cannons.  
Then on the 22nd we’ll ask if it is possible 
to terraform the moon to have green lands,  
blues seas, and white clouds, just like Earth, 
and then visit the topic of Vacuum Trains and  
other hyperfast transit systems on Sunday February 
25th, before finishing the month on February 29th,  
as we leap into the topic of life on colony 
ark ship carrying people to new worlds that  
will carry us ahead into this leap year.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Topopolis: 
The Eternal River, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
