This episode is sponsored by Audible
Black Holes are the most terrifying and destructive
things in the Universe, so they would make
truly dreadful weapons.
Or would they?
So today we are returning to the topic of
black holes.
In our previous discussion in Black Hole Ships
and Colonizing Black Holes, we challenged
the notion that they are only good for destruction
and showed how they could make for amazing
spaceships to rapidly take us out to explore
new worlds, and how they could help us build
and power new worlds.
Yet, while they have great value in those
regards, they are indeed capable of immense
destruction.
A weapon can be used for good not just ill
and, as usual, we’ll mostly bypass the ethical
aspects of the technology under discussion,
but we will note some valuable defensive roles
they might play, and also some adaptations
of the basic technology that might make them
even better if we ever truly master gravity
manipulation.
In those previous episodes on black holes
as ship drives and power sources, we focused
on black holes of sizes that occur in nature.
But today we’ll be looking at the entire
range, from the tiny, artificial Kugelblitz
variety that emits lots of Hawking Radiation,
to monsters far more massive than anything
that exists in nature -- as far as we know.
We have essentially two different types of
black holes of note.
The first is the more massive kind, be it
the natural ones made from dying stars or
smaller artificial ones likely made by artificial
implosions or ultra-relativistic collisions.
These are dark creatures able to rend apart
any who venture too close to them, and which
can emit impressive amounts of energy not
from themselves, but from the radiation of
things falling into them that have heated
up immensely from friction while spiraling
inward but not quite crossed over the event
horizon of that black hole.
The other variety are those much smaller,
which we usually call a kugelblitz black hole
due to how we envision making these objects
tinier than an atom.
That comes from the German word for ball lightning,
and is doubly appropriate as we expect these
objects to glow brightly.
Black holes slowly give off energy as they
evaporate and the smaller they are the faster
they evaporate.
One that’s evaporated to a tenth its prior
mass will give off a hundred times the power
and will have only a thousandth of its life
remaining , it will also have an event horizon
merely a tenth its original size.
A bit later it might be a thousandth its original
mass, radiating a million times more brightly,
and with only a billionth of its life remaining,
with an event horizon a thousandth what it
used to be.
Needless to say that starts sounding a lot
like a bomb, and a black hole of just one
ton of total mass would glow as brightly as
our Sun does, though only for a few millionths
of a trillionth of a trillionth of a second.
In that short instant it will radiate 9x10^19
Joules of energy, the equivalent of 22 thousand
megaton atomic warheads, or 1.4 million Hiroshima
bombs.
And that one ton explosive is so tiny, just
3 trillionths of a trillionth of a meter across,
that if we sat it next to an atomic nucleus,
it would be to that nucleus what a marble
is to our planet.
This means if you shot one at a planet, ignoring
that it would not live long enough to go through,
it would fly right through the planet with
no effect besides the energy it was giving
off.
Micro black holes are the ultimate in armor
penetration.
There is no material we know of that can stop
this micro-black hole from penetrating through
it, except another black hole.
That’s an important point because the most
typical uses of black holes as a weapon in
fiction is to dump them into someone’s planet
so it gobbles it up.
This is not going to work.
Oh, a full solar mass black hole would rip
that planet apart but that’s decidedly overkill.
Your typically natural black hole is at least
a million times more massive than our planet
and the energy needed to hurl it at a planet
could be far more easily employed to just
hurl something smaller and faster at one instead.
It’s far easier to blow up a house with
a few kilos of explosive than to drop a mountain
on it.
The solar mass black hole approach is the
classic case of swatting a fly with a star-sized
sledgehammer.
You don’t win wars that way, because if
your advantage in energy is that overwhelming,
you probably didn’t even view its use as
a war.
If this is not easy for you to do, then you
are going to lose if you deploy attacks that
are pointless overkill when your equally armed
enemy is being more tactical with their expenditures.
That is the first rule of warfare after all,
don’t waste ammunition, you might need it
later.
Of course, the nice thing about black holes
is that as very massive objects go, they are
pretty stealthy, and it is nice if your enemy
doesn’t know you’re there until the bullet
arrives to introduce you to them, but it’s
still not a reason for pointless overkill.
Snipers do not sneak up and shoot people with
bazookas.
A less massive black hole, say the mass of
a large asteroid, might seem ideal.
We know what a large asteroid can do to a
planet – just ask the dinosaurs, and one
massing a trillion tons is going to ruin your
whole day, or epoch, when it hits.
But, of course, they are awful weapons against
a spacefaring civilization.
As we’ve noted before, a spacefaring civilization
that detects an asteroid coming doesn’t
have people running around their observatories
in a panic.
Rather, their people are running around in
joy at this sudden injection of cheap metals
into that market as they plan to deflect and
capture it.
For attacking spacefaring civilizations, what
you want is a weapon that carries enough force
to do the job, moves quite fast, and hits
the target.
That is the first rule of warfare after all,
shoot first and don’t miss, and don’t
use a squirt gun, since there’s precious
little point in getting the first hit if all
it does is irritate them.
In this regard a black hole with the mass
of such an asteroid works fairly well.
They won’t see it nearly as soon as they
would that asteroid, and even better, you
could use one smaller but faster, carrying
the same amount of kinetic energy.
In this case such a black hole emits very
little, a trillion ton black hole only emits
a few hundred watts of Hawking radiation and
an order of magnitude more than the typical
light bulb, though in the hard X-Ray range
of the spectrum in this case, and would not
explode for a couple billion trillion years,
so the kinetic energy it carries is the thing
we’ll exploit, plus the notion it would
suck that planet apart when it hits.
A black hole of this large mass is much smaller
than an atom, so the defenders will have a
problem pushing on it, and yes it can be deflected
off course by shoving on it, the same as anything
else.
Though, it’s rather hard to focus enough
force on a fast moving object smaller than
an atom that has all the momentum of a trillion
ton object.
So, it sounds like a great weapon, except
it’s going to fly right through that planet
doing basically no damage.
It could slam right into the middle of a football
field and most of the folks sitting in the
bleachers would just feel yanked on strongly
for the fraction of a second it passed by
before sliding through the planet.
It’s massive enough that if it passed through
your house you’d probably get bones broken
and those xrays it was giving off would be
handy for letting you know which ones.
It would then pass through the planet and
out the other side and off into the void.
Indeed even if you made one here on Earth,
it would just drop down and pop back out the
other side and fall back, oscillating around
the planet, so if you want to get a black
hole lodged into a planet you need it to arrive
with virtually no velocity.
It’s not going to be slowed in any noticeable
way by the atmosphere or the planet, and would
have picked up speed as it approached, same
as any falling object.
Ramming through thousands of kilometers of
rock would slow most things down, but remember
this is a trillion tons of material with a
cross section smaller than an atom, the handful
of particles it might absorb passing through
will slow it down no more than hitting a sheet
of tissue paper would slow down a large asteroid.
Who knows, our planet could already have had
close contact with thousands of these black
holes slamming rapidly through it in its history,
we still haven't ruled out primordial black
holes existing.
We wouldn’t really know about it because
they wouldn’t be sufficiently destructive
for us to worry about it and then they’d
be gone.
So it’s actually very hard to damage something
by just hitting it with a modestly massive
micro black hole.
Even one slow enough to repeatedly passing
through a planet will and slowly gain mass,
and will gain it faster and faster as its
event horizon widens and its oscillation rate
slows, but don’t hold your breath waiting
for the apocalypse, as it would take it many
trillions of years to gobble up the planet.
Professor Christopher Springob once calculated
a billion ton black hole would need 10^28
years to eat Earth, 10,000 trillion trillion
years of oscillating around inside our planet,
and since it would be giving off a few hundred
megawatts of gamma radiation while it did
this, it would not live long enough to eat
the planet and would obviously not be very
stealthy.
An attack over this timeframe is meaningless
anyway as the Sun would have long turned into
a cool stellar cinder, even the solar extension
techniques we discussed in Civilizations at
the End of Time can’t prolong a star that
long, that’s exactly why that series contemplates
using black holes for survival, and such being
the case, your ‘attack’ was merely doing
them a favor, akin to throwing an asteroid
at a planet.
That violates the first rule of warfare, don’t
give gifts to your enemy, and doesn’t even
get the Trojan Horse caveat, since while it’s
easy to hide your troops inside a black hole,
you can’t deploy them from there, except
as Hawking Radiation.
Incidentally if you’re wondering why the
trillion ton one was giving off X-rays and
the billion ton one was giving off gamma,
Hawking Radiation comes out at various wavelengths
with a peak photon energy or frequency [error: inverse] to mass or a wavelength [linear] to it.
If you wanted one that glowed in the visible
light spectrum it would need to be about 20,000
trillion tons, and wouldn’t make a very
good light bulb, since it would give off about
a microwatt of light.
This one could actually eat a planet in a
respectable time and would live far, far longer,
though would still take a very long time to
do so, particularly as its gravity is now
strong enough to have quite a heating effect
on matter falling into it.
It’s hard to suck matter into a tiny hole
if it’s turning into a superhot plasma.
It won’t even eat the planet, but it will
blow it up.
You still can’t shoot it at a planet, as
it would fly through.
We finally have an example of something that
cause some real damage along its passage,
but if left inside the planet for any decent
period of time it will form an accretion disc
and that will blow the planet up.
You’ve essentially ignited a small star
around that black hole and indeed if you’ve
seen our Making Suns episode, you know this
is one of our tricks for creating artificial
stars, though there we use far less mass.
We keep it inside a shell so the plasma can’t
escape, probably made of tungsten or similar
so the shell can be hot enough to emit light
itself without melting.
That brings us to magnetic containment.
A black hole as a weapon would need that to
be stealthy on its approach, since it needs
to come in slow and that is a lot of mass
and space isn’t really empty so it will
encounter gas as it approaches and start radiating.
If you make an artificial black hole that’s
rotating, you could also use that magnetic
field it would have to steer it, though that
won’t be stealthy.
You still need to exert a lot of force to
move it and that will be decidedly detectable.
And again, it needs to be going slow, on an
order of the speeds planets generally orbit
at, tens of kilometers a second.
So shooting it from another system would require
tens of thousands of years to arrive, and
the launch itself is unlikely to be subtle.
You need to expend around a trillion, trillion
joules of energy to push it up to that speed,
even ignoring the energy needed to make it
in the first place, and that’s on a par
with all the sunlight hitting the Earth for
months, so any civilization you’re likely
to need to deploy this against probably could
see you creating and launching it.
They also can have early detection systems
out to spot one, even if just by its gravity,
that will have a fairly detectable effect
with sensitive enough gear, and at those speeds,
a detection grid out in the Oort Cloud would
pick it up millennia before it arrived.
With such timelines, even if you can’t knock
it off course, you could move even your own
planets out of the strike vector.
These problems make it seem like these aren’t
very good weapons, you can’t even make one
on a planet since people are going to notice
you stuffing a mountain range worth of material
into something.
However, they are a good way to sabotage a
planet someone else is planning to colonize,
since you could calculate the right sized
one to act like a bomb on a timer to blow
the planet up, or keep one in a cage to be
triggered to go off.
You could do this on a gas giant for an even
bigger boom, or a sun too, though that would
be much harder to keep caged and stars are
already superhot balls of plasma.
But if you put one in a star it will cause
a nova, though hardly instantly and you do
still have to shoot it in fairly slow, and
if it’s not big enough, no boom, at least
not for a very long time.
If that cage is holding onto the black hole
magnetically, you might be able to use that
to slow the whole thing down faster, but trillions
of tons of matter that you also can’t physically
touch isn’t easy to push along quickly.
Timed right though, or in a cage rigged to
detonate on timer or command, this makes an
amazing ambush method, but at the very least
it also allow you to engage in resource denial,
destroying valuable assets so your enemy can’t
use them.
Temporarily anyway, as we noted in Colonizing
Black Holes, they’re very valuable real
estate if you’ve got the right technology,
and obviously you do if you’re using this
method, and that means your enemy probably
does too since otherwise you’d be curbstomping
them by sheer energy advantage.
That’s one way to weaponize them too, just
use the power generation methods we discussed
in the prior episodes to power conventional
weapons, or conventional weapon manufacturing
facilities, or use them as ship drives on
unmanned vessels.
As we often note here, there’s no such thing
as an unarmed spaceship because the velocities
and energies involved are so high you can
devastate someone just by ramming your ship
into them.
A black hole ship rammed into a planet is
still going to see the black hole part fly
out the other side, but the big relativistic
ship it used to be in is going to slam that
planet more powerfully than if it was made
of atomic bombs.
The need to make that ship huge to control
the black hole is also likely to make the
asteroid that wiped out the dinosaurs look
like a pebble in comparison.
It’s a relativistic kill missile powered
by a black hole, but it can move very fast.
The first rule of warfare is to shoot first,
but that assumes your bullet is also getting
there first.
A preemptive strike that takes forever to
arrive is at worst wasted and at best is just
a way to take the other guy with you.
Which admittedly is handy for more than vengeance,
since it permits the Mutually Assured Destruction
strategy.
Needless to say such black holes also make
for awesome landmines.
If you built one into an asteroid or comet,
caged, and had sensors and remotes on it,
you could get quite the bang by letting that
cage fail.
It’s all that’s holding back the matter
above.
You’re going to get a bang releasing a fair
percentage of the mass energy of that object.
We’ve talked about using these asteroid
mass black holes as centers of habitats, where
they can provide both gravity and power, so
if you’ve got them you can easily colonize
all those countless small icy bodies in the
Oort Clouds we think most stars would have.
If those served as early warning and defense
sites, they’d have a lot of power to run
detection and weapons, and have a heck of
a self-destruct mechanism too.
Space is big and empty, especially out so
far from a star, but it’s not that big or
that empty, you set of a miniature nova and
it’s got quite a blast radius, even by the
standards of interstellar voids.
Of course, if you’ve got a big natural black
hole, you might not care if the enemy sees
it coming and you can move it very fast, using
the Quasar Drive method we discussed in Fleet
of Stars, and that’s going to wreck any
system it passes through.
It’s one attack even a full-blown Kardashev
2 civilization with a Dyson Swarm is going
to have to work hard to defeat, as it’s
carrying more mass than a normal solar system
and is a big engine.
There’s no subtlety there, everyone in the
galaxy is going to know you just lit one off,
and since it is going to keep on trucking,
you basically declared war on every system
in the galaxy that is within several light
years of the path of destruction it’s following.
You could scale that up for deployment too,
but there’s one thing a black hole can’t
pass through: another black hole.
So if you shot one at another black hole,
when it hits and they merge, it’s going
to be very devastating.
The energy release from a binary black hole
merger in ‘ringdown’ makes a supernova
look like a firecracker.
Ringdown occurs when two black holes merge
and begin to settle down to a stable form,
where any distortion in the shape is dissipated
as gravitational waves.
In the final fraction of a second the black
holes can reach extremely high velocity, and
the gravitational wave amplitude reaches its
peak.
That sounds pedestrian until we look an an
example.
The black hole pair GW150914 that LIGO picked
up, each about 30 times more massive than
our Sun, released so much energy in ringdown
that if it produced visible light we could
detect, even though it was a billion light
years away - it would have outshone our own
full moon.
It would literally have been brighter than
all the light sources in the observable Universe
combined.
Of course, that’s also another way to weaponize
smaller ones, which would normally fly right
through a target, if you can precisely aim
to intersect close enough to hit or ringdown.
So you could shoot two from opposite directions
to collide at the center of a target, where
the merged black hole would now sit stationary,
then you could send them in as fast as you
want and quite stealthy, though that takes
some precision targeting, and if you can pull
that off you could probably also send two
that were coming from roughly the same direction
that would intersect close enough to ringdown
and that released gravity wave is going to
be pretty nasty, even though the merged black
hole will still fly out.
Precision like that also strongly implies
you’ve got the ability to make kugelblitz
black holes, and keep them fed too.
Kugelblitzes are so small they’re very hard
to feed and don’t live long, and the general
notion of making one on a ship and shooting
it at another ship, while appealing, wouldn’t
generally be a good approach.
You’re cramming a huge amount of focused
energy into making one, instead of just shooting
that same precision energy at the enemy target,
and a lot of the energy will be lost en route
to that target.
A black hole is less a bomb than a big flare
that burns brighter and brighter before dying
off, and space being space, any such piece
of ordinance is spending far more time crossing
through areas where it’s radiation isn’t
doing much damage than near or in an enemy
ship.
You’d probably get more mileage if you just
had a directed vent on the black hole you’re
probably powering your ship with, some magnetic
nozzle that let you spray matter in as an
accretion disc and blow that out as a beam
at your enemy.
However, if you can keep them fed, especially
if you can re-feed them their own energy by
reflecting it back in, which would require
gamma ray mirrors that we don’t know how
to make at the moment, then you’ve got bombs
you can make in advance and store to fire
at will, and potentially keep them caged while
they fly to the target.
So you could use very short lived ones fired
at relativistic velocities in cages that would
smash against an armored hull, and the black
hole would slide right inside and evaporate,
like a tank round and sabot, and we’ll just
call that a black hole sabot round.
These would also be rather delicate devices,
and effectively as dangerous as making and
storing anti-matter munitions, which you probably
can do if you can make these too.
Both have advantages and disadvantages, a
black hole sabot is the ultimate in armor
penetration since it will go right through
the hull, while antimatter munitions get double
the yield, since it’s setting off an equal
mass of normal matter, presumably the enemy
ship’s hull.
The shared disadvantage is the whole ‘own-goal’
problem, where you get blown up by your own
bomb, which violates the first rule of warfare--don’t
use weapons more likely to kill you than your
enemy.
So the black hole sabot is physically possible,
if dangerous, and would require some insane
precision to make and store those black hole
sabots, not to mention a perfect gamma ray
mirror, and I mean a perfect, 100% reflective
one, and as I said, we have no gamma ray mirrors
at all.
If you’ve got those, you do still have another
way to make a black hole bomb, using the superradiance
method discussed in Kurzegesacht’s Black
Hole Bomb episode.
That’s a very good episode and explains
it in more detail, so you can get the details
there, but short form, you’d get superradiant
scattering of energies near a black hole and
if you’re reflecting that back rather than
letting it out it’s going to exponentially
grow as it bounces around and eventually explode.
This trick works on any decently sized black
hole and is another way to use smaller artificial
ones as landmines, but does need those gamma
ray mirrors.
Other types of non-kugelblitz black hole power
generation would usually only need something
reflective to X-rays and we can reflect those,
gold and iridium foils are good for that,
but if you’re just reflecting it back and
forth to build up, that will shift up to gamma.
It also requires precision reflection, so
isn’t something you’d use as a final self-destruct
when you were losing the battle.
Again though, we don’t have gamma ray mirrors
and may never get them.
Gamma is so dangerous precisely because those
are high energy photons that don’t play
nice when they slam into matter, mirrors included.
We never know what technologies might develop
though, and since I’m actually writing this
episode way back in April the same day our
Clarketech Anti-Gravity episode came out,
it’s worth reminding that if you can engage
in gravity manipulation using some physics
beyond our current understanding, you could
also potentially make some amazing defensive
shields this way too.
A black hole’s event horizon is one heck
of a protective barrier, but the problem is
it takes a lot of mass to make one that’s
not microscopic.
If you could play with that in some way to
make bigger event horizons without needing
tons of mass or make them flat rather than
spherical, you might be able to deploy what
amounts to the ultimate shield.
Of course, black holes have event horizons
linear to their mass, so if we’re talking
about K3 civilizations, galactic empires,
worried about enemy galaxies firing high energy
beams their way, they might consider cramming
a supermassive black hole together on a vector
directly between you and them, especially
if you’ve compacted your own galaxy down
using the methods we discussed in Fleet of
Stars so you didn’t need as much coverage.
It’s easier though to live near a giant
black hole and just keep on the other side
of it from your presumed enemy.
However, and that is a note for anyone living
around black holes, even small ones, it’s
hard to get a black hole to really hit things
rather than slide through them, unless those
things are also black holes.
That still takes some impressive aim, for
the small ones anyway, where you are trying
to hit something atom sized or smaller inside
a facility that obscures your view, but the
really big ones are obviously pretty easy
to aim at, and as we mentioned earlier, black
hole mergers are nothing you want to be near
when they happen.
There’s many other ways to use them, some
of course would be less effective than other
weapon types, and others are more secondary.
For instance, as mentioned in other episodes,
normal black holes are a very good way to
change the direction of a spaceship significantly
and cheaply, so a fleet engaged in century
long interstellar conflict could use one to
come at an enemy from an unexpected angle
by swinging around one and coming out at an
unpredictable vector.
Since they are so valuable, and so easy to
make a giant explosion by ramming matter into
them, you might booby trap them knowing an
enemy would be very like to swing close to
them.
Fundamentally though, they offer such a great
value economically and strategically if you’ve
got the tech to use them that they’d seriously
alter what the goals and objectives of conflict
were about.
These objects so feared in science fiction
that people avoid taking their ships anywhere
near them instead become super valuable strategic
resources, but as we saw today, they can be
rather dangerous to you not just in enemy
hands, but in your own.
As mentioned, there’s a lot of black holes
in science fiction, but very often those black
holes have very little in common with actual
science, though we do have a fair few scifi
authors who are scientists and do it right.
One of the best of these is David Brin, who
got his degrees and doctorate in physics and
space science and always has accurate science
incorporated into his work.
We’ve recommended his books before, most
notably his Uplift series in our episode on
Uplifting, but one of his other best known
books is “Earth”, which features an artificial
black hole getting lost on the planet, and
seems a good choice for our Audible Book of
the Month and for our short series on black
holes.
Written back in 1990, it’s also considered
one of the best for having predicted a lot
of technology that came afterwards, and Brin
not only always combines a mix of excellent
storytelling with good hard science but is
great at seeing consequences and shifts that
technologies are likely to cause in society.
He’s one of the best hard scifi authors
and long overdue to win our book of the month,
and you can pick up a free copy of “Earth”
by using my link in this episode description,
Audible.com/Isaac or text Isaac to 500-500.
Audible offer a 30 day free trial, but each
month you’re a member you now get a free
audiobook and 2 audible originals, and those
credits rollover to the next month or year
and stay yours, along with any books you got,
even if you later discontinue your membership.
And with their convenient app, you can listen
on any of your devices and seamlessly pick
up where you left off, whether you’re listening
at home, commuting, running errands or off
jogging or at the gym.
Audible makes it cheap and easy to access
a vast collection of amazing stories.
Incidentally if you’re interested in what
other books have won our book of the month,
we have a fairly comprehensive list of not
only them but most of the other books we’ve
recommended over on our website, IsaacArthur.net
As we were mentioning, it’s fairly common
for a lot of science fiction to take liberties
with science and one of the most common examples
are comic book superpowers.
Next week we’ll be taking a look at a lot
of those and asking if technology might let
us create or closely imitate such abilities,
as well as considering a lot of overlooked
options such abilities would offer.
The week after that we’ll head back to the
Upward Bound series to look at how energy
beaming technology might allow very cheap
and safe transport from ground to orbit.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
