In order to reach the stars, we’ll need
space ship drives of titanic output, even
those powered by 
the stars themselves…
So, over the years, we’ve reviewed a lot
of spaceship designs in our overall discussions
of humanity’s future and of space colonization
in general, some in-depth, and some only in-passing,
and some in episodes that were made so long
ago that they’re buried in search engine
results, and since our Megastructure Compendium
episode from last summer was well received,
I thought we might follow that up today with
a list of all the various advanced spacecraft
propulsion methods that are either on the
drawing board, represent popular theories,
or are even just things that are regularly
and seriously discussed in science fiction.
Each will have its own alphabetical entry,
and those on youtube should see a chapterized
version available, and we’ll have a time
index of topics in the description on all
of our platforms.
If you review those, you’ll note that some
aren’t very advanced drives at all, or even
propulsion methods, as I felt that certain
critical topics like the Rocket Equation or
what Specific Impulse is; should be in the
episode, especially as while you can listen
to this episode all the way through, it’s
not necessarily intended to be observed in
that way like most of our episodes incline
towards.
It is also going to be a long one, so a drink
and a snack is advised, and my wife Sarah
will be calling off the titles and references
between episodes to help distinguish the break
up of the individual entries.
Also, at the end of every entry there will
be a list of other entries related to the
topic or mentioned in the entry, and we will
sometimes reference relevant episodes, and
for viewers the cover art of that episode
will appear as thumbnail on screen, to help
you find that episode, as Youtube limits us
to 5 in-video links, and also 100 chapters,
which we discovered with the previous compendium
episode, and is part of the reason why some
of our topics are merged.
One of the others being that some are very
similar, especially without getting into technical
details that most casual watchers wouldn’t
follow.
Indeed, being a physicist rather than an aerospace
engineer, there are a few I’m not sure I
do either, and there is a reason why rocket
scientist is synonymous with being very smart.
I would also like to note that virtually all
of these ideas are someone’s brainchild,
whether it was a scientist or scifi writer
or both, and for brevity’s sake we’re
not delving into the full backgrounds and
bios of the device and their designers, especially
when the device is named for them.
Though that means folks like Mark Millis,
who proposed or expanded on tons of hypothetical
drives like the Bias Drive, Diametric Drive,
Disjunction Drive, Pitch Drive and more, are
not getting anything like the credit they
deserve.
I can only say that for as long as this episode
is, much is being left out, and there is mind-bending
science, fascinating development backgrounds,
and amazing science fiction out there for
those who choose to go beyond these short
entries and explore these topics more.
If you are looking for good places to continue
finding out more on these drives, I’d definitely
recommend the National Space Society, Tau
Zero Foundation, Atomic Rockets, Centauri
Dreams, Orion’s Arm, and of course NASA’s
Eagleworks Lab.
With all that said and without further ado,
let’s get started.
Alcubierre drive
The Alcubierre Warp Drive is a well known
example of a type of warp drive that uses
hypothetical negative matter or negative energy
to warp spacetime in front of a ship to contract,
and behind a ship to expand.
Because the ship itself is not accelerating,
this not only allows high speeds but bypasses
normal limits on the speed of light in the
same way dark energy and Hubble expansion
do.
Because of it requiring an exotic matter not
currently known to exist in nature and permitting
faster than light, or FTL travel, this technology
is an example of Clarketech - technologies
so advanced they are indistinguishable from
magic and to which we have no clear scientific
path to produce - and is very similar to an
Induction Ring Drive, as it is creating a
bubble of warped space around the ship.
See our episode on Warp Drives for more on
the Alcubierre Drive.
See also: Bias Drive, Clarketech, Diametric
Drive, Disjunction Drive, Pitch Drive, Warp
Drive
Antimatter Rocket
Antimatter is matter with opposite characteristics
of normal matter, and when particles of antimatter
such as the anti-proton or anti-electron,
better known as a positron, come into contact
with a proton or electron respectively, they
typically turn into a pair of photons containing
the total mass energy of those particles.
By itself this is not explosive and occurs
often enough in nature, as many particles
emit positrons during decay, including inside
your own body, and rapidly find an electron
to mutually annihilate with.
In large quantities antimatter makes a nuclear
bomb look weak, as a single kilogram of antimatter
would combine with a kilogram of mundane matter
to release the equivalent of a 43 megaton
hydrogen bomb, equal to the Tsar Bomba which
was the largest thermonuclear device ever
tested, which also weighed 27,000 kilograms,
not just 1.
Antimatter has the second advantage that it
doesn’t require any other hardware to do
its job, other than presumably magnetic containment.
The difficulty of making it and storing it
are the two main limitations, and the basic
theory and techniques for producing antimatter
are discussed in our episode Antimatter Factories.
Assuming you can make and store it, antimatter,
along with an equal amount of mundane matter,
can be easily magnetically sprayed into your
equivalent of a rocket nozzle and form a photon
rocket with an exhaust velocity of light speed.
An antimatter rocket such as the theoretical
Valkyrie spacecraft was expected to be able
to reach 92% of light speed, at which speed
the crew of the ship would be experiencing
less than 10 hours for every day here on Earth,
or 40 years for every century.
For this reason antimatter is generally considered
the most powerful rocket fuel available under
known science.
However, due to its incredible rarity in nature
and difficulty to produce and store, more
frugal uses of antimatter are often considered,
such as the Antimatter Ablated Light Sail
& Antimatter Catalyzed Fusion.
See also: Antimatter Ablated Light Sail, Antimatter
Catalyzed Fusion, Photon Rocket.
Antimatter Ablated Light Sail
As antimatter is thought to be hard to produce
and store, various rationing ways to use it
in tandem with other materials have been contemplated,
and this includes the Antimatter Ablated Light
Sail.
This technique involves a small supply of
anti-hydrogen, maybe just a few grams for
smaller ships.
This uses anti-hydrogen slowly released toward
a forward plate or dish, akin to the Medusa
Drive, made of Uranium-238, which might be
as small as a few meters, allowing a relatively
small ship.
The antimatter reaction with the U-238 should
produce neutrons and other secondary products
which would leave the sail at very high speeds,
and produce a power rate of a couple megawatts
per kilogram of sail.
Such ships may be able to gather the necessary
antimatter from natural sources, such as gas
giants.
See also: Antimatter Rocket, Antimatter Catalyzed
Fusion, Medusa Drive
Antimatter Catalyzed Fusion
We have been pursuing artificial fusion with
varying but improving degrees of success for
decades, but one of the most promising methods
is antimatter catalyzed fusion.
Using small amounts of antimatter we can catalyze
far larger bursts of fusion, releasing far
more energy than that bit of antimatter held,
and it is believed to be a fairly simple process.
This could either run a fusion reactor, to
power ion drives, or simply be used for micro-fusion
bombs right behind the ship as an effective
fusion rocket.
Unfortunately it requires a small supply of
antimatter, which is barely existent naturally
and hard to make and store.
Should we find a way to make and store antimatter,
but not in sufficient quantities for a full
antimatter rocket, antimatter catalyzed fusion
could allow a Fusion Torch Drive behind a
ship allowing it to travel at very high speeds,
possibly in excess of 10% of light speed.
See also: Antimatter Rocket, Antimatter Ablated
Light Sail, Fusion Torch Drive, Nuclear Pulse
Drive, Orion Drive
Arcjet Rocket
The Arcjet Rocket or Thruster is an electric
spacecraft propulsion method commonly used
in small spacecraft as it is simple and small.
An Arcject that uses a pair of electrodes
to generate an electric arc, the same as a
conventional arc welder, that in turn vaporizes
the propellant and pushes it back.
The arc and propellant, now plasma, then continue
backward through the thruster gaining speed
from the anode and cathode.
This is an example of a low-thrust, high-efficiency
rocket, as very little thrust is produced
at any given moment, but the exhaust velocity
is very high.
Ammonia, a popular Arcjet rocket propellant,
typically has an exhaust velocity of 9000
meters per second, more than double that of
a typical chemical rocket.
The arcjet is generally more efficient than
its cousin, the Resistojet, but both suffer
from some durability and longevity issues,
particularly of its electrode, which electrodeless
designs such as Pulsed Inductive Thrusters
seek to circumvent.
See also: Pulsed Inductive Thruster, Resistojet
Bias Drive
A Bias Drive is an example of a Clarketech
engine that works not by warping space or
time, but by locally altering physical constants
of the Universe, in this case the Gravitational
Constant, in front of and behind the ship,
letting it essentially fall to its destination.
Beyond having no method to alter physical
constants at this time, it is likely that
a bias drive would produce a singularity in
the center of the ship.
If functional however, such a ship would not
need to expend any fuel to move from point
A to B, and a bias drive would appear to allow
perpetual motion machines, for producing electricity
and power, though it is entirely possible
that techniques for changing physical constants
might still conserve quantities such as energy
and momentum.
See also: Clarketech, Pitch Drive
Black Hole Drive
Black Hole Drives are a group of hypothetical
spacecraft propulsion methods that can range
from using a naturally occurring one to accelerate
and redirect a spaceship to co-opting one
to move an entire star system, as discussed
in our episode Fleet of Stars.
The most well known version relies on using
micro black holes in the sub-megaton range
to generate Hawking Radiation, and Hawking
radiation drives are covered in their own
section.
Other methods include using the Penrose Mechanism
or similar methods to dump matter into a black
hole, presumably a micro black hole larger
than a megaton, and get 20-40% of its mass
energy released as radiation during the descent.
Gaining power from black holes this way is
not technically complex, it’s simply absorbing
high energy photons coming off it as with
any nuclear process, and such black holes
may be tethered to spaceships or stations
with magnetic fields, which black holes both
produce and interact with.
Additional uses, which are discussed in our
episode Black Hole Ships, would also involve
using them as the power plants of ships running
photon rockets, using them to power giant
laser pushing beams such as we contemplate
for Laser Sail and pushing relay stations,
or even using them in pairs for accelerating
ships around them in a loop to achieve high
speeds.
See also: Hawking Radiation Drive, Laser Sail,
Matter Beaming, Photon Rocket.
Bussard Ramjet
The core concept of the Bussard ramjet is
that most of space is full of ionized gas
particles, most of which are hydrogen, a ready
source of fusion fuel, and if you can grab
these magnetically and suck them down into
your ship, you can use them as fuel.
The ramjet part comes from parallels to how
an air-breathing ramjet works, sucking air
in and superheating it, then shooting it out
the back, but here the power source for heating
that gas up is the gas itself by fusion, and
that fusion is ignited by sucking in interstellar
gas at relativistic speeds and jamming them
tightly down the throat of the ship to ram
into other gas particles at high speeds, temperatures,
and pressures.
This seemed like a possible way to give ships
an infinite power supply, simply grabbing
it out of space as they flew by, like a ship
sailing on a sea of diesel fuel.
Indeed it was contemplated for a while as
a way to keep accelerating indefinitely, something
we see in the scifi classic novel Tau-Zero,
or with other drives likes the Gravitic Dipole
or Laser Sail, but the math turned out not
to work.
Indeed some argue the method would actually
require more energy than the reaction released
and result in the ship slowing.
Which ironically makes this drive handy for
decelerating for free, which would make it
function very well with a laser sail and relay
system on the front end of the journey, to
push the ship up to speed, and the ramjet
to slow on arrival, while also powering other
ship functions.
Additionally, this technique of sucking in
ionized particles magnetically; works perfectly
fine if you have otherwise functional fusion
reactors and are not planning to move in excess
of what that ship’s normal exhaust velocity
is, and thus works just fine for giant ships
with conventional fusion reactors who only
plan to move a few percent of light speed.
This might include freighters, deep space
miners, monitors or patrols, or giant beaming
stations, be it laser, energy, or matter beams,
needing to do station-keeping and to resupply
their fuel.
It also works just fine if you have a refuelable
black hole in the throat of your ship, into
which you’re stuffing in the matter you
sucked in, though only to whatever speed your
effective exhaust velocity of that system
would be, since otherwise, you’re sucking
in matter that you have to absorb the momentum
of to use for power and propellant which would
exceed what you were getting out of it.
That makes it handy for big carrier ships
wanting to turn directions or launch higher
speed vanguards out of, since it can supply
power to those too, by laser or energy beaming.
So the bussard ramjet wouldn’t work as planned
but they do have some variations and alternative
applications worthy of note.
See also: Black Hole Ships, Gravity Dipole
Drive, Laser Sail, Matter Beaming.
Caplan Thruster
A Caplan Thruster is a method for moving stars
proposed by Matthew Caplan in 2019 for using
statites to concentrate solar energy and erupt
solar wind in a beam out from a star, which
would then pass through an enormous Bussard
Ramjet Assembly and jets of Oxygen-14 to push
a star at a faster rate than a traditional
Shkadov Thruster would allow.
See our episode: Fleet of Stars, for more
discussion of potential methods of moving
stars.
See also: Bussard Ramjet, Helios Drive, Nova
Drive, Quasar Drive, Shkadov Thruster
Chemical Rockets
Chemical Rockets is the ballpark term for
any rocket running on chemical interactions
but generally refers to those running on combustion
and producing the classic high-intensity rocket
flame seen in countless rocket launches.
In such cases the fuel is typically burned
with an oxidizer to emit a propellant that,
because of its high temperature, also has
a high exhaust velocity, allowing it to exit
the rocket nozzle with a high momentum, while
pushing the ship in the opposite direction
with that same momentum.
Chemical rockets typically have far higher
exhaust velocities and specific impulse than
alternatives such as compressed gas, as is
used in CO2 cartridge guns, pumped water rocket
toys, or other alternatives such as the elasticity
that traditional catapults or bows use for
firing a projectile.
Because combustion occurs very quickly, it
permits a spacecraft to have enough thrust
to escape from a planetary gravity well, whereas
more efficient ion drives could never get
off the ground or clear an atmosphere, even
though they will ultimately push a ship to
a far higher speed.
However, as a result, chemical rockets are
most efficient at high temperatures and so
we run their combustion as hot as the rocket
body and nozzle can withstand.
The most efficient known chemical rocket fuel
is molecular hydrogen burned with oxygen,
though it is difficult to handle compared
to its more commonly used counterpart rocket
fuel, which is essentially kerosene.
Many other fuels have advantages in certain
conditions or environments, or are easier
or safer to work with, or easier to obtain,
which becomes critical in wanting to source
your fuel from your destination for a return
trip, in-situ production of fuel from whatever
is available on the Moon or Mars or elsewhere.
See also: Ion Drive, Propellant, Oxidizer,
Rocket Equation
Clarketech
Clarketech is not a propulsion system itself
but a category applying to many possible propulsion
methods suggested in hypothetical science
or science fiction.
The name is derived from Arthur C. Clarke’s
famous quote that “any sufficiently advanced
technology is indistinguishable from magic”,
and is the name for various technologies that
folks have suggested that would not seem possible
under currently-known physics and can include
negative matter or other exotic matter types,
as well as faster than light systems and perpetual
motion machines.
It would also include propulsion technologies
that operated by altering physical constants,
such as the speed of light or force of gravity,
or the electromagnetic or strong and weak
nuclear forces.
Or bending spacetime in strange fashions,
like creating a circle with only 359 degrees
inside, or portals to other dimensions with
different properties.
See our episode: Clarketech, for more discussion
of these near-magical technologies.
See also: Alcubierre Drive, Bias Drive, Diametric
Drive, FTL drive, Inertia Reduction Drive,
Krasnikov Tube, Pitch Drive, Negative Matter
Propulsion, Warp Drive, Wormhole Drive
Diametric Drive
The Diametric Drive is a Hypothetical Clarketech
reactionless drive typically envisioned as
running on negative mass, but may work on
any field or force which can be used to create
an effective pressure difference on the ship
to push it along, much as an airfoil in the
atmosphere works.
A property of negative mass particles is that
they are believed to gravitationally repel
both positive and negative mass, unlike positive
mass which is believed to pull on both positive
and negative mass.
Therefore, two positive mass particles pull
toward each other, two negative mass particles
repel each other, and a positive and negative
mass particle will actually shove the positive
mass away from the negative mass, while pulling
the negative mass toward the positive mass,
resulting in the positive mass particle being
chased by the negative one.
This technology is akin and equivalent to
a gravitational dipole drive where gravity
is the force or field being used for propulsion.
Diametric Drives are a subcategory of Pitch
Drives, and again may use negative energy
to achieve this push, or other effects, and
is very similar to a tractor beam, which might
also be used for spaceship propulsion.
See also: Bias Drive, Clarketech, Gravitational
Dipole Drive, Pitch Drive, Negative Matter
Propulsion, Reactionless Drive
Disjunction Drive
The concept behind the disjunction drive is
that a field might be disjoined from the object
that created it.
Conceptually, we might imagine a ship built
near a large gravity well, which was then
disjoined from the mass creating it and potentially
reattached to the front of the ship so it
constantly fell forward.
We might also disjoin something’s inertial
mass while leaving its gravitic mass in place,
or disjoin an electrostatic or magnetic field
from their generator.
This could also be a disjunction from a Higgs
boson field.
Needless to say, such technology would be
Clarketech.
See also: Bias Drive, Clarketech, Pitch Drive,
Reactionless Drive
Electric Solar Wind Sail
Our Sun has a surface temperature of thousands
of degrees constantly being stirred around
by the Sun’s immense magnetic field, and
this results in emission of particles, principally
ionized hydrogen, from our Sun’s surface,
moving at hundreds of kilometers per second.
It is possible to create a large thin sail
that would take these particles and be shoved
by them, same as a ship sails the winds here
on Earth, but as solar wind is very diffuse,
such a sail would need to be very large and
potentially impractical, even if made from
graphene.
Instead though we might run out conductive
cables or wires as thin as a hair, like spokes
on a wheel and kept in a circle by slow rotation
of the main body, allowing the equivalent
of square kilometers of sail from tiny threads.
As these particles are mostly ionized, they
can interact with electric and magnetic fields,
and in this case electrically to push the
ship along.
This method only works inside solar systems,
and thus is a good method for accelerating
ships to speed or decelerating them once they
reach another star, to save fuel, if used
in tandem with other drive systems.
It should be noted that, while all stars have
solar wind, the quantity and speed of those
particles will vary immensely as the difference
in brightness from the dimmest red dwarfs
to the largest supergiants is a factor of
over a billion.
Stellar remnants may also have more polar
particle stream, such as we might expect from
pulsars, which interstellar ships might use
for both gravitational assist, to gain speed
and direction, and to ride away on that jet,
gaining more speed.
So too, technologies such as Starlifting,
see that episode, which are normally intended
for mining a star of its materials, also allow
for increasing solar wind and directed streams
of denser and higher speed wind, similar to
what we might use for matter beaming.
See also: Magnetic Solar Wind Sail, Matter
Beaming, Solar Sail
Electrodynamic Tethering
Electrodynamic tethering is an electric propulsion
technique available around large magnetic
fields, such as many planets like earth have.
By having a satellite with an anode hanging
below it attached by an insulated tether,
we can run electric current through that system
and push away from Earth, shoving on the magnetic
field, or de-boost by having the tether above
instead of below.
Due to the size of these magnetic fields,
in a physical sense, the tethers must be long
to function, typically on an order of kilometers
of wire, and this technique may be reversed
to generate power rather than turn power into
thrust.
Electrodynamic tethering is often considered
an option for regenerating momentum in Skyhooks
and Rotovators, which lose momentum while
helping spaceships move from air to orbit,
though vastly reducing their own fuel needs
with the boost, see our episode: Skyhooks
for details, but a skyhook which lost some
momentum and altitude by lifting a spaceship
to orbit could slowly regenerate that over
some hours by gathering sunlight from solar
power and using that electricity to run an
electrodynamic tether, as skyhooks are already
very long tethers themselves.
Such technology is also good for stationkeeping
of satellites, space stations, or high orbital
variations of a rotavator meant to slingshot
a ship into deep space at high speed, and
could also be employed near superpowerful
magnetic fields like those of gas giants,
stars, and stellar remnants like white dwarfs,
neutron stars, pulsars, and black holes.
See aso: Rocket Equation
EM Drive
The EM Drive is a spacecraft thruster that
gained popularity, or notoriety, early this
century as a potential reactionless drive
or perpetual motion machine, as it seemed
to exhibit properties violating conservation
of momentum.
It was catapulted into fame when NASA Eaglework’s
Lab built and tested one in 2016 and it seemed
to exhibit the purported physics-breaking
properties but those were later blamed on
measurement errors and no other experiments
have since replicated the desired results.
As it appears to be a falsified technology,
rather than a still hypothetical one, we will
not classify it as Clarketech, and we will
also not give it further discussion today,
other than to say the basic principle is to
supply power to a magnetron into a resonant
cavity that is roughly cylindrical but narrows
a bit, thus has one side with a slightly smaller
diameter than the other, which the microwaves
will now bounce between.
This is said to produce a larger force on
the slightly wider side and a smaller force
on the narrower side, for a net force on the
object pushing it toward the narrow side,
which would be fine from a conservation of
momentum standpoint except the claim is that
it is producing more thrust than a photon
rocket under similar power input would achieve.
See also: Clarketech, Quantum Vacuum Thruster,
Reactionless Drive
Exhaust Velocity
Exhaust velocity is a critical term to rocketry
and spaceship propulsion, and represents the
speed at which particles of propellant are
being exhausted out of the back of a rocket
or ship drive.
That velocity, times the mass of the exhausted
particle, is its momentum.
As conservation of momentum requires a ship
to gain the same momentum in the opposite
direction as the propellant being exhausted,
a fuel with twice the exhaust velocity lets
a ship travel twice as fast, or the same speed
but on far less fuel.
Most chemical rocket fuels have an exhaust
velocity on an order of a few kilometers or
miles per second, and it is typically impractical
for a spaceship subject to the rocket equation
to go much more than thrice the exhaust speed,
thus we seek propellants with higher exhaust
speeds, or drives which circumvent the rocket
equation.
Fundamentally, all particles moving around
as a hot gas do so at a certain average speed
based on their temperature and mass, low mass
particles like hydrogen move much faster at
the same temperature as higher mass particles
like carbon dioxide do and thus are generally
preferable propellants, where a simple thermal
rocket is involed.
Most objects - including rocket nozzles - will
melt at temperatures of thousands of degrees,
so this is often our limit on exhaust velocity
as well, though options like magnetic containment
and ion drives circumvent this issue, and
can work better with heavier ions.
A propellant’s exhaust velocity divided
by the gravitic acceleration of Earth, 32
feet or 9.8 meters per second per second,
will give the approximate Specific Impulse
of a propellant, or essentially how many seconds
a rocket running on it could hover the ship
in Earth’s gravity.
See also: Propellant, Rocket Equation, Specific
Impulse
Field Propulsion
Field Propulsion refers to any type of spacecraft
whose momentum is exchanged by interaction
with external force fields, such as we see
in Electrodynamic Tethering, or any spaceship
being launched from an electromagnetic space
catapult, such as those discussed in our episode
Mass Drivers.
This also includes more hypothetical or fictional
examples, such as most gravitic drives, or
various other hypothetical external fields,
possibly including Vacuum Energy.
See also: Electrodynamic Tethering, Gravitic
Propulsion
FTL or Faster Than Light Drives
This category includes any method of moving
a spacecraft at superluminal speeds or faster
than the speed of light, which can range from
Tachyons to Wormholes to Hyperspace and Warp
Drives.
As known science generally considers this
impossible, it is classified as Clarketech,
and methods for doing it usually require exotic
matter such as negative matter or imaginary
mass, and generally result in time travel
and violations of casualty.
See our FTL series for more discussion of
techniques proposed and their strengths and
flaws.
See also: Alcubierre Warp Drive, Hyperspace
Jump Drive, Krasnikov Tube, Warp Drive, Wormhole
Drive.
Fuel
Fuel is what keeps a ship speeding up or slowing
down, or runs its onboard power plant to keep
the crew alive and the equipment running.
Most often with modern spacecraft the main
fuel is burned up with an oxidizer and the
byproduct of that combustion is expelled out
of the rocket as a propellant, pushing the
ship along.
Not all ships would have conventional fuels,
and might rely on nuclear reactors, solar
panels, energy beamed in from afar, or exotic
materials like antimatter.
We also contemplate ships needing no fuel
or propellant, a reactionless drive.
See also: Oxidizer, Propellant, Reactionless
Drive, Rocket Equation, Thrust
Fusion Torch Drive
While the term torchship originally referred
to a ship that converted matter completely
into energy, a fusion torch drive is one that
achieves very high speeds by being able to
turn fusion fuel, potentially even basic hydrogen,
into energy and the fused remainder into its
propellant heated by that energy.
Since fusion occurs at millions of degrees,
this is not something that takes place inside
a normal chamber, and generally needs magnetic
confinement and involves lots of equipment
for conversion of released radiation and heat
into electricity and then into accelerating
propellant, typically by some form of ion
drive or plasma thruster.
In practice this would really limit how fast
a fusion-powered ship could reach and how
fast it could accelerate up to that speed.
This is where the torch ship comes into play
as it is assuming the reaction is taking place
at the rear of the ship and basically acting
like a rocket flame rather than a reactor
or engine burning gas.
A ship able to do this is one which can reach
high speed quickly by high thrust, rather
than requiring low thrust from a reaction
inside the ship designed not to melt the ship
or blow it to bits or erode it all under the
intense gamma and neutron radiation.
There are many basic if still theoretical
designs, Atomic Rockets has the best collection
of them I know of, and many examples in science
fiction, but probably the best known, The
Epstein Drive from the Expanse series, is
a fusion torch ship design.
Fusion Torch Ships are beloved by space enthusiasts
as often being considered the most near-future
technology which definitely makes space travel
practical for regular human transport, including
interstellar travel and ground-to-space travel.
Though as we’ve discussed elsewhere, there
are lower tech or parallel tech options that
should allow interstellar colonization, many
of which we’ll review today.
See our episode: Fusion Propulsion for a more
in depth look on the topic.
See also: Antimatter Catalyzed Fusion, Ion
Drive, Photon Rocket, Torch Drive or Torch
Ship
Gravitational Dipole
A type of negative mass reactionless drive,
using a dumbbell-shaped ship with a sphere
of negative mass on one end, and positive
mass on the other, able to accelerate due
to the suspected properties of negative matter,
that it is attracted to positive matter but
exerts a push on it, thus two particles, one
negative mass and one positive, will result
in the positive mass fleeing the negative
which is pulled behind it in a perpetual and
accelerating chase.
This is a parallel concept to the Diametric
Drive.
A ship utilizing this technique is described
by Robert L. Forward.
He proposed a simple dumbbell-shaped spacecraft
design using a ball of regular positive mass
on one side, the front side, and negative
mass on the back or stern of the ship.
Such a ship in theory can accelerate eternally,
though likely would experience drag force
on its prow, from interstellar gas and radiation,
giving it a maximum speed at 99.9-something
percent of light speed, making it what is
sometimes called a lighthugger, a ship that
moves at within a tiny fraction of light speed.
Such a ship could slow down by flipping over
and would accelerate or decelerate based on
its ratio of drive mass to payload, and could
likely physically anchor itself to any larger
object.
Such a ship may or may not violate conservation
of energy or momentum, though would appear
to do so on first glance.
See also: Diametric Drive, Negative Mass Propulsion,
Reactionless Drive
Gravitic Propulsion
Gravitic Propulsion is a blanket term for
any ship drive manipulating artificial gravity
or using anti-gravity, directed gravity waves,
graviton beams, certain types of tractor beams,
or insulating itself from gravity to move.
While we typically classify this as Clarketech,
and indeed have an episode on the topic, Clarketech:
Anti-Gravity, it does seem plausible that
gravity may be able to be manipulated or produced
by means other than raw mass.
In theory a gravity drive might also circumvent
normal inertial problems of rapid acceleration,
as discussed in Isaac Asimov’s 4th Foundation
novel, Foundation’s Edge, which features
a ship using this sort of drive.
Normally, rapid acceleration causes damage
as not everything is accelerating simultaneously
at the same rate, but when falling into a
gravity well, this is not an issue, as the
force applies to every particle equally, no
matter how strong or fast the acceleration,
and ignoring tidal effects.
A gravitic engine with this property would
permit safe super-rapid acceleration of people
and cargo, which is of inestimable value for
short space journeys especially, or those
on interstellar ships able to reach ultra-relativistic
speeds.
See also: Clarketech, Diametric Drive, Field
Propulsion, Gravitational Dipole, Inertia
Reduction Drive, Negative Mass Propulsion,
Reactionless Drive
Hall Effect Thruster
A type of ion drive, the Hall Effect Thruster,
is named for Edwin Hall and the Hall Effect,
and is recognizable for its rather lovely
plasma jet colors that it emits, based on
the propellant it uses.
The Hall Effect results in a potential difference
perpendicular to a magnetic field, so we can
create a cylindrical chamber with a large
magnetic solenoid in it, and any ionized particles
will accelerate down the axis of that chamber
as with a normal ion drive.
The magnetic field itself is responsible for
ionizing the propellant and shoving it and
the electrons out the back to neutralize the
ions as they emerge.
Hall Effect Thrusters have been around since
before we went to the Moon and have seen continual
improvement, and come in multiple varieties,
as well as achieving exhaust velocities as
high as ten times our best chemical rocket
fuels.
As is often the case, we have to choose between
high thrust or high efficiency, and Hall Effect
Thrusters are very low thrust.
The highest power one yet produced is the
University of Michigan’s, which is a 100
kilowatt thruster massing 230 Kilograms and
producing just 5.4 Newtons of thrust.
Force being equal to mass times acceleration,
this thruster, without any additional equipment
including a power source, would only accelerate
at about 0.0022 meters per second per second,
about 4,500 times slower than something falling
in Earth’s gravity.
So, by itself, it could not be used to leave
Earth, however one accelerating constantly
for an entire day would reach a speed of 190
meters per second, for an entire month, nearly
6 kilometers per second, and if its fuel held
for an entire year, 70 kilometers per second.
See also: Ion Drive, VASIMR
Hawking Radiation Drive
A Hawking Radiation Drive is one that utilizes
a small black hole to create a photon rocket,
as it is believed that black holes evaporate
over time, releasing mostly photons, and do
so faster as they get lower in mass.
A one megaton black hole is believed to evaporate
at a rate that would release 356 Trillion
Watts of Power, and would do so at a slowly
rising rate for a lifetime of 1474 years,
while one at a tenth of the mass, 100 kilotons,
would emit 100 times more power and live just
a thousandth as long, 1.47 years, and it is
usually assumed Hawking Radiation Drives would
use black holes in this mass range of 100
to 1000 kilotons for operation.
Bigger ships would use multiple black holes,
not a bigger one, as bigger is lower power
for black holes, albeit vastly longer lived
and with higher ultimate energy output.
Smaller is better but smaller is harder to
make, and even harder to refuel, and we have
looked at methods of using them as ships,
power sources, and weapons, in our Black Hole
Series, including hypothetical ways of creating
them.
This does appear possible under known physics,
so we do not necessarily classify it as Clarketech,
though it is at the hazy edge of that category,
especially as it is also difficult to chain
the black hole magnetically to the ship and
to make the emissions, mostly gamma rays,
to leave the ship non-omnidirectional, as
we have no gamma-reflective materials.
In their absence you have to absorb those
and re-emit it as heat at a lower frequency
that existing materials could then reflect.
For Hawking Radiation drives, bigger is not
better, and again for a bigger ship you just
add more black holes.
This is not the only way to use black holes
as spaceship drives or to move ships.
See also: Black Hole Ships, Clarketech, Photon
Rocket.
Helicon Double-Layer Thruster
A type of Plasma Thruster, the Helicon Double
Layer Thruster, or HDLT for short, excites
its propellant to high velocity by using radio
waves to break it down into a plasma.
It is similar concept to the better-known
VASIMR thruster, and is not subject to building
up a charge and needing a neutralizer, as
an ion drive is by default, nor does it have
any moving parts or anything particularly
susceptible to erosion for it to function,
which makes it a low maintenance design as
long as you have a power supply and remaining
propellant.
See also: Ion Drive, VASIMR
Helios Drive
The Helios Drive is a variation of the Shkadov
Thruster that incorporates Starlifting Technology
to move stars and can accelerate a star faster
than a Shkadov Thruster but achieves a slower
maximum velocity, because it uses accelerated
plasma as the drive, lowering the stars mass
in the process.
By turning mirrors towards a star instead
of reflecting its light in a single direction
like the Shkadov Thruster does, we can cause
a stream of hot matter to come off that star
like a rocket flame.
This technique works well for moving dangerously
large stars which might go supernova out of
a region of space, as it takes far less time
to get that star moving at interstellar speeds
and also reduces the mass of that star, potentially
extending its lifetime.
A variation of this using Bussard Ramjets
to fuse the plasma as it comes off that star
to provide more thrust is called a Caplan
Thruster.
This technology can also be used to boost
the surface temperature of a star, by statite
mirrors over its polar regions such as a red
dwarf, to produce a hotter star with a spectrum
more like our own, for its equatorial region
where the planets and space habitats might
be at, and is known as Starboosting.
See our episodes: Starliftng and Fleet of
Stars for more discussion.
See also: Caplan Thruster, Shkadov Thruster,
Statite
Hyperspace Jump Engine or Hyperdrive
Hyperspace drives are a blanket term for any
number of FTL drives that operate by having
a spaceship leave this Universe to enter into
another congruent to our own, that allows
for faster travel by either being smaller
or having a higher speed of light.
As a conceptual example, imagine you wanted
to travel from The Western United States to
the Eastern US, and could leap from the real
world onto where you are on a map of Earth
the size of a normal piece of paper in an
atlas, and just step from where you were to
where you want to be, as that map is congruent
to the US, and teleport back to the real world,
as opposed to walking the whole way.
Popular scifi examples of hyperspace would
be Star Wars, Babylon 5, Event Horizon, Warhammer
40,000, and many more.
It is more or less interchangeable with the
terms subspace, superspace, overspace, underspace,
or Nulspace, though these are different concepts
in mathematics.
While many modern cosmological models permit
various possible hyperspaces or similar, we
have yet to document any, nor a means to transfer
between them or survive in such a hyperspace,
and for this reason we would classify this
as Clarketech.
This topic is discussed in greater detail
in our episodes: Cheating Reality, the Edge
of the Universe, and Folding Space.
See Also: Clarketech, FTL Drive
Inertia Reduction Drive
Inertia reduction works on the assumption
that all objects have an inertia or momentum
that must be conserved, and which is based
on their speed and mass.
Specifically their inertial mass, which is
seen as different from the mass which generates
or interacts with gravity.
Inertial mass is how much an object resists
being shoved on, by something like a rocket
attached to it.
A ship which massed 100 tons, and was able
to shift its inertial mass down to 10 tons
while in flight, should be able to move like
an object with the same momentum or kinetic
energy but a tenth the mass, thus far faster.
It would also do far less damage on a collision
with an object, which means it would represent
a safer form of space traffic.
So too, it could slow down very suddenly,
like we often see spaceships in science fiction
do, braking speed by rapidly restoring its
true inertial mass or raising it even higher.
Such Technology is generally considered Clarketech,
and may violate conservation of momentum or
energy.
Inertia Reduction Technology may also imply
access to Inertial Dampening Technology, such
as we see in science fiction for explaining
how ships can rapidly jump to high speeds
or down from them without painting the ship's
interior with the jellified remains of the
crew, a feature we might also see with Gravitic
Propulsion, which might be considered as a
twin technology.
See also: Clarketech, Field Propulsion, Gravitic
Propulsion
Ion Drive
Ion Drives, also known as ion thrusters or
ion engines, represent a large category of
electric spaceship propulsion, generally any
situation where ionized particles, being those
with some electric charge, are accelerated
in an electric or magnetic field powered by
an electric supply.
The ion is typically propelled out the back
of the ship by the electric or magnetic field
at a far higher speed than combustion of a
rocket fuel allows.
They require an electricity supply which can
be anything from batteries to radioisotope
thermal generators, or RTGS, to onboard reactors,
solar panels, or energy delivered by a laser
or energy beam.
These are typically low-thrust, high-efficiency
engines which cannot be used for take off
from a planet, but allow for much higher speeds,
as they typically could operate for many hours
or even weeks in comparison to a chemical
rocket, which will usually run for mere minutes
at most, but can provide a high enough thrust
during that period to escape a planet.
For this reason ion drives are a popular option
for situations where power can be provided
but haste is not needed, such as an interplanetary
voyage or a satellite needing to counter minor
orbital perturbations, or station-keeping.
There is no real limit on ion drive exhaust
velocity, as fundamentally it is a particle
accelerator, and those have achieved velocities
as high as 0.999,999,999,988c, but they are
likely to have practical limits on what is
most effective.
See also: Hall Effect Thruster, VASIMR
Krasnikov Tube
The Krasnikov Tube is an example of a Warp
Drive for FTL travel, and like other warp
drives relies on the existence of exotic matter
not yet experimentally shown to exist in nature,
and thus is classified as Clarketech.
Under standard special relativity, a ship
moving at near-light-speed will experience
far less time on a journey than those outside
it will have experienced.
A ship moving at 99.5% of light speed will
have only one day pass for every 10 experienced
by those outside, and thus could travel to
Epsilon Eridani, a star System 10 light years
away, in roughly 10 years, but only experience
one year on board the ship.
In simplified terms, S.V Krasnikov argues
that in the wake of that ship is a tube that
allows a shortcut through time, where someone
could make that 10 light year journey in just
one year.
This allows a fast ship to make the journey
as normal, but for someone to depart 9 years
later in its wake and arrive at the destination
when the ship does.
This means a ship could depart in the year
2090 to Epsilon Eridani and a person could
leave here in the year 2099 and both arrive
at Epsilon Eridani in the year 2100.
One should be able to keep a constant stream
of ships to a given destination, say one departing
the first day of each month, to provide a
tube of constant FTL travel between two star
systems.
However, a two-tube system, one going each
way to allow return trips, is generally considered
to violate causality.
See also: Alcubierre Warp Drive, Clarktech,
FTL Drive, Warp Drive
Laser Sails
A Laser Sail is very much like a solar sail,
bouncing light or other EM radiation off a
thin reflective sail to impart momentum and
thrust on the ship the sail is connected to,
except it allows us four options: First, to
push on a spaceship by sending a concentrated
supply of photons to be absorbed or bounce
off the back, like a solar sail, only vastly
more powerful and thus allowing a smaller
sail to achieve the same thrust.
Second, by concentrating a beam we can also
keep it focused on the sail far from its origin
source.
Third, its origin source need not be a star,
but can also be a power planet or relay station,
such as a deep space comet converted into
a fusion reactor and laser, allowing us to
extend range indefinitely.
And Fourth, it allows us to transfer energy
to the ship, be it by solar panels absorbing
a laser beam far from the Sun or giant rectennas
absorbing microwaves.
Depending on circumstances, a ship might take
advantage of one or more of these options,
even if it had another drive system and power
plant.
Transmitting energy to a spaceship allows
us to run ship operations, but can also allow
us to achieve higher thrust by using that
energy to superheat a propellant or ionize
it and fire it out the back as with an ion
drive.
Doing this will usually sacrifice a higher
final speed in favor of faster acceleration,
though such technology can be employed in
tandem with a matter beam to potentially refuel
the ship's propellant.
That propellant can also be used to fire forward,
and thus slow the ship even though a beam
is hitting it from the otherside, which is
a good way of moving comets, by beaming energy
to them from in-system that they use to vaporize
ice as propellant to push back against the
beam and bring them into a system.
So too, if your destination system has a laser
beaming array in place, it can slow a ship
on arrival without fuel.
And we have discussed how to forward deploy
these beamers to use them to slow each other
on arrival in a new system to help a fleet
slow down.
Use of Laser Sails is heavily discussed in
the show, particularly in our Episodes Exodus
Fleet, Interstellar Laser Highways, and Interstellar
Colonization Strategies, where we discuss
using relay chains of them between star systems
to allow cheap relativistic travel to near
light speed.
See also: Electric Solar Wind Sail, Magnetic
Solar Wind Sail, Matter Beam, Solar Moth,
Solar Sail
Magnetic Solar Wind Sail
A Magnetic Solar Wind Sail, also called a
Winglee or just a Magsail, is very much like
an Electric Solar Wind Sail, using the stream
of ionized matter emitted from the Sun to
drive it to speed, but can take advantage
of superconductors, especially high temperature
superconductors, to speed or slow or maneuver
inside a star system by using the solar wind.
It should also be noted that the galaxy has
many pockets of high speed ionized gas that
might be ridden around the galaxy or out toward
the rim, and that it may also be used for
slowing from higher but still modest interstellar
speeds by spiraling into a solar system.
See also: Electric Solar Wind Sail, Solar
Sail
Magnetoplasmadynamic Thruster
The Magnetoplasmadynamic Thruster, or MPDT,
or MPD Arcjet, or Lorentz Force Accelerator,
is another example of electric propulsion,
but a potentially very high speed one compared
to your basic ion drive or Resistojet.
The MPDT is fed on ionized gas, with everything
from hydrogen to neon, argon, or xenon being
good but lithium having the best known performance
to date.
The acceleration chamber is acting on the
principles of the Lorentz force or Electromagnetic
force, as opposed to electrostatic or magnetic
forces alone, and that is what is accelerating
our plasma, and as with similar designs we
have a lot of erosion of our cathodes.
This combined with it being a power hog, needing
hundreds of kilowatts to run efficiently,
often make it of low interest for satellites
and small probes.
That is no bar to usage for larger ships and
manned interplanetary missions, however, and
it is a popular candidate for those options,
where you would expect to have lots of power
and a crew able to do some maintenance.
In theory a MPDT could achieve an exhaust
velocity of over 100 kilometers per second,
though just over half that is more common
in tests, but that would be sufficient for
interplanetary travel and at the lower edge
of viable interstellar travel, as we discussed
in our episode Crawlonizing the Galaxy.
It also has a very high thrust compared to
most other electric propulsion techniques,
permitting not just a high final speed but
an acceleration rate to it that is not superslow.
See also: Arcjet, Ion Drive, Resistojet, VASIMR
Matter Beam
Matter Beaming is an example of how we can
circumvent the rocket equation by accelerating
matter at some stationary facility to push
on a ship, much like a laser sail, but such
matter beams in theory could also refuel a
ship.
A beam of oxygen could provide air to breathe
and shove on a ship from behind, as a simple
conceptual example.
This is typically thought of as a stream of
ionized atoms fired out of a long linear particle
accelerator, and has the problem that they
will tend to shove off each other being ionized
and like particles of the same electric charge
repelling each other, causing the beam to
spread out too fast.
Numerous workarounds have been proposed, though
it should be noted this could also include
actual cargo pods rather than microscopic
particles, as a ship might catch such a pod
in its own net, a long decelerator, or a pod
might be designed to vaporize near a ship
so that its scattered atoms spread to push
on the sail or pusher plate, and such a pod
can have limited guidance and transmission
packages on it.
Regardless of focusing methods and their effectiveness,
matter beams are far more useful than laser
sails for pushing ships up to speed while
they are moving up to or at interplanetary
velocities.
Matter beaming is a parallel concept to energy
beaming, though there it is assumed we would
be using photons and electromagnetic waves,
and principally to transfer power, which we
discuss more in the laser sails entry.
See also: Laser Sail, Magnetic Solar Wind
Sail
Medusa Drive
The Medusa Drive is a variation of Pulsed
Nuclear Drives that replaces the pusher plate
behind the ship with the equivalent of a parachute
in front of the ship.
A large sail assembly connected to the ship
by a very long tether is shoved forward by
detonating nuclear bombs inside the sail,
and much like the normal Orion Drive’s pusher
plate, this shoves the sail forward, which
then drags the ship along by the tether, rather
than shoving the plate forward to push the
ship from behind.
This potentially lets you use nukes for leaving
low orbit, as the detonation might be in safer
higher orbits and drag the ship along.
See Also: Nuclear Pulse Drive, Orion Drive
Microwave Electrothermal Thruster
Whether generated by an internal power source
or beamed in as microwave energy beam, it
is possible to use microwaves inside a spaceship
much as we use them in our kitchens, to heat
matter up.
The Microwave Electrothermal Thruster or MET
does this, and much like the arcjet rocket,
igniting a plasma in a propellant gas.
Electrothermal Thrusters all work on the concept
of using electricity to heat the propellant,
and as mentioned, this electricity might be
supplied internally, by reactor, RTG, or battery,
or by solar panels, or beamed in.
As electrothermal propulsion goes, the MET
is usually considered superior to the Resistojet,
due to its higher specific impulse, but inferior,
or at best roughly equal, to the arcjet.
Electrothermal thrusters in general are popular
mostly for their simplicity as an electric
propulsion system, as they are generally neither
efficient nor high thrust, even for electric
propulsion.
One advantage they do have is fuel, as a MET
can run using water as its propellant, which
is super abundant throughout the cosmos.
See also: Arcjet Rocket, Laser Sail, Resistojets,
Solar Moth
Negative Mass Propulsion
Negative Mass Propulsion is a catch-all term
for any drive that relies on the properties
of negative mass, generally how it should
warp space to expand around it, opposite of
normal matter contracting space around it,
or be pushed toward you if you shove on it.
As no negative mass has ever been detected,
any negative mass technology currently qualifies
as Clarketech, and this includes most warp
drive and wormhole proposals.
There are multiple versions of how negative
mass should operate, depending on if it is
negative inertial mass or gravitational mass,
active or passive, or some combination thereof.
In the most commonly discussed version it
is generally assumed that positive mass will
attract both positive and negative masses,
and negative mass particles would repel both
positive and negative masses.
As a result, two positive mass particles pull
toward each other, two negative mass particles
repel each other, and a positive and negative
mass particle will actually shove the positive
mass away from the negative mass, while pulling
the negative mass toward the positive mass,
resulting in the positive mass particle being
chased by the negative one.
This is the basis of reactionless spaceship
propulsion concepts like the diametric drive,
and we discuss variations of negative matter
in our episode Clarketech: Anti-Gravity
See also: Alcubierre Warp Drive, Bias Drive,
Clarketech, Diametric Drive, Pitch Drive,
Warp Drive, Wormhole Drive.
Neutrino Rocket
Neutrinos are very low mass high speed particles
that normally do not interact with regular
matter, being more likely than not to pass
through an entire planet without being absorbed.
If you could manipulate them they would be
very handy as a rocket propellant, as they
would not superheat air or structures around
them or shake the ground, allowing for quieter
propulsion.
A Neutrino Rocket currently would qualify
as Clarketech, as it would require technology
that either allowed for the near total reflection
or absorption of neutrinos or their production
in a directed fashion.
Such technology or materials generally imply
the ability to have far more efficient fusion
reactors.
While a rocket beam made of neutrinos is useful
for stealth purposes, as neutrinos are hard
for us to detect,this probably only assists
in stealth against lower-tech targets, as
it might be assumed that anyone possessing
this ability also has a very good neutrino
detector too.
It would remain a valuable propellant for
its low heat transfer rate to objects around
it.
It potentially would represent a Quiet Aliens
technology for the Fermi Paradox as well,
as the implied technologies of stealthy neutrino
drives that emitted little heat or noise would
also have advantages being used in other energy
and industrial applications.
See also: Clarktech, Photon Rocket.
Nova Drive
Nova Drives, along with their big brother,
the supernova drive, are a method of moving
dead stars such as white dwarfs, by delivering
a stream of hydrogen to them to cause a small
nova.
This is a parallel technology to the Orion
Drive, which propels a ship with nuclear bombs,
only vastly bigger.
See our episode: Fleet of Stars, for more
details.
See Also: Helios Drive, Pulsed Nuclear Drive,
Orion Drive
Nuclear Electric Ion Drive
A Nuclear Electric Ion Drive, also called
a nuclear electric rocket, or nuclear electric
propulsion, refers to any type of drive where
a nuclear reactor, fission or fusion, is being
used to generate heat to convert into electricity,
which in turn is used for electric propulsion,
such as an ion drive, where charged particles
are accelerated by electrodes or electromagnets
to serve as a high-speed propellant.
This would apply to a ship that was running
a nuclear reactor as its main way to heat
the ship, run the lights, life support, and
other equipment, and use excess power to run
the ion drive propelling the ship.
As there is always some significant loss in
converting energy at each step, as well as
additional equipment to buy, carry, wear down,
and maintain, many nuclear designs seek to
circumvent the normal heat engine producing
electricity for options like the Nuclear Light
Bulb, Nuclear Thermal Propulsion, or Nuclear
Pulse Approaches.
See also: Ion Drive, Fusion Torch Drive, Nuclear
Lightbulb, Nuclear Pulse Drive, Nuclear Thermal
Propulsion
Nuclear Lightbulb
While a nuclear lightbulb drive might seem
like a photon rocket at first glance, and
indeed could be modified to act as one, the
purpose of a nuclear lightbulb is to take
a gas core fission reactor rocket, run it
at roughly 22000 Kelvin, and give it a quartz
wall, which is transparent to photon emissions
at that temperature, which are mostly hard
ultraviolet.
Again, that light could be allowed to move
out the back, making for a weak but reasonable
photon rocket, since the power source is nuclear
and energy dense.
Instead though, we run it into a propellant
that absorbs those ultraviolet photons and
which we would expect to provide an exhaust
velocity possibly as high as 30,000 meters
per second, far better than our best chemical
fuels and quite reasonable for interplanetary
spacecraft.
For details, see our episode: The Nuclear
Option.
See also: Nuclear Electric Ion Drive, Nuclear
Pulse Drive, Nuclear Thermal Propulsion, Photon
Rocket
Nuclear Pulse Drive
The Nuclear Pulse Drive, also called external
pulsed plasma propulsion, is best known for
its Orion Drive variation, which uses nuclear
bombs detonated behind the ship and pushing
it to higher speed, relying on the vast amounts
of energy proportional to mass that nuclear
detonations have.
These are not always large bombs or at a very
high rate of explosion.
Ideally we would like many very small nukes
to detonate almost continuously, to produce
the equivalent of a nuclear rocket flame,
but generally, bombs are both cheaper and
more efficient the bigger you make them, and
we must resort to ultra-rare artificial elements
or antimatter catalyzed fusion to contemplate
very small nuclear explosions more equivalent
to a typical bomb or even less than a hand
grenade.
Your basic design calls for a large and sturdy
plate behind the ship, called the pusher plate,
which can absorb or reflect the photons released
by the blast, and this shoves it forward where
it slams into a layer of immense springs,
which slowly push the plate back into place
to await the next detonation, while moving
the ship forward at a more modest acceleration,
translating the rapid shove of the plate into
a protracted push on the ship.
The Medusa variation uses a forward sail to
absorb the blast, which is attached by a long
and somewhat elastic tether to the ship.
While the Orion Drive was the first major
design of this type, we also have other variations,
such as Project Daedalus, which imagined detonating
lithium deuteride pellets with a laser and
a small deuterium and tritium trigger at its
center, not unlike the laser fusion method
used at the National Ignition Facility.
This would release very modest fusion powered
explosions to run the ship.
Were we ever able to produce a material able
to reflect gamma rays - which would be invaluable
for both fusion and many other high energy
applications - this would make a superior
pusher plate option, reflecting rather than
absorbing the gamma rays and achieving twice
the momentum per detonation.
Nuclear Pulse Drives are mostly unproto-typed,
minus some early work in the 50’s and 60’s
and later modeling, but are considered buildable
and do have the ability to reach speeds which
would allow interstellar travel.
See our episodes: “The Nuclear Option”
and “Revitalizing Project Orion: A New Dawn
for Nuclear Spaceship Propulsion” for more
discussion of this technology and its variations.
See also: Antimatter Catalyzed Fusion, Medusa
Drive, Nuclear Electric Ion Drive, Nuclear
Pulse Drive, Nuclear Thermal Propulsion, Orion
Drive
Nuclear Thermal Propulsion
In a Nuclear Thermal Propulsion system we
have a reactor which is being cooled much
like a normal fission reactor, but that heat
is used to superheat a propellant.
While the individual engineering varies and
is complex, the basic concept is as simple
as that, cool your nuclear reactor with your
future propellant, and try to get that propellant
as hot as you can without melting things,
which is more difficult if you are attempting
closed loops that make sure your actual propellant
is not getting radioactive.
While it is possible to run an open-cycle
reactor that would blow radioactive propellant
out the back, and rather cheaply and efficiently,
this is not considered a viable method of
spaceship propulsion on or near Earth, or
honestly any place people will be hanging
out at.
Either closed or open cycle NTP’s make interplanetary
missions much easier, and of course space
is empty of basically everything but radiation
already, so other than shielding the crew,
we mostly need to ensure safety when approaching
or leaving inhabited places.
While they are usually advertised as never
being used to get off Earth, from a realistic
perspective this is reasonably safe with a
closed loop NTP, not particularly more or
less dangerous than a normal rocket to those
who might be near it or get hit by its debris
on a failed launch, and thus may one day become
common in launch vehicles.
In the meantime though it is contemplated
as a second stage system used to travel from
some space station in high orbit of Earth
to other worlds, with conventional rockets
or alternatives like space elevators being
used to get to that station.
See also: Nuclear Electric Ion Drive, Nuclear
Lightbulb, Nuclear Pulse Drive
Orion Drive
The Orion drive is the best known example
of Nuclear Pulse Drives, using nuclear explosions
behind the ship to propel it to very high
speeds, sufficient for interstellar travel.
See our episode: “Revitalizing Project Orion:
A New Dawn for Nuclear Spaceship Propulsion”
for details.
See also: Medusa Drive, Nuclear Pulse Drive
Oxidizer
While every rocket needs fuel to burn, it
also needs an oxidizer, as no fire can go
without oxygen to breathe, and indeed molecular
oxygen is the most common oxidizer.
In most cases a rocket’s propellant will
be a byproduct of the combustion of the fuel
with the oxidizer, carbon dioxide and water
being plentiful in most rocket exhaust, as
well as plane and car exhaust.
See also: Chemical Rocket, Propellant, Rocket
Equation
Photon Rocket
The key to a good rocket is a high exhaust
velocity, fast moving particles coming out
the back of your ship and the faster the better.
And with the possible exception of exotic
hypothetical particles like tachyons, nothing
moves faster than photons, the particles of
light that travel at the speed of light, and
of gravity.
This is where the photon rocket comes in,
sometimes called a flashlight drive.
This is a device that shoots photons out as
its rocket plume, possibly light, possibly
even a laser beam, maybe different frequencies
like microwave or gamma rays or even radio.
Such a ship, if it could contain a large portion
of its mass as photons waiting to be propellant,
or something it turned into photons, like
antimatter or Hawking radiation off a black
hole, would allow a ship to travel at near
light speeds.
Now, the problem with a flashlight is that
your typical modern battery contains less
than a million joules per kilogram of battery,
about a megajoule, just a percent or two of
what an equal mass of gasoline or rocket fuel
has, and while an actual kilogram of photons,
or its mass-energy equivalent, would be an
amazingly powerful rocket fuel, that wouldn’t
be a megajoule, but rather 90 billion megajoules.
That drained battery only lost a few nanograms
of mass, not a kilogram.
We might imagine some box made of perfect
mirrors that light bounced around inside,
frozen light essentially, or options for things
that convert some or all of their mass into
photons - nuclear reactions, antimatter, evaporating
black holes, and so on.
If you have these, photon rockets are a good
approach to achieving very high speeds.
For lower speeds though, you’ll get more
thrust from the same energy by applying it
to a propellant.
A particle of hydrogen that soaked up a 1
MeV gamma ray and flew out of your ship is
going to have more momentum exchange, and
thus yield more thrust than that gamma ray
alone did.
But it also had 938 times more mass-energy
than that photon carried and is now only moving
away at 4400 kilometers per second, which
is dozens of times faster than any spacecraft
we’ve ever made but still only about 1.4%
of light speed.
With that in mind, unless you actually have
a matter to energy converter like the Torchship
has, ships moving in interplanetary space,
even if possessing a photon rocket, will still
opt to use that energy to superheat propellant
as they should have little difficulty tanking
up on hydrogen or some other plentiful propellant
while in-system.
This is essentially the notion of a Nuclear
Lightbulb Drive.
See also: Laser Sail, Matter Beaming, Neutrino
Rocket, Nuclear Lightbulb, Propellant, Rocket
Equation, Torch Drive or Torchship
Pitch Drive
The Pitch Drive is a Hypothetical Clarketech
reactionless drive where a field or force
can be used to create an effective pressure
difference on the ship to push it along.
Diametric Drives are a subcategory of Pitch
Drives, where there is a source for the force,
like a ball of negative mass.
Pitch drives in a wider sense do not require
a source and would include technologies that
simply caused some force or pressure difference
to appear on your ship.
This is a general concept rather than a hypothetical
engine so no specific cases are involved and
it would qualify as Clarketech.
This technology is also akin to a gravitational
dipole drive when gravity is the force or
field being used for propulsion, and negative
mass is available.
See also: Bias Drive, Clarketech, Diametric
Drive, Gravitational Dipole Drive, Reactionless
Drive
Propellant
Propellant is the term for anything leaving
a spaceship with the intent of adding to its
momentum, and typically this is the byproduct
of combustion of the rocket’s fuel with
an oxidizer, though a propellant can also
be ions slung out of the ship by electric
propulsion or photons produced by an antimatter
reaction.
All things being equal, your optimal propellant
is fast-moving, with a high exhaust velocity
and specific impulse, and this can include
light speed or near light speed particles
like photons, gravitons, neutrinos, or various
other lesser known or hypothetical particles.
See also: Antimatter Rocket, Exhaust Velocity,
Fuel, Oxidizer, Neutrino Rocket, Photon Rocket,
Rocket Equation, Specific Impulse
Pulsed Inductive Thruster
A Pulsed Inductive Thruster, also known as
a PIT, is another example of an ion drive
but one utilizing both magnetic and electric
fields.
It is popular for its lack of electrodes,
which tend to be a weak spot of other ion
thruster designs as they are eroded by use.
PIT have a nozzle that sprays a small puff
of gas toward a flat electromagnetic coil,
which a bank of capacitors will then pulse
up to many thousands of volts for just a few
microseconds.
This causes the gas to ionize and move in
a circle opposite the original direction,
making it a plasma flowing perpendicularly
to its magnetic field, which is ideal for
the Lorentz Force to grab and hurl out the
back of the spaceship at tens of kilometers
per second.
PIT is also scalable to high powers too, with
a megawatt system able to pulse it a couple
hundred times per second, making for decent
thrust, and it’s relatively omnivorous for
propellant, able to use everything from water
or carbon dioxide to ammonia or hydrazine
to argon or xenon, which makes it attractive
for use on Mars missions where it might be
able to refuel while orbiting from scooping
Mars’s carbon-dioxide rich atmosphere.
See also: Ion Drive, Magnetoplasmadynamic
Thruster
Quantum Vacuum Thruster
Also Called a Q-thruster, the Quantum Vacuum
Thruster is a hypothetical space drive making
use of the Casimir Effect and Quantum Mechanics.
It is the current belief of physics that at
the Quantum scale we have a constant ebb and
flow of electromagnetic waves and virtual
particles pop in and out of existence, we
discussed this more in our episode Antimatter
Factories, where we explain how virtual particles
and sea and valence quark interactions are
thought to take place.
In summary though, we generally think of what
we call the Vacuum of space, sucked of all
normal matter and walled off from outside
radiation, to still not be quite a vacuum.
Rather it is a false vacuum that still has
all these electromagnetic waves and virtual
particles popping in and out of existence
on the hazy edge of reality.
They exist for an instant but there’s always
a ton of them, amounting to a constant supply
and density.
If you’ve heard of the Casimir Effect, this
is where we put two very flat and uncharged
conductive plates just a few nanometers from
each other, barely enough room for a few atoms.
This generates a very small repulsive or attractive
force or pressure on the plates depending
on the arrangement.
While you can get a similar effect inside
any medium that’s oscillating like water,
empty space and vacuum isn’t supposed to
have any of that, no medium to oscillate.
So this was quite mysterious and is where
we get concepts like Vacuum Energy and False
Vacuum from, experimentally anyway.
One way of thinking of this is that no virtual
particle can appear between those two plates
whose wavelength is bigger than the plates.
Which means if you get them close enough,
no virtual particles could appear, making
for an even more vacuumy-vacuum.
That means the plates are experiencing a net
force from outside, where the vacuum is just
normal and thus greater than inside, and we
can use that to create power.
Key bit there: if the quantum was getting
confusing, we can generate power, or thus
photons or other particles, out of nothing
at all, and thus don’t have to carry them
with us, particles we can use as a propellant.
Meaning we now have a photon rocket, or neutrino
rocket or a plasma of whatever particles or
waves are emerging from our plates, which
are going to keep pumping them out.
It is debatable if this would qualify as a
reactionless drive since it is generating
reaction mass.
Since this would seem to blatantly violate
conservation of energy and momentum, and make
for a very simple perpetual motion machine,
it is generally assumed to be Clarketech,
it is also very similar conceptually to the
EM drive which is better known and more recent,
though this technology continues to be discussed,
and seriously.
For those wanting a deeper dive, Centauri
Dreams has had several articles discussing
it and variations over the years.
See also: Clarketech, Bias Drive, Diametric
Drive, EM Drive, Field Propulsion, Pitch Drive,
Reactionless Drive
Quasar Drive
The Quasar Drive is a scaled-up black hole
drive, capable of moving planets or entire
galaxies and is the ultimate engine for moving
large objects, being both faster than a Shkadov
Thruster to accelerate stellar objects, and
more efficient, allowing faster final speeds.
The quasar drive takes a charged black hole,
artificial or natural, builds a structure
around it to attach to it magnetically, and
injects matter into it to produce power production
as is typical for a large-scale black hole
power generator.
This is then used to run a drive able to achieve
a decent fraction of light speed.
The name ‘Quasar drive’ is derived from
Quasars, the super bright objects which are
typically thousands of times brighter than
entire galaxies, as a result of matter falling
into the black holes in the centers of many
galaxies.
Used carefully, a Quasar Drive on a supermassive
black hole in the center of a galaxy, can
move that galaxy, especially if used in tandem
with many other drives throughout that galaxy,
gravitationally dragging that galaxy along,
which may permit a sufficiently advanced civilization
to counteract hubble expansion in a large
region of space, such as a galactic supercluster,
and potentially several billion light years
around, though much of the galaxy’s mass
must be used to power the trip the further
out you go, as Hubble expansion rises by roughly
7% of light speed for every billion light
years of distance.
Planet Ships using Quasar Drives represent
a plausible approach to intergalactic colonization
of even galaxies more than a billion light
years away.
See our episodes Fleet of Stars, and Intergalactic
Voyages, for more discussion of this.
See also: Shkadov Thruster.
Reactionless Drives
Newton’s Third Law says that for every action
there is an equal and opposite reaction, and
this is critical to spaceflight but also a
strong limit on it.
All modern spacecraft work by using a propellant
to provide reaction mass, matter being expelled
at speed out the back of a spacecraft to push
the ship the other way.
Those particles flying out the back have a
certain mass and velocity, and mass times
velocity is momentum, a quantity which must
always be conserved, so the ship gains that
same added momentum.
This means immense amounts of propellant must
be expelled and that every new bit of propellant
you carry takes more propellant to push, what
we call the tyranny of the rocket equation.
Outside of a vacuum environment, like space,
we can cheat around this.
When walking we can push off the ground, which
provides our reaction mass, the Earth being
shoved ever so infinitesimally the other way.
An aircraft can do the same, burning fuel
but using the air to suck in and push out
the back.
Such options aren't available in a vacuum,
and even a spaceship having photons or matter
bounced off it from the outside, while circumventing
the Rocket Equation, still represent reaction
mass, much as us stepping on Earth and shoving
off it, or an air-breathing engine on an airplane
or jet.
Thus a reactionless drive is usually considered
Clarketech, but it is contemplated with spaceship
drives such as the Alcubierre Warp Drive,
Diametric Drive, EM Drive, Field Propulsion,
and Gravitational Dipole Driven ships.
See also: Alcubierre Warp Drive, Diametric
Drive, EM Drive, Field Propulsion, Gravitational
Dipole Drive, Propellant, Rocket Equation
Resistojet
Resistojet Rockets are an example of electric
propulsion, using a power supply to create
electricity that we then run through resistors
to produce a hot incandescent filament - same
as a classic incandescent light bulb - which
in turn heats up an inert material that becomes
the rocket propellant.
Resistojets are commonly used in satellites
and have been for decades, as they provide
the benefit of decent specific impulse like
hydrazine does, but the safety of an inert
propellant like cold gas thrusters have.
This makes it good for minor course corrections
and long term use over many years.
It can also be used in conjunction with a
power supply like an RTG or solar panel.
It should be noted that it is not very efficient
compared to its cousins, the Arcjet and the
Microwave Electrothermal Thruster.
See also: Arcjet, Microwave Electrothermal
Thruster
Reusable Rocket
While much discussion of rocketry has to do
with better fuels with higher exhaust velocities
or higher tech propulsion, most of the cost
of modern rockets and space launches currently
and in the past was not the fuel, but the
rocket body itself, which must be precision-tailored
and incredibly tough to handle the insane
forces, pressures, vibrations, and heat involved
in a launch.
As a result, the easiest path to cheaper space
travel has been seen as either recovering
and reusing those rockets, or repurposing
the booster shells leftover in orbit as space
station components.
These days, we can not only use parachutes
to slow a booster falling back to the ground
but reserve some fuel to gently re-land it,
as Space-X has often demonstrated.
However, reuse is still harder than it sounds,
since even a rocket body that isn’t slamming
into the ground at high speed or falling into
corrosive seawater has still been through
a burn, which tends to cause cracks and warping
and requires careful inspection and reuse.
Supermaterials that were more resistant to
this wear and tear would vastly cheapen rocket
launches, allowing quick and easy reuse such
as we see with automobiles and planes.
See our episode: Reusable Rockets for more
discussion of this topic.
See also: Exhaust Velocity, Propellant, Rocket
Equation.
Rocket Equation
The Rocket Equation governs how fast a ship
can go based on the speed its propellant moves
out of the ship - its exhaust velocity - and
the ratio of its initial mass when full of
rocket fuel and oxidizer to its final mass
when that fuel is expended and only the ship
and the payload it is carrying remain.
For a rocket to achieve the same speed as
its exhaust velocity, but in the opposite
direction, it must have nearly double the
amount of fuel as rocket and payload combined.
Alternatively, to achieve half that speed,
it would need only about half as much fuel
and oxidizer as rocket and payload.
This means a 10-ton pod being launched with
a 10,000 mile per hour exhaust velocity propellant
can achieve 5,000 miles per hour with roughly
6.5 tons of fuel, but would need almost 17
tons of fuel to get to 10,000 miles per hour,
to get to double the exhaust velocity, 20,000
miles per hour, fully 64 tons of fuel, and
to get to three times the exhaust velocity,
201 tons of fuel.
This sharply-rising curve is why we often
hear the expression, in regard to space travel,
of “The Tyranny of the Rocket Equation”.
Most chemical rocket fuels have exhaust velocities
of thousands of meters per second, or as high
as roughly 10,000 miles per hour, but to reach
low Earth orbit, and ignoring losses to air
friction during your climb, you must reach
almost 8000 meters per second or 17,000 miles
per hour, to go to other planets even more,
and interstellar travel speed must be tens
to hundreds of times higher to be practical.
While we do have higher exhaust velocity options,
in general we often must sacrifice rate of
thrust to achieve a more efficient higher
final speed from a higher exhaust velocity.
Virtually all discussion of advanced propulsion
is about trying to find either higher exhaust
velocity propellants or to circumvent the
rocket equation, with options like reactionless
drives or laser sails.
See also: Exhaust Velocity, Fuel, Laser Sails,
Oxidizer, Propellant, Reactionless Drive,
Specific Impulse, Thrust
Shkadov Thruster
A Shkadov Thruster is a type of stellar engine
designed for using a star’s own power to
move it, by surrounding the star in orbital
mirrors or statites which reflect light in
one direction.
With this method, stars can be slowly accelerated
up to a small fraction of light speed.
Bigger stars accelerate faster as they have
a higher brightness to mass ratio, whereas
small dwarfs can attain higher ultimate speeds
as they burn a larger percentage of their
fuel.
All versions are slow though, and because
of the acceleration time, it is a relatively
minor difference in effort to move them across
a galaxy or even between galaxies, compared
to simply moving them a few systems over.
See our episode: Shkadov Thruster and Fleet
Of Stars, for more discussion.
See also: Caplan Thruster, Helios Drive, Nova
Drive, Quasar Drive
Solar Moth
A solar moth is a type of solar thermal rocket
that uses a parabolic mirror, or wing-like
pairs of them, to focus light from a nearby
star on a tank of future propellant, the tank
likely being half-silvered to allow light
in and keep it bouncing around to heat the
gas inside the tank.
This Super-heated gas then makes for an excellent
propellant.
We may also use this in conjunction with laser
beaming or microwaves or another type of energy
beaming, to achieve a higher thrust.
This approach allows for higher thrust than
a simple solar sail, or laser sail, though
that thrust comes to end when the propellant
runs out, and it will then simply be a solar
sail, though one moving faster sooner and
bearing less cargo and payload.
It may be very useful for forward-deploying
laser beaming equipment to new star systems.
Like a laser sail, it could be used in conjunction
with a matter beam to replenish propellant
too.
A solar Moth is a very simple design with
few failure modes and a solar moth might use
very nearly anything that can be vaporized
as a propellant, including common elements
in deep space like hydrogen, water, methane,
or ammonia, making them a potentially good
engine for probes and long-term monitors in
the Asteroid Belt or Kuiper Belt.
Scaled up, a solar moth is a good way to move
a comet, simply using it as propellant, as
energy beamed to it from in-system will create
far less outward thrust than the energy received
being used to vaporize ice and shove inward
toward the solar system’s inner regions..
See also: Laser Sail, Matter Beam, Solar Sail
Solar Sail
Solar Sails operate on the principle that
photons of light carry momentum which may
be absorbed by opaque objects, transferring
that momentum, or reflected by reflective
objects, or mirrors, which can double the
imparted momentum, sending the photon back
with the same but opposite momentum, or deflecting
it at an angle to send both sail and deflected
photon off in different directions.
This allows a sail to quarter the Sunlight.
The weakness of a solar sail is the need for
a very large thin sail to reflect enough sunlight
to shove a relatively tiny spaceship.
That sail, even if made from super-thin materials,
remains a target of micrometeors, can be eroded
by space dust and radiation, and if big enough,
is a navigational hazard.
Sunlight also drops-off inverse square to
distance, meaning a solar sail twice as far
from the Sun is getting only a quarter of
the push, and so a sail at Mercury pushed
out to Pluto is receiving many thousands of
times less push at the end than at the beginning.
With this in mind we have options like laser
sails, which are simply solar sails which
a laser is focused upon, and Electric and
Magnetic Sails, which can use ionized solar
wind particles or matter beams to fill and
push their sails.
Solar Sails can also be used to maintain stationary
or atypical orbits, as with Statites.
See also: Antimatter Ablated Light Sail, Electric
Solar Wind Sail, Laser Sails, Magnetic Solar
Wind Sail, Matter Beaming, Statite.
Specific Impulse
Specific Impulse is the twin to Exhaust Velocity,
and both are used to measure how effective
a given rocket fuel, propellant, or spaceship
drive are.
While Exhaust velocity measures how fast particles
of exhaust come out of a rocket nozzle, or
other spaceship drive, specific impulse, abbreviated
as Isp, is a measure of how efficiently the
engine creates thrust.
It is measured in how long the engine can
produce that thrust, and the default measurement
is based on how many seconds an engine could
operate at 1-g of thrust, the amount needed
to hover a rocket right over the ground on
Earth, neither rising nor falling.
Most modern rocket fuels will be on an order
of a few hundreds seconds, and it should be
noted that some lower specific impulse fuels
will be more useful in certain situations,
or that specific impulse can alter based on
if you’re in an atmosphere or not.
Such being the case, we will often use lower
specific impulse boosters to get off the ground.
A propellant’s exhaust velocity divided
by the gravitic acceleration of Earth, 32
feet or 9.8 meters per second per second,
will give the approximate Specific Impulse
of a propellant, and vice-versa, multiplying
specific impulse by gravitic acceleration
will yield exhaust velocity.
See also: Exhaust Velocity, Fuel, Oxidizer,
Propellant, Reactionless Drive, Thrust
Statite
The Statite varies from most propulsion systems
in that it aims to keep an object stationary
rather than moving it.
Statites are the brainchild of Robert Forward,
who suggested the name in 1993 as a mix of
static and satellite.
A Statite is able to hang directly above a
star, rather than circling it in a typical
orbit.
These make use of the radiant pressure of
sunlight to allow very thin objects perpendicular
to the Sun, to hover in place by balancing
the amount of force the sunlight exerts against
the gravity of the Sun.
A Statite must be carefully balanced in terms
of its cross-section density so that it doesn't
float further away or fall closer, and thus
would likely include the ability to adjust
its cross section and tilt to allow it to
engage in station-keeping or even moving as
a solar sail.
The critical factor of statite function is
surface or cross section density, how thick
the statite is, and this will generally be
on the order of tinfoil or thinner.
As the strength of light and gravity both
fall off inverse to the square of distance
from the Sun, a statite of a given surface
density functions regardless of its distance
from its star, however it would not function
around any star with a different brightness
to mass ratio.
Statites are far easier to make function around
more massive stars - which are far brighter
- than they are around less massive dwarf
stars, as stars can vary by a factor of around
100 in mass but more than a billion in brightness
for that range.
Variations of these can also use magnetics
to deflect solar wind ions, as an alternative
to sunlight or in combination with them.
So too, the use of focused sunlight from solar
mirrors or beams can be used to allow heavier
statites.
The Lagite variation of this, being a combination
or Lagging and Satellite, is where we can
mix normal orbits and propulsion with a statite
to produce an object that orbits at an unnatural
speed, such as Low Earth Orbital object that
orbited Earth two times per day, rather than
every 2 hours, or a near-Mercury orbit power
array that remained in conjunction with Earth
as it orbited the Sun every 365 days, to beam
power home.
See also: Shkadov Thruster
Teleportation
While teleportation is most familiar as a
short range point-to-point transfer, such
as the transporters in Star Trek, this general
category of space travel can refer to any
drive that circumvents travel between two
places to deposit you immediately there, and
thus differs from hyperspace jump ships which
typically involve moving to a parallel and
congruent space or reality where either the
space is smaller or the speed of light is
higher.
Examples of this vary wildly, and might include
the Holtzmann Drive utilized by the Spacing
Guild in Frank Herbert’s Dune series or
the intended use of the Drive in the movie
Event Horizon for the ship of the same name,
which is described as instantly moving between
two points but instead turns out to be a type
of hyperdrive, much to the crew’s dismay.
Teleportation, especially for FTL purposes,
is usually considered Clarketech, but for
possible teleportation methods under known
science, see our episode: Teleportation.
See also: Clarketech, FTL Drive, Hyperdrive
Thrust
Thrust is what makes ships move, the more
they experience, the faster they accelerate,
and the longer they accelerate, the faster
they go, but the bigger they are, the more
thrust they need to push themselves.
Most often in spaceships, this is produced
by a rocket flame expelling superheated gas
out of the ship, pushing on it in the other
direction, and providing a high thrust.
High thrust is good, as we cannot get off
a planet without a high thrust, and the faster
we can get up to speed, the shorter our journey
time.
However, in practice, almost all high thrust
technologies are low efficiency, allowing
a quick acceleration to a modest speed, and
lower thrust engines like an ion drive allow
for very long accelerations to a higher final
speed.
The holy grail of spacecraft propulsion is
a high-thrust, high-efficiency fuel, such
as a torch drive or antimatter rocket.
See also: Antimatter Rocket, Fuel, Fusion
Torch Drive, Oxidizer, Propellant, Rocket
Equation, Torch drive
Torch Drive or Torchship
While the term torch drive is often used to
discuss fusion reactions, which generally
convert no more than 1% of the fuel’s mass
to energy, its original usage was on a TorchShip
in Robert Heinlein’s 1953 short story “Sky
Lift”, where it was able to convert 100%
of matter to energy, which generally means
it can achieve an order of magnitude higher
velocity than a fusion drive, and parallels
the performance of antimatter drives.
Converting matter directly into energy is
preferable to antimatter as it implies the
ability to load any matter into your spaceship
harvested from any source, as opposed to needing
complex and dangerous antimatter production,
and storage.
Some consider a ship a torchship if its exhaust
velocity multiplied by its thrust amounts
to a very large figure: for example, a high
speed and high thrust ship like those in The
Expanse, or perhaps a low acceleration but
very large ship that puts out hundreds of
terawatts of power even as it’s pushing
a few milligees.
See also: Antimatter Drive, Fusion Torch Drive
VASIMR
The Variable Specific Impulse Magnetoplasma
Rocket, known by the acronym VASIMR, is a
spaceship propulsion technique utilizing an
electrothermal thruster, using electricity
generated by a reactor, battery, or solar
panel to generate radio waves which then ionize
a neutral and inert propellant, generally
Xenon or Argon, noble gasses with no net electric
charge.
Once ionized by the radio waves, they lose
an electron and gain an electric charge, and
are injected into a hollow cylinder full of
electromagnets which shove on the now-ionized
particle, much like a particle accelerator,
and propels it out the back of the ship at
the equivalent temperature of a million degrees,
rather than the low thousands of most chemical
rocket fuel exhausts.
VASIMR and parallel engine concepts allow
a ship with a good power supply, such as a
nuclear fission or fusion reactor, or external
power such as solar or energy beams, to achieve
very high speeds on a very small amount of
fuel.
See also: Hall Effect Thruster, Ion Drive
Warp Drive
While the Alcubierre Warp Drive and Star Trek
Warp Drive are the best known examples of
warp drives, this category predates both concepts
and relies on the notion that a spaceship
has to travel through space and thus warping
space or spacetime becomes an attractive option.
If we can warp space to make two pieces of
it meet, like folding a paper map in half
to make London touch Los Angeles, or contract
it to just shorten the path, we can make my
trip faster or easier.
Since Einstein’s Relativity tells us spacetime
can be warped, and this has been experimentally
confirmed many, many times, much speculation
of using this for moving ships has been contemplated.
Additionally, warping spacetime circumvents
normal relativistic restrictions on traveling
faster than lightspeed, and potentially offers
travel with little fuel or energy used.
It should be noted that problems still tend
to arise using space-warping for FTL purposes,
that likely make this usage impossible, but
such space warping can still be practical
for sub-light travel and indeed could be argued
to be at work in a gravity assist maneuver,
since large bodies like planets, stars, and
black holes all warp spacetime.
However, most warp concepts require not just
contracting space, which normal mass and gravity
do, but also expanding space, which requires
the use of negative mass, or energy, and negative
mass has not yet been documented to exist,
nor negative energy outside of the debatable
case of the Casimir Effect and Vacuum Energy.
See also: Alcubierre Warp Drive, Black Hole
Ships, Clarketech, Faster Than Light FTL Drives,
Negative Matter Propulsion, Quantum Vacuum
Thruster, Wormhole Drive
Wormhole Drive
A Wormhole Drive is an example of a type of
Clarketech, utilizing a wormhole not to travel
along, but to bring fuel in from.
If wormholes are possible to create, it is
likely that you would have to create the entrance
and exits at the same place, and then move
them apart, or that the exit would appear
at a random place, possibly deep in a gravity
well or in another Universe.
They may also be one-way or destructive on
passage, scrambling data and objects that
pass through, irrecoverably.
Should any of these be true, another way to
use a wormhole for travel would be to place
one end in close orbit of a star or even inside,
and the other end on the back of your ship,
allowing huge amounts of thrust to be produced
without needing to carry it along, thus circumventing
the rocket equation.
Parallel methods, for Stargate-style portals,
would also permit matter or laser beams to
be sent to ships or the transfer of cargo
or personnel.
See also: Clarketech, Matter Beam, Photon
Rocket
We looked at a lot of spaceship engines today,
from the classics to the distant far future,
some of which might let us travel to other
worlds.
But for now we have rockets and a very real
concern is how much we could scale up using
them before it becomes an environmental problem.
It’s a sad reality that a lot of our technology,
especially in transport, has various negative
or disruptive impacts on the environment,
whether it’s deforestation or carbon emissions
or air and water quality.
There’s often a lot disagreement on what
do about these problems, but if you’ve ever
wanted to find out how you can make a difference,
you can go visit Wren’s website and answer
a few simple questions to calculate your approximate
carbon footprint, and then see a list of options
like planting trees, mineral weathering, or
rainforest protection, to offset your total.
Wren is a climate-centric Public Benefit Corporation
that let’s people sign up for a monthly
subscription equal to their carbon footprint,
which for most folks is less than $20 a month.
Carbon offsets are a controversial space with
a lot of projects failing to live up to their
potential.
Wren deep dives a project’s finances, gets
third party experts to evaluate them, and
does its due diligence by asking potential
project partners over 80 questions to make
sure they have a financially, logistically,
and scientifically sound project.
Like their tree planting project in East Africa,
which helps subsistence farmers improve their
land while planting trees, but also makes
sure to track real progress and make sure
the trees are healthy and not just getting
cut down again in ten years.
Wren focuses on data-driven, transparent,
and accountable projects, and if you signup,
you receive monthly updates from the projects
you support.
You get to see what your money is spent on,
with photos and details on every tree planted,
every acre reforested, every ton of carbon
offset.
And the first 100 people who sign up using
the link in the episode’s description will
get their first month of subscription covered
by Wren for free!
As a brief aside before we close out, as a
lot of you probably know already, I recently
was elected the President of the National
Space Society, and it’s a great honor to
be heading up a group that has been working
to help raise awareness and encourage research
in so many of the topics we looked at today
and in general on the show.
And something of a happy coincidence, the
NSS hosts a space forum every other Thursday
evening, though not this week or next, and
since I plan to get more actively involved
in those, I am curious what topics or people
folks would like to see over in those, so
leave a note in the comments if you’ve got
any suggestions.
So, that will wrap up for today’s very long
episode and March, but we’ll be back next
Thursday to start April up with another of
our favorite topics, the Fermi Paradox, and
a look at the concept of Galactic Habitable
Zones.
After that will head on back to modern Earth
for a discussion of Nuclear Energy and Small
Modular Reactors, and an update on the state
of that industry.
Then it will be time for our monthly Scifi
Sunday episode, to contemplate Super Weapons,
from the kind that blow up planets all the
way to the things that could rip holes in
reality or kill Universes.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
