So today we’ll be looking at the concepts 
of Statites, or Static Satellites,  
and several variations of them like the 
Lagite, Quasite, Mag Sail, and Solar Moth. 
One of the difficulties of doing a show focused on 
space and the distant future and the cool things  
we might find and build out there is that we 
often have concepts we use a lot that are not even  
vaguely household concepts and I end up discussing 
them quickly in an episode focused on something  
else but which requires that topic. I created the 
Megastructure Compendium a couple years back as  
a handy reference for a lot of them but as I 
was writing & recording this month’s episode  
on Lagrange Point Settlement I found myself 
discussing Lagites and Statites and I explained  
them but neither there or the Compendium really 
allowed us to discuss what these things are, what  
all their variants are, what their limitations and 
changes are, and any of the really cool things we  
can do with them. Some of which, like starliftng 
or Shkadov thrusters, have their own episodes. 
We should start with the basic concept though. 
Smaller things orbit much larger bodies at a  
rate determined from that bigger object's mass 
and how close it is. The further away you are,  
the slower you orbit, the more massive it is, 
the faster you orbit. This means around any big  
body there’s a fairly limited number of options 
for where you are orbiting at and none of them  
are stationary with the kinda-sorta-exception 
of a geostationary orbit and its equivalents  
around other bodies besides Earth.
If we imagined I wanted to put a big  
solar collector in near Mercury or closer, where 
it could get maximum efficiency without melting,  
then beam that energy back to Earth, I’ve got the 
problem that my satellite orbiting out there is  
not doing so every 365.25 days, but rather might 
be doing it every 80 days, and that makes for  
quite a pain for keeping that beam on track 
even when it’s not got the Sun in the way or  
some other orbiting body or space station that 
might pass through its no-fly-zone of safety. 
This is where the Statite can help out because 
we could just hang it right over the Sun’s north  
pole. Statites are short for static satellites 
and were introduced as a concept by physicist  
and sci fi writer Robert L. Forward in 1993 
and the idea is amazingly simple and a bit  
of a misnomer. A statite isn’t orbiting at all and 
unlike the lagite, which we’ll get to in a moment,  
isn’t a satellite, it’s a solar sail that hovers 
over a bright object held by radiant pressure of  
photons. Think of a sheet of paper hanging over 
a heat vent, blown up by it and pulled down by  
gravity, same idea but easier to control.
Partially because most stars are decently  
stable in their output of light, our Sun 
particularly so, and very stable in gravity.  
The light coming off a star drops with the 
inverse-square of distance and so does gravity,  
they weaken at the same rate, so light twice 
as far from Earth is a quarter of its strength,  
and gravity is a quarter of its strength here too.
Making these work at a practical level is a bit  
trickier but conceptually it is simple. For any 
given star there is cross-sectional density a  
sheet of reflective material would have 
that would cause it to float in place,  
make it a bit thinner and it will blow away, 
a bit thicker and it will fall down. Stick it  
around a dimmer star and it will fall down. Big 
giant stars can be thousands or even millions  
of times brighter than our sun while only having 
ten or twenty times the mass or gravity, while red  
dwarfs might be tenth our sun’s mass and not even 
a thousandth as bright. This massively affects how  
this technology works in other star systems and 
so too would things like high star variability,  
binary partners, or a large hot Jupiter nearby. 
Though again, a statite hanging over our Sun’s  
north pole could be closer than Mercury or further 
than Pluto and still work the same way. Again the  
light and gravity both diminish at the same rate.
From this spot a giant power collector could beam  
energy back to Earth, or any other planet or the 
asteroid belt, as those all generally orbit around  
the equator of the Sun and thus are visible 
from above or below the Sun all of the time. 
Now how thick does this sail need to be 
in order to be stationary? Again it's very  
dependent on the star in question but can be 
many thousands of times thicker around a big  
supergiant. For our Sun, which generates about 10 
micronewtons per square meter out here near Earth,  
and which generates about 6 micronewtons per 
gram of material out here, gravitationally,  
that means whatever you’re using needs to be 
pretty thin. The good news is that if you reflect  
sunlight away rather than absorbing it you double 
the radiant pressure it exerts, so a shiny surface  
might allow more than 3 grams per square meter.
A gram isn’t much but we’re talking  
tissue-paper or aluminum foil thickness and 
thin sheets at that. So for moving sunlight  
around this works. That works for your typical 
Shkadov thruster around a star like our own  
but even doing power generation might require 
some special materials like graphene to permit  
something thin enough to also handle the weight of 
some machinery and computers hanging down from it.  
And if you imagine a statite as a big parachute 
with some module attached, that’s about right,  
gravity slowly pulls it down but sunlight blows 
it back up, like a strong wind up from the  
ground might on that parachute. In the solar 
system, away from a planet, the Sun is down. 
It also makes Starboosting tricky around 
suns much dimmer than our own, which are  
exactly the kind you want to starboost 
normally, to make hotter and brighter. 
We have four fixes for this. The first is better 
materials and honestly those better materials  
should be doable but regardless anything that 
makes it easier is better. Graphene can be made  
very thin, even thin enough for a red dwarf, 
and has great tensile or hanging strength,  
though ensuring it’s opaque or reflective at those 
miniscule thicknesses or surface densities might  
be pushing it for the smallest and dimmest stars.
The second option is to use pushing beams to  
achieve a higher density, and you might do 
this in cases like trying to keep a statite  
over a planet or some other gravitating body that 
doesn’t give off much light for a unit of mass,  
as an alternative to the polesitter option we’ll 
discuss later. You can use a surface based laser  
to hover an object over our atmosphere, but 
this does need to be pretty powerful since  
Earth’s gravity near its surface is more than a 
thousand times stronger than the sun’s gravity  
out here is. We have materials reflective enough 
to take a beam a thousand times stronger than the  
Sun at full noon without melting but we also 
have geostationary orbits and other forms of  
active support that are more power efficient. 
One of those would be running charged objects  
like ions at a magnetic field to carry momentum up 
to it, hand it over, and fall back down, caught on  
the drop to regenerate momentum and be shoved back 
pu again, rinse and repeat. They are going to be  
a much better approach in cases like this and so 
is solar wind, the other thing coming off the sun. 
Solar sail is a term a lot of folks have heard 
but which is a bit nebulous, as it can include  
not just radiant pressure of sunlight or focused 
beams of light, but different wavelengths the Sun  
doesn’t produce much of, like microwaves, and also 
charged particles and arguably spills over into  
magnetic sails or magsails. Much as a statite 
is basically a slightly heavier solar sail,  
a slightly heavier magsail would do the job too, 
hovering stationary. And an object could be using  
any combination of these, sunlight, laser, MASER, 
beam, solar wind, or a particle cannon or matter  
beam shoving on it. At the bigger scale, it 
could be pods containing matter or supplies  
fired out of a mass driver that it caught down a 
long reversed driver of its own. It could also be  
some massive asteroid hanging over a planet that 
was using sunlight to power a giant mass driver  
that fired slugs of matter down to the planet 
below. Which might be for industrial uses or  
might be some sort of orbital bombardment siege 
cannon that was constantly falling and popping  
back up from the recoil whenever it fired.
Those all probably deserve their own specific  
name, but I already coined the term for 
our fourth option so figure I’ve hit my  
quota. Our fourth option is the Lagite and 
combines a normal orbit with radiant pressure,  
or beams of light or matter, or solar wind, to 
produce a non-Keplerian orbit, one that either  
isn’t a circle or ellipse or just has the wrong 
orbital period for its distance. This can include  
artificial Lagrange Points. This category of 
variant got that name from me way back in 2016  
when the channel was young, and I was discussing 
Shkadov Thrusters and my interest at the time was  
having large reflective solar mirrors orbiting a 
star at an atypical period, mostly to let sunlight  
through to planets around that star while you 
moved it. These are satellites that are not  
static but rather lag behind their normal orbit, 
hence a lagging satellite, or lagite, rather than  
a static satellite or statite. Thus they might 
be where an orbit should only be a few months  
but have a lagging orbital period of exactly 
one year, so as not to block light from Earth  
while maximizing the light a Shkadov Thruster or 
other Stellar Engine or Dyson Swarm could get. 
I’m attached to the name as it seems a good fit 
but I’m hesitant to claim the concept as mine own  
as I’m guessing others thought it up before at 
some point, Colin McInnes suggested using Solar  
Sails for a type of Halo Orbit even before Forward 
patented the statite and my friend David Kipping  
from Cool Worlds independently came up with the 
quasite not long after, which overlaps a fair  
amount, and while I like my name better, that’s 
also a pretty good name, especially in the context  
he was discussing them, which also discusses using 
them as a possible techno signature for aliens and  
the Fermi Paradox. If you haven’t ever watched 
an episode of Cool Worlds, he has a very good  
catalog including Quasites, and he also did 
a paper discussing them as technosignatures. 
To give an example of how these theses could 
be a techno signature, let us imagine I’ve  
found a star with a nice planet we could 
terraform, only it’s a bit far from its sun,  
which is a weaker orange dwarf. Our baseline 
statite cloud could be composed of tons of  
reflective mirrors aimed right back down at 
that sun, mostly over its poles. Probably  
these would be large parabolic dishes to make it 
easier to reflect light back down on that sun,  
again picture a parachute. It absorbs that light 
in its photosphere and it raises the temperature  
of that star in general, making it brighter.
For a simple first approximation, if half its  
light is bounced back down all the time, it will 
reach an equilibrium when the total coming out  
and staying out matches that original. In such 
a case that star’s surface temperature is going  
to go up and now matches our sun’s spectrum 
and emits more net light into that equatorial  
band. If half that light were blocked, we would 
assume the blackbody temperature of that star  
had to rise to produce twice as much sunlight, 
which goes with the fourth power of temperature  
so would be a rise in temperature of 
15%, around 900 Kelvin in this case. 
We use this approach with the Alderson Disc BWC 
megastructure and it also works for Dyson swarms  
where you want to build it more stably as a wide 
equatorial torus that would be bigger than the  
default equatorial region Dyson swarm there would 
otherwise be. In that regard I would expect this  
style of starboosting to be fairly common, or its 
variant where those polar mirrors just deflect the  
light back down on the wider equatorial region.
There are secondary effects and this is also  
the basic method we use for pushing off 
more solar wind to engage in starlifting,  
which also uses a statite or lagite hybrid 
as the pump for taking matter off the star's  
surface. This isn’t an episode on Starboosting 
though, or on Starlifting, so we’ll bypass  
further discussion. Using this method you could 
also make the star's radiant pressure rise and  
thus permit a thicker or more massive statite.
However, if you're starting with a very dim star,  
you can opt to deploy lagites orbiting that 
star and they are very flat and thin satellites,  
so with a little guidance they can alter their 
profile to turn perpendicular or parallel to the  
sunlight. In this way you could have a large 
collector array orbiting a star, in polar  
orbits or equatorial, and they could simply turn 
parallel to the sunlight when they were passing in  
between that sun and its planet you want that 
light to get. It will begin to fall until you  
turn it perpendicular again, but a statite would 
fall faster, since it has no orbital momentum. 
Now these would never be a simple flat sheet. 
Likely it’s a flat reflective surface or even  
pinwheel with a couple spots that are solar 
panels to run a computer and to run some  
winches. You probably spin it so that centrifugal 
force spreads it out and constrict it back in  
with those winches and some wires, again it might 
come to resemble a parachute. You build it bigger  
and thinner than needed to stay where it should 
and it maintains active balance by relaxing its  
pull if it's dropping and pulling it tighter 
if it's gotten a bit too far from the star,  
and it can pull in one side or spread out another 
to turn or reposition. This works with any of  
these versions, statite or lagite or ones using 
magnets and solar wind. For solar wind you have  
simple wires spread out as a magsail that deflect 
solar wind and this can actually be a lot thinner  
and bigger than one running on radiant pressure.
Now the primary value of a lagite is for creating  
fake Lagrange Points, where you can have something 
like a solar shade or power beamer remain fixed  
with a planet just like it’s L1 would, or to 
engage in free station keeping for very massive  
space stations in Trojan Lagrange Points, where 
even a modest solar mirror or sail could keep an  
enormous and dense station where it needs to be. 
We’ll discuss those more in that Lagrange Point  
Settlement episode in a month that I mentioned, 
but the one key takeaway for now is about  
Lagites being used to widen Lagrange Points.
If I put an enormous solar Shade at Venus’s  
L1 Lagrange point with the Sun, it will block 
sunlight from reaching Venus and let us cool it  
down and then we can terraform it, as we explain 
in Winter on Venus. However, let’s imagine 4  
different objects out there. One is simple wire 
mesh that’s transparent to light and which solar  
wind would blow through unaffected. This needs to 
be at the normal L1 Lagrange point to stay where  
it should be, doing whatever it is supposed to do. 
If we charge that up to be a solar wind deflector,  
as we’ve discussed for use at the Martian 
L1 to minimize atmospheric stripping,  
as an artificial magnetosphere, that solar wind 
will push that mesh back and away. Which means it  
won’t be stable there and we need to put it closer 
to the Sun to keep it in a quasi-L1 stationary  
position with Venus or Mars in this case.
If instead we used an opaque sun shade, it  
gets pushed by sunlight it absorbs too, thus will 
also need to be closer to the sun to be a stable  
L1-like actor than the normal L1 spot. But it 
would be different than the magnetic deflector and  
it would be different than if we made it 
reflective instead, which would double  
the push. As would hybrids that do both. 
These will never be one big sheet either,  
thousands of kilometers wide, but rather those 
of smaller sheets, maybe just a kilometer wide,  
which is why the ability to quarter the light 
is important. They can shift their direction  
left or right or north or south, instead of just 
radially outward or inward. Individual sheets can  
then hang off to the side of the L1 or modified 
L1 and stay there by titling themselves a bit. 
Though some big conglomeration of sheets 
can also be kept in touch and tweak position  
with thin tethers connecting them, at all 
times perhaps, or just firing one off to  
connect to a neighbor and pull them in and then 
disconnect, after the adjustment. The ability to  
alter their reflectivity or use different colors 
reflective to some wavelengths may also be handy,  
especially in hybrids like a farming station that 
let green light in but reflected others away. Such  
relatively low-mass and reflective stations might 
tend to occupy the rural outskirts of a Lagrange  
Point settlement region for that reason.
What this means is that you can get some  
very large Lagrange Point-like regions and 
put artificial structures in those that can  
maintain true stability of position with that 
constant positional tweaking. The thinner one is,  
the further to the edge of the Lagrange Region 
they can be. This is not just an inner-system  
advantage either. Out in deep space where gravity 
is so light that objects take centuries to orbit,  
like Neptune, we have the ability to create 
what we call a parabolic hab, and these are  
big cylinder habitats with huge but thin and 
light parabolic dishes behind them focusing  
sunlight into them for warmth, sun, and power.
And again, this is likely to be many small mirrors  
acting as a parabolic dish. When it's twilight 
or night time they can swivel off the ones not  
being used specifically for power generation to 
engage in stationkeeping too. Instead of orbiting  
at the normal rate they could have a far longer 
orbital period or far shorter period or remain  
stationary as a de facto statite, especially 
around brighter stars. With some tinkering  
we can also adjust asteroids in the belt to be L2 
LaGrange Point like objects, speeding their orbits  
so they matched Earth, or simply other nearby but 
closer asteroids they wished to form a long term  
economic tie too. Though in many cases a tether, 
as an actual and literal tie, might serve better. 
One other note on that, comets are weak 
lagite-like objects as the Sun ablates  
gas and dust off them as tails that push in 
a different direction than gravity is pulling  
and thus alter their orbit more than modestly. 
We can stage that up and it is the idea behind  
the solar moth, which uses sunlight focused 
on a supply of fuel to be heated and vaporized  
and emitted in the direction of your choosing.
Now we’ve been talking about applications of these  
close to the sun or far out in space but not near 
Earth, except in application to expanding Lagrange  
points or doing stationkeeping, and again we’ll 
discuss that more in Lagrange Point Settlement,  
but there are near-Earth applications and 
one of those is creating a completely new  
quasi-Lagrange point, such as one hovering 
not over the sun’s north or south pole but  
over Earth’s. Something geostationary but 
over the poles, or just not over the equator. 
This is called a Polesitter and there’s a few 
ways to do it with either a normal statite  
that Earth is dragging along or a tilted lagite 
that’s deflecting light from the sun at an angle  
to create a push away from Earth as well. You 
can even do cylindrical orbits around planets. 
If your materials are good enough and thin, you 
can use this as a type of polar space elevator,  
by having a large collection of thin and spinning 
mirrors tilted to bounce sunlight to push up from  
Earth, and again is essentially a form of active 
support at this point. I should note that we have  
discussed something similar both for slowing or 
speeding the rotational rate of a planet, on top  
of a space tower, or pushing a planet further from 
its star to cool it or protect it from a sub giant  
or red giant phase of that star as it nears death. 
Different constructs but also uses the sun’s  
light and solar wind to do your work for you.
As for the pole sitter, you could intentionally  
break this light into two or more directions 
so it went either side of Earth but if you  
wished this could also be used to warm a polar 
region of a planet. You can also use these same  
methods to add sunlight to a planet or add certain 
wavelengths you find beneficial or remove certain  
wavelengths you feel harmful, or to deflect solar 
wind around to help minimize atmospheric stripping  
and ionizing radiation near your planet, 
making orbital facilities and ships safer. 
The amount of material necessary to entirely 
englobe our sun in such statites at about 3  
grams per square meter and let’s say 50 
million kilometers radius from the Sun,  
a bit less than Mercury’s distance, is 10^20 
Kilograms, not even thousandth of Mercury’s  
Mass or just seven thousandth of our Moon’s Mass, 
and probably made out of aluminum or carbon or  
some other abundant material. I can’t really see 
any colonization effort at a new star not having  
enough mass for one. We have individual asteroids 
that could supply all that raw material themselves  
and there’s no sophistication to it requiring 
advanced AI and automation to make. Grab rock,  
crush rock, melt out metal or separate our 
carbon, churn out thin flat reflective sheets,  
attach a computer no stronger than 
needed to run an old Nintendo. Repeat. 
You could likely create one within a few 
decades of arriving at a new star system  
and using no dangerously sophisticated AI. 
And now you’re a Kardashev 2 civilization  
even though you’ve only got a colony ship of a 
few hundred thousand people, and maybe millions  
more coming in faster on follow up ships your 
new pushing array can be used to slow down. 
And now you have total access to all 
the power of that star. You can move it,  
using a Shkadov Thruster or one of the other 
variants we’ve discussed in Fleet of Stars or  
the Megastructure Compendium, you can move whole 
armadas of space arks out to claim the galaxy,  
pushed by laser or ion beams, or you can 
weaponize it into some terrifying Death star  
that can sterilize a whole galaxy. You can use it 
to run the settlement of that system, harvest that  
star for planets worth of heavy elements, dump the 
excess power into Kugelblitz black holes for long  
term storage as batteries good for quadrillions of 
years or use it to power relativistic spaceships. 
This is what statites, lagites, and our other 
variants let us do, and by now I’m sure you see  
why we discuss them in passing in so many 
of our episodes about mega engineering and  
our future in the cosmos. They are simple but 
they are the keys to the Kardashev scale and  
the reason why even a civilization that wanted 
to stay in one system or even one planet would  
still want to deploy these technologies. 
And I believe we will within this century,  
and use them to unlock the doorway to the galaxy.
So today we were discussing enormous objects  
in space that might help us forge our future, 
but another enormous thing in space that might  
affect our future is giant space monsters, and in 
this month’s Nebula Exclusive we’ll be examining  
everything from huge space kraken to kaiju and the 
sandworms of Dune to ask what science tells about  
their biology and if we might end up encountering, 
or even engineering, enormous space creatures. 
That’s out now exclusively on Nebula, our 
streaming service, where you can see every  
regular episode of SFIA a few days early and 
ad free, and all our other bonus content,  
including extended editions of many episodes, and 
more Nebula Exclusives like, Giant Space Monsters,  
The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter 
Hypothesis, Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships,  
Dark Stars at the Beginning of Time, Life As 
An Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon,  
Space Freighters, Retrocausality, Orch Or & 
Free Will, Colonizing Binary Stars, and more. 
Nebula has tons of great content 
from an ever-growing community of  
creators. Using my link and discount it’s 
available now for just over $2.50 a month,  
less than the price of the drink or snack you 
might have been enjoying during the episode. 
When you sign up at my link, 
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur  
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only get 
access to all of the great stuff Nebula offers,  
like Giant Space Monsters, you’ll also be directly 
supporting this show. Again, to see SFIA early,  
ad free, and with all the exclusive bonus 
content, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
One of the more interesting alternatives for 
encountering non-human intelligence in the future  
is that it might be intelligence we engineered, 
such as making animals smarter, a process we call  
uplifting and this Thursday we’ll discuss the 
ethical challenges of that endeavor. Then on  
January 14th it will be time for Scifi Sunday and 
a look at two other types of inhuman intelligence,  
Aliens and AI, and which is a greater threat 
to us and who would win in a fight between the  
two. And we’ll discuss regulating space on January 
18th, then we’ll talk about settling our Lagrange  
Points and why a society at L5 would be awesome.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can  
also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Giant 
Space Monsters, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
