This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
Throughout history great and terrible rulers 
have sought to conquer the entire world…
Personally I think such a limited goal 
shows a lack of imagination and ambition.
So today we’re beginning a new series on Galactic 
Domination here on Science and Futurism with Isaac  
Arthur, and I am your aforementioned host, Isaac 
Arthur. In this series we’re going to be looking  
at approaches to taking over the galaxy, whether 
it is colonizing a lifeless galaxy or conquering  
one already inhabited. We’re going to look at the 
mechanics under known science, and how that will  
impact things, but we’re also going to be looking 
at the motivations for a galactic power grab. 
With that in mind we will start our series with 
two of the biggest drives for expansion in our  
own history, outright imperial conquest and an 
urge to hold it all and keep it held together,  
in today’s episode, then in episode two, 
Stellar Strip Mining, we will look at the  
motivation of resource seizure and extraction.
Now a common problem in discussion of Interstellar  
efforts is the sheer amount of time and effort 
needed to accomplish anything, and the usual work  
around in science fiction is some form of FTL 
travel, faster than light travel, and while we  
want to look at the slower than light pathways to 
establishing and maintaining Galactic Domination,  
we will look at Faster Than Light contexts too.
With that in mind, we will also finally be  
relaunching our FTL series this month, which has 
been a long standing request from the audience  
and my apologies for constantly putting it 
on the backburner in favor of other topics,  
but I think it will mesh well with this series.
We’ll be aiming for a hard science approach to  
most of this, as usual, but we will explore 
FTL options and we will be using a lot of  
science fiction examples for discussion and 
much like our Alien Civilizations series,  
the goal is to have fun with the topic too. So if 
you want alerts when all those episodes come out,  
make sure to like and subscribe to the Show, 
grab a drink and a snack, and let’s get started. 
When we talk about galactic domination, we’re 
not talking about colonizing the galaxy,  
we’re talking about establishing and maintaining 
a cohesive empire across unimaginable stretches of  
time and space. This is the big hurdle for non-FTL 
Galactic Empires. It isn’t one for colonizing  
empty planets itself, on any given world, be 
it Earth or a colony of Earth or a colony of  
a colony of Earth, some group can build a colony 
ship and go set up a new nation on a new world.  
There’s no real need for any cohesion between 
star systems for that. Empires are another story  
and galactic-scale ones even more so. So today 
we’ll be contemplating 3 specific scenarios,  
though there are plenty more and some will 
probably get their own episodes down the road. 
First, we’ll ask how you would go about 
establishing a long lasting empire from a  
single homeworld like Earth into an empty galaxy, 
at sublight speed. Second, we’ll contemplate  
conquering a galaxy your own species and only 
your own species has previously colonized,  
if you did have FTL travel. Third we’ll ask 
how you would do that if many diverse species  
were already established throughout the 
galaxy, as in so many space opera stories. 
So scenario 1, you are Earth, and you find out 
the galaxy is empty of life and plan to head out  
and colonize it all, and you believe faster than 
light travel and communication are impossible,  
but light speed communication and ships moving 
at a decent fraction of light speed are possible. 
Could you build and maintain a galaxy wide empire? 
And just as importantly, why would you attempt to  
ensure your colonies were all unified under your 
government, all the way out to Galaxy’s Edge? 
Possibly for the sheer mustache-twirling evil of 
it all, but the problem is that no classic human  
could conquer the galaxy because it would take 
a thousand times longer than any human has ever  
lived just for the message to make it home from 
the Galactic Rim that you’d finally succeeded,  
after however many hundreds of thousands 
of years that colonization took.  
Now that ruler might be eternal, we’ve often 
discussed ways to extend human life and we’re  
not limited to contemplating only the human 
or organic. One way to have an eternal empire  
is to have a single leader everybody loves, 
respect, dreads, worships or some combination  
thereof… but it wouldn’t be a classic single 
human and so let's assume for now that the classic  
motivation to rule the world, or the galaxy, 
just for the sake of ruling it isn’t enough. 
Let’s take this more plausible scenario. Sometime 
in the next few centuries we are going to be able  
to build a ship that can carry us to new star 
systems. Once that happens, we might do a few  
modest trial runs, doing a few nearby places like 
Alpha Centauri or Tau Ceti, to get some practical  
experience, but soon thereafter it's going to hit 
a point where we can send out colony ships by the  
armada. See our Generation Ships series for some 
idea what those ships would be like and how many  
of them a fully developed solar system could crank 
out. But think billions of ships, carrying many  
thousands of people each, or potentially trillions 
of seed ships, which are more automated affairs. 
Whether we start sending out swarms of colony 
ships in a couple centuries or we develop slowly,  
taking a couple millennia to grow this solar 
system, its going to take about a hundred thousand  
years divided by whatever fraction of light speed 
those ships travel to get one out to every star  
in this galaxy. It will take longer if we’re leap 
frogging, colonizing worlds then waiting for them  
to grow and send their own colonies off, but I 
doubt colonial efforts will ever come from the  
most freshly colonized edges of things, and while 
that percolating colonization slows stuff down a  
lot, its not as much as we tend to assume.
A colony that begins with a million people  
can be up to a billion at normal 20th 
century human growth rates in 5 centuries  
and up to a trillion in 5 more, so if 
they feel good sending colony ships out to  
any uncolonized system within 100 light years and 
their ships move at only 10% of light speed, then  
even stopping and growing a new colony at each 
100 light year step, which sends out new seeds,  
is only doubling your colonization time. In this 
case, colonizing the galaxy in 2 million years,  
as opposed to a more minimalist 100,000 years of 
near-light speed ships leaving Earth directly for  
their destination. We’ve discussed the ups and 
downs of both approaches and a lot of alternative  
approaches in that Generation Ship series.
So you’re staging up to do this,  
here on Earth a few centuries from 
now, and someone asks the big question,  
“Are we planting the galaxy with enemies?”.
Actually there’s two big questions,  
the other is “Who is paying for this and how 
are they getting a return on their investment?”  
but that’s something we’ll focus on more 
in the next episode, Stellar Strip Mining. 
Is colonizing the galaxy merely seeding it with 
potential rivals? Quite possibly, but that’s  
never stopped us before. On the other hand it 
wasn’t actually us colonizing Earth for instance,  
it was various unintelligent organisms followed 
by progressively smarter ancestors of ours  
all the way up to prehistoric humans. They weren’t 
thinking their children or break away tribes would  
replace or conquer them one day. As we progress to 
intelligent prehistoric humans, I’d imagine they  
did often worry that the piece of the tribe that 
left might come back stronger and unfriendly one  
day, whether they were leaving on good terms or 
being driven out, but even in more modern times  
we don’t really sit around thinking about how 
the pioneers settling west of the Mississippi  
might represent a future economic or military 
threat to the folks on the Atlantic Seaboard. 
But there’s no real reason to do so 
because we can talk to them the whole time,  
a colony heading out to even Alpha Centauri is 
effectively cut off from casual interaction. So  
folks are going to be thinking about that threat 
seriously before those first ships leave, heck  
we’re doing that right now and no human has ever 
even been born off Earth or immigrated from Earth. 
How do we keep these colonies from being a threat? 
Well it's all nice to say that we can keep being  
friendly to them, or that they’d remember us 
fondly, but here’s the problem – those colonies  
will cost time and money and someone was footing 
the bill. If it’s folks scraping their assets  
together to flee Earth, then they presumably 
aren’t fond of it and might turn hostile in the  
future. If it’s nations or corporations 
trying to get some investment underway,  
they need some way to turn a profit on that 
new colony, again our topic for next time.  
Either way it's not a recipe for easy friendship, 
and kindness is no definite solution either,  
there’s a reason it's proverbial that the 
fastest way to ruin a friendship is to loan  
a friend money. Even if you succeed in setting 
up a hundred colonies that you have positive  
relationships with, and only one you were on bad 
terms with, which would be an amazing success  
rate, then that still means you’ve a hostile 
world out there, where before you had none. 
And incidentally it's not 
a gamble you have to take. 
While we often talk about getting 
all our eggs out of one basket,  
that really isn’t a survival strategy at the 
interstellar scale. For one thing they aren’t  
your eggs anymore when you let them grow up 
alone under alien suns. For another, I cannot  
think of a single plausible natural disaster that 
could wreck an interplanetary civilization and  
wipe the whole thing out, even a localized 
Supernova wouldn’t take out your Oort Cloud  
colonies. To wipe out a fully developed solar 
system requires a powerful outside intelligence,  
which in our current scenario doesn’t exist 
until you make one by colonizing the galaxy. 
Now some of you are probably saying to yourself 
“Well, you can breed enemies up at home  
too” which is true, but you can be vigilant 
about that whereas colonies light years away  
are hard to monitor, and just because you 
have worries of internally created problems  
doesn’t mean you should shrug 
and make external ones too.  
Yes a big crazy artificial intelligence 
might arise and crush you from inside,  
but it could do that on a colony too and probably 
easier, since taking over a small colony would  
make a better incubator for it and a vastly easier 
place to get recklessly made and under controlled. 
Others might be saying, “Yes but don’t we 
have a responsibility to colonize the stars?”  
Perhaps, and a lot of us nod our heads at that 
and say “Darn right” but the rebuttal to that is  
“Says who? What responsibility and who exactly 
is that responsibility to?” It sounds nice to  
say we have a destiny among the stars, heck I 
say it and similar on the show all the time,  
but that’s usually implied to be either poetic or 
naturalistic, that our nature compels us to grow  
and expand, not something morally binding to the 
point of risking spawning enemies. Genesis might  
say be fruitful and multiply and fill the Earth, 
but it doesn’t say anything about the galaxy,  
and while my knowledge of various religions 
and ideologies is anything but comprehensive,  
I’ve never heard one that specifically placed 
a compulsion on us to colonize the galaxy. 
All of this may be true, you can argue those 
points or many others, but what really matters  
is that if we can see this now, and worry about 
it now, so will the folks a few centuries from  
now when its sitting in their laps as a real 
thing waiting to begin, not a nebulous future. 
We also need to remember that our enemies have 
reason to come home and attack us, or push on us.  
For a very long time to come Earth and our solar 
system will be the richest place in the galaxy. It  
not only is likely to be home to untold trillions 
of people in untold numbers of settlements of  
major planets, moons, minor planets, and 
artificial space station habitats, it’s  
going to be where virtually all the information, 
research, and entertainment get made and funneled  
through. We’ll be the big source of those and 
we’ll be the big target for folks either giving  
or selling or paying for things with their own 
locally generated R&D and entertainment and so on. 
We will also tend to be the natural hub of 
easiest reach for physical trade too, especially  
if we employ something like the Interstellar Laser 
Highway system we’ve often discussed on the show.  
And simply having wealth increases the flow of 
trade in luxuries to you, as the best place to  
sell them, which subsidizes other trade too, 
making all cheaper, and making it more abundant.  
If you’ve got a lot of resources, folks have 
reasons to come visit and take them. This need not  
be overtly hostile either, there’s a lot of ways 
our home system might get pressured externally  
in ways we might not want, which can’t happen 
if there’s no one outside of here to do that,  
and again we’re assuming there 
wouldn’t be, for this scenario,  
unless we go and plant them.
If it is going to happen,  
well maybe we need to make an effort to establish 
control for our own safety from the outset. Not  
just for our own good either, but our daughter 
colonies. It only takes one reckless research team  
to unleash some monstrous self-replicating swarm 
on the galaxy seeking to assimilate us or turn  
us all into paperclips – another topic we will 
probably dedicate an episode of this series to. 
So how do you do it? How would 
you control all these systems? 
Probably not entirely centrally, maybe you would 
divide the galaxy into major sectors with capitals  
there and sub-sectors and local regions and so on, 
each of which has increasingly limited authority  
to make changes or adapt the official script but 
far more day to day power to operate. Let’s say we  
could make either functionally immortal humans, or 
post-humans, or machine intelligences. We’ll just  
call them the Editors, a small handful of people 
– or whatever – who we can program or brainwash  
to be absolutely obedient to a specific script 
of rules sent out from the hub level above them,  
with Earth serving as the Chief Editor.
That script might be something very specific,  
somewhere in between Asimov’s Laws 
of Robotics and a Constitution,  
not meant for day to day operations necessarily 
but it might have required guidelines. Let’s  
say we sent 9 of them off to each system, these 
editors, and each had a laser transmitter system  
with the one-time pad used for communicating 
officially. Each transmitter requires the super  
majority of editors to enter in their personal 
code, for which they have one for each year,  
in order to operate. The actual security 
methods or number of editors doesn’t matter  
other than that it be something that isn’t likely 
to be easy to sabotage or break accidentally, lots  
of redundancy but without compromising security.
Any of those editors can refuse – and must refuse  
because of their programming – to enter their 
code if the local system is breaking the rules.  
If that happens the system goes officially 
dark and no other aligned system can keep  
transmitting once they know. Not just Earth, not 
just their local hub, but their neighbors too.  
If this is how official currency is moved and 
how research and money and information all move,  
it becomes ridiculously expensive to intentionally 
cut ties by imprisoning the editors or blowing up  
the transmitters or blowing up the editors for 
that matter. The question is then if any given  
system is going to buck the rules, which 
probably depends on what those rules are. 
They might be stuff like everyone following the 
same currency rules, data formats, and units of  
measure, they might be formal rules of war 
and arbitration. They might be human rights,  
they might be definitions of what qualifies as 
a human, banning mutants or robots for instance.  
Notice there’s no threat of force here yet or 
taxes, this is just a basic shunning system,  
but its still a potent tool, especially if the 
rules are ones everyone agreed to before leaving.  
Military retaliation, taxes, tribute, and 
changes to those rules can certainly play a role,  
but at the moment this is just basically rules 
you agree to in order to play on the server,  
as it were. Perhaps it’s a requirement that 
any entertainment or R&D your system makes  
has to be uploaded to the hub and compensation 
awarded using the agreed on method, but perhaps  
there’s a penalty for failing to upload it, or 
a quota for it. The analogy here is someone able  
to just shut down the internet, or shut out 
any one person who fails to follow the rules. 
How well would this work? Pretty well probably, 
as a basic means of empire. I can think of ways  
to interfere in it, but also ways to patch those 
bugs, and I’m sure you can too. The key thing here  
is that your editors are presumably programmed 
to accept updates to the script from the hub  
level above, all the way back to Earth, and also 
presumably programmed not to seek any method of  
avoiding this or following the rules. You need 
ways to handle the rare occasions someone thinks  
of a new loophole, though most of the time the 
person who comes up with that loophole probably  
won’t seek to exploit it anyway. Maybe you don’t 
tell folks about loopholes you already found and  
patched, and they are afraid the one they came 
up with is already known, maybe there’s a large  
reward for folks finding one out and reporting it, 
maybe they just don’t want to use it. You keep big  
war fleets at your hubs worlds, or giant death 
rays, for handling cases of critical failures. 
You’ve also got going for you that folks 
are likely more afraid of their neighbors,  
or crazy accidents and experiments gone 
wrong, than of you. You’re a known evil,  
back home at Empire central command, and odds 
are good they mostly like the system operating  
to protect them from those brigands next door or 
the radical researchers in that rebel system that  
are spawning abominations the empire keeps in 
check. Indeed you might be running that radical  
research facility secretly just to keep some folks 
afraid of it and to attract the sorts of folks  
who might be into radical research, to suborn 
them to your cause or quietly dispose of them. 
Such a system might be tyrannic or democratic, 
but let’s consider scale for a moment.  
We’ll bypass whether such systems are just single 
terraformed planets or a full on Dyson Swarm,  
and just stick with there being about 
400 billion star systems in this galaxy.  
If we assumed every layer of hub, or subsidiary 
government or control level, was two orders of  
magnitude higher – say 100 system makes up 
a region, 100 regions a galactic precinct,  
10,000 systems, 100 precincts a sub-sector, 
a million systems, 100 of those a sector,  
100 million systems, and 100 of those 
a galactic zone, 10 billion systems,  
of which you’d need around 40 or so in our galaxy.
If you’re doing something like that  
democratically, then any rules change, suggestion, 
or vote is taking decades at the regional level,  
and roughly 4-5 times longer for each 
step up. So it is very likely you’d  
have specific tiers of control folks could 
shift the rules around inside at each level. 
Well let’s be honest, its possible this 
could go on forever, give us an example  
of an Eternal Empire, but let’s say it 
felt stifling to a lot of people anyway,  
that those system’s nearer Earth and older and 
vastly more developed were tired of being pushed  
around by Earth and little new research was 
really coming out. That a lot of the hubs were  
increasingly finding ways to delay or interfere 
in upgrades to the official rules and that many  
systems just didn’t care and were logging out, as 
it were. The raw system we suggested was mostly  
advantageous for interstellar banking, R&D and 
IP, so some might just say the heck with it. 
Let’s say colonization had proceeded out rather 
quickly and that by the year 1 million AD  
the signal came back home to Earth that the 
last stars of the Galactic Rim were colonized,  
and many of those in between decided – having 
gotten the message sooner – that they were done,  
screw the Empire, the galaxy was colonized and no 
horrible aliens had been found or crazed machine  
intelligences released, and they just checked 
out. Or sought to run their own mini-empire,  
which would hardly be mini, all things considered.
The empire falls, many galactic precincts  
remain nominally unified, maybe even whole 
sub-sectors, but the thing just collapses  
and stays that way till someone figures out FTL.
We’ll say this is back on Earth too, though some  
other big hub world or whichever would work. 
Decent odds are these worlds did have a lot of  
military assets and R&D, and probably need to keep 
them up to, since they are likely to be subject  
to a lot of covert attacks, or even open ones, by 
anyone wanting to make sure they stay independent. 
In any event, they have FTL now and some 
modern Justinian gets the reigns and starts  
dispatching fleets out to seize the galaxy.
This is scenario 2, a human colonized galaxy  
being conquered by humans with FTL. Faster than 
Light or not this is going to be a slow slog.  
It’s a lot like the Great Crusade of 
Warhammer 40k, back when it was 30k,  
Earth heads out to reconquer and save its lost 
colonies and it takes them a few centuries. Only  
that’s terribly optimistic. 400 billion systems, 
each probably growing to be full Dyson swarms or  
at least vastly developed interplanetary 
systems of trillions or quadrillions.  
Conquering one of those ought to take you 
centuries, as it may well be composed of millions  
of individual nations and empires each of which 
might still outnumber any empire Earth ever had. 
Do that 400 billion times. If you were doing that 
in a mere two centuries because your FTL allowed  
you to cross a galaxy in around a year, then it 
means you conquered on average 2 billion systems  
a year, or added 60 systems to your empire every 
single second, each one probably not only dwarfing  
any empire we’ve ever seen, but probably each 
individually being more populous than your typical  
space opera scifi galactic empire is typically 
described as being, with trillions of citizens. 
Scale of people matters now because before it was 
all about finding someone way to maintain cohesion  
against time and space, not politics or fleets or 
soldiers, a non-FTL empire relies on just finding  
a way to maintain cohesion even if it was outright 
using brainwashing and programming on everyone,  
just because of the difficulty avoiding drift 
and mutation and patch and update issues. 
Much will depend on how your travel works, if its 
wormholes or gates of effectively unlimited range,  
then you probably have the big hub systems 
again with wormholes leading to each unit below,  
Earth to each zone capital, each zone 
to the sector capitals, and so on.  
If its something like warp where 
its space travel just faster,  
then everything you do administratively 
depends on how much faster.  
If faster means ten times light speed, then little 
is really changed from the prior non-FTL travel,  
if it gets you anywhere in the galaxy in a 
year, then you still need lots of local control,  
your viceroys or ambassadors need teeth.
If it is anywhere in the galaxy inside a  
couple days, then folks are making all major 
decisions back at the Galactic Capital,  
faster than that and you’ve got pizza delivery 
anywhere in the galaxy in 30 minutes or less.  
It matters a lot, how fast information or material 
can move, because it’s the difference between your  
satellite facilities being a franchise whose owner 
follows a few rules but otherwise runs the show,  
or a manager or clerk with much more limited 
authority – be you an empire or a business,  
a fleet or a bureaucratic department.
Of course as you’re conquering your way out,  
even with FTL, and probably taking systems 
at a snail’s pace compared to your engine  
or communication speed, odds are good mutation 
will be an ever bigger problem. Back in the day,  
and in the inner systems, you might well have hard 
rules or definitions for what qualified as a human  
or acceptable variation thereof, but a couple 
millions years of separation and isolation  
is a lot for regular old evolution to change, let 
alone active genetic and cybernetic manipulation. 
As we’ve often noted before, if it turns out 
the galaxy is devoid of intelligent alien  
civilizations, just wait a million years and there 
will be tons. I’ve mentioned Warhammer 40k’s Great  
Crusade partially because it’s a popular franchise 
with a lot of the audience and partially because  
it deals with a lot of the extreme physical 
and cultural mutation and not cheerfully. In a  
Star Trek style Universe the aliens can all be 
friendly and get along with enough effort – at  
least till we encounter the Borg – but in that 
more grimdark setting – actually the origin of  
the word grimdark – the entirely ruthless and vile 
empire doing the conquering tends to slaughter  
anything that mutated off the human norm and in 
conquering millions of worlds has a fairly large  
and detailed list of acceptable mutations for 
their conquering generals and admirals to follow. 
They are even worse where aliens are concerned, 
though how evil and stupid they are varies by  
author and edition. In-universe justification for 
this is that all the aliens and mutants – not to  
mention actual demons who live in the warp 
they use for faster than light travel – are  
utterly vile and ruthless even in comparison 
to them. It’s a setting that’s built on the  
assumption the Universe really does suck and 
the only gods are dark and hungry ones, see our  
episodes Gods & Monsters for more discussion of 
those kinds of scenarios and their plausibility.  
For the more ruthless sorts, there’s 
always the background option,  
common in our own history, that points out 
that wiping someone out and repopulating with  
loyal and ideal citizens of your own takes 
a bit more time but often solves problems.  
Needless to say it can cause plenty too.
I’ll repeat the reminder that we’re not  
discussing good or evil today, just 
the plausibility of approaches,  
and it is easy to imagine a galaxy full of diverse 
civilizations might develop some very nasty ones,  
who might give the others a bad reputation, 
or just wipe them out till all that’s left  
is the various vicious or ruthless empires, and 
their rivals, slaves, victims, and future prey. 
This is a point of interest though because while 
we would all hope for any future Galactic Empire  
to be a benevolent and peaceful one, the issue 
with that is that folks generally do not like  
being told what to do, so the glue that holds 
empires together is generally a common goal  
or external threat and the pressure 
pulling at that empire against the glue is  
all that space and time, which is a lot 
when contemplating an entire galaxy.  
So ironically a peaceful and prosperous galaxy 
composed of fairly kind and well-intentioned  
beings is one that has less reason to 
have a galactic empire than one where war,  
atrocity, and carnage is an ever present option.
We’ll be examining a lot of the more specific  
scenarios we mentioned today and many others 
in future episodes, but I want to close on  
that general notion. Fiction delights in giant 
empires but that does not necessarily mean their  
an ideal approach even when you can actually 
keep one running, and a galactic empire – even  
one with FTL – is one where a ‘thousand year 
empire’ just doesn’t cut it, you need to be  
considering stability over millions of years and 
millions of worlds just to pay the entry fee,  
so to speak, and you need a good reason to 
do this or an overwhelming way to enforce it. 
Going back to our early notion of folks being 
worried about colonizing the galaxy for fear of  
breeding enemies, I think to even sell it to your 
potential supporters to get the empire underway,  
you need to have a plan for how you could 
not just plausibly create a galactic empire,  
but make it run eternally without the machine 
breaking down no matter how hard it was struck. 
As an upside though, if you’re a ruler or cabal 
able to offer up a system that believably had a  
chance at doing that, you probably are the sort 
of awe-inspiring figure that folks might imagine  
leading such an ambitious endeavor. Which 
is another interesting topic for discussion,  
perhaps some other time, not what sort of form 
a galactic empire might take, but what sort of  
person, creature, or entity, might be able 
to govern it, a potential galactic overlord.
So one of our key points from today is 
that a galaxy wide empire is no easy task,  
even if you can go faster than light, but that 
apparent restriction really ups the difficulty,  
and it’s an example of how what we see 
in science fiction and fantasy needs to  
be tempered by known science if we want to be 
able to better forecast the future and the key  
issues and challenges we’ll face in it.
That seemingly hard-ban on FTL is not a popular  
one and it can feel like science is limiting us 
there but by and large science helps us broaden  
our horizons and push our boundaries, and in my 
experience a greater knowledge of science and  
STEM fields opens so many doors, both for 
our imaginations and our day to day lives. 
Odds are if you are watching this show you 
already know this and know the value and wonder  
of science, computer science, math, and logic, and 
you want to learn more about how our world works.  
And videos like ours or from the many 
other excellent science shows out there  
is a great start but in order to really 
learn something, you have to *do* it. 
Our long time show sponsor, Brilliant, is a 
website and app built off this very principle: you  
learn best while doing and solving in real-time. 
You can jump right into solving problems and  
be coached bit-by-bit until, before you even 
realize it, you've learned a new subject in STEM. 
You won't need to memorize long messy formulas 
and endless facts — just pick a course you’re  
interested in, like Artificial Intelligence, and 
get started. Feeling stuck or made a mistake?  
You can read the explanations to find 
out more and learn at your own pace. 
Brilliant has something for everybody — whether 
you want to start at the basics of math, science,  
and computer science, or dive into cutting-edge 
topics like Cryptocurrency or Neural Networks.  
Or try any of their many excellent daily 
challenges, which combined with a cup of  
coffee is one of my favorites ways to 
get my brain jumpstarted for the day. 
If you'd like to join me and a community 
of 8 million learners and educators today,  
click the link in the description down 
below or visit: brilliant.org/IsaacArthur. 
So today we started up our new 
series, Galactic Domination,  
and we will be returning for part two in a few 
weeks for a look at Strip Mining the Galaxy. 
Next week week though we’ll examine Brain 
Computer Interfaces then wrap up June with  
our end of the month livestream Q&A. Then we will 
start July off with a long-requested return to our  
Faster Than Light series for Cheating Reality.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes  
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel, 
and if you’d like to help support future episodes,  
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website, 
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode  
description below, along with all of our various 
social media forums where you can get updates  
and chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas. You can  
also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud, or Spotify 
to get our audio-only versions of the show. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
