For those of you just joining us, this is
part two of of a collaborative episode with
Fraser Cain of Universe Today.
If you haven’t already seen part one, you
should head over and start there first.
Today we are looking at Kardashev-2 Construction
methods, and to make things even better, Fraser
and I have been joined by artists Kevin Gill
and Sergio Botero who are going to show you
some visions of what some of these projects
might look like.
No with no further ado, let’s return to
Tips from Type 2 engineers, already in progress.
In our last episode, we set up shades to block
the light from reaching our planets.
And we did the same with dangerous radiation
streaming from the Sun.
We set up a concentrated magnetic shield at
the Mars-Sun L1 Lagrange point, which catches
and redirects high energy particles.
This protects a world from the Sun, but it
doesn’t prevent harmful cosmic rays, which
can come from any part of the sky.
 
Our own planet Earth has a robust magnetosphere,
and it’s the main reason we have air to
breath and don’t absorb dangerous radiation
from the Sun and space.
Places like Mars don’t.
For this purpose, we created artificial magnetospheres.
We considered trying to get Mars’ core spinning
fast and hot so that rapid spinning molten
ferromagnetic materials would generate a protective
magnetosphere.
But that was too much effort.
We didn’t actually care what generated the
magnetic field, we just wanted the magnetic
field.
In the end we deployed a constellation of
electromagnetic satellites around every world
exposed to space.
These satellites could do double duty, harvesting
solar radiation and generating an artificial
magnetosphere.
Cosmic rays and radioactive particles from
the Sun were captured and redirected safely
away from the world, allowing us to roam freely
on the surface.
Once we had made acquired the resources of
every world in the Solar System, we began
our next great engineering effort.
To move and dismantle the worlds themselves.
To create the optimal configuration that gave
us the most living space and the most usable
energy.
We began the construction of our Dyson swarm.
Moving planets is almost impossible.
But not completely impossible.
How do you get all that energy to move a world
without melting it?
The orbital energy of Earth around the Sun
is approximately 30 million, trillion, trillion
joules.
That’s equal to all the energy the Sun puts
out over a few months.
Of course, the Sun is slowly warming up, and
while estimates vary, it’s generally accepted
that in about a billion years it will have
warmed up enough that Earth would be uninhabitable.
Moving the Earth was inevitable.
To move the Earth outward to counteract the
increased solar luminosity, we needed to add
orbital energy.
A lot of energy.
In Part 1 we discussed using gravity tractors
and gravitational slingshots to slowly and
steadily move objects around the Solar System.
This technique works at the largest scales
too.
A gravity tractor could slowly and steadily
move an entire planet if you had enough time
and fuel.
Because we already had mastery of all the
asteroids in the Solar System, we put them
into orbits that swept past worlds.
Each gravitational slingshot gave or stole
orbital momentum from the world, pushing it
closer or farther from the Sun.
We also used orbital mirrors to bounce sunlight
from the Sun.
With enough of them, deflecting their light
in the same general directional while maintaining
an orbit around the planet, we could move
worlds without touching them or heating them
up from the light beams.
With enough satellites to keep the net gravitational
force on the planet homogenous, we didn’t
have to worry about tidal heating, allowing
us to move a planet far faster.
In the future, we’ll use a king-size version
of this to move the entire Solar System, using
the star as the power source, called a Shkadov
Thruster.
We will push the Sun and every star we control
into a constellation that matches our needs.
But that’s a problem our Type III civilization
engineers will have to worry about.
We always needed ice.
For water, for fuel and for air.
And the outer Solar System had all the ice
we could ever need.
We brought comets and other icy bodies in
from the outer Solar System to bring water
to the planets we’re terraforming - Mars,
Venus, and the large moons of the Solar System.
Pushing ice is a tricky process, but the comet
itself is the source of fuel, either liquid
hydrogen and oxygen as the propellants or
using the hydrogen for a fusion torch drive.
However we have an alternative trick we can
use.
We just talked about using energy beams, focused
sunlight, lasers, or microwave beams to push
objects outward from the sun.
You can also move inward by reflecting the
beam off at an angle, removing orbital momentum.
This lowers their orbit into the Solar System.
By setting up energy collectors on comets,
we could beam power out them, and use that
energy to melt atoms into gas and accelerate
them away with a magnetic field, just like
an ion drive.
This let us take high-strength lasers and
microwave beams powered from the inner Solar
System and use it to tractor comets inward.
The propellant melted off the comets could
carry away far more momentum than the energy
beam added, though at the cost of losing some
of your mass in the process.
One by one we identified the icy bodies in
the Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud, installed
an ice engine, and pulled them inward, to
the places we needed that water the most.
The day to day energy for our civilization
comes from the Sun.
Solar collectors power the machines, computers
and systems that make day-to-day life spanning
the Solar System possible.
Just as the ancient Earth civilizations used
hydrocarbons as a store of fuel, we depend
on hydrogen.
We use it for our rocket fuel, to manufacture
drinking water, and most importantly, for
our fusion reactors.
We always need more hydrogen.
Fortunately, the Solar System has provided
us with vast repositories of hydrogen: the
giant planets, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and
Neptune all made up of at least 80% hydrogen.
But harvesting the planets for their hydrogen
isn’t without its challenges.
For starters, the gravity on the surface of
Jupiter is nearly 25 m/s2, which is nearly
three times the surface gravity of Earth.
On top of that, Jupiter’s magnetosphere
produces intense radiation fields through
its entire system.
You can’t spend much time near Jupiter without
receiving a lethal radiation dose.
We deploy huge robotic scoopers to swoop down
into Jupiter’s gravity well, skim across
the upper cloud tops, funneling in as much
hydrogen as they can.
On board compressors liquefy the hydrogen,
or refine it into the more energy dense metallic
hydrogen.
The fuel is then distributed across the Solar
System through the interplanetary transport
network.
For Uranus and Neptune, where the gravity
well is less extreme, we have permanent mining
stations which float in the cloud tops, harvesting
raw materials for return back to space.
These factories are a huge improvement over
the more expensive scoop ships.
Smaller cargo ships ferry the deuterium, helium-3
and hydrogen up to orbit, for an energy hungry
Solar System.
In order to construct our Dyson Swarm, we
will eventually need to dismantle almost all
the planets and moons in the Solar System
to provide the raw materials to house countless
people.
This process has begun, and we we have a number
of options.
For some worlds, we plan to just keep mining
and refining them with robotic factories until
they are gone, but this can be quite time
consuming and often we would rather do our
refining and manufacturing elsewhere.
Instead, we have set up very large mass drivers
running around the object to launch material
directly towards its desired destination.
To avoid building up angular momentum inside
the shrinking mass of the planetoid, we run
these giant cannons in both directions.
This prevents it spinning so fast that it
tears itself apart.
There’s very little gravity holding these
objects together after all.
For the smaller objects that’s actually
just fine.
When we want to disassemble a smaller asteroid
or moon into rock and dirt for the inside
of a cylinder habitat, we construct a cylindrical
shell around the asteroid, and spray material
from the asteroid onto the cylinder, giving
it some spin and artificial gravity to hold
the material up, or rather down to its surface.
We spin the asteroid faster and faster until
it flies apart, transferring its material
and its angular momentum to the cylinder.
With larger asteroids we send a series of
cylinders past them in a chain, painting their
interiors with the material we will turn into
dirt later on, until we run out of asteroid.
For full blown minor planets and moons, which
are much more massive but still fairly low
in gravity and lacking an atmosphere, we pump
matter up tubes to high above the planetoid
to fill freighters, get compacted into cannon
balls to be launched elsewhere, or simply
pumped into rotating habitats being built
nearby.
Mercury is already half consumed.
In a few more generations, it will be a distant
memory.
Perhaps our greatest accomplishment is the
work underway at Jupiter and Saturn.
We are now in the process of dismantling these
worlds to harvest their resources.
The largest machines humanity has ever built,
fusion candles, have been deployed into the
atmospheres of Jupiter and Saturn.
These enormous machines scoop up raw hydrogen
from Jupiter to run their fusion reactors.
One side of the fusion candle fires downward,
keeping the machine aloft.
The other end blasts out into space, spewing
material that can be harvested from orbit.
Not only that, but these candles provide thrust,
pushing Jupiter and Saturn slowly but steadily
into safer, more useful orbits for our civilization.
As we use up the hydrogen, their mass will
decrease.
Uranus and Neptune will follow slowly, from
farther out in the Solar System.
Eventually, eons into the future, we will
have dismantled them down to their cores.
There is more than a dozen times the mass
of the Earth in rock and metal down at the
core of Jupiter.
More raw materials than any other place in
the Solar System.
The long awaited construction of our fully
operational Dyson swarm will finally begin.
We’ll miss the presence of Jupiter and Saturn
in the Solar System, and remember them fondly,
but humanity needs room to stretch its legs.
Of course, as huge as the gas giants are compared
to Earth, the Sun is far bigger, and contains
not just hydrogen and helium but thousands
of planets worth of heavier elements, which
are spread around the sun, not just concentrated
deep down.
Trying to scoop matter off a star is much
harder than out of gas giant, though conveniently,
we can take advantage of all that energy the
Sun is giving off to power our extraction.
The material on the Sun is also ionized, so
it reacts strongly to magnetic forces, and
the Sun generates a massively powerful magnetic
field too.
In fact, our Sun ejects about a billion kilograms
of matter a second as solar wind.
We have a few ways to increase this flow and
harvest it.
The first is called Thermal Driven Outflow.
We hover mirrors over the surface, reflecting
and concentrating light down on spots on the
Sun’s surface to heat it up and increase
the mass being ejected.
This kicks up an eruption much like a solar
flare, feeding more solar wind.
We then place a large ring of satellites around
the Sun’s equator, connected to each other
by a stream of ionized particles generating
a huge current, themselves running that stream
off solar power.
This ring creates a powerful magnetic field
pushing outward toward the Sun’s poles,
and sending the super-heated matter in that
direction.
Hovering over the poles further out, we have
a giant ring sucking up sunlight and generating
a huge toroidal magnetic field.
All the matter we stir up on the sun and off
the poles is sucked through that and slowed
down for collection.
It’s a lot like the VASIMR Drive, using
a magnetic nozzle, so that nothing has to
touch the ultra hot plasma.
Giant Plasma Thrusters essentially acting
as the pump to gather the matter, it stays
in place using the momentum it’s stealing
from the particles it is slowing down, again
it’s a giant plasma thruster.
We will eventually build far more of these
rings around the Sun, spaced up and down from
the equator, and intermittently shut off the
power beam holding them aloft.
As all the satellites in that ring drop, building
up speed, we switch the power for the beam
back on and their plummet stops and they push
back up to their original position.
We do this with all the rings, in sequence,
pushing much larger waves of matter toward
the poles than the Thermal Driven Outflow
method provides, and we call this option the
Huff-n-Puff Method.
And there you have it, our tips and techniques
to harvest all the resources from the Solar
System.
To push and pull worlds, to heat them up,
cool them down and use their raw materials
to house humanity’s growing, ever expanding
population.
As we nearly achieve our Type II civilization
status, and control all the energy from our
Sun and all the resources of the Solar System,
we set our sights on a new goal: doing the
same thing for the entire Milky Way Galaxy.
Perhaps in a few million years, we’ll create
another guide for you, to help you make this
transition as efficiently as possible.
Good luck!
Now, if you haven’t already seen part 1,
take the link to that, and make sure to subscribe
to both channels.
I wanted to thank all the Patreon supporters
for both channels for their continued support
and for submitting ideas for this episode,
and there were some great ones, at least half
are already tentatively scheduled for future
production, but special congratulations to
Gannon Huiting who suggested this specific
topic and who also is receiving one of Fraser’s
meteorites as an award.
If you enjoyed this episode, don’t forget
to like it and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
