This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula,
when you sign up for CuriosityStream using
the link in the description.
We often wonder why we can’t see any aliens,
and it might be that they are out there and
can see us,
but make it so we can’t see them.
That Earth is essentially a zoo.
Of course if we are in a zoo,
it does make one wonder what their equivalent
of peanuts would be.
The Fermi Paradox is the big question of where
all the aliens are, when we don’t seem to
hear from them but the Universe seems to be
a huge and ancient place.
In our galaxy alone there are many billions
of stars likely possessing a planet of around
Earth’s mass orbiting at a distance where
liquid water might be on the surface, and
which are as old as our own Sun, or older.
And of course we have many billions of galaxies.
It just doesn’t seem probable that we could
be it, either the only advanced civilization
out there or the first on the galactic stage.
Last fall we continued our discussion of the
various hurdles or filters that might make
advanced civilizations less probable than
we’d tend to assume, in our Great Filters
Series, but I thought we’d spend a bit of
time this spring looking at some of the Fermi
Paradox solutions that assume intelligent
life is pretty common and tends to hang around.
This as opposed to the Great Filters, that
life, or intelligent life at least, occurs
very rarely - or as we discussed in Late Filters,
tends not to last very long.
For today we’ll assume more optimistic views
of both how aliens might act and their capacity
to do so.
That they aren’t malevolent or so alien
as to be indecipherable in their behavior,
and that they could send ships here to contact
us if they chose to.
We’ll examine the notion that they might
be unable to go out and settle the stars and
send ships here later this month in “Fermi
Paradox: Whispers in the Dark”.
Now if we assume they’re not malevolent
nor so utterly alien in motivations that we
can’t predict anything about them, and that
they are common enough and willing and able
to colonize new worlds, we have a bit of problem.
It’s just seems likely they would be interested
in us since it’s rather inconceivable we
wouldn’t be in their shoes.
Now this doesn’t mean they all would be,
by any means, they might tend to view us as
a rather boring and insignificant little pale
blue dot full of primitive hairless apes,
but it only takes one, and if we assume they’re
curious by nature – which is strongly implied
by them having technology – someone would
have taken an interest.
After all, few of us care about some random
species of fish or insect, but there are plenty
of folks who make a career of studying them,
and certainly would talk to them if they could.
Similarly, Earth might be a primitive backwater,
but we never hesitate to poke around our own
backwaters.
Comparing Earth to Space Kansas is humorous,
but Kansas has millions of visitors every
year.
Of course to be fair, many folks visiting
Kansas are actually visiting relatives, and
an alien wouldn’t have any relatives here,
or just passing through on their way elsewhere,
and Earth is not an exit ramp with restaurants
and gas stations as space travel doesn’t
really work that way.
You don’t pull over to refuel and stretch
your legs in space, you speed up then cruise
to your destination as it takes no extra fuel
to cover more distance, you only burn it speeding
up and slowing down, so stopping to refuel
doesn’t make sense.
Even if you need a resupply you stop someplace
genuinely boring, like a small icy rock with
no significant gravity well that you can suck
raw materials out of.
Regardless, folks do stop in Kansas for things
unique to Kansas besides people or location,
such as its nature preserves.
Quite a few people too as it’s a rather
beautiful place, as is my own home of Ohio
which is also proverbially boring.
And again, you don’t need a flood of visitors,
it only takes one to stop by and say hi.
They needn’t be particularly normal either.
If no one is stopping them and they’ve got
easy space travel, or at least practical space
travel, then it could just be one rather eccentric
alien who heard about the lovely wines we
make up in my hometown of Geneva and decided
to land in my backyard to sample those and
give me a nervous breakdown.
Then have to call up my friend Jimmy Church
to apologize, tell him he was right all along,
and then redo all our Fermi Paradox and Alien
Civilization episodes.
Indeed you might have someone visit Earth
and me specifically just because they were
spying on our communications and rolling around
in laughter at those episodes and were a touch
malicious.
We’re only assuming they’re not grossly
malevolent today after all, as opposed to
actually nice and enlightened people.
Confirmation bias is a big one on this topic
and I don’t make much of a secret I tilt
to the solutions we discussed in the Great
Filters series, but as usual we’ll try to
treat today’s topic fairly, and it’s past
time we got to that, so grab a drink and snack
and let’s get rolling.
The Zoo Hypothesis is essentially a blanket
term for those Fermi Paradox solutions which
say they are quite capable of contacting us
but choose not to do so.
That could be a direct zoo analogy, though
does not have to be, and in any event we do
generally interact with zoo animals except
where they’re too dangerous for us to approach
or where we’re are worried about their health,
physical or mental.
Zoo’s aren’t really meant to hide humans
from animals, just replicate their natural
habitat, but some critters don’t handle
humans well and that’s one of the motives
often given for this approach.
The Zoo Hypothesis contains examples like
the Star Trek Prime Directive of Non-Interference
where you are an ethical being who thinks
it unethical and unwise to go poking at species
before they’re ready for contact if you
don’t have to.
It’s a mind-your-own business approach with
a pragmatic exception of those capable of
traveling the stars already as you really
have no choice but to interact with them and
you are still curious about them and want
to talk to them.
Now there’s many more aspects to the Zoo
Hypothesis than the Prime Directive case but
it’s a good one to use to highlight the
problems of the Zoo Hypothesis, on first glance
anyway, and we examined some of those problems
in our episode Smug Aliens.
One point I made there is that not all civilizations
will agree on non-interference nor would all
members of that civilization, many might feel
you absolutely should say hello and even share
your knowledge with them at the earliest chance.
So you have to enforce it, establish a travel
ban and quarantine, and that’s a very iffy
proposition.
You have to maintain it for millions of years
and the threat of punishing someone isn’t
likely to be super effective.
As I said in that episode, if someone feels
the existence of that primitive species is
endangered, even the threat of death isn’t
likely to stop them.
Threatened with a firing squad, "my death
saved a civilization" are pretty good last
words to have carved on your tombstone.
Now that would seem to kill the entire notion,
but there are some ways around this.
First off, it doesn’t actually matter how
many civilizations are out there and how varied
they are, it really only matters what the
local big dog thinks on the matter.
Some ancient sprawling empire might have arisen
early in our region of space and said to their
neighbors, to paraphrase Arthur C. Clarke’s
from his Space Odyssey series:
“ALL THESE WORLDS ARE YOURS, EXCEPT EARTH.
ATTEMPT NO LANDING THERE.
USE THEM TOGETHER.
USE THEM IN PEACE.”
They might agree, they might resent it, but
they’re very unlikely to be willing to go
to war over it, especially since even if you
think leaving the primitives in peace is ethically
wrong, it’s a bit hard to seize the moral
high ground there to justify a bloody interstellar
war.
Particularly as you’d probably lose since
they’re ancient, and you probably don’t
want to die on that hill.
That is the first rule of warfare after all,
go pick someone you own size, or smaller,
David sometimes beats Goliath but we remember
that story because it’s the exception to
the rule.
Normally the goliath beats the stuffing out
of you.
So we could be a rare example of civilization
in this Universe not because they’re rare
but because they’re rarely uncontacted by
our point and we just happen to fall under
the dominion of some empire that follows something
akin to the Star Trek Prime Directive and
is willing and able to enforce it in regard
to other species.
Of course their own members might be trickier.
For that matter, while other galactic empires
might agree to leave us be, they’re going
to have a hard time preventing one of their
citizens from sending a signal our way if
they want, and that moral high ground issue
goes away if that protective empire decides
to attack you because their monitors for Earth
picked up a signal and tagged it as coming
from your backyard and sent an armada.
You might not be willing to risk a war with
them over going to Earth to say hi or sending
a sanctioned signal, but trying to enforce
your own non-contact policy to the degree
necessary to keep anyone from beaming a signal
to Earth is another matter.
It doesn’t matter if you’re even willing
to give up the culprit for punishment, because
the deed is already done and they might cheerfully
surrender themselves for that punishment.
Again, "my death saved a civilization" are
pretty good last words, and for many folks,
so are "my death enlightened a civilization".
Then there’s the matter of keeping that
quarantine and for how long.
In Star Trek, they do warp travel as their
contact threshold on the presumable grounds
that now those folks are capable of interstellar
flight, they’re going to start meeting people,
but realistically your tipping point is likely
to be as soon as they discover radio.
Not so much because they’d pick up on signals,
even assuming advanced civilizations use omni-directional
radio signals, they’d probably be compressed
digital ones that just looked like noise.
Rather, if you’ve got radio you now definitely
know what the electromagnetic spectrum is
and will start noticing the Universe if full
of a lot more than visible light coming off
stars.
You’re going to investigate and you’d
start noticing other civilizations and also
be able to receive transmissions from other
folks if they sent them.
It’s worth keeping in mind that a group
quarantining from contact also has to worry
about false signals or propaganda being sent
to the protected world too.
It also implies you’re only a few centuries
from figuring out space travel and while that
might be earlier than they’d like to make
contact, when you’re doing quarantines for
potentially millions of years, that’s probably
at the point where you’d shrug and say “Good
enough, they’re about as ready as they’ll
get and it will take way more effort to screen
them now”.
Needless to say, if that’s the case, it’s
not a great Fermi Paradox solution since the
Fermi Paradox is about why we specifically
can’t see aliens and we obviously do have
radio.
Nor can you really point to light lag and
say that someone living a thousand light years
away wouldn’t know we had that technology
yet, because they can presumably setup a transmitter
to run that whole time.
Although if the local big dog is threatening
use of force, it’s a lot more plausible
that they can enforce that one since “If
you detect anyone signaling Earth, stop them
or else” is a lot different than “Prevent
anyone ever doing it even briefly, or else”,
so that one might work.
At least to distant empires, as to your own
people in nearby worlds, well, anyone within
50 light years of us has had time enough to
hear us, figure us out enough to say something
clearly artificial, decide to send something
back and have it reach us, and there are over
a thousand of stars within that volume many
dozens of which probably have planets they
could easily have terraformed, assuming they
even limit themselves to terraforming which
they probably do not in favor of just building
their habitats.
It also wouldn’t include any personnel on
board their quarantine fleet blockading the
Earth or monitor bases watching us.
As to an actual blockade against physical
visitors, maintaining something like that
for millions of years is a pretty dubious
affair simply because we’d be assuming that
original civilization changes over time and
has to worry about things like budgets, not
to mention folks who decide to break the rules.
However, it’s not really all that inconceivable
they might build some artificial intelligence
that was very rigidly and fanatically programmed
to guard and quarantine that world even against
that empire, the equivalent of a minefield
they can’t shut off.
They could doubtless do so if they really
wanted to but may have set it up so solidly
that it took a major effort and deliberately
made it tamper proof against even themselves
so their descendants couldn’t change their
minds.
They might hesitate to build something that
powerful that might later be a threat to them,
after all, you should never hand someone a
gun unless you know which way they’re going
to aim it, that’s the first rule of warfare,
but if they’re a massive sprawling empire
they just need to make it tough enough to
discourage folks and probably have way more
ships and guns of their own than that lone
automated system protecting our system would
have.
You’d figure we’d notice something like
that hanging around our solar system but since
it only needs to maintain a small portion
of itself active, there could be whole armadas
of ships or self-replicating machines and
power collectors all folded up and buried
under a thin skin of ice or rock.
When dealing with an advanced civilization
with access to some of the tech we’ve discussed
us potentially using within even the next
few centuries, don’t even rule out something
like the Entire Asteroid Belt being nothing
but warships covered in a thin layer of debris.
Or even something like Jupiter being a giant
megacomputer with an artificial micro black
hole at its core and hoards of robots and
raw material buried under the atmosphere.
You could probably make that look pretty natural,
especially since the native species only knows
what natural is by looking at their own solar
system anyway.
Until a couple of decades ago we couldn’t
have even said if gas giants elsewhere in
the galaxy looked even vaguely like our own
and we still can’t see them well.
Amusingly, if we flat out blockaded another
solar system with warships that overtly looked
like warships and some other primitive species
we were protecting saw them, they might just
assume spaceships were natural objects like
asteroids instead.
If your main goal is to protect them from
being exposed to the big bad universe you
probably don’t have any real issues cannibalizing
most of the resources in that solar system
besides their homeworld to use for that protection,
especially since you can just turn the stuff
over to them, even as recycled raw materials
if you like.
Such mega-engineering and manufacturing is
mostly about energy and the Sun gives off
plenty, only about a billionth of which ever
hits Earth.
If you’ve got even fairly simplistic automated
manufacturing like we probably will have within
a generation or two or maybe ten, and you
see some world with primitive apes playing
with fire, that’s plenty of time to send
in the robots and crank up your production
there to screen them from contact.
And ‘screen’ might be rather literal.
If you’re just trying to keep signals and
ships from getting through, it is conceivable
you might build a big thin shell around their
planet or whole solar system that scrambled
signals and watched for interlopers to warn
off or pulverize.
Of course if you’re doing that, you might
decide that instead of trying to obscure the
outside Universe, which may well be full to
the brim of Kardashev 2 or higher civilizations
- and those are kind of hard to hide – that
you’d just build that shell like the wall
of a zoo that you decorated to look natural.
Kind of like a big dome made of TV screens
that showed a fake world outside, only scaled
up a lot.
That might sound pretty crazy but in truth
it’s not that hard to do, especially for
shielding someone pre-space flight.
We’ve certainly considered bigger constructs
on this show than some millimeter thick TV
screen englobing a planet that you could probably
build by disassembling one medium sized asteroid,
of which there are millions to choose from
locally.
Presumably anyway, there’s no guarantee
what the screen shows is what the natural
universe would look like minus the civilizations
now inhabiting it, but if your goal is to
let them naturally develop without interference
then it stands to reason you’re trying to
keep their view of the Universe reasonably
natural.
Or seemingly so anyway, as I said a bit ago,
we only know what natural is from observing
nature and assuming it’s natural, and we’ve
got enough big questions and unknowns still
that we can’t assume we’d just notice
a telltale and see it for a big giveaway that
things were fake.
Earth might exist in some little bubble with
a fake Universe on display that only loosely
matches reality.
We can’t assume the only reason for such
a quarantine is to let us naturally develop
undisturbed by aliens.
The motivation might be to see how a civilization
would develop without knowing about aliens
because it was so rare and long ago since
the last time that actually happened, just
a handful of times billions of years ago to
the eldest species, that someone commissioned
the project as an experiment.
We might be orbiting inside someone else’s
native home system on an artificially constructed
world.
As to our own spacecraft, we’ve never sent
anything manned farther than Moon, and while
they could probably build a bubble solar system-wide,
let’s not ignore that they could probably
very easily see any of our probes headed out
to deep space and just hijack them and send
back fake signals if they wanted to.
I really doubt some ancient alien empire is
going to have issues rapidly hacking the computer
on one of our space probes.
For that matter, they could probably do that
to manned ships too.
It’s presumably a lot harder to hack and
brainwash a human while jamming their signals
and sending fake stuff home so mission control
thinks all is well but they can probably do
it and probably have got extensive physiological
and neurological databases on us and would
have plenty of time to prepare for that.
It’s not like our current spacecraft are
fast or sneaky, even ignoring that we’d
be discussing such a mission on the news years
before it even launched.
That’s a bit awkward if we ever reach the
contact stage and they have to explain that
they’ve not only been tinkering with our
probes but probing our astronauts brains,
or other uncomfortable places, but they might
not give a fig.
They presumably think whatever they were doing
was reasonably ethical and we could be convinced
of the same, particularly as they presumably
have a lot of guns and very big ones at that.
That is the first rule of warfare after all,
the persuasiveness of your argument is directly
proportional to how much firepower you have
to argue your case.
And again, they might not care if we’re
angry.
Particularly since the astronaut-brainwashing
case requires they have brainwashing technology,
which combined with lots of firepower offers
additional means of convincing folks you’re
right.
You can, after all, simply sterilize their
planet if they get to uppity about their treatment
and indeed if your original motive was just
a scientific experiment, you might regard
it as just cleaning up your lab and washing
your petri dishes.
As I said though, for today we’re assuming
the aliens in question aren’t malevolent
and wholesale genocide is hard to argue as
anything but malevolent.
You just don’t kill off an intelligent species
to avoid them holding a grudge of mistreatment
unless you’re pretty darn evil.
Depending on what we mean by ‘kill off’
anyway.
There’s an assumption that it’s pretty
likely civilizations tend to go digital or
otherwise post-biological eventually, uploading
their minds to computers or beginning as artificial
intelligences and replacing the biological
species that made them.
If that’s the case, ‘kill’ is a bit
ambiguous.
If you really want to quarantine to a world
the easiest place to do that is in a separate
Universe they can’t get out of and nobody
can get into without a key.
Now, they might actually be able to build
universes, we don’t want to assume they’re
particularly bound by known physics, but they
probably can build simulated ones.
It’s pretty likely we’ll have that level
of computerization and sophistication before
our first manned ship ever heads out to another
star.
After all, you don’t actually need to simulate
every particle, just the actual brains of
the folks in it and their reality down to
whatever their bandwidth of observation is.
A simulated mind is not a brain in a vat,
it’s code, so you can go in and leave triggers
to let you know if someone just had a ‘gotcha
moment’ and saw through the illusion or
leave things in there to make them ignore
those flaws or just pause the simulation and
re-write things including their memory so
they saw no flaw.
Hard to catch errors in a pretty deep and
high resolution simulation too, if you’ve
got quantum mechanics at the bottom layer,
since little random events all the way down
at the fundamental level of reality rather
interfere with trying to repeat certain experiments
to see if you’re in a simulation.
You don’t need to simulate them having a
computer that can calculate the quadrillionth
digit of pi or a large prime number either,
just a computer that acts like its doing that
and sends a call to your own database containing
those.
And again you can always pause the simulation
and tinker if you need too.
So it doesn’t necessarily take anything
like an atom-by-atom simulation requiring
a planet-sized computer, but it’s actually
quite possible they’d have those and more
too anyway.
Still, this particular version of the Zoo
Hypothesis is pretty effective.
You find an intelligent species and want to
protect them from interference, and you’re
already post-biological yourself so you probably
don’t have a moral issue with transferring
brains to computers anyway.
You sneak onto the planet, infect everyone
with tiny little robots that reproduce and
crawl into everyone, scan their brains, then
flip them off and turn them on again in your
nice safe simulation.
You could presumably do that to every single
critter with a brain, big or not, leaving
that planet covered in corpses.
You collect up all the biological and DNA
samples you want then disassemble that planet
for raw materials to build more computers.
And you need not put them their either, they’re
just frozen till you boot them up so you can
bring your harddrives home to the center of
your empire, protected by your own armadas,
and keep back-ups of everybody here and there
while keeping that simulation on a nice secure
firewalled computer.
Even if someone does get in and tinker, you
just revert to your last safe archived state.
It also lets you save civilizations while
eliminating competitors, as they’re inside
a simulation you control, so it’s a handy
way for a marginally ethical species to get
the galaxy all for itself.
Mind you, doing that, especially with the
motive of keeping them there forever to keep
you safe from them too, no competitors, is
pretty messed up but it’s inside the zone
of what I can imagine our own species convincing
itself was ethical so I wouldn’t rule out
aliens doing the same.
People can rationalize a lot where self-interest
is concerned and I suspect that’s fairly
universal, even when those people were born
under an alien Sun and have twenty eyeballs.
There are tons of Zoo Hypothesis iterations,
and there are probably tons more you can all
think of – feel free to leave those examples
in the comments below or discuss them over
on our Facebook group, Science & Futurism
with Isaac Arthur.
Of them all though, this subset, kill everybody
and upload their brains to a secure simulation,
strikes me as both particularly terrifying
and particularly plausible.
That someone saw us, didn’t want to see
us harmed or dead but wanted us out of play,
and just snuck in one day and killed us all.
As an upside, they probably would have done
that shortly after finding us and that likely
was not recently, so you and I would probably
have been born inside the simulation rather
than being copies of ourselves without own
bodies rotting on the real Earth or getting
disassembled to make more processors or paperclips
or whatever.
As to those massive computers bigger than
planets, that might not just be for simulations
of species but for housing their own minds,
and possibly just one mind.
You could have some planet-sized computer
running a single massive intelligence or even
an entire star converted over to that purpose,
and we’ll be exploring that in our episode
Conscious Stellar Objects, which is out now
for early release over on Nebula.
Nebula, our new subscription streaming service,
was made as a way for education-focused independent
creators to try out new content that might
not work too well on Youtube, where algorithms
might not be too kind to some topics or demonetize
certain ones entirely, or just doesn’t fit
our usual content.
And if you’d like to get free access to
it, it does come as a free bonus with a subscription
to Curiositystream, which also has thousands
of amazing documentaries you can watch, on
top of the Nebula-exclusive content from myself,
like our Nebula-Exclusive series, Coexistence
with Aliens, and many other excellent works
by creators like CGP Grey, Minute Physics,
and Wendover.
A year of Curiosity Stream is just $19.99,
and it gets you access to thousands of documentaries,
as well as complimentary access to Nebula
for as long as you're a subscriber, and use
the link in this episode’s description,
curiositystream.com/isaacarthur.
So we were discussing the Fermi Paradox today
and we’ll be returning to this topic in
two weeks to look at another popular notion
for a Fermi Paradox Solution that has aliens
civilizations as common, but just not talkative,
or perhaps talking but we can't hear them,
in “The Fermi Paradox: Whispers in the Night”
First though, next week we’ll be exploring
humanity’s future as we get out to space
and colonize and industrialize our solar system,
and ask how that industrialization might impact
how we colonize, in Industrial Belts in Space.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, visit our website IsaacArthur.net
to donate to the show or look over our inventory
of over 200 episodes or our awesome SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
