So we used a Youtube poll on the Channel to
select the next videos and the first two winners
were Black Hole Powered Spaceships and Faster
Than Light Travel.
There’s a lot of overlap in some of those
concepts and when I realized I was 20 minutes
into the video for the first one before I
even mentioned how those spaceships might
work, I decided I’d just go ahead and make
both of them and this video all part of a
set.
Today I’m explaining the concept of micro
black holes, how they differ from regular
black holes, and how we might go about making
these things.
To properly discuss that we need to talk about
Hawking Radiation, and to do that we need
to talk about virtual particles.
But when we’re talking about black holes
we first need to clear away a lot of the misconceptions
people tend to get about black holes.
Which is to say they’re not black and they’re
not holes.
That term, Black Hole, didn’t even come
into use till the late 1960’s, on the other
hand the notion has been around since well
before Einstein discussed the concept in General
Relativity.
They first got discussed way back when the
American Revolution was going on.
A lot of the common features of black holes
people reference either are limited to naturally
occurring ones made of dead stars or actually
describes the tiny condensed matter, probably
a point like object of infinite density, inside
the black hole called a singularity.
But a black hole itself is simply any region
of space where the escape velocity exceeds
the speed of light, and we often call that
the event horizon because it’s the place
where you can’t see events occurring on
the other side.
Nothing that happens on the other side, no
event, can be witnessed externally because
the light never reaches you from it.
This does not mean all black holes are dense.
The monstrously huge ones at the center of
many galaxies have an average density less
than white dwarfs or neutron stars for instance,
and one formed from an entire galaxy’s mass
would be nearly a light year across and for
all that it contained a trillion stars worth
of matter would have an average density on
par with the air you and I are breathing.
Stellar mass black holes are very dense, since
they are squeezing in the mass of a whole
star to an area a few miles across.
Smaller black holes are a lot denser than
even that, and an Earth-mass black hole would
be about the size of a marble and fit comfortably
in your hand….
At least until it tore you apart and sucked
you in.
But a lot of the black holes we’ll be interested
in the next video, to be used as power sources,
are way smaller than even that and actually
wouldn’t suck you in.
They simply lack enough mass to yank on you.
They’re also so small they have problems
absorbing matter.
That’s made worse by Hawking Radiation which
we’ll get into later on.
So if I collapsed an entire small mountain,
a billion or so tons of matter, into a black
hole, that black hole would be about the size
of a proton.
If we stuck it in a room on a pedestal, you’d
be quite safe standing on the other side of
the room from it.
Though when you got to at about arm’s length
it would be yanking on you as hard as Earth
does.
Almost all the micro-black holes we’ll be
interested in this and the follow up videos
will be even less massive than that, and in
most cases, if it weren’t for the Hawking
radiation they emit, wouldn’t hurt you if
you walked right past them.
That Hawking Radiation does matter though,
because as we’ll see in a bit, while your
average dead star black hole doesn’t even
emit enough energy via Hawking Radiation over
a billion years to power a light bulb for
a millisecond, smaller ones release a lot
of energy and the smaller they are the more
they produce.
This billion ton one we just mentioned releases
an amount of power comparable to a nuclear
powerplant or major hydroelectric dam.
So while you could safely stand across the
room from it without being dragged in, the
power coming off it would burn you to a crisp,
since it would about a thousand times more
potent than noon time sunlight at the other
side of even a fairly large room.
Before we get into Hawking Radiation and Virtual
Particles we have to talk about gravity gradients
and tidal forces.
You’ve probably heard that you fall towards
a black hole you’d be torn to shreds, the
official scientific name of this is Spaghettification.
Because you get stretched out thin then ripped
apart.
Personally I don’t like this being mentioned
in regard to black holes because it gives
some weird notions and feeds into misconception
that black holes are incredibly dangerous
compared to normal stars.
A stellar mass black hole wouldn’t shred
you till you got way closer to than its original
parent star would have torched you into atomic
dust at.
In fact you need to be closer than a planet
distance, and if you fell toward Earth you’d
get burned up and hit the ground way before
you’d get to the tidal tearing distance
of most stellar mass black holes.
Now they all have a distance that would shred
you, assuming they have a singularity or a
near-singularity in their middle anyway, but
for galactic central black holes it is way
after you’ve already fallen into the event
horizon and for micro black holes it’s at
a distance less than most atoms are wide.
The cause for this is the same in all cases.
Gravity is an inverse-square force, get twice
as far away and gravity is at a quarter of
its strength, get half as close and it’s
four times more powerful.
Any object is going to experience slightly
less gravity on its bottom than its top, gravity
is just a bit weaker up there.
On planets that’s as far as it goes, because
the mass is all spread out so that even if
you drilled down deeper into the earth gravity
doesn’t get stronger, in fact at the center
of the Earth, there’s no gravity at all,
because all the matter is symmetrically spread
around you canceling out, not working together
like when you’re outside of it.
Black holes are all concentrated so you can
get very close, to distance where your head
might be twice as far from the center as your
feet, and would thus experience one fourth
the pull of gravity as your feet.
And if you’re near a normal black hole that
gravitational difference might be only a fraction
of a percent but it’s a fraction of a percent
of millions times more gravity than you experience
on Earth, so it would stretch you and rip
you apart.
This tidal force, this gravity gradient, is
very important in smaller black holes because
it means that over a very small distance,
distances the size of atoms or smaller, that
difference in gravity might be truly massive,
while in larger black holes for all that they
have a lot of gravity, the difference in it
at only an atom width further away aren’t
that large out above the event horizon.
Remember that because we’ll come back to
it, smaller black holes can have tidal forces,
above their event horizons, so severe that
they could rip an electron off an atom simply
because it was slightly closer.
So let’s talk about Virtual Particles.
At the core of physics, especially in Quantum
Mechanics, there’s a bit of conundrum with
how attractive forces work.
If you’ve got two positive charges, like
repels like, and we envision this as both
spitting out photons that hit each other and
shove each other further away.
That doesn’t work too well with attraction,
normally if you chuck a baseball at someone
it shoves them further away, it doesn’t
drag them closer.
So in Quantum Field Theory we fix this with
something called a Virtual Particle.
Particles that don’t have to follow the
normal rules like having positive mass, positive
momentum, positive energy, obeying the speed
of light, or moving forward in time.
Now while these particles are literally pulled
from nowhere, the concept isn’t.
The keystone of Quantum Mechanics is the uncertainty
principle, that holds that when you get down
to really small scales, certain complimentary
variables, like position and momentum, or
energy and time, can only be simultaneously
measured with so much accuracy.
Conceptually it’s sort of like fractions
of penny, if something costs 99 cents and
there’s a 6% sales tax, you pay a $1.05,
though 106% of 99 is actually 104.94, that
6 hundredths of penny got rounded up.
The Universe is a bit like that too, it can’t
keep track of fractions of a cent, and the
amount it can’t keep track of, it’s fraction
of penny, is Planck’s Constant.
We see this in effect too, a lot of particles
that mediate forces, like the W and Z bosons
that regulate the Weak Nuclear Force, are
actually way more massive than the particle
that emits them, and this force has an incredibly
short range because that amount of mass and
energy can only exist out of nowhere like
that for a very short period of time, so these
particles can’t travel far before disappearing.
Giving the Weak Nuclear Force a very short
range.
For virtual particles, they come into existence,
the theory goes, in pairs right out of nothing.
We call this the Quantum Foam these days.
If you’ve hear references to Vacuum Energy,
or Zero Point Energy, or weirdness with the
Casimir Effect and wormholes, this is what
that originates from.
And we’ve measured the Casimir Effect in
labs, so again this idea isn’t coming out
of nowhere, even though it is based on the
idea of things popping out of nowhere.
So the virtual particles appear in pairs out
of nowhere.
These are opposite particles of each other,
akin to anti-matter, they pop up right next
to each other and almost always near instantly
recombine and annihilate.
Virtual particles don’t have to have the
same energy or mass as their real equivalents,
since the uncertainty principle permits them
to vary off the expected normal amounts quite
a lot.
This normal, what particles have when we graph
their energy, mass, and momentum in terms
of classical mechanics, forms a hyperboloid
that looks a bit like a shell, so we call
normal matter as being ‘on shell’ or ‘on
mass shell’, and virtual particles can be
off mass shell, and conceptually how far you
are off shell is sort of a measure of how
unreal a particle is and how short its existence.
Though there are way for virtual particles
to become real and the divide between real
and virtual particles can be a bit blurry
and arbitrary in some cases.
In other ways of looking at virtual particles,
they don’t so much exist in space and time
as they occupy the moment between ticks of
the clock or cracks between flagstones.
I like that analogy personally since they
are basically the mortar holding the bricks
of matter together.
Non-virtual, real matter that has these properties
like negative mass or energy is generally
what is being referred to when we talk about
Exotic Matter, which will be a big component
of a lot of the various ideas we will talk
about in the Faster than Light Video in a
couple episodes.
Incidentally quite a few of the notions kicked
around for where all matter and energy of
the big bang came from often revolve around
Virtual Particles or parallel concepts from
String Theory, a sort of notion of the whole
Universe being a big Vacuum Fluctuation.
There’s not much evidence of this, but there’s
not much evidence of anything else from that
event either and as Ex Nihilo theories go,
those tend to be some of the more interesting.
But the basic theory dealing with Quantum
Foam holds that virtual particles are constantly
popping up in pairs everywhere, pairs that
almost immediately negate each other out.
Now we get to Hawking Radiation, because as
I mentioned earlier, on very small black holes
the tidal forces right near the event horizon
can be so strong that a pair of particles
right next to each other, but with the one
just a tiny sliver of distance further away,
might be ripped apart by the difference in
forces.
Now normally, just above a black hole event
horizon, just like everywhere else, pair production
of virtual particles is constantly going on.
Sometimes both will escape, sometimes both
will fall in, and the nothing important has
happened, literally nothing has actually happened.
But everyone so often one virtual particle
will fall into the black hole and the other
will fly away, separated by an event horizon
they can’t recombine or talk and the black
hole will lose just a little mass or energy,
same difference in this context, as that one
virtual particle flies away and becomes real.
Normally a photon, a big gamma one, but it
can be other particles too.
This doesn’t happen much.
Around the big black holes this happens almost
never.
Even though there’s a lot more real estate
right over the event horizon of a bigger black
hole, and way more virtual particle pairs
being produced.
Around the smaller ones though, right over
their event horizons, the difference in forces
over even sub-atomic distance can be massive,
massive enough to yank those two particles
apart and pull one under the horizon, and
to do this quite regularly.
This makes the black hole emit energy, which
we call Hawking Radiation since it was Stephen
Hawking who figured this out in 1976, and
we call this process black hole evaporation,
as it means that unless a black hole is absorbing
replacement matter they will eventually shrink
in size, and will keep shrinking even faster.
So while a stellar mass black hole might let
one virtual photon fly free and become real
every couple years, and thus take tens of
millions of trillions of trillions of trillions
of trillions of trillions of years to evaporate…
a smaller one like that billion ton mountain-mass
one we looked at earlier, should emit a few
hundred megawatts of power constantly for
a mere couple trillions years.
A flyspeck of time to evaporate, just a couple
hundred time longer than the Universe has
already existed.
And a few hundred megawatts is a pretty nice
power supply, comparable to most nuclear reactors.
Very loosely, black hole power output by Hawking
Radiation scales up with the inverse square
of its mass, meaning if cut the black hole’s
mass in half we expect to get four times the
power, it would also mean it only lived on
eighth the time since it’s losing mass-energy
four times as fast and only has half as much
to burn in the first place.
So if you wanted a black hole power source
that would just outlive our sun, it would
only mass about 100 million tons, a hundred
megatons, the mass of a decent sized hill,
and would pump out about 30 billion watts
of power continuously for the next four billion
years.
That’s a lot of juice, about enough for
ten million people by modern US electrical
consumption, and a hundred megatons isn’t
that much mass, I mean it is a lot, in terms
of water that would be enough to fill a stadium
to the brim several dozen times, but the oceans
hold over a billion megatons of water, and
the planet itself masses about 6 quadrillion
megatons so in the grand scope of things it
ain’t that much mass.
Now while that is a lot of juice and not that
much mass, it’s still way too little power
for way too much mass to make a good spaceship,
so when we talk about black hole powered spaceships
in the next video we will be looking at ones
closer to the one megaton range.
For mostly stationary things, at least in
interstellar terms, like space stations and
planets, these Hill Mass Black holes are where
it’s at.
They can last millions or billions of years
and produce more power than an equal mass
of solar panels or wind turbines or other
things that don’t use limited supply fuels
like petroleum or uranium.
And they take up a lot less room than fields
of solar panels or wind turbines since they
smaller than a proton.
Which also means if you built one on the Earth
it would just fall right down… and then
back out the other side of the planet and
back up in 80 minutes.
I mean it’s way smaller than an atom and
yet would still be carrying all the inertia
of a freefalling asteroid, it won’t run
into much friction from collision.
It will just oscillate back and force every
80 minutes scorching a nice line along the
way.
That’s one of the reason why we don’t
worry much about accidentally making black
holes in the lab, even if we made one it would
have way less mass than a hundred megatons,
we’d be talking grain of sand levels of
mass, and lifetimes so short we can only talk
about them in scientific notation, so it would
just flash right out of existence but even
if it didn’t it would just harmlessly oscillate
through the planet every 80 minutes, though
you’ll often see that listed as 84 minutes.
The time it takes for something to fall down
and through an object to its other side and
back again, if it’s not slamming into things,
like if you drilled a frictionless vacuum
tunnel right through the planet is based entirely
on the density of that planet, not its size.
That’s at the core of the concept called
a gravity train, one of the subscribers was
asking about it recently and it was in that
Total Recall Movie, the remake not the original,
which personally I liked even if it wasn’t
as good as the original.
Normally we use gravity train concepts for
skimming brachistochrone curves between two
cities on the same continent, rather than
passing through a planet’s molten core,
basically you’d fall down a frictionless
vacuum tunnel between say New York and Cleveland,
using no power.
Which is an unrelated but fun concept we might
look at down the road.
There are some tricks to keep black holes
from plummeting but the easiest would probably
be just to make the thing up in geostationary
orbit then beam the power down.
I know I generally disdain beaming power,
since a power beam able to supply electricity
for ten million people is also known as a
death ray, especially considering Hawking
radiation is normal hard gamma, but it deserves
mention.
I will talk about weaponizing micro-black
holes a bit in the next video but we’ll
skip that for now.
I get asked fairly frequently to do videos
on superweapons, which is an interesting collection
of options, but if my supervillain vibe gets
any stronger I’m going to have to start
picking out a location for my lair so that’s
on the back burner.
Besides I already did a Top 10 video of ways
to wipe out a planet’s population last year.
You’d get around the gamma radiation by
wrapping the black hole in something that
was a good absorber and had a high melting
temperature, like Tungsten, which for our
30 Gigawatt Hill Mass black hole would mean
a spherical shell of Tungsten a couple hundred
feet across that would be glowing red hot.
You could then trap that power with solar
panels or just leach the heat off it classically
to boil water and turn turbines.
Though the latter is a pretty counterintuitive
setup in zero-gravity.
Now making black holes is also a problem,
not as bad as refueling them so they don’t
explode, which we’ll talk about in the next
video since the ones for spaceships tend to
have lifetimes where you’d actually need
to worry about them exploding, but it is still
quite a technical hurdle.
It doesn’t appear to be physics hurdle though,
as best as we can tell there isn’t a specific
problem making small black holes that violates
some known law of physics though that’s
always hard to be sure of since we don’t
know much about black holes definitively yet
and there’s still debate about if black
holes themselves might violate the laws of
physics.
For very big ones its conceptually easy, cram
a lot of matter together, bingo, black hole.
But matter doesn’t like to be crammed together
and for smaller ones you don’t even have
gravity helping you pack it in tight.
So the popular theoretical methods is to blast
lasers together since photons are bosons and
unlike fermions… which is pretty much everything
you think of as normal matter, they don’t
care if you jam them together.
Photons are incorporeal as it were, all bosons
are, any number of them can occupy the exact
same place at the same time, though space
and time start getting a bit inaccurate as
concepts at that scale.
You can read up about that under the Pauli
Exclusion Principle if you want more details.
So if you fired a bunch of photons all aimed
at the same place to arrive at the same time,
and you packed enough energy into that spot
to form a black hole, you’ve got one.
Normally you’d do this with gamma radiation,
since it has a way smaller wavelength which
is important when you’re trying to target
a spot smaller than an atomic nuclei.
Now doing this would require some amazing
precision, and a big initial power supply
though you could draw that out by bouncing
the stuff around mirrors or similar.
You could also control the initial conditions
of the black hole if your accuracy is good,
giving it the spin, or lack of spin, you want,
as well as an initial velocity of the direction
and speed you want.
Incidentally, doing it this way means your
black hole is not a power source, it’s a
battery, since you are feeding all the energy
into it from some massive solar array, fortunately
the sun puts out a billion times more power
than hits Earth and if you were using all
that power just manufacture the 100 Megaton
Hill Mass black holes we’ve been discussing,
which by good old E=mc2 have just under 10^28
joules of Energy in them, you could manufacture
a new one a couple times a minute using the
total solar output.
And it might be a battery in this context
but since you could control its initial velocity,
and they are capable providing significant
thrust by themselves, that’s what the whole
next video is about, these black hole batteries
are very handy things for powering anything
decently far from the sun or that’s compact.
Alternatively a fusion reactor isn’t a battery,
which is why I often talk about future power
sources and just talk about them.
But in the context of batteries, or fuel for
ships, they seriously surpass fusion and are
potentially way lower maintenance too.
I talked about making small fake suns that
orbited their planets geocentrically in the
Shell Worlds and Disc Worlds video and these
are sort of ideal for that task since you
just build one, or a collection of black holes,
of the right power output and lifetime, stick
a shell around them of something with a high
melting point, and dump it into a 24 hour
orbit around the fake planet.
Real quickly, refueling black holes, small
black holes anyway, is harder than making
them because dumping matter into an object
that is smaller than an atom and spraying
out gigawatts of power is sort of like trying
to throw beach ball into the nozzle of a firehose
that’s turned on.
We’ll talk about that more next time but
I think we’ve reached a good place to end
for now.
Next time, black holed powered starships,
which is going to be a bit more sci-fi focused,
and after that we’ll talk about theories
for faster than light travel and communication,
which is also going to be pretty sci-fi oriented,
though as always we’ll keep it as close
to hard science as possible.
No poll this time since I already know what
the next two videos are going to be, but I’m
always collecting ideas for new videos, so
please leave suggestions down in the comments
section along with any questions.
If you enjoyed the video, hit the like button
and share it, and if you’re new to the channel,
hit the subscribe button so you can be alerted
when new videos come out and try out some
of these other video playlists.
As always, thanks for watching, and we’ll
see you next time.
