This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
There’s been a lot of discussion over the years
about whether Pluto should be categorized
as a planet or a dwarf planet.
But all that talk misses the fact that Pluto
is something unique in our solar system,
a binary planet.
And some day, it will be a landmark tourist
trap…
Today we’re talking about colonizing Pluto,
and also our other icy dwarf planets and various
Kuiper Belt and Trans-Neptunian bodies.
Throughout this video, I’m going to refer
to Pluto as a planet, so I want to say upfront
that I am not defying the International Astronomical
Union or trying to restart an old argument.
Remember, a dwarf planet or minor planet is
still a planet, just as our Sun is called
a dwarf star but is inarguably still a star.
Category names in astronomy have always been
a little muddled, because astronomers have
almost always had to invent categories without
knowing all the things they’ve eventually
have to categorize.
Pluto’s not the first planet to get reclassified,
as we discussed in Colonizing Ceres and the
Asteroid Belt, in the first decade of the
19th century, long before we found Pluto,
we found Ceres, Vesta, Pallas, and Juno and
dubbed them planets because they orbited the
Sun.
As we were able to see smaller objects, we
noticed far more of them and in an area we
called the asteroid belt, a somewhat bad name
itself since asteroid means star-like, which
they’re not, and it’s not really a belt
but several of them.
So while we’d like a neat taxonomy in which
objects fall into neatly defined categories,
nature keeps testing—and wrecking—our
category definitions.
The Solar System has turned out to be chock
full of moons much larger than some planets,
moons orbiting other moons, and non-spherical
objects larger than some spherical objects.
Meanwhile, the Sun was dubbed a ‘dwarf star’
because it’s smaller and dimmer than the
other stars we could see at the time—but
then telescopes improved and it turned out
that the vast majority of stars in the universe
are actually much smaller than our so-called
yellow dwarf.
Whoops.
So it shouldn’t surprise anyone that as
observational technology improved, we had
to update our category definitions, and as
a result some objects got bumped from one
category into another.
Pluto has since joined other icy dwarfs like
Makemake, Haumea, and Eris and is now known
to be in a second and indeed larger belt full
of icy bodies.
But whether you compare Pluto to the planets
or to the other known minor planets, Pluto
is quite an oddball that probably warrants
its own category.
And there are certain unique sights that future
tourists will only be able to enjoy from Pluto.
The most unique aspect of Pluto is its moon,
Charon.
Now, Earth just has one moon and it’s quite
large, indeed it’s bigger than Pluto, and
also quite close, coincidentally about the
same size in the sky as our Sun is, permitting
total solar eclipses, a phenomenon unique
to Earth among the rocky inner planets.
Mercury and Venus don’t have moons and Mars’
two moons are pitiful little things.
Eclipses do occur on the outer planets though,
as the Sun is much smaller in the sky out
there and they have some rather large moons.
Though you couldn’t watch it from their
surfaces because they’re gas giants, so
there’s no place to stand.
Moreover, their moons generally look smaller
than our Moon too.
Only tide-wracked Io, the closest of Jupiter’s
big Galilean Moons, would actually look as
big in Jupiter’s sky as our Moon does on
Earth.
Pluto viewed from Charon would be even bigger
of course.
Pluto currently has 5 known moons, and its
largest, Charon, is an eighth the mass of
Pluto and a third the diameter of our moon,
but is twenty times closer to its planet,
making it about 7 times wider in appearance
than our Moon is.
That makes it the largest-looking object in
any planet’s sky in our solar system, even
beating out the Sun as seen from Mercury.
This unique relationship paired with relative
size as well as mutual tidal locking may one
day see Pluto and Charon classified as a binary
planet or a double dwarf planet.
So, what makes a double planet?
Planetary systems orbit around their center
of mass or barycenter.
In most cases, the largest body makes up nearly
all of the system’s mass, and so the barycenter
is inside it.
In those cases, we just say that the moon
orbits the planet.
But Charon is so relatively large that the
barycenter is well outside of Pluto.
And while many moons are tidally locked to
their planet, always showing it the same face
while the planet spins freely, Pluto is unique
in also being tidally locked to its moon.
Pluto and Charon always show each other the
same face, each of them rotating and orbiting
around the barycenter in just under a weeks
time.
Each of them is a constant, unmoving feature
always at the exact same place in each other’s
sky.
There’s currently no precisely defined category
‘binary planet’ but any reasonable definition
we might create, Pluto certainly meets!
The solar system is a huge place, filled with
millions of tiny rocks and ice balls that
really only seem tiny through a telescope,
and many hundreds of them are at least as
big as the areas most folks thought was the
entire world throughout most of humanity’s
existence.
It is a place destined to be home to many
quadrillions of people one day, and if the
big planets might be thought of as continents,
places like Pluto or Ceres, giants among the
many objects of the Asteroid Belt and Kuiper
Belt, might be thought of as the largest islands
in immense archipelagoes.
With that perspective in mind, let’s join
the crew of the freighter Persephone, as she
prepares to dock at Port Taenarum, astride
the River Acheron, flowing above Pluto, in
the year 2723.
Quite a lot of our cargo is actually passengers.
Some are tourists from the inner solar system,
here to see the unique coupling of Pluto and
Charon, a sight well worth the long trip.
But most of the tourists are more “local”,
if that’s the right word to use here, hailing
from the icy hinterland habitats of the Kuiper
Belt, come to see River Acheron and the sights
and sounds of the big city.
Our captain, hailing from the Jovian region,
and remembering when Pluto was only a small
colony, can never help but chuckle at the
notion of Pluto as a metropolis, not compared
to thousands of empires around Jupiter or
the trillions of people living in the inner
Asteroid Belt, let alone the vast habitat
swarms lazily orbiting high above Earth.
For 248 years now, Port Taenarum has been
a major hub for Kuiper Belt trade.
Even back in those early days of the late
25th Century, building the station and the
elevator connecting it to both bodies was
extremely easy.
No expensive advanced materials were required,
unlike on Earth, because Pluto’s gravity
is a mere 6% of Earth gravity.
No geostationary counterweight was necessary
either, because that role and spot were already
occupied by Charon, a mere 20,000 km away.
And best of all, the system’s orbital eccentricity
is so slight that the first tether barely
even needed to be elastic to stay taut.
Pluto is a true binary planet, something Charon’s
denizens are rather firm on, and the reason
they insisted the system’s government be
located at the barycenter.
Back in the early days, Port Taenarum itself
was just a cylinder habitat relocated from
Neptune and connected to the tether.
In the quarter of a millennium since then
though, Pluto’s population has grown and
that thin space elevator has too.
Now it’s the Acheron, a transplanetary river,
a massive highway of tethers lit by the glowing
lights of the capsules moving back and forth
on it like an old highway at night, dotted
with hundreds of smaller hub stations every
hundred kilometers or so.
The captain of our freighter has always thought
the name ‘river’ a bit of a strange one,
merely a nod to the Hades mythology dominating
this distant corner of the solar system.
His engineer disagrees though and points up
to Pluto, where most of the tethers don’t
meet at the surface but keep running far down
into Tartarus, Pluto’s vast capital city,
cut as a deep cone far beneath the surface
level and slowly spinning around once every
few minutes to augment Pluto’s own gravity.
The engineer says that the name also comes
from how much ice and liquid get mined from
Pluto to be sent on to other colonies.
Pluto’s surface is mostly solid nitrogen,
and there’s always a demand for bulk nitrogen
wherever humanity is building habitats, especially
back in the inner system.
But the engineer says soon it might be an
actual river too, folks are suggesting a very
long skinny rotating habitat could be set
along this pathway between Pluto and Charon,
and by using a mix of pumping and various
cylindrical segments that aren’t quite cylinders,
a long corridor of water could be produced
that allowed folks to sail right between the
two worlds.
Indeed much of the population already live
on the Acheron River or in its two terminus
cities.
Our captain disembarks the passengers before
making the trip down the Acheron to Tartarus
to make some trades.
Tartarus is the biggest industrial hub of
the Kuiper Belt, as while Pluto is mostly
ice, it is less ice than any other place out
here, having many metals too.
While freighters heading back to the core
worlds with those ices often return with metal,
it’s always cheaper to get manufactured
goods from Pluto while docked here and he
wants to fill up on those before heading back
out on the long circuit run to the various
icy city states of the Kuiper Belt.
Tartarus is aptly named, it’s essentially
a giant pit, differing from a normal cylinder
habitat in that it slopes slightly, curving
to be wider at the top end by the surface,
and narrower near the bottom, with everything
slightly canted, to mix Pluto’s weak natural
gravity with spin gravity for a more comfortable
higher net gravity.
Even deeper below run more shafts where that
low 6% gravity is tolerable for mining work,
but not good enough for regular people to
live in every day.
So when the robots need onsite oversight,
in the freezing cold depths, the lower gravity
makes the heavy insulated suits feel less
cumbersome anyway.
Pluto’s made mostly of ice and ice in this
context often isn’t water ice, but things
like ammonia or methane or even air frozen
to a solid.
It doesn’t do to warm it up, and indeed
some of the largest computer systems are out
here on Pluto, where they can take advantage
of the cold for powerful, compact computing.
While it benefits from being colder than Titan,
it lacks the atmosphere that allows for good
heat dissipation, but there’s a lot of mass
to spread the heat around and many lakes deep
below.
So there are quite a few computing complexes
on Pluto, and this includes Elysium, one of
the larger data-realms favored by post-biological
humans looking to be removed from the hectic
day to day life of the inner system, or the
Universe in general.
Our captain is heading there next, though
not to trade with any of the folks living
in Elysium Proper, as such people trade little
and mostly only in software.
Sometimes one of them wants to travel and
has a dislike for being transmitted rather
than carried on a physical storage medium,
but otherwise they have little interest in
freighters like his.
Rather, our captain is headed there because
plants don’t much care about gravity, just
needing a little bit for determining direction,
and Elysium gives off a lot of heat, so it
was economically advantageous to site various
farms and hydroponics above it to benefit
from slightly cheaper climate control.
There’s something of a luxury market for
certain agricultural products grown there,
which the captain has always found peculiar
but the captain has never much cared why some
products sell for more or less, just that
they do, and Tartarus wasn’t a great market
this time around.
When the freighter departs it will have plenty
of manufactured goods, but the ship’s quartermaster
thinks some luxury foods and drinks will help
the bottom line for this circuit.
Our quartermaster has never been on Pluto’s
surface before and Elysium is a long way from
Tartarus, its ethereal citizenry keep themselves
far away and deep down for maximum protection.
She notes that it must be strange living along
Acheron or in those few habitats on the outskirts
of Tartarus, where Charon always hovers in
the same place of the sky.
As their crawler speeds its way through the
Cthulhu Regio toward Elysium in the Elliot
Crater, Charon slowly drops toward and under
the horizon.
Fortunately the Sun is rising and as dim as
it is so far from the inner system, it’s
more than sufficient to see by.
Of course it’s nowhere near bright enough
to grow plants under, and much of Elysium’s
agriculture is also done deep below the ground
under artificial lighting.
Some is indeed quite deep down, amid the underground
lakes.
Part of Elysium’s commercial success in
botany comes from the early subterranean explorations
of Pluto, hunting for those underground seas
and searching for any signs of life.
Sadly none was found there, nor yet on any
of the early interstellar colonies created,
so humanity still finds itself alone in the
cosmos, not including various AI, post-humans,
or uplifted animals it has made in the centuries
since it took its first tentative steps off
Earth.
Elysium’s scientists figured though, that
since no life was found in Pluto’s underground
seas, they can certainly make some, and adapted
various organisms from Lake Vostok under Antarctica
and from the Europan and Triton colonies for
Pluto.
Our quartermaster is intrigued and would love
to see more, but they barely get a few hours
there before the Captain tells her to make
ready to leave.
As at Tartarus, he got the goods but not as
many and at as good a price as desired.
So the Quartermaster suggests they should
head over to Mordor on Charon, and need to
head back to Tartarus to cross the Acheron.
Time is pressing though, so the Captain will
not simply walk into Mordor, and rents a ship
to fly straight there.
Spaceships don’t need much thrust to get
to and fro in the Pluto system, with an escape
velocity of just 1200 meters per second.
It’s still expensive for bulk freight, hence
the Acheron, but passengers from distant parts
of Pluto regularly make use of shuttles.
This very low escape velocity plus proximity
of Charon means gases often evaporate off
Pluto and get pulled onto Charon.
Indeed the Mordor Macula near Charon’s north
pole, named for the black land of J.R.R.
Tolkien’s famous saga, is believed to be
formed by methane gases escaping from Pluto
and being pulled down onto Charon.
Our crew was hopeful that they could sell
their moderate stores of tholins and organic
macromolecules sourced from moons closer into
the system: Titan, Europa, Rhea, and Triton.
Tholins are valuable to Kuiper belt settlements
because they are a mixture of molecules made
up from carbon dioxide, methane, ethane, nitrogen
and water.
They contain pretty much the ideal mix of
elements for farming, when refined down into
their constituent molecules and used to create
atmosphere, water and fertilizers for agricultural
installations.
A few years back, it was a highly prized commodity
as the agricultural sector grew exponentially
with the population on Pluto.
As it turns out, though, Mordor’s refineries
have caught up and are now supplying an abundance
of organic macromolecules and tholins from
Pluto and Charon’s cryovolcanoes that spew
these out in large quantities from the higher
pressure depths.
These aren’t available to most small icy
bodies of that region.
So instead of selling, they buy and walk out
of Mordor with a good supply of those arranged
for delivery to the Persephone.
Time being less critical now, with goods to
be delivered, they take the slower route back
along the Acheron and the Captain finds himself
wondering about what his engineer had said
about creating a long habitat corridor between
Pluto and Charon.
He doesn’t think there’s nearly enough
people here yet to warrant such a mega-engineering
project.
Pluto and all its moons and habitats have
only a hundred million residents.
The entire Kuiper Belt is only home to a few
billion souls, a pittance against the trillions
of the inner system, but already far more
than the entire outer solar system held when
he was a kid and traveled along with his parents
to witness the initial colonization of Neptune
some centuries ago.
He had a chance to meet the governor of Neptune
back then, who regaled him with various plans
for the Kuiper Belt which sparked his own
interest in the region once he grew up.
The governor’s guesses proved largely true,
the Kuiper Belt is an immense place of scattered
icy rocks, and countless small groups claimed
this or that one and burrowed in deep, living
in cylinder habitats embedded inside the protective
ice.
Large freighters like the Persephone slowly
cycle around these, trading goods for those
manufactured locally, and most have their
own specialty products, while some are more
insular and mostly import fusion fuel and
export citizens who have decided they like
a less remote and secluded life.
Indeed many of these have ended up on his
crew at some point.
All the big hubs of the Kuiper Belt, be it
Pluto or Eris or one of the other ice dwarfs,
or even Neptune itself, move around the belt
as years go by and everybody orbits the Sun
at a different period and angle, so the Persephone
never makes the same trip twice on its many
years long circuits.
But the Hub worlds are always nice stopovers,
not just for trade goods and R&R, but for
the bigger mirrors and pushing lasers they
have.
Ships can make their way out from the Sun
on the immense stellaser platforms inward
of Mercury, and of course can fall back on
fusion drives, but the more massive outer
planets usually have mirror arrays to bounce
light beams back inward to let ships most
easily move back to the core worlds, and Pluto’s
Hydra Array is the biggest of all.
Also, due to Pluto’s orbit being cocked
well off the ecliptic, it also allows decent
pushes north and south of the ecliptic too.
Those mirrors are very large but thin and
light, and they need a good amount of mass
and gravity to avoid being pushed right out
of the solar system, so the various dwarf
planets like Pluto are ideal anchor points.
The vaunted Hydra Express can carry fast passenger
ships from the inner system out to Pluto in
just a few weeks, riding the light out to
the dark outer regions, and remains the fastest
way to most settled places in the Kuiper Belt
from the Inner System.
Bulk cargo though still takes years to travel
and even fairly speedy freighters like the
Persephone will often spend weeks travelling
just between the nearest stops on its circuit,
saving fuel to coast along at more modest
speeds.
Out here, even the nearest decent sized minor
planets are whole astronomical units apart,
and so far, very few are settled, though it’s
growing quite quickly and reminds our captain
of tales of the Asteroid Belt’s growth back
in the pioneering days.
Their first stop will be a secure facility
doing black hole research, hoping to make
artificial ones, and as a scientific outpost
it’s only just starting to produce its own
food and goods.
Tinkering with black holes has to be done
far from civilization, so the researchers
and staff are here for work, not to make a
new home.
Luckily for the Persephone, there’s a small
but burgeoning secondary supply economy springing
up and, while marginal, it’s still cheaper
to grow food locally than bring it in.
They get to offload their tholin supplies
from Pluto at a good profit.
Most small settlements melt their way inside
an icy rock, build a cylinder habitat, and
warm and light it with fusion power, but his
engineer comes back from shore leave at the
research facility regaling the captain about
how one day they might replace spin gravity
by inserting micro-black holes in the centers
of such snowballs instead, and power themselves
with those black holes rather than fusion.
The captain is tempted to scoff, but he’s
seen many changes in his life, and remembers
when people scoffed at the notion any major
settlement would even occur this far from
the Sun’s warming light, and wondered why
anyone would ever settle that non-planet of
Pluto.
When the crew leave the research station,
they face months or years to the next stop
at a linked radio telescope installation that
avoids the radio interference of the noisy
inner system by being so far out and it’s
part of a much larger distributed array that
dwarfs the inner system telescope arrays,
allowing humans to peer at the universe in
ever greater detail.
We’ll leave Persephone for now, which will
eventually turn around and head in-system
again.
Out here, drifting among deep space where
a mountain sized ball of ice is like an oasis,
and now with many home to manmade oases hidden
in their cores, Pluto doesn’t seem like
much of a dwarf.
We were talking about interplanetary trade
today and that’s a topic we’ve looked
at in more detail before, and I mentioned
how the crew of the Persephone would never
be traveling the same trade circuit twice.
Interplanetary trade is often counterintuitive
about destinations, because there’s no fixed
map and everything is moving relative to each
other.
Even way out in the Kuiper Belt where things
orbit much slower, taking centuries not years
to orbit the Sun, you’re rarely heading
to the next closest destination, but rather
one based on travel times and velocity vectors,
and of course demand.
There are no fixed maps in a solar system,
and you never travel in a straight line aimed
at your destination.
If you want to understand this better, try
out Brilliant's Bus to Mars quiz in their
Gravitational Physics course, which explains
the Hohmann Transfer, a way of moving between
two orbiting bodies with the least fuel.
Gravitational Physics and orbits are the lynchpin
of interplanetary trade and colonization,
especially for bulk cargo for terraforming,
and so they will dominate the factors that
set out how a future solar empire will develop.
Far future stuff to be sure, but math and
science already strongly dominates so many
variables in day to day life, and a better
understanding of it makes it easier to not
only to visualize the future, but navigate
the present too.
Plus it’s a lot of fun.
Brilliant uses a mix of interactive visualizations
and illustrated and animated problems to help
you learn about topics like these in a fun
and intuitive way, and they also have daily
challenges that help you learn a little and
stimulate your mind everyday, which is the
best way to learn, and if one of the challenges
grabs your curiosity, there’s a full interactive
course that explores a similar topic in depth.
Want to learn something new on your commute,
while traveling, or just without a constant
stream of phone notifications?
Brilliant's new offline courses will allow
you to do just that!
Download any of their dozens of interactive
courses through the mobile app, and you'll
be able to solve fascinating problems in math,
science, and computer science no matter where
you are, or how spotty your internet connection.
If you’d like to learn more science,math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
So we’ve got some good episodes coming up
for the rest of June.
Next week we’ll be continuing our look at
Black Holes and the sorts of civilizations
that would develop around their use, by talking
about their military applications for offense
and defense, in Weaponizing Black Holes.
Later in the month we’ll also be looking
at how energy beaming technology might be
applied to let us push spaceships off Earth,
not just in deep space, and we’ll also take
a fun look at various superpowers like telepathy,
telekinesis, super-strength, flying and more,
and see what technological options might allow
these, which surprisingly would not include
absorbing a lot radiation as so often seen
in comic books.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
