One day you wake up to news that we’ve picked
up an alien signal, no uncertainty or ambiguity,
it’s an alien TV channel and inside a few
days we’ve picked up some other stations
and decoded them and you can watch them live.
A few weeks later they all just stop, nobody
knows why, and soon thereafter we realize
we’ve just been introduced to the biggest
murder mystery in history.
So our topic today is Extinct Alien Civilizations,
something we see a lot in science fiction
and something we contemplate a lot in discussing
the Fermi Paradox, the apparent contradiction
between the massive size and age of the Universe
and the seeming absence of any other intelligent
life in it.
One of the most common suggested explanations
for that paradox is that intelligent life
is prone to killing itself off.
In one of the earliest episodes on this channel,
Apocalypse How, we explored that possibility
and found many apparent weaknesses in the
argument.
Those weaknesses though were not in the notion
that many civilizations might kill themselves
off, but rather that it could be the case
for such a large percentage of civilizations
as to answer the Paradox.
We did see that many of those catastrophes
were much less likely to kill intelligent
life off than folks often assume, but a few
of them did leave the door open to a total
extinction event.
But again, it wasn’t the idea that such
things rarely if ever happened but rather
that they couldn’t be a strong solution
to the Fermi Paradox unless they were getting
virtually every civilization.
In the Fermi Paradox we often have what we
call filters, factors or steps in the process
of becoming a civilization which can lower
the odds.
We went through 50 of them in the Fermi Paradox
Compendium episode, and we listed ourselves
as having already gotten through the first
48 out of 50.
In that episode I defined the remaining two
as not falling victim to self-annihilation,
blowing up your planet basically, and as having
both the ability and desire to colonize other
solar systems.
Almost every proposed solution to the Fermi
Paradox includes all these filters, but often
with one or more considered stronger or weaker.
For instance, even folks who think the galaxy
is full of thousands of spacefaring civilizations
tend to assume not every planet spawned life
that evolved to intelligence.
Alternatively even folks like myself who tend
to be very optimistic about those last two
filters, not blowing ourselves up and colonizing
the galaxy, believe there’s a chance we
might do the former or not do the latter.
We do not know the odds of a single one of
those filters or if there may be others.
In the Compendium I arbitrarily said each
was 50/50 to highlight how such odds could
compound to make spacefaring civilizations
very rare, even though no single step was
improbable.
If each step was 50/50, coin flips odds, to
become a spacefaring civilizations would require
flipping a coin and coming up heads 50 times
in a row.
The odds of that are 1 in 2^50, or about in
1 in a quadrillion.
Which is a few thousands galaxies worth of
stars, and makes even civilization like our
own, at step 48 of 50, so uncommon you’d
find about 1 per every thousand galaxies.
Those numbers were selected arbitrarily for
an easy example of compounding improbabilities.
Kick those odds down to just 1 in 3 per filter
and the final odds drop to about one in a
trillion, trillion, more stars than in the
Observable Universe, bump them up to 2 in
3 and the total odds jump to just 1 in a billion,
which would imply a few hundred civilizations
in our galaxy alone.
We have no idea what the probability of a
single one of those steps is, not to even
that wide range of accuracy, 50/50, 1 in 3,
or 2 in 3, and just that amount of variation
radically shifts the environment.
Whatever those odds are, they won’t be the
same for each filter.
Some might be 50/50, others might be paper
thin barriers that 99% of the time get passed
through.
Some might be the reverse, far less likely
than even 1% to be passed through.
We tend to call these kind Great Filters,
one that just by itself drop the odds of space
faring civilizations down multiple orders
of magnitude.
This series is not about the Fermi Paradox
though, that has a series all on its own you
can watch and we will be revisiting it again
soon, but it is this kind of thinking we have
to keep in mind when giving the topic serious
thought rather than just going with the classic
Space Opera notion that there are civilizations
all over the place, typically with one within
a hundred light years of us and maybe ten
thousand years older than us at most.
When you start contemplating the numbers on
things like that it breaks down, let me demonstrate.
Let’s imagine that case for the moment,
that in a bubble of space about 100 light
years in radius we could expect a technological
civilization to arise every ten thousand years.
There’s a few thousand stars within such
a bubble and odds are most have planets, a
pretty good portion of them probably are rocky
planets close enough to their sun for water
to be possible.
We’ll say a thousand to keep it even.
If we are assuming a new civilization popped
up in that bubble every 10,000 years, we would
expect each of those planets to have spawned
a civilization every 10 million years.
The Universe is over a thousand times that
old and while we can hardly say for sure,
we’ve no particularly reason to think life
couldn’t have existed long before it formed
on Earth nor evolved to complexity faster
than it did here.
But it is entirely possible most extinction
events don’t totally sterilize a planet.
In fact all the known means that we could
realistically employ wouldn’t have very
good odds of killing most people, let alone
all of them, and getting every single organism
would take some doing.
Some life will probably survive to repopulate
things and let it evolve again, and probably
with a large head start.
We are the first technological species on
Earth, but that’s something we could only
have said with much certainty in recent times.
You could easily have places where every few
million years civilization evolves again then
wipes itself out, layering up civilizations
like a lot of ancient cities.
We discussed the problems with that sort of
cyclical extinction scenario in the episode
Apocalypse How, but this is also a common
theme in science fiction.
And that’s the only way you could get civilizations
popping up that close to each other in time
and space, nearly every system spawning civilizations
and over and over again to boot.
Let’s slim down the odds a bit and discuss
a scenario where maybe just 1 in 10 stars
has given rise to a civilization, and just
one time and just in the last billion years,
and we’ll say there’s a ten thousand year
window when we might notice them by radio
transmissions or other indicators.
In such a scenario only 1 in a million stars
would host such a civilization at any given
time.
Such being the case, if we centered a bubble
on Earth 1000 light years in radius, odds
are we would have at least one active civilization
besides ourselves inside it, possibly a few.
Those would be close enough for us to hear
with modern equipment if we were looking at
that star at the time, if they transmitted
like we do now.
Out past this scale the galaxy gets a bit
more two-dimensional, turning into a disc,
so if you doubled your bubble’s size you’d
only quadruple the number of civilizations
in it.
However we would again be assuming 1 in 10
had hosted an emerging civilization at some
point in the last billion years and that there
were a few hundred within a hundred light
years of us.
Let us assume that this is the state of play
in a couple centuries when we have our first
manned interstellar ships go lumbering out
into the stars.
Now if you want a look at what those ships
might be like and the problems traveling through
space, you can watch the Life in a Space Colony
series and the Interstellar Travel Challenges
episode.
Those of you who have already seen those will
remember our example ship, Unity, that we
last visited when it was leaving the Tau Ceti
system and heading for 82 G. Eridani at 20%
of the speed of light.
As I mentioned at the time, 82 Eridani is
a G8 yellow sun 20 light years from here.
It’s about 74% as bright as our own sun
and is thought to be at least 6 billion years
old.
It has been considered a strong candidate
for habitable planets for a long time now,
shown up in a lot of science fiction, and
we’ve also found a few planets around it.
Those are all bigger than Earth and too close
to their sun for life, but that strongly indicates
there are more planets.
As we’ve discussed before, most methods
for finding planets can most easily find large
ones or ones near their sun, so if you a few
large ones that are also near a sun they are
much easier to see and probably indicative
of other planets we can’t see yet.
So 82 Eridani is an old star, more than a
billion years older than our own, and longer
lived too, since it’s less massive.
If I had to pick a place near us most likely
to be home to an extinct civilization, it
would either be 82 Eridani or Delta Pavonis,
which is also a G8 yellow star 20 light years
from us and billions of years older than us.
Since we already have a ship headed to the
former, we will make Eridani our example for
today.
Here’s the first big thing about extinct
alien civilizations on their dead planets.
Most of the time you won’t even know you
are walking around a graveyard.
That extinct civilizations is much more likely
to be hundreds of millions of years dead then
hundreds.
You won’t likely see ruined skyscrapers
like we often picture with extinct technological
civilizations, or even stone structures like
we see with our own ancient civilizations
dead and gone a few thousand years.
If you are visiting a solar system a billion
years older than your own, it is much more
likely they were dust and ashes before dinosaurs
roamed the Earth than kicking around while
we were learning to bang rocks together to
make tools and fire.
Very few things will last even a million years,
the pyramids might, but they would likely
be buried and look like hills after that much
time.
A collapsed skyscraper probably would be too.
This does not mean you wouldn’t be able
to find stuff clearly showing technology once
existed but it won’t likely be obvious from
orbit.
Now, that said, a lot depends on how the planet
died.
If you blow your atmosphere off in some fiery
atomic holocaust things probably won’t corrode
and decay nearly as fast, for instance.
But more importantly, on that theme, the kinds
of technologies you need in order to kill
off a population for keeps are generally the
same kind that let you get stuff off a planet.
Maybe not manned bases and colonies but at
the very least probes.
Many planets have moons, not necessarily big
ones like ours, but even modestly sized moons
are likely to have be visited and possibly
more likely, since for example Mars’ two
moons are both way closer to their planet
than ours is.
Before we jump for joy at the notion that
we are likely to be able to see remnants of
civilizations on their moons an eternity later,
let me dampen that a bit.
The moon is literally covered in craters,
and craters on top of craters, and they didn’t
just all show up one night then stop.
The frequency of impacts is going to vary
from system to system but should follow the
normal inverse relationship of size to frequency,
smaller stuff hits more often.
Our nice lunar landers we left behind on the
Moon would still be there and intact for a
long, long time if we ceased to exist tomorrow,
but time will still take its toll.
Smaller meteors will hit, there’s no atmosphere
to burn them up, and they’ll scratch or
punch holes in the object.
On top of that, every strike nearby will kick
up a little bit of dust that settles back
down and over a long enough time it will bury
that lander.
Heck, over a long enough time a bigger meteor
might thud down right on top of it, and not
all moons are particularly stable, sometimes
they get ejected from their host planet or
decay and fall on them.
But they will last a long time and we will
assume that’s what we first notice when
our colony ship, Unity, arrives in the system.
They find a nice Earth-ish sized planet in
the habitable zone and want to check it out.
They probably knew it existed before they
ever left Tau Ceti and maybe had probes arriving
ahead of them taking photos.
Now a common dilemma in science fiction is
what to do if you find a planet with life
already on it or ruins of a civilization but
that’s not too much of a dilemma for our
colonists, as we discussed in the Life in
a Space Colony series, while planets are probably
always going to be viewed as prime real estate,
they are not the first thing you colonize
when you get into a new solar system nor do
you really need them.
So we will say they knew about the planet,
and had probes arriving taking closer looks
at it that got there a few years earlier.
I will go ahead and name this planet Amber,
since Eridanus was a mythical river rich in
amber, and since amber is fossilized tree
resin and we often find ancient tiny critters
like mosquitos encased in it, so it seems
an appropriate name for the home of fossilized
civilization.
We will also say it has a moon a bit smaller
and closer to Amber than ours is to Earth.
We will go ahead and call the moon Shiva,
since that deity is associated to what the
Eridanus Constellation is called in Indian
Astronomy.
Shiva of course also being a rather appropriate
deity when discussing extinct civilizations.
So the moon Shiva around the planet Amber
in the 82 G. Eridani System, 20 light years
from Earth.
Our colonial ark is in the middle of its long
deceleration when they get photos back from
some probes that did a flyby of Amber and
Shiva, and they see some nice shiny patches.
Now this is a colony ship, they’re not on
a five year mission to explore strange new
worlds and seek out new life.
They are on a millennia long mission to establish
colony after colony.
Yet they’ve contemplated the possibility
of encountering alien life and we’ll go
ahead and say this isn’t the first time.
We’ll say their sister ship, the Nostalgia
for Infinity, found the remnants of an extinct
species on a planet in the Delta Pavonis system.
Bird-like people a million years dead.
They got word of it a few years back and so
they’ve been discussing the possibility
since they figure they’ll eventually encounter
such a planet.
They’ve already come to grips with definitive
proof civilizations are decently common.
So when they see a few small bright patches
on the moon Shiva, they send some slower probes
ahead for another more detailed flyby and
get reports back just as they are entering
the outer solar system.
So the captain calls a meeting and the first
thing she asks is if this is aliens.
The science officer says oh yeah, they have
spotted an antenna mast on a crater rim near
north pole of Shiva.
It looks like they erected a mast with some
solar panels on it, and the height and the
angles will have better protected it against
meteors, though they would have put it there
to take advantage of the near perpetual sunlight.
She asks what else they have detected, anything
big enough to be a base or a colony.
The science officer says no but that absence
doesn’t mean anything.
They probably would have buried any larger
structures to add protection from meteors
and radiation, or at least have used local
regolith to help construct the building and
they can’t see that well yet.
Those probes were flicking by at modestly
relativistic speeds after all, they didn’t
get a good look.
She asks about the planet but the science
officer just shakes his head, Amber is one
large snowball.
Assuming the original inhabitants weren’t
yetis or reindeers, whatever killed them dropped
the planet’s temperature enough to ice it
over, and while the atmosphere is not too
thick, indeed a lot thinner than on Earth,
it’s still interfering with pictures.
So what do they do next?
Of course they plan to investigate, but they
decide to get the usual colony infrastructure
going first on the moon of a local gas giant.
They’ll comb over those moons too looking
for a possible probe or base, but they decide
to begin the investigation by going to Shiva,
so the captain dispatches a shuttle there
with personnel and equipment.
They decide to land the shuttle near the crater
where they spotted the antenna mast.
The reasoning being that you wouldn’t build
something like that during a quick manned
mission like the Apollo Landings let alone
for an unmanned lunar rover.
So if there was a base, this should be the
spot.
They start by looking at the mast, and it’s
in bad condition, the solar panels that ran
it are heavily pitted with meteor damage and
scratched up and it looks like a meteor came
by and severed the top of the mast too, and
after some poking around they find a couple
meters of antenna buried under dust nearby.
The astronomy and geology experts put their
heads together and give a rough age of 2 to
4 million years to the antenna.
They base this on the amount and size of the
pitting in the panel, and the depth of the
dust.
This is good and bad, obviously the younger
it was the more likely it was to yield information,
but it’s actually a stroke of luck to have
found something only a few million years old,
not a few hundred million or even a few billion.
Our science officer doesn’t think so though.
He doesn’t know that this site and the million-year
old one at Delta Pavonis were made so recent
for plot convenience and stretch credulity.
Using the Mediocrity Principle, which tells
us to assume random samples should be assumed
to be pretty ordinary, he now has 2 civilizations
inside a 20 light year radius of Earth that
are less than 4 million years dead.
Plus Earth.
There’s around a hundred stars in that volume
and 3 of them hosted civilizations in less
than 4 million years.
By that reckoning it stands to reason life
is so insanely common we’d expect 3% of
stars to have hosted civilizations in the
last 4 million years which would imply that
galaxy wide about 12 billion civilizations
have existed during that time, 3 billion in
the last million years, and 3 million in the
last thousand years.
The only silver lining is that the two they’ve
discovered so far don’t show signs of interstellar
flight, yet, so there’s a decent chance
that discovery is still quite rare and that
as high as the probability now seems that
species tend to wipe themselves out, humanity
might have already passed that point safely.
That we won the Doomsday Lottery.
With that cheerful thought in mind he goes
ahead and starts a Doomsday Lottery with the
rest of scratch archeological team on Shiva.
And I say scratch archeological team because
you wouldn’t really expect your average
colony ship to have a lot of archeologists
on it.
So they get a betting pool going on what the
cause of death of the Amberites was while
they hunt for the hoped-for moonbase.
Atom bombs, a plague, chemical or biological
warfare and so on.
The ship’s computer tosses in a bet on rogue
AI rebelling and killing off the meatbags
that enslaved it, and everyone chuckles nervously
and awkwardly.
Fortunately the tension is broken when one
of them spots what looks to be a collapsed
cave in the crater wall.
They shine some lights in there and see a
metal door with some weird symbols on it recessed
a few meters back but with a bunch of boulders
blocking the path.
Someone suggests they go get some heavy lifting
equipment or explosives to move the boulders
but one of them snorts and starts chucking
the one ton boulders off to side like they
were made from paper mache and reminds everyone
that gravity here is around ten percent of
normal.
Excavation is very easy in low gravity.
Now it is a bit of truism that the more advanced
technology is, the quicker it decays.
Stone Age technology and structures tends
to be fairly enduring since it is just rock,
whereas paper tends to fall apart a lot faster
and circuits aren’t terribly durable.
Part of the reason for that is we don’t
bother making something like a circuit or
microchip long-lasting when we expect it to
be an antiquated hunk of junk in a couple
decades anyway, we can build things to last
longer but this would often come with it being
more expensive and less efficient.
Of course that situation is changed a lot
when you suck all the air out of an environment
and where there is no erosion or meteor strikes
to worry about.
It is possible that the door we are now looking
at might still function.
It does not matter though because they aren’t
going to try to open it, they are very used
to dealing with airlocks and have tools for
working on them, which would include a drill
they can use that will maintain a pressure
seal.
They are going to drill a hole in the door
and insert a camera.
Of course in the meantime while someone is
fetching that drill they are photographing
this door and cave entryway with every camera
they’ve got and in every frequency of light
they can, especially the strange symbols.
Odds are those symbols are what you’d expect
to find on a door.
Possibly the word for hello or the name of
the base, but most likely stuff like ‘stand
free of airlock when opening’, ‘check
suit pressure seals’, and stuff like that.
Possibly manufacturer names and serial numbers.
As we saw in the episode Cryptic Aliens though,
even stuff like that can be quite handy for
deciphering a language.
If you’ve got a bunch of serial numbers
there’s a good chance you will be able to
find out at least what base they did their
math in and what symbols are there numbers.
Of course when we get through that door we
will find an empty room with another door
on it, because that’s just how you build
an airlock.
The important thing is we find out the room
is not pressurized so we can go ahead and
open the door.
Which we’d do by removing the entire thing
since we want to disassemble it and look for
every symbol we can that might be stamped
on the parts and see what we can learn about
their mechanisms.
Odds are the door represented the height of
their technology in some respect.
That seems a bizarre statement considering
our own doors are a lot like the ones our
ancestors made and usually aren’t very high
tech, but this is an airlock on a moon, not
the door to your closet.
What’s more, something like the ball bearings
or how the metal was made or cut could tell
us a lot.
We will probably replace that door but we
have no intention of pressurizing this base
so that we can walk around without suits on.
Odds are good there is no air left in there,
some tiny crack or leak would probably have
vented it, re-pressurizing it will expose
stuff to oxygen, which is quite corrosive,
maybe blow stuff around in the process, and
quite a few other things which might screw
with our site.
We will drill the next door too, and every
time we encounter a closed one inside, since
there’s always a chance one might have some
residual gases inside we could sample.
One thing we note as we go though is that
the whole place is a vacuum, not too surprising,
but our guys know space life support systems
quite well and it looks like someone actually
opened the place up to drain of air.
Not fast, the airlock doors were not open,
but like they wanted the complex to empty
of air in an hour or so.
Not fast enough to blow stuff around.
Now we could do whole episodes on exploring
a place like this.
On what we can determine from this or that
artifact and mummified body we find.
Archeology is a fascinating field of study
even without the kind of excitement folks
like Indiana Jones or Lara Croft experience.
Every mundane object we find inside has the
potential to tells us whole volumes about
the species that made it.
However, we are going to skip to the conclusion.
This was a moonbase staffed by a small crew
of 20 or so.
When the end of the world came down on Amber
they decided they could not go on and refound
civilization.
In a situation like that, if you know you
can’t survive or choose not to try if you
think there’s not much chance, what would
you do?
It’s good to have a purpose when you are
living on an hourglass that’s rapidly emptying
out of sand.
After I’d ascertained that survival wasn’t
a realistic option I’d try to archive my
civilization so someone else could learn of
it later.
Maybe visiting aliens like our guys, maybe
survivors on their own world that pieced civilizations
back together a thousand years later, maybe
a second evolution of intelligent life from
whatever organisms survived.
Here’s the picture of what happened to those
aliens then, when their homeworld died, and
one of the reasons why we decided to go to
this moon base first, rather than going down
to visit snowball Amber.
They knew the jig was up and they’d run
out of supplies.
They were a lot like us in many ways, a head,
two eyes, ears, two arms, two stomachs, six
legs, etc.
Practically a clone of us, at least in every
way that mattered.
They decided they wanted to leave what they
could behind, so after a lot of prep work,
when there supplies we almost gone, the last
two of them sat down together for a last good
meal after weeks of tight rations, took some
sleeping pills, arranged their bodies to be
easily found, and opened a vent to drain the
air out slow enough to not disturb things
but fast enough to keep them from rotting.
Then they fell asleep and didn’t wake up.
Inside this place they tried to store things
to last and made copy after copy of historical
records on every memory device they had.
They also carved history and information into
every metal surface they could find or manufacture.
Not every bit of metal though, some they polished
up and took outside and stuck up as signs
pointing to the base.
Just shiny metal sheets elevated a bit off
the ground and angled so that dust wouldn’t
build up too much.
Those are some of the things we saw when our
probes did a flyby.
On those walls and metal sheets we find most
prominently something to serve as a Rosetta
stone and the events that killed them and
their world.
It doesn’t matter what, something that killed
virtually everyone and afterwards changed
the composition of the atmosphere to make
things colder so the planet iced over.
But we find something else too.
The shiny arrows mostly point at the base
but near them, some point down at the bottom
of the crater and our science team suddenly
knows that these guys probably did not just
give up and die after all.
Back here in our solar system, the coldest
place we’ve ever measured, colder even than
Pluto, is the bottom of some of the craters
on the poles of the Moon.
It can get down to just 26 Kelvin.
We find most of the base personnel buried
down there with some possessions, even food,
like the Ancient Egyptians used to do.
We figure maybe they sacrificed some of their
last precious food to give their dead something
to make their journey into the afterlife with.
But then we think maybe that’s not what
they did, or rather, in a way, that is exactly
what they did, pack food to journey with them
to the next life.
Even the vacuum and temperatures so cold it
will turn oxygen into a solid ice is no guarantee
of perpetual preservation, but they took a
gamble that it might make the bodies last
long enough that someone might be able to
find them.
They buried their colleagues down in the bottom
of that crater with biological samples and
more copies of data, including genetic data.
They gambled that someday someone might be
able to find them and bring them back.
Not just learn of their civilization, not
just maybe using digital records of genetic
information hard coded onto sheets of metal,
but maybe even they, themselves.
It was slim odds all around, especially on
that last option, but they had nothing to
lose.
That food isn’t for eating, it contains
genetic samples of what they did eat.
They may have etched copies of their DNA into
metal and burned it onto memory crystals or
whatever, but they tried to leave the real
deal around too.
Now whether or not DNA would survive a few
million years even at those temperatures is
hard to say.
Particularly since we don’t know that it
would be DNA, there’s no guarantee they
used anything like the same biochemistry we
do.
On this channel I tend to use DNA as a bit
of blanket term for organism blueprint, just
a short hand.
Not only might they not use DNA but there’s
a lot more entailed in creating an Earth organism
then just its DNA, and that is likely to be
pretty different for them too.
We can’t just take the samples they gave
us, especially the digital ones, and cook
up some Amberites.
But the crew is quite experienced in restoring
frozen bodies, they do it fairly regularly.
We discussed that when we first introduced
them back in Life on a Colony Ship.
They can freeze and restore people and they
have the nanotechnology to repair cellular
damage, that’s why, in that series of episodes,
the Captain was a few centuries old herself
and our crew contains a lot of cyborgs, a
topic we’ve discussed before and will discuss
more soon.
But these folks have gotten quite skilled
at repairing, cloning, or mechanically replacing
damaged tissues.
And so she asks them the question, can you
bring these aliens back?
The Science Officer says the answer to that
is yes and no, they might not be a perfect
copy, but that we first need to decide if
we should do it.
It’s not easy, they can’t just take the
bodies to sickbay and raise them sometime
tomorrow.
To do this they are going to need spends years
learning their biology and their civilization
too.
What’s more, if they can bring them back,
this is their moon, their planet, their solar
system, and we are working to colonize it
for ourselves.
This represents a bit of a tricky issue, especially
since this won’t be a unique case.
Two civilizations found this recently in time
and this close to earth guarantees they will
be finding civilization after civilization
out there.
If they do revive these guys it establishes
a precedent, they could end up sharing the
galaxy with a lot of ancient civilizations,
some of which might not be too friendly.
He also says that even if they can clone up
new Amberites, they won’t have the memories
of their culture, and while they have a lot
of genetic info, much of it is damaged and
it’s anything but comprehensive.
They maybe have a few hundred intact or mostly
intact samples of DNA from Amber, not a whole
ecosystem with millions of species.
The science officer speculates that they might
be able to restore the dead bodies they found,
take high resolution scans of everything and
pump in enough computing power to guess the
layout of whatever passed for an Amberite
brain and maybe restore them with nanomachines
with most of their memories intact.
They can probably have extrapolated their
language and culture enough by then to be
able to talk to these guys.
Or rather, for the colonists they’ll be
leaving behind to do so, they have their own
mission and will continue it to the next solar
system.
The actual colonists can communicate back
to Tau Ceti and Earth for advice if they choose
or make that decision on their own.
So this raises a lot of questions.
Even assuming they can restore these organisms,
or at least guess their way to a close enough
approximation from the available data, damaged
in some cases, it is hardly a guarantee they
can restore those specific dead Amberites
with their memories intact, in whole or part.
If they can’t, they are going to have to
raise the new Amberites they grow in a tank
entirely on their own.
Ditto every single organism, and the more
complex ones might be kind of tricky.
A kitten or a puppy has more than just biological
needs from their parent after all, that parent
teaches them to hunt, to hide, that sort of
thing.
Restoring that civilization is going to be
a long term task, probably one where the first
few generations of them aren’t very like
the originals in behavior at all, and you
might be working with them to try to restore
the civilization as best you can guess it.
They’d essentially be half-human hybrids,
even if the genetics was all correct, just
from having been raised by humans.
It’s also possible that buried under that
ice down on Planet Amber are some living organisms,
we’ve got life way down in the bottom of
ocean trenches that would probably survive
even a local supernova that sterilized the
surface of the planet.
You might also later on encounter a scenario
in another system where some decently complex
organisms had survived and had a good headstart
getting to intelligence, their equivalent
of raccoons survived and are now a thriving
Bronze Age civilization when you find genetic
data on their moon too, and are faced with
a conundrum.
Do you bring back the old civilization that
went extinct and got replaced?
Is it even ethical to consult the new species
about doing that?
Should they have a say?
What about the species you did bring back?
If you helped them restore their planet to
the way it was, while colonizing various asteroids
and moons for yourself, and for the infrastructure
and resources to help restore their planet
too, do they have the right to kick you out
of their solar system?
What about nearby colonies in other systems?
Should they have a claim on those on the grounds
that everybody deserves some other places
to colonize and the ones closest to home are
the most logical?
What do you do if Earth calls back and says
“Don’t do it.”?
What crime if any would you charge the Captain
with if she said the risk was too great and
ordered an orbital strike on the moonbase
and its tombs of people and knowledge?
What if she packed up only the folks who agreed
with that decision to go to the next colony
and stated her intent to repeat that destruction
every time they encountered such a tomb again?
What if back on Earth you decided that was
a monstrous crime?
Would you build a fleet to go chase after
the ship, that’s got a twenty light year
head start and probably centuries of comm
lag and travel time to buffer that lead further?
And we still have the mystery of what actually
killed that civilization.
We talked about some of the options for ending
civilizations way back in the Apocalypse How
episode of the Fermi Paradox series, which
we will be revisiting again soon.
Also unlike some of the episodes in this series,
we didn’t reference a lot of fictional works
but there are many.
In fact we actually did reference one, one
of my favorite science fiction novels, and
by my favorite author still alive and writing,
Alistair Reynolds, begins at an archeological
dig in the Delta Pavonis system.
That novel, Revelation Space, is definitely
worth reading, as is a short story set in
that Universe titled ‘Glacial’ that talks
about bringing a frozen survivor of a colony
back from the dead.
There are of course tons of other examples
of extinct aliens in fiction, even going back
to H.P.
Lovecraft’s Mountains of Madness, it’s
always an intriguing topic to cover because
it lets you discuss archeology, astronomy,
aliens, and forensics all in one go.
One part alien civilization, one part murder
mystery.
For my part though, I think it will be confined
to just fiction, I rather doubt our galaxy
has ever hosted another technological civilization
besides ourselves, and you can watch the Fermi
Paradox series to get the reasoning behind
that conclusion, and again we’ll be revisiting
that series in the next month or so.
Next week however we’ll be heading back
to modern Earth and the Upward Bound series
for a look at reusable rockets, a promising
technology that is making space travel a lot
cheaper in the here and now.
The week after that we will be jumping a bit
ahead in time to revisit Transhumanism concepts
in an episode on Cyborgs.
To get alerts when that and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you’ve enjoyed this episode, please like
it and share it with others, and if you would
like to help support the channel, you can
visit our website, IsaacArthur.net to donate
or follow the link in the episode description
to the channel’s Patreon Account.
If you’d like to discuss the many questions
we raised in this episode, check out the comments
below or join the Channel’s Facebook Group,
Science and Futurism with Isaac Arthur.
Until next time, thanks for watching and have
a great week!
