This episode is sponsored by Raycon.
I often get asked what the technology I most
want to see developed in my own lifetime is,
and the answer is always life extension technology.
Live forever or die trying, that’s my motto.
So it’s Scifi-Sunday here on SFIA, and today
we will be examining a popular trope in science
fiction, folks living a lot longer, and talk
about what that will do to a civilization.
Of course Life Extension is not a new topic
on the show and not one we regard as science
fiction in and of itself.
It’s a technology that isn’t on the distant
horizon of the far future or even the near
horizon, but one actively making real progress.
We’ve looked at it before in episodes on
Life extension and the Science of Aging, a
collaboration episode we did with SENS Institute
some years back.
Those episodes discuss the science and technology
of how our lifespans might be increased, whether
it's from cybernetics and genetic engineering
to tiny robots fixing damage inside us to
outright mind uploading to computers or android
bodies.
Today we are more interested in the effects
of such technology though.
So I thought we would look at some of the
more common tropes in sci fi and fantasy that
deal with extreme longevity and ask how realistic
or flawed those are.
As a first example, we often see very long-lived
species, like elves or dwarves in most fantasy
series, as having centuries of life and coming
from ancient civilizations, and it raises
the question of why they are not vastly more
numerous than shorter-lived humans.
The answer is usually that they have children
far less often and those children take longer
to raise.
That makes some sense in a fantasy context
where the assumption is they are naturally
that way, not technologically altered that
way, and typically the product of intelligent
design, some creator deities that made them
naturally that way rather than a product of
evolution.
If we suddenly had longer lifespans we might
expect a big population boom, and we’ll
get to that later, but we might start by asking
if a species that naturally evolved might
live longer and if they would have less kids.
Now aliens with longer lifespans is common
in science fiction too, coming from older
and more advanced civilizations, indeed this
is so common we have a trope called “Space
Elves” and some of the more common examples
are the Vulcans of Star Trek, the Minbari
of Babylon 5, the Asari of Mass Effect, the
Protoss of Starcraft, the Asgard of Stargate,
the Taelons of Earth Final Conflict, the Eldar
of Warhammer 40,000, and presumably whatever
species the 900-year old Yoda of Star Wars
is from plus countless others.
They are often older than dirt as civilizations,
not just individually living long times but
coming from a civilization that would think
of the egyptian pyramids as a recent innovation,
and just as often they are either stagnant
or in outright decline.
Which makes sense from a fictional stand point,
if your main protagonists are humans, then
having them emerge into a bright and growing
empire whose lead species is in a Golden Age
doesn’t leave much room for humans to do
anything interesting.
Like a lot of science fiction tropes, they
exist to create interesting stories not be
realistic portrayals without flaw, but they
need to seem plausible on surface inspection
for the story to be interesting.
This can bias us however to think they are
realistic.
This one is at least half-realistic, there’s
no core scientific reason why individual life
can not be extended almost indefinitely, and
we would tend to assume it was a major goal
of technology.
Whether or not this would lead to various
types of stagnation and declines in culture
or civilization we will return too.
However we shouldn’t assume aliens would
have anything like our lifespans or difficulty
increasing them.
Their pathway to biological immortality might
have been a stupid-easy accomplishment of
their neolithic period, or built-in before
they had developed fire.
Aging, as we think of it, is not some natural
and universal process that is the biological
equivalent of entropy.
It isn’t even a universal process on Earth,
and the human version that’s reflected in
most of our mammalian cousins is many different
processes with mostly little to no relation
to each other and which we cannot not only
not take for granted would be in all aliens
but should not even assume any of our particular
processes would be fairly common in them,
again see the Science of Aging episode for
discussion of that.
What we would expect to be common is that
their species would tend to produce the maximum
offspring they can handle, naturally anyway.
Most mammals produce a litter of young every
year or even more often, which are also grown
up in a year or around that.
Only a handful of the bigger mammals are single-child
multi-year childhood sorts: humans, apes and
monkeys, elephants, horses, cows and so on.
Having less kids, from a biological perspective,
is a bad idea, having kids with individually
higher survival rates is a good idea, the
two tend to be at odds though as most of the
ways to enhance individual survivability of
offspring require bigger investments of parental
effort.
This does not even vaguely imply the specific
human strategy and timeline is one intelligent
lifeforms converge to though.
However there are no advantages to either
have long periods when you’re not raising
kids or to those kids needing long development.
Now we can potentially gain advantage to waiting
on having kids ourselves, as we can hoard
up resources, but that sort of very long term
delaying of gratification is probably the
near-exclusive realm of technological civilizations.
An exception might be some organism that never
reached a maximum size and just kept growing
and growing in capability to gather resources
and defend itself, its young, and its territory
every year.
This is sometimes implied to be the case with
Dragons in fantasy literature, and indeed
dragons are often implied to have even longer
lives and maturation periods than elves, along
with slower overall breeding rates, and the
latter would be rather peculiar for a species
that lays eggs.
Egg-laying is not necessarily at odds with
long and heavy investment in offspring, but
you would not expect a critter that spent
centuries raising its young to be producing
dozens of them at once.
And again a long maturation period is not
a good thing, a very large body or very complex
body or very smart brain can be a good thing,
and it might be that requires a long maturation
period, but that period is not good in and
of itself.
It’s often displayed in fiction as simply
a life being slowed down.
Some elf or space elf might take a century
to become an adult and live a thousand years,
and while they might be smarter at 100 years
old than the typical 20 year old human, they
don’t seem equal to what we would expect
of a human granted 100 year lifespan of vigor.
It is one thing to delay a species maturation
rate for some tangible gain, it’s another
when the only gain is getting to enjoy having
a child for longer.
Of course a civilization might go that way,
especially if it allowed for some gains.
If your kids are hitting adolescence in their
thirties but have already emotionally and
mentally matured a lot more, your society
might gain big advantages on things like accidents,
crime-rates, and the various costs poor judgement
tends to have for the individual and community
they live in.
Ironically in fiction, attempts to show humans
with longer lifespans almost always imply
the reverse, mostly negative on a civilization
gaining in average lifespan.
But longer maturation times that are usefully
adding something should result in very impressive
adults.
If we encounter some scifi alien race or fantasy
race and they tell us their kids take a century
to grow up, then when I’m chatting with
their high school graduates their valedictorian
better be talking like they got a Ph.D. in
a dozen fields or its equivalent in life or
trade skills.
Though of course they might view child labor
very differently too, traditionally kids have
worked as soon as they could and nature has
little use for idle hands and mouths, and
a species that had a protracted maturation
period might have a very different view on
education and apprenticeship as a result.
So we obviously can’t discount wildly differing
maturation and lifespans in aliens, but where
humans are concerned, a longer human lifespan
shouldn’t be assumed to imply a longer childhood.
That might be something we actually would
do, genetically program future humans to hit
puberty later for instance.
We often tend to assume this has been occurring
naturally too with folks starting puberty
at an older age than earlier humans, though
archeological evidence is limited and mixed
on that point.
We did tend to assume even Neandethals, our
closest evolutionary relative, lived fast,
grew quick, and died young, but newer evidence
says they hit puberty about the same age as
us, and maybe even a bit later.
Though I should note that we have nowhere
near enough bodies or intact skulls to speak
with certainty.
It’s hard to emphasize how small our collection
of intact fossils of various species, including
our own, actually is.
In this case most of the argument for Neanderthals
hitting puberty at an older age comes from
a Neanderthal child estimated to be just shy
of 8 years old and having 87% of the typical
Neanderthal brain size.
That’s not exceptional incidentally, if
you did not know the typical modern human’s
brain is 90% of adult sized by age 5.
You have probably also heard that there are
concerns about kids hitting puberty sooner
than their ancestors did, in historic timelines,
as in a century or two back, rather than long
evolutionary periods of many millenia.
This is still debated but analysis of medieval
skeletons seems to put it in doubt, and puberty
tends to be delayed by poor nutrition, poverty
in general, air pollution, alcohol, and probably
many other factors so it occurring earlier
in a given civilization would generally indicate
better health.
When I speak of delaying it I’m suggesting
we would take specific and very technologically-powered
steps.
For today’s topic we’re discussing extending
life in general, and in this context it might
be worth asking what effect longer lifespans
have had already had on humanity, especially
with the surge in lifespan this last century.
People discussing life extension technology
often talk about what we call a ‘take off
velocity’, the point at which life extension
techniques are extending lifespans by more
than 1 year per year that’s passed, or so
close to it so that someone alive right now
might live long enough to see that take off
point.
And for my part I do believe people alive
now will see that day, I just don’t know
if it includes folks only just being born
now or folks my age or older.
However when folks go to put a date on when
human lifespans began increasing they won’t
put it in the 21st century, and I don’t
mean because it will be in the 22nd century.
Not only has the average human lifespan doubled
in the last century from less early deaths,
but people tend to look younger for their
age too.
Anecdotally you can glance through any collection
of photos from black and white or sepia photo
days and see it.
Has this affected us?
Hard to say, for all that we talk about how
old civilizations treated you as an adult
in your teens, it does seem to have varied
a bit and your typical modern 18 year old
honestly has a lot more rights and freedoms
than a historical 18 year old.
Respect is another story but if it was easier
to get respect when younger in the past it
would probably be in large part because first,
there were fewer older folks still alive,
and second, their culture was a lot more muscle
and labor oriented, so a robust youthful body
was a more valuable coin than it is in an
era of intense automation, computerization,
and skill specialization.
That is probably going to be really important
in the future for longer lifespans too.
A lot of younger folks feel low self-esteem
or depressed because they feel folks generally
don’t tend to trust or respect them much,
and they feel that way because it's mostly
true, folks generally do not trust or respect
them as much as they do people who are older.
There are plenty of very intelligent and trustworthy
teenagers, and plenty of folks much older
who certainly don’t act it, but by and large
folks grow more experienced and skilled with
age, and folks respect both those traits.
We do value youth, both for new views and
out of the box thinking, but also for youthful
physical and mental vigor and the notion behind
life extension is to maintain both of those
traits.
In a civilization where everyone stays physically
looking like they’re in their 20s when they’re
200, the folks actually in their 20s are bound
to feel a lot less empowered and respected
than nowadays.
This would tend to imply you either need to
tinker with humans to limit or modify things
like ambition or aggression, or you need to
give it an outlet.
Now one regular fear we have about the future
is that folks will turn all hedonistic and
slouch off into mansions where robots wait
on them hand and foot or dive into virtual
worlds where they can play at king or god,
effectively ending humanity as a coherent
force.
If faced with the temptation of idle luxury
or casually-satisfied egomania, it might be
very hard to handle being told you need to
spend a hundred years pursuing a career before
anyone will even think you should be allowed
at the adult table for serious discussion
of it.
We often say the trait of delayed gratification
is one of the most important traits needed
to succeed, but centuries might be too much
of a delay to be plausible and the core assumption
of delayed gratification is that the delayed
reward is bigger than the near term one.
This could result in humanity essentially
dividing into two camps, those folks who dump
immediately into those private decadent retreats
and those who possess a willingness to spend
centuries obtaining goals.
Of course such an inward focus need not be
a negative thing either, they might be engaging
in deep introspection or similar, while on
the flip side an external focus of centuries
is not necessarily positive either, that could
be described as outright obsessive.
It depends a lot on the goals and how worthy
they are, and that’s presumably rather subjective.
I suppose from a Darwinian perspective whichever
goals result in self-continuation and propagation
win out but those can be rather counterintuitive
in a technological civilization.
Colonizing the galaxy though would seem like
one of those long-term goals that extended
lifespans would favor.
If your big issue with space travel is how
long it takes, potentially requiring decades
or even centuries to reach the nearest new
solar system let alone colonize it properly,
a longer lifespan certainly makes that option
more attractive.
On the other side of that, if your civilization
has slow upward mobility from everyone living
half of forever, so that back home it takes
centuries to make any real progress up the
social hierarchy, getting on board a spaceship
for a new world where you can start off without
that climb ahead might be very appealing.
If you and a million colonists go to some
system and claim some world and divide the
space up equally, well, Earth has a land surface
area of 150 million square kilometers, so
that’s 15 square kilometers of land, 6 square
miles, or 3700 acres.
Even if you got an uneven share or the colony
charter had set 90% of it aside as communal
property to be sold or given to future generations
that still leaves you very rich once that
world grows to our current population levels.
Which it can do faster since people presumably
can perpetually have kids, not just grandkids.
Now in futuristic terms land’s habit of
growing in value does so because population
grows this may be less valid in the future,
as we have a whole galaxy of planets to consider
and also we don’t really value other star
systems just for their Earth-like planets
but all the raw materials we can build stuff
out of, like new land inside O’Neill Cylinders
or other rotating space habitats.
However it works with other things too.
We’re often told to invest at least 15%
of our income to retirement, and if we assumed
an income of 50,000 dollars a year, around
the current US Median income, then that would
be 7,500 dollars.
A quick check shows that the 2020 average
rate of return on Mutual Funds was about 10%,
and if we round that down to 8% to remove
inflation and be conservative, then that investment
strategy should give you 220 million dollars
in modern value a century from now.
That is the compound interest on what was
only 750,000 dollars of investment over that
whole time, a 30,000-percent increase.
Of course, that’s a fairly simplified calculation
and ignores all sorts of stuff like taxes,
market shifts, and income growth as you age,
but is a reminder just how huge compound interest
can be.
It’s also worth asking what the Effects
of Longer Lifespans would be on something
like that.
We often imagine a future in which money doesn’t
matter much, but let’s assume for the moment
that it’s still a major driving factor in
exchanges between various individuals and
groups, for our discussion today.
Interest rates are ultra-low right now in
Early 2021, which makes some people sigh in
relief and others growl in irritation, and
the dividing line on that tends to be whether
or not your personal economy is focused on
borrowing money or loaning money.
That obviously tends to vary a lot on personal
income levels but as an example, someone who
takes out mortgages to fix up and rent or
flip houses loves low interest, someone who
puts their excess earnings into Banks Savings
Accounts, CDs, and Money Markets hates it.
You’re not making money in those right now
because inflation is at a higher rate than
interest.
That’s assumed to be temporary, but basic
savings accounts at banks rarely offer return
rates way above inflation rates anyway, they
exist for security and liquidity not making
money, but the core principle of them is that
someone wants your money right now more than
you do and will give you back that money plus
some more if you let them borrow it for a
bit, and the longer that time, the more extra
they pay, and the bigger the risk they might
not be able to pay it all back, the more they
pay.
If everybody lives half of forever, my gut
says interests rates tend to go down and stay
down, and maybe even go negative sometimes.
Folks’ principal investment goal, especially
long term, tends to be to have enough money
invested that they can live comfortably off
the interest and dividends without having
to touch the principle, so that you can keep
getting that income indefinitely without any
effort on your part, often called passive
income.
However if almost everyone over 70 is doing
that, and most of the population is over 70,
and most of them are in good physical and
mental condition, thus can work, odds are
good that the economic effect of that is going
to seriously alter that equation, possibly
resulting in interest rates turning and staying
negative or taxes built around discouraging
passive income, and many would argue that
the reverse is currently true.
That might be even more so in an ultra-long
term economy, such as those that we might
see with post-humans or in the context of
those societies and entities we discuss in
the Civilizations at the End of Time series,
where the simple existence of entropy slowly
eroding stockpiles of saved up resources and
energy over trillion year timelines might
dominate economics between mega-computer minds
talking to each other across vast tracts of
empty space from around the black holes they
live on.
Incidentally I am keeping our discussion of
finance pretty limited here because first,
I’m not an expert on it, and second I don’t
want to start a flame war off in the comments
section about fiscal policy, fiat vs commodity
currency, or so on.
We can’t ignore it though because money
is a big factor in life and life extension
effects, so needs discussing.
It also is our proxy discussion for the reminder
that a lot of these practical issues start
coming up.
A civilization where a majority of folks are
ancient and sit at home living off interest
or robot workers is one where the folks who
aren’t, rightly or wrongly, probably have
serious anger issues at those who are.
Those may or may not be justified in many
cases and your mileage may vary, youth being
angry at those older and vice-versa is a paradigm
that is older than dirt itself, but in a civilization
where someone looks 20 when they are 2000,
this is likely to alter a lot.
Puts a very different spin on concepts like
May-December romances too.
I recall a bit of fiction, though sadly not
the name or author, where a character was
thousands of years old, unbeknownst to those
around him who thought he was rather young
and were commenting nastily on how someone
older should be dating in their own age range,
and he remarked under his breath that he’d
have to do all his dating in the Natural History
Museum.
Which is interesting to consider because folks
often object to other folks dating much younger
or older than them but the reasons vary a
fair amount.
For some it's the vast difference in life
experience, which would seem only worse for
someone who was centuries older, whereas for
others it is the implied unfairness of the
elder one soon becoming old and infirm and
dying off on the younger one who is tied to
them through all that and might be limited
on many life goals like having kids and raising
them, which is obviously not a problem if
neither of you has to worry about dying of
old age.
In a lot of fiction we see the nominal immortal
who stays forever youthful going through a
series of partners and spouses and sometimes
even children as they age and die, and enduring
the perpetual heartbreak of that, but we’re
not contemplating a fictional scenario where
some small number of folks are magically living
long lives, but rather one where anybody who
wishes to live longer can do so.
Of course if everyone is living longer than
Population growth becomes a real issue.
There is a lot of debate these days about
if our population growth rates are declining
as we grow more prosperous and if they are,
if that might dip below replacement levels.
That’s out the window with real life extensions
technology though because even if lifespans
are only doubling or tripling, it would seem
to massively shift the equation on things
like career vs family.
Many folks, especially women, have to choose
between focusing on a career in their twenties
and early thirties or starting a family and
the compromise tends to be fewer kids by starting
later.
If folks live centuries, fewer kids isn’t
really the result of starting later.
Alternatively, if life extension occurred
but fertile duration in women did not extend
with it, you might see folks opt to start
families young and do careers later which
might have some interesting effects on family
structure, like heavier grandparent and great-grandparent
involvement in child-rearing and household
where folks tended to move out with their
kids when those kids were having children,
rather than the norm nowadays, or idealized
norm, where someone moves out to start a career
and family.
If your typical person can live hundreds of
years and does, but mostly only has kids between
20-50, then you might see a family shift to
extreme multi-generational where real careers
don’t start till you’re 100 and you’re
expected to divert a lot of your income to
raising and supporting your great-grandchildren,
which you are presumably doing in a youthful
body of your own with a century of life experience
and accrued resources.
Amusingly in a case like that I could imagine
a lot of interstellar colonists not being
youths looking for new opportunities but older
folks looking to move on now that all their
own immediate descendants are well established
and they’ve gotten bored with their own
career and day to day life and wish a new
place and a new challenge.
Also, since any given place can only handle
so many people, whether it's a sparsely populated
world or some dense Dyson Swarm, they might
internally set some rules encouraging older
folks to leave rather than younger folks.
There’s a lot of other ways that might go
too, setting maximum lifespans like in the
story Logan’s Run or doing something like
the Biblical Jubilee where twice a century
land got re-divided or debts nullified, and
a society might see that or parallels as a
very necessary option in near-immortal culture.
You might do things like that to open up opportunities
to younger generations while encouraging older
ones to move on, which might be seen as a
beneficial strategy for colonies too.
As we are seeing there are some downsides
to long lives, especially to the society which
has to deal with population growth worries
in a whole new way, and changes to family
structure and economic priorities.
Mostly though it is upsides, I’d say, regardless
of what fiction often says.
I think the tendency to portray longer lives
as a bad deal in fiction is almost a reverse
of the grass always being greener on the other
side of the fence, folks figure they can’t
get to that longer-lived pasture so paint
it as ugly and barren so as not to feel bad
about not being able to have it.
It’s one where most people have had time
to develop huge skill sets and personal wisdom,
to pursue a thousands hobbies, to read a million
books, where they can benefit from enormous
and long-lasting friendships and families,
where only a tiny fraction of their economy
is diverted to educating or supporting youth
or seniors in the decades prior to or after
their main employment period.
It’s one where someone can actually get
all their bucket list items done, done right,
and without neglecting other life goals or
responsibilities.
Of course I might be very biased, I’d very
much like to live several more centuries and
can’t imagine getting bored with life, a
lot of folks tell me they feel different.
So it is hard to predict if it would be a
net benefit, much like post-scarcity civilizations
where robots do most of the work and the poorest
pauper - assuming you even use money - lives
in a mansion, success brings its own risks
and challenges, and those challenges would
vary by the individual.
It isn’t hard to imagine lives of thousands
or millions of years, or even billions or
trillions, getting unbearable or changing
the person living it into something very inhuman,
for good or ill.
I don’t think any civilization that emerged
millions of years from now in that sort of
post-human existence would resemble ours much,
and maybe scifi will be right about it tending
to be old, cold, stagnant civilizations whose
individuals live too long.
What seems to emerge though, in the near-term,
at least compared to sprawling galactic empires
or post-stellar hyperminds, is that longer
lifespans gives us a huge reason to forge
new worlds, be it on an alien world, a rotating
habitat we built in orbit, or a bunch of virtual
kingdoms people live or rule.
Fundamentally longer lives seems to call out
for more and larger worlds to live them in.
So that will wrap us up for today’ Scifi
Sunday episode, and depending on your timezone
and weather, I hope you’ve either been enjoying
this spring weather or plan to.
For my part I do a lot walks and cycling,
and its a great way to unplug a bit and get
away from screens, plus a good way to extend
your own lifespan.
I generally like some audio when doing that,
either some music or an audiobook, and especially
for outdoor exercise it’s nice to have a
good pair of earbuds with noise isolating
features, without dangling wires, and at half
the price of other premium earbuds, I’d
recommend trying out Raycon’s Everyday E25
Earbuds.
They’ve also got a good battery life and
a very compact charging case with its own
battery that can recharge them four times
while you’re on the go, which means they’re
recharging every time I put them back in their
case for safe keeping, even when I’m far
away from any power outlets.
Raycon earbuds give you 6 hours of playtime,
seamless Bluetooth pairing, more bass, and
a more compact design for a comfortable, noise-isolating
fit!
Raycon is disrupting the electronics industry
by designing premium wireless audio for half
the price, without compromise.
They’re doing things differently than other
brands out there—from the way they design
their products to the way they price them,
Raycon prioritizes their customer experience
from start to finish.
The company was co-founded by Ray J. and is
popular with celebrities Snoop Dogg, Melissa
Etheridge, and many others for their comfort,
style, and playtime.
They also come in a range of colors and style,
and Raycon has a 45-day free-return policy.
Whether you’re taking up a new hobby—or
just want to make your day-to-day a little
more comfortable—Raycons are the perfect
way to bring premium audio to everything you
do, and if you’d like to give them a try,
click the link in the description box or go
to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur to get 15% off
your Raycon purchase.
So we were looking at longer lifespans today,
and this often is seen in connection with
what we think of as a Utopian or a Post-Scarcity
Civilization, and this Thursday, April 15,
we’ll look at another challenge to future
civilizations besides long lifespans, which
is finding a purpose for them, or creating
one.
Such a world also may not be populated by
modern humans in the biological or psychological
sense, and that’s something we’ll look
at on April 22nd as we examine Transhumanism
and Post-humans.
Then we’ll wrap April up with another Fermi
Paradox Episode, where we will ask what the
impact and changes to our discussion of the
topic are when we contemplate concepts like
Multiverses and the Many Worlds Interpretation
of Quantum Mechanics.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
