Space is so big it makes Earth look like a
tiny pale blue dot, but the hardest part of
exploring space is simply getting above the
thin layer of air around that dot
What we’re going to be doing in the future
episodes of this series is taking a more in-depth
look at a lot of the launch assist systems
that hold promise for making space travel
cheaper and easier in the future.
Way back when the channel was in its infancy
I did some quick episodes covering many of
these but not with the sort of depth I tend
to favor these days.
The time seemed right to revisit these topics
in proper detail, with each of those concepts
getting their own episode, but I thought we’d
begin with discussing some of the basics and
giving each a quick overview.
So that’s what we’re going to do today.
Each subsequent episode will be designed to
be a standalone one, able to be watched without
having seen any of the others first, or even
without this episode.
But today’s episode, besides giving an overview
of those, is essentially about clearing up
a lot of the misconceptions about getting
off the planet.
Something I avoided even in the Spaceship
Propulsion Compendium, where I mostly focused
on more high tech options to modern propulsion,
particularly things like the Ion Drive which
is only useful once you are already up in
space.
The hard part is getting up into space in
the first place, something we’ve already
succeeded at.
Now many would wonder why if that’s the
hard part we seem to have stalled out in space
exploration.
The simple answer is two-fold.
First, we haven’t stalled out, we’ve made
tons of progress in the half century since
the Space Race, but it does seem a lot slower.
Second, and it’s the reason for that slow
down, is that we have pretty close to maximized
what we can do with rockets, and those require
huge amounts of resources to deliver just
a small package to orbit.
Ultimately you are constrained by the rocket
fuel, you typically need 20 times as much
fuel to get into orbit as the mass of the
ship and cargo being put in orbit.
That’s all chemistry and we’ve basically
maxed out what that allows.
The amusing thing about it is that if we could
teleport a fully fueled rocket from the launch
pad into orbit, that rocket would contain
nearly enough fuel to get pretty much anywhere
in the solar system.
Currently to get such a rocket into space
would require dozens of trips into orbit first.
Even then such a ship would still be quite
slow.
But up in space, with ships designed solely
for space, we can use alternatives like Ion
Drives, which are far more efficient in space
but useless for getting into space.
Now the important thing to understand is that
when we say orbit, we don’t mean just height.
Height is the easy part.
First you claw your way up through the atmosphere
then with the air out of the way you start
picking up the lateral speed needed to get
into orbit.
Otherwise you’d just fall back down again.
Ignoring air resistance for the moment, to
get up into the Low Earth Orbit zone, defined
as beginning at 100 miles or 160 kilometers
up, simply requires an upward speed of about
1800 meters per second, or Mach 5.
Fast but not nearly fast enough for orbit,
it is only about a fifth of the speed necessary
and only a tiny fraction of the energy and
fuel necessary.
Without that speed to get into orbit itself,
you’d get up there and just fall right back
down again.
This is where all the technical terms start
getting in the way.
A rocket consists of fuel and the tank that
fuel is in, and those are pretty heavy too,
so we tend to build multiple tanks and discard
the empty ones.
For that matter certain fuels and rocket designs
are better for that initial ascent then for
in space so the rockets tend to have multiple
stages.
Typically 2 or 3.
If you had a magic rocket casing that weighs
virtually nothing you’d probably just use
one.
Instead we drop that first stage tank, the
booster rocket, right into the ocean.
This is why launch sites are typically by
the ocean, and the reason why they tend to
be on the east coast is because the Earth
spins that direction.
You can launch the opposite direction too,
what is called a retrograde orbit, but this
uses more fuel because instead of using the
Earth’s spin to give you a nice boost up
to orbital speeds, you’ve got to fight that
spin first instead.
You could also launch from the North Pole
for instance and gain neither advantage or
disadvantage.
Many folks wonder why we don’t launch from
on top of mountains, and indeed those would
offer some benefit, but it’s fairly minimal
and it’s quite a hassle to base from up
there.
The Russian Cosmodrome is an example of spaceport
that’s pretty far from population and industry,
it has to be since they need a sparsely populated
area for their boosters to come falling down.
You pick your location based on all the available
factors and being near the equator, or on
the west coast of an ocean, or up high are
all advantageous but not necessary.
Trying to build on top of a Mountain just
isn’t deemed worth the effort, though Mount
Chimborazo in Ecuador is right on the Equator
and while only the 18th tallest mountain,
in terms of sea level, its peak is the furthest
point from the center of the Earth.
The Equator bulges out a bit compared to the
poles because of the same spin that would
assist us in launching rockets.
So it’s a better launch site than even Mount
Everest if transportation were not an issue
and you didn’t need to worry about boosters
crashing down on people.
While some booster rockets have parachutes
built into them so they don’t actually smash
into the ground at terminal velocity, in general
only the ones landing in the ocean are recoverable
for reuse.
Even then the necessary retrieval and repair
costs are significant, which is part of the
reason there is interest in reusable rockets.
Now those boosters falling, on parachutes
or not, is an issue.
When we talk about serious exploration and
exploitation of space we are not talking about
doing one launch per week, or even a couple
a day.
Real space development needs to be involving
moving thousands of people back and forth
from space every single day and preferably
from places near major cities.
Ideally we want to be able to have a spaceport
at just about every major metropolis, like
we do airports.
Having boosters land all over the place and
near inhabited areas isn’t viable.
Even if there wasn’t a risk from boosters
falling down, because they were one stage
rockets, the sheer noise of any sort of rocket
launch is so loud that it makes an airport
or train station sound quiet, and folks aren't
too happy about having those near their homes
either.
While having launch sites far from inhabited
areas is not prohibitive to space travel,
we will be looking at some options for getting
into space that do not require large and loud
rockets, some of which would allow direct
access to space directly from cities without
being a hazard or nuisance.
But let me emphasize this point.
This series is not about getting a few more
space launches or getting them a bit cheaper
or safer.
We are interested in ways that let us start
getting people and material into space at
frequencies and costs not much higher than
flying to another continent.
That is our goal, because that is what allows
us to build actual spaceships, ones that spend
all their time in space, and aren’t confined
by the design limitations of having to claw
their way up through an atmosphere or survive
a fall into one.
That’s why we won’t be focusing too much
on stuff like reusable rockets and modern
initiatives like Space-X, though we will also
look at the rocket issue and the huge advantages
of reusable rockets, both in terms of their
advantages in the here and now and in terms
of their uses in spaceflight where sometimes
a rocket is going to be helpful.
The stuff we will be looking at is also expensive,
and I mean compared to rockets, which aren’t
exactly cheap.
A common question I got when I did the original
short videos on some of these items was if
we had the technology, why we were not using
it?
And the answer is that for many of them we
do have the technology but even ignoring all
the prototyping and developing, such things
are only worth it if you are doing hundreds
of launches a day.
They are ‘all in’ strategies’, where
you might spend a hundred billion dollars
just to build the launch site, and you might
spend quite a bit more in prototyping.
So even though they make individual launches
a lot cheaper, they only actually make it
cheaper if you are launching so often that
all the R&D and construction is less than
the amount you’d otherwise spend shooting
stuff into space.
In the upcoming videos we will always take
some time to discuss how close we are to the
necessary technology, how much it might cost
to build, in loose terms, the cost per launch,
and the safety issues.
So to get into space you have to get above
the atmosphere where the drag would not slow
things down and make them fall down, and you
need to get up to a phenomenal speed that
makes the fastest aircraft look like snail.
That’s the trick and we have a lot of approaches.
We will survey those now.
The first and most obvious is to build a giant
tower into space, like the Tower of Babel.
The problem here is, besides the construction
issues, that you will be turning around the
planet once every twenty four hours.
If we built a tower 100 miles or 160 kilometers
tall, stretching up to the bottom of the Low
Earth Orbit Zone, things will be very different
from what most people expect.
First, you wouldn’t float around.
Things like the space station don’t lack
gravity because they are far from Earth, the
gravity they experience is only a few percent
lower there.
They are just in a state of freefall where
their centrifugal force cancels out the gravitational
pull they feel.
On the equator, even on a tower a hundred
miles tall, our centrifugal inertial force
outward away from Earth is pretty miniscule,
not even enough to decrease our weight by
one percent, let alone cancel it out completely.
In a natural orbit the two exactly cancel
out, so to speak.
So if you stepped off the side of this tower,
up in Low Earth Orbit, you’d fall down,
unlike stepping out an airlock on the space
station where you’d remain in orbit because
you still have that speed, and you’d still
feel weightless even though Earth is yanking
on you nearly as hard as it is right this
second here on the ground.
You would not, incidentally, burn up on reentry
by stepping off the tower.
Reentry is rough because of the speed you
are moving at, and since slowing down would
cost a huge amount of fuel, we prefer to let
the atmosphere break our speed instead.
If you fell off the tower you would get quite
fast during the fall, hitting hypersonic speeds,
but as the atmosphere got thicker you’d
begin slowing and eventually hit normal terminal
velocity for the thicker atmosphere below
and you could pull a parachute and land on
the ground.
Of course you’d need a pressure suit.
It would take you a few minutes to fall into
the areas that the atmosphere was thick enough
to cause real drag and not be causing you
to suffer vacuum exposure.
That’s an important point though because
some of the structures we will discuss, like
the Orbital Ring or Lofstrom Launch Loop just
hover in the sky high above where the air
causes much drag, and folks wonder about it
tumbling out of the sky and smashing things
when it hits.
In practice such things would not cause much
damage even if they landed unaided, but you’d
put parachutes on them and separation charges
to break the things into smaller pieces.
You wouldn’t want to be under one when it
landed, but it's like a bridge falling down,
only it is unlikely to land in traffic and
has a long descent time, nobody should be
under it when it lands, you can even put those
charges on it to push it so that it doesn’t
land on a city even if it is right over one,
and even the folks on it would have a good
chance to survive by just grabbing a parachute
and leaping out an airlock during that last
minute of descent.
They might even survive the actual crash if
they were inside it.
This is one of my irritations with space elevators
in fiction.
I’ve seen a lot of authors, even some with
strong science backgrounds who should know
better, refer to a snapped space elevator
coming down like it was mini-apocalypse.
I’ll explain in detail why it is no such
thing in the episode on space elevators, but
the reasoning for that, and for any of these
other constructs we will discuss, is the same.
They are not crashing in at re-entry speed.
Some of them probably wouldn’t even kill
you if they landed on your house.
But the issue, besides construction, with
this sort of tower is that if you do step
off the side you are not in orbit, you fall
down.
Now the upside is that on top of one you do
have a little bit less gravity to fight and
you also have no air to fight, and that is
still a pretty big deal.
You could launch a rocket a bit cheaper from
one of those.
But more importantly you could build two or
more towers and have a runway, where something
accelerated you up to orbital speed, like
a magnetic rail line.
And that option definitely has some fuel advantages,
as you could be gaining speed not from on
board fuel but electric cables connected to
a stationary reactor powering the track.
This is why levitation methods don’t tend
to interest us too much for ships though.
Floating up on a balloon or some magnetic
levitation platform just gets you high up
where the air is thinner, it doesn’t help
that much.
Nonetheless it does help enough that we will
see variations on it in future episodes.
The other thing is the tower’s top is moving
faster than the equator is, and the Earth’s
spin does help a lot with getting into space,
the higher up you are, the faster you are
spinning even though you are staying in the
same spot relative to the ground, so the bigger
the boost, also the higher you are, the slower
your orbital speed.
Unfortunately the Earth’s is 4000 miles
or 6400 kilometers in radius so being up a
couple hundred more doesn’t help much.
It does help though, just a little bit.
The Classic Space Elevator circumvents this.
It takes you high up in space all the way
to geostationary orbit where the orbital speeds
are a lot less, only about 3 kilometers a
second, not the 7.8 of Low Earth Orbit, and
we call it geostationary because that’s
the orbit where you hover over the same spot
on the ground.
Which means a building built that tall would
have the top moving at orbital speed.
And if you stepped off here, you would not
fall down.
You would also be weightless, because while
the Earth’s gravity is still decently strong,
just a couple percent of what it is at the
surface, the spin of the tower is now creating
a centrifugal force that cancels that out.
So a tower built all the way up into geostationary
orbit would be one where you could step off
and float there.
If you built it a bit higher and stepped off
you’d start floating away rather than dropping,
incidentally.
Needless to say a tower 36,000 kilometers
high is not something we can easily build,
but such a device is called a space elevator
and was designed back in 1895 by Konstantin
Tsiolkovsky, who is essentially the grandfather
of spaceflight, and on top of giving us the
rocket equation he came up with a ton of different
approaches to get into space, including the
elevator, which at the time was designed as
just a very tall building.
You can’t build something that tall with
normal materials but we actually have several
different approaches to making something that
big.
The more modern notion of an elevator, a long
tether hanging down from orbit and relying
on tensile strength, has come to be viewed
exclusively as a space elevator, whereas ones
that only partially hang down, either from
geostationary or lower, have come to be known
as skyhooks.
Actual buildings that tall tend to be called
Space Towers or Space Fountains, the latter
because they use streams of particles to hold
themselves aloft.
We will get to all of those in turn in future
episodes, along with options for floating
up on balloons or having runways held aloft
above the main atmosphere by balloons, or
towers held up by being made of balloons,
or runways held aloft, like the Lofstrom Loop
or the Orbital Ring, by streams of matter.
We still have some entirely different approaches
though.
First is that instead of using rockets to
get up to speed you use a long runway down
here on the ground.
However to do this properly you need a tunnel,
preferably one evacuated of air, for the thing
to race along and when it does shoot out,
it still slam right into the air anyway, essentially
undergoing re-entry right here on the ground.
To get around that problem you often have
it ascend a ramp to exit on top of a mountain
where the air is thinner or even higher up.
This is the idea behind concepts like Star
Tram, and various other mass drivers that
are essentially giant rail guns.
It’s also a lot like the Hyperloop, a type
of vacuum train popularized by Elon Musk.
Instead of burning rocket fuel and dropping
booster tanks you get up to speed using some
electrically powered system, using magnetics,
or up to enough speed that you can do the
rest with more modest rockets.
The next option is better rockets.
And we still can improve chemical rockets
in many ways but what we usually mean is nuclear
ones.
Needless to say there are some safety issues
with this but I am going to give them their
own episode because they can be used decently
safely in an atmosphere and in the past I’ve
only ever discussed their use in space, which
uses a different design.
Now lastly we have hybrids of these, which
would work to the strengths of multiple systems.
Sometimes hybrids aren’t advantageous because
of all the extra effort and mass of multiple
systems, but they’re very appealing for
spacecraft where we might, for instance, have
a long ramp that exited out dozens of kilometers
above the ground at the top of a space tower
and then used some rocket fuel to match speeds
with a low hanging, rotating skyhook.
That hybrid scenario by the way, is the one
I would deem best for if we needed to get
a lot of material into space and couldn’t
expect any significant new scientific breakthroughs.
Major breakthroughs might change that equation,
which could include advantages from Economy
of Scale.
On the other hand the grand-daddy of getting
material up into space cheaply is the Orbital
Ring, or rather several of them built at different
heights and angles, in that it rivals or surpasses
the space elevator in terms of usefulness
but does not require any materials that are
arguably impossible to make, whereas this
object is more of feat of engineering than
science.
We’ll get to them all in turn, some episodes
will be longer than others and we might occasionally
combine two decently related topics, especially
where I feel like I’d need to explain the
basic science over again for both, but I want
to close out by saying not what this series
is about, but what it isn’t about.
It’s not about fringe science concepts where
ships shaped like saucers will magically rise
into space on anti-gravity or magnetic thrusters,
though we will use a lot of magnetic levitation
where we can.
I don’t do conspiracy stuff on this channel,
either for or against, not my cup of tea to
buy into such theories or spend my time poking
fun or ranting at those who do.
We stick to the realms of known science here,
not because we think we know all of science
but because that’s what we’ve got, and
speculating about unknown theories we might
one day discover has always struck me as counterproductive.
Some of the things we will discuss are so
immense in scale they might make the blood
drain out of the face of any engineer, but
they will rely only on known science and nothing
else.
We will also always take as a given that we
want to get into space in a big and bold way.
Not everyone feels that way and we’ve discussed
before some good reasons why you might not
want to do this, but this series is focused
on ways of getting huge amounts of people
and cargo into space in a way that is a lot
more affordable and safe than now.
That’s our goal for this series and hopefully
it will be a fun trip.
Next week will continue that trip by looking
at the best known option, Space Elevators,
and we will hack away a lot of the misconceptions
that have grown up around these in recent
years.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
In the links below in the episode description
you can also find the audio-only versions
of these episodes, with or without music,
over at Soundcloud or visit our website or
join in the discussion at the channel’s
Facebook and Reddit groups, Science and Futurism
with Isaac Arthur.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
