So today we’re looking at Double Planets,
and our big focus is going to be on the especially
rare case of two Earth Sized planets orbiting
every 24 hours, since that’s the probably
the most interesting case, to us anyway.
But we’ll also take a look at a few other
examples to including Rocheworlds, double
planets that have literally merged into a
dumbbell shape, and as always we’ll take
some time to discuss how native life might
arise on such worlds and what special aspects
of terraforming would be needed to make these
habitable for humans.
The first thing to understand about double
planets is that there’s no real cutoff at
which something ceases being a moon and becomes
a double planet.
Our own moon, at an eightieth Earth’s Mass
and a 1000 miles in radius is enormous as
natural satellites go, one of the largest
in the solar system and all the others of
similar size are around gas giants much bigger
than Earth.
Yet an Earth-sized moon around a Jupiter-sized
gas giant, our topic a couple videos back,
would be much more like what we mean by planet
yet would be proportionally much smaller compared
to that gas giant than the moon is to us.
Pluto and Charon are the closest to being
double planets, and will actually be my own
cut off point.
Charon is about an eight Pluto’s mass, not
the eightieth the Moon is to Earth.
Some would argue having the barycenter of
a two-body system outside of the larger planet
is the proper definition, which is not true
for Earth and the Moon but is true for Pluto
and Charon, but that’s also not my definition
for today.
I will be arguing that it is because they
are both tidally locked to each other that
makes for two double planets, in the context
of what we think of as a habitable planet,
which is what this series is about.
Now we discussed tidal locking in detail on
the video about that and before in this series
as well, but as a quick reminder, that is
when a moon or planets slows its rotation
over time from tidal forces until it has the
same side always pointing at its larger neighbor.
In a double lock, both planets point the same
face at each other, and realistically any
two planets of vaguely Earth mass and temperature
will be close enough in their orbit of each
other that they will have both tidally locked
long before complex life could arisen, though
in point of fact the sheer tidal stresses
involved prior to that double lock would probably
prevent complex life arising before that lock
anyway.
What we haven’t discussed before is a barycenter,
and mostly because it usually doesn’t matter.
We do not exactly orbit the sun, nor the moon
orbit us, in terms of circling around it.
For any two-body system there is a center
of mass that two actually orbit, and this
moves since two body systems usually have
at least slightly elliptical orbits.
We’re mostly interested in circular or very
low eccentricity orbit today though.
Now if the main body is infinitely bigger
then the satellite that barycenter would be
exactly in the middle, but of course that’s
never the case and for the Earth-moon that
barycenter is in Earth’s Mantle, whereas
for Pluto and Charon it’s actually outside
Pluto.
And it will be in pretty much any case we’d
start thinking of a planet and moon as a double
planet instead.
As the planets get closer and closer in mass,
if you’re looking at them from above that
barycenter, they increasingly stop looking
like one is orbiting the other and more and
more look like both are orbiting the barycenter,
until at equal mass they seem to both orbit
on the same circle 180 degrees apart.
And if they are both tidally locked then the
same face of each will always point at the
other.
This is great for space elevator if you’ve
got a material strong enough because you can
run one right from the one to the other.
If they’re on elliptical orbits you’d
need to have winches on either end playing
out or reeling in a little extra length since
they would alter their total distance a bit.
Though you could, hypothetically anyway, use
such a tether, if it’s just a little stronger
than it needs to be to avoid snapping, to
slowly force the two into a perfectly circular
orbit.
Or one just as close to that as you like so
as to keep some tidal forces in play, which
we’ll get back to in a minute.
Now in the case of two planets with approximately
the same mass as Earth, the one most people
are interested in, once they’ve gotten tidally
locked, in order for them to have a day 24
hours long they’d need to be just over 33,000
miles, or 53,000 km from center to center
for a circular orbit, only one seventh of
the distance from center to center of the
Earth and Moon.
Different masses or day lengths would have
different distances but you may calculate
such cases if you’re curious and in the
video description below there is a link to
a convenient online calculator for that.
Further away and the days are longer, closer
together and the days are shorter and we get
even more severe tides.
Now that’s actually only 25,000 miles apart,
since 33,000 was from center to center, and
these are 4000 mile radius planets.
That’s more than nine time closer than the
moon is and the planet is just under 4 times
wider, so the other planet is going to be
about 40 times wider in the sky.
Here we’ve got our moon coming over the
horizon, and here would be that double planet.
And a double planet could also have a moon,
orbiting out far beyond the two, and it will
more or less look and act like a normal moon
of that appropriate size and distance around
a planet of double the normal mass.
Of course that double planet never rises or
sets, it stays in the same place in the sky
minus minor perturbations and libration like
we discussed back in episode 2 in regard to
tidal locking.
It’s also going to be incredibly bright,
over a thousand times as bright as the moon.
One side of the planet always has it hanging
overhead, and the other never sees it, with
a band around the middle where it wobbles
up and down over the horizon.
Now before they became mutually tidally locked
the tides on these planets would be monstrous,
but would settle down to very low once that
happened, relatively speaking anyway.
Two mutually locked bodies still exert tidal
force on each other but it’s from various
types of libration and orbital eccentricity,
not perfectly circular orbits and the like.
A very mildly eccentric orbit that saw the
two planets just 5% further apart than when
they were closest would mean the gravity between
them was 9.3% lower then when they were closest,
so the distortion caused by that 24-hour 9.3%
drop in force pulling each other would get
you pretty decent tides, considering that
change in force is a good deal stronger than
the total force the moon exerts on the Earth.
The moon is only 1.2% of the Earth’s mass,
so even a twin planet that far away would
exert about 80 times the force that the Moon
does, and ours are seven times closer.
The total force exerted would be around 4000
times what the moon exerts on us.
So the change in force from the moon being
on one side, then another, of the Earth, when
compared to a 9.3% variation in force from
a planet being 5% closer at perigee than apogee,
is a good 200 hundred fold higher.
Even if that apogee and perigee ratio was
100:101 we’d still be looking at 40 times
the force variation.
That’s vastly smaller then what would have
been experienced by both before they tidally
locked but still pretty darn impressive.
For Earth like tides you’d need an eccentricity
that kept them from moving more than about
a hundred miles closer or further apart.
That is one reason why a space elevator between
them, either the classic one built on tensile
strength like we discussed in the first episode
of the megastructures series or the alternative
pushing form, the space fountain we discussed
in episode 3 of that series, would be very
nice for terraforming.
Besides the obvious value of a space elevator
for getting material on and off those planets
when terraforming them, and traveling between
them, you could use that elevator to slowly
bring down the eccentricity to the desired
level, which might be preferable to some of
the other methods we discussed in the Terraforming
video for tinkering with planetary orbits
and rotational speeds.
Now a common question about double planets
is if they could share an atmosphere, and
the answer is yes but it depends.
The Rocheworld case will get to in a couple
minutes can, but actual double planets like
our Dual Earth case really cannot.
These two planets will actually deform slightly
toward each other, making them even a bit
closer from surface to surface then I previously
mentioned, and there would be exchange of
material during major asteroid strikes, possibly
allowing one world to seed another with life.
Especially early on in a solar systems life
when you’d expect a lot more debris to be
careening around impacting stuff, a strike
could send very basic and robust microbes
up into orbit and to fall back down on the
other world.
We’d be talking very tiny and robust things
though, so you wouldn’t expect them to have
the same flora and fauna, just to quite probably
use the same basic building blocks.
And while atmosphere arguably extend hundreds
of miles over a planet, what we think of when
we mean atmosphere is where you can still
breath and fly, and that could never stretch
over that distance.
There’s no special tricks to terraforming
these planets, they are in this specific case
obviously very earth like in mass and temperature,
so just that linking space elevator trick
is unique to them and you can actually do
something similar with any two bodies, tidally
locked or not, so long as you let the base
of the elevator move on some track, though
an Earth-Moon one for instance would require
a lot of extra energy to overcome the constant
massive drag of slamming the base through
your own atmosphere at supersonic speeds,
making this a trick much better done from
a top an orbital ring like we also discussed
back in the first megastructures video, since
there’s no air up there to cause drag and
sonic booms.
Regarding life on such a double planet, they’d
be forming in a very high tide environment,
which is not necessarily a concern, Earth
used to have way worse tides back when the
moon first formed and it was closer and the
earth spun around about once every 12 hours
not 24.
Only a double planet with any eccentricity
is going to keep pretty impressive tides so
possibly amphibians would be a larger share
of the planet’s animal life.
More tides also means erosion too, and this
would effect storms, but if you’re just
thinking of this from a fictional standpoint,
or one we’ve terraformed including altering
the orbital eccentricity, then it could be
tailored to ape Earth tides by simply having
low eccentricity.
No flying critters between planets though,
for that you need a Rocheworld.
The Roche limit is as close as an object holding
itself together by gravity can get to another
large body before being shredded, as the larger
body pulls on the surface of the smaller one
harder than the smaller one pulls on that
surface itself.
This gets worse from both the deformation
from gravity and the centrifugal spin near
the surface.
Equal sized, or near equal sized, bodies have
much lower Roche Limits, so close they practically
have to be touching.
Even our moon if brought close to Earth would
have to be within 6000 miles, which would
be skimming distance since the Earth is 4000
miles in radius and the moon 1000 so they’d
only have a 1000 miles of separation from
closest points.
For our double planet the two can flat out
overlap, and Robert L. Forward played with
this idea in his novel Rocheworld.
Your two planets are more egg shaped then
Spheres, and can definitely share atmospheres.
They are also definitely tidally locked.
They can share an atmosphere, they can even
share an ocean, and eventually they will deform
to share land and become a peanut shape.
This can take billions of years, but once
that occurs they will begin merging into a
single sphere and that will be a very destructive
process if you’re living on it.
But it is a geological timeline, not a short
one.
This is also the sort of process that could
give birth to a naturally occurring Hoopworld,
we looked at the artificial variety recently
in the megastructures series.
While very close double planets should eventually
merge together, if this process was interrupted
by a strike from a large rogue planetoid,
similar to how our own Moon is thought to
have formed, and a strike that added a lot
of new angular momentum to the system, it
could result in a torus shaped planet.
Neither a Rocheworld nor a Torus world are
terribly probable or stable items, double
planets, even the big double pair of Earth
masses, aren’t incredibly likely either
but would be much more likely than either
of those.
Now a Rocheworld has another problem, the
ones with Earth-like gravity would have very
short days.
These are double planets whose centers, if
we’re talking Earth-like masses, will be
only about 10,000 miles from center to center.
So your day length is only 4 hours long.
I don’t think there’s any combination
of worlds that would give you fairly Earth
like gravity and day length that wasn’t
almost completely water.
What we often dub a Panthalassic world.
Water deforms, as a fluid, much easier than
rigid bodies so you could have a rocheworld
that had a lot of water, and a vaguely sane
day length and surface gravity, which might
actually connect oceans and potentially if
just right have land masses on the far sides
of the two planets.
We’ll talk more about Panthalassic worlds
in the future, ones who outside this case
are worlds with no land mass, or very little
land mass, not including icebergs, potentially
whole ice continents, and oceans many miles
deep.
But that’s going to wrap us up for double
planets today, next week we’ll be returning
to the Fermi Paradox for a new, updated, and
expanded version of Comprehensive list of
Fermi Paradox Solutions, so we can lay the
groundwork to start exploring some of those
solutions in greater individual depth in their
stand alone videos.
Questions and comments are welcome, and if
you want alerts when those videos come out,
make sure to click the subscribe button.
In the mean time try out the other Habitable
Planet videos or any of these other video
series by clicking on them to bring up that
Playlist.
As always, thanks for watching, and we’ll
see you next time.
