“There is a theory which states that if ever  
anyone discovers exactly what the 
Universe is for and why it is here,  
it will instantly disappear and be replaced by 
something even more bizarre and inexplicable. 
There is another theory which states that 
this has already happened.” - Douglas Adams 
So, today we’ll be discussing some common 
misconceptions about space, time, life,  
the Universe, and everything. Some of these 
are pretty well known but have a twist,  
some are well known misconceptions but actually 
wrong themselves, and some are sadly less known  
and we’ll be correcting those today. We have a 
lot of topics to cover, from common misconceptions  
about space – that it is cold, or dark, or empty, 
or quiet – to grander ideas like where the edge  
or center of the Universe are, its beginning 
and end, and how we might travel around it,  
see new worlds around alien suns, and even 
survive the death of the stars themselves. 
I feel obliged to say from the outset that this 
episode is going to have a lot of “Actually”  
moments, where it might seem like a nitpick, and a 
few probably really are, tastes vary and some are  
really there for completeness or a bearing on more 
important misconceptions, or less well known ones,  
including how some of our worldview is constructed 
around these concepts and is arguably flawed or at  
risk of being blinded to new evidence or correct 
conclusions because of them. This episode is not  
about pointing out a few irrelevant technical 
errors that really have no relevance to day-to-day  
life, and to poke at the realism of a given 
work of science fiction – though we’ll do that  
too – but to suggest different ways of looking 
at the Universe and our place in it, both now  
and in the future. And indeed many of these become 
relevant in the very deep future, eons from now. 
The Youtube version of this episode has 
been chapterized to make it easier for  
individual viewers to jump to specific topics 
of interest, but as always, our episodes are  
written and created with the principal intent 
of being watched as an episode, not a reference  
book. It’s going to be a longer episode than 
most, so a drink and snack might be advisable. 
I thought we’d start off by quickly hitting 
five big qualities of space that get assumed,  
one of which people get right but understandably 
can’t really wrap their heads around, and four  
others that get misunderstood. Those five commonly 
misunderstood qualities which I’ve listed are:  
That space is huge, that it has no 
gravity, and that it isn’t dark,  
that it isn’t cold, and that it isn’t empty.
Everybody gets that Space is Huge, but trying  
to really wrap your head around just how huge is 
just not doable. It is immense in a way that only  
numbers can describe, rather than experience, and 
even those of us used to the math and scale have  
to constantly work not to make horribly off-target 
speculations simply because of how non-intuitive  
everything is. Earth is huge, but understand 
that if you’re on a tall hill or skyscraper  
being impressed by how much of it you can see, 
that whole landscape or cityscape around you  
is maybe one single letter in the entire big 
book of the planet’s surface, and your whole  
lifetime and the lifetimes of everyone you know 
takes place during a period that’s only a page in  
humanity’s own history, itself barely a page in 
this planet’s. There is no understanding of that  
immensity and yet the tiny flyspeck of your or 
my existence against the story of this world is  
still big compared to the miniscule dot that our 
world is in the crushing hugeness of this galaxy,  
which in turn is only trillionths the size 
of the known Universe, which itself might  
be a speck against the great total of reality.
There is no managing something like that in the  
mind, and as we’ll talk about nearer the end, 
the shadow of that immensity sits very heavily  
on science and science fiction, influencing 
a lot of our perspectives, even while at the  
same time nobody ever really manages to truly 
capture the colossal nature of space and time. 
Some of the other aspects of space aren’t so hard 
to capture though. For instance, the confusion  
that space has no gravity is a big misconception.
When orbiting an object, whether it’s our space  
station around Earth or Earth around the Sun, the 
nature of the mechanics involved are basically  
placing you in free fall, perpetually, but just 
like when an elevator starts or stops, gravity  
isn’t in any way shutting off. On the space 
station you’re only a few hundred kilometers up,  
the planet itself is thousands of kilometers wide, 
gravity is only a few percent lower up there.  
It’s just that you are orbiting by constantly 
being flung sideways as gravity pulls you down,  
and that is constantly changing the 
direction that gravity is coming from,  
so when your speed is just right, and there’s no 
air in the way, it allows you to essentially fall  
right back to the same spot, over and over again.
Air is critical here because orbit right over the  
Earth’s surface, and the air drags your speed 
down. We only put satellites as high as we do  
because that gets them above the air drag. We 
literally want them as low as we can possibly  
get them to, see our episode on Stratospheric 
Satellites for more on that. Stop the space  
station though, with a magic hand, and you 
will fall right to the floor. Nor is it really  
zero-gravity, there are lots of other forces and 
minor variations, it’s just minimal and so we call  
it microgravity. Normal gravity, what we have 
here on Earth, is 9.8 m/s² or 32 ft/s² and we  
call that 1 gee, much as we call Earth’s distance 
from the Sun one AU, or Astronomical Unit. 
The Sun and Moon’s gravitational pulls on Earth 
are what cause our tides, moving trillions of tons  
of water and ground along. If we froze Earth in 
place and removed it, so just the Sun was pulling  
on us, it is just under a thousandth of a gee, 
and on the Sun’s surface it’s 28 G, and the escape  
velocity from the Solar System from Earth’s 
position is 42 kilometers per second, almost  
4 times what the escape velocity from Earth’s 
surface is. It’s more than 10 times that to escape  
to the galactic rim. There is no known natural 
place where you can’t feel gravity or escape its  
effect, and even stuck at the center of a planet 
or between two identical and massive objects,  
like a pair of binary neutron stars or black 
holes, that merely means the pull of gravity is  
balancing out. The time dilation experienced there 
remains enormous. As gravity slows the passage of  
time, the stronger it is in total, not net.
Much like gravity, there is no place free of  
light in space either. Space is not Dark, and 
only in the shadow of a planet or moon is our  
Sun ever not shining all day, every day and it 
is actually brighter than here on the ground,  
even at high noon, and perpetually so. Even 
out on distant Pluto, during the day time  
you would have light comparable to modest room 
lighting and much brighter than the full Moon. 
Out in deep interstellar space there’s an ambient 
starlight that varies in intensity and spectrum,  
locally a bit over a percent of the Full Moon, 
which means you could see enough to walk around,  
if clumsily without a flashlight, even on some 
dead frozen rock in the Oort Cloud. Alternatively,  
inside star clusters or the galactic bulge it 
might be hard to find any place that wasn’t at  
least full moon bright all the time, and 
many places where darkness is only inside  
buildings or caves. The average color 
of starlight in the Observable Universe  
is a shade of yellowish-white-beige 
named Cosmic Latte, though for a time;  
from a miscalculation we thought it was more 
of turquoise. Either way, there’s always light. 
There is also tons of radiation in other 
frequencies, from radio and microwave up  
to X-Ray and Gamma. Most of the universe is 
indeed darker than daytime or full moon light,  
but the notion that space is pitch black is wrong, 
the darkest places are always those in shadow. 
Similarly, the notion that space is Cold 
is also wrong, though that needs several  
qualifiers. First, cold is not really 
a science term, as some measurement,  
but more of a relative state. Something is hotter 
or colder than something else it’s compared to.  
What we have is temperature and total heat, 
or thermal energy in something. The air in a  
hot oven is much hotter than a pot of boiling 
water, but that water contains a lot more mass  
than the air in that oven has and any given 
material also has a thermal capacity. Air has  
only about a sixth of the thermal capacity 
of water, so raising the temperature of a  
kilogram of water by a degree takes six times 
the thermal energy a kilogram of air does. 
There is also thermal conductivity, which is 
how quickly something leaks or absorbs heat,  
Styrofoam is low and slow to change while metals 
are quick, which is why you can keep your coffee  
warm in a styrofoam cup in the winter and not burn 
your hand touching it, while touching metal can  
give you quick frostbite or burns in the summer, 
even though they’re roughly the same temperature  
as everything else there. Space is not empty 
but it nearly is, so we don’t really lose or  
gain heat by conducting it out of ourselves 
there, or by convection, merely by radiation. 
This is why stars burn so hot, they are actually 
very thin and cloud-like by and large, especially  
the large ones. Our Sun is only slightly denser 
than water overall, only about a quarter the  
density Earth is, and its upper regions that 
we actually see are even thinner than air,  
nothing like the implication we often have of 
it being a big ball of fiery lava, and more on  
that later. But the Sun doesn’t really end there, 
what we call the surface is just the photosphere,  
the place where most of its light comes from, it’s 
not the hottest place or the end of the Sun and  
there’s no real definition for the end, it just 
gets much thinner. Most of the matter in our solar  
system is far hotter than the hottest places on 
Earth, and even our own core is not terribly hot. 
Gases have their temperature basically off of how 
fast they are moving and what they are in terms  
of atoms and molecules, and so a place with 
fast-moving gas might be so thin in density  
that you only had a few atoms per cubic meter, 
and thus less heat energy than an ultra-cold  
cube of ice has, and yet its temperature might 
be a million degrees. You could still freeze to  
death in it, as you radiated heat faster 
than you absorbed sunlight or starlight,  
or for that matter cook to death, just depends 
where you are. If we exposed you to the vacuum,  
then you would freeze only in the sense the liquid 
state of matter, as opposed to solids and gases,  
which only exist where there is pressure, and the 
range of temperatures they exist at narrows as  
pressure lowers, and widens as it gets higher.
Water freezes at 0 Celsius and boils at 100  
Celsius at normal pressure, but boils at much 
higher temperatures under greater pressure.  
You will actually get a mixture of both the 
boiling and freezing of the water that’s in a  
human that is suddenly exposed to space, so it’s 
not really wrong to say someone freezes in space,  
especially as if they’re decently far from a 
star, the remaining water will stay that way,  
rather than boiling off, which is why 
water ice is ultra-common in the outer  
solar system but not the inner, and is 
why comets have those beautiful tails. 
It is actually kind of weird because we also tell 
people that the Universe is cooling over time as  
it expands. And this is true if we’re talking 
about the average temperature of a given cubic  
meter of empty space as opposed to the average 
temperature of a given atom in the Universe. 
However, the actual average temperature of deep 
space is much higher, about 2 million Kelvin,  
versus more like 200,000 10 billion years ago. 
This might seem at odds with saying that the  
Universe is only about 2.7 Kelvin, way 
colder than Antarctica or even Pluto,  
but that’s the temperature of the Cosmic 
Microwave Background Radiation, or CMB,  
permeating everything and thus is the coldest you 
can get anything down too, currently. Like a big  
hunk of metal floating in deep space that rapidly 
radiated off its heat but was so big and dense  
that the occasional collision of a couple atoms 
– even if they are millions of degrees – just  
doesn’t do anything to warm it. Nor is the CMB 
the only type of ambient radiation out there,  
just a very old one that’s basically everywhere.
Which takes us to the misconception that Space is  
Empty, as there’s something like a half a billion 
of those CMB photons left over from the dawn of  
the Universe passing through any cubic meter of 
space at a given time, even in ultra-deep space,  
out in the cosmic voids between galactic filaments 
and walls. Ignoring Dark Energy for the moment,  
there’s plenty of other random matter, even 
out in those voids, indeed even whole galaxies,  
but inside galaxies the density of space is a 
lot higher. It is ridiculously tiny compared  
to here on Earth, the densest known body in the 
solar system curiously, but it is not empty and  
we have regions of space where the interstellar 
dust and gas is a lot higher than in our solar  
system at large, millions of times so, and it 
is much denser than the intergalactic void. 
Even beyond that though, if we block off 
every form of radiation getting into some  
shielded volume and find and pull out 
every single atom floating around,  
we still have the reality that what we normally 
think of as reality but is actually built on a  
Quantum Universe. Everything going up here is 
a statistical byproduct of Quantum Mechanics  
at that scale, and down there everything 
is in a constant state of uncertainty,  
with packets of energy and matter popping 
into existence and right back out again,  
after lengths of time so tiny, they 
make a second look like untold eons. 
But just as billions of photons of light can zip 
through a volume of space every second, each there  
for less than a billionth of a second, as long 
as the light source is still emitting photons in  
that direction and at the same rate, that volume 
of space being measured will still have a constant  
density of new migrant photons, like traffic on 
a road, nobody lives there but it’s always busy.  
So too all these particles flickering in and out 
of existence for fractions of an instant do cause  
a net density. And this is everywhere, all of the 
time. So, even in a sealed-off vacuum, space is  
never really empty, and indeed when we add in 
dark matter, which would casually pass through  
any shield more easily than a neutrino, and dark 
energy, which seems to just add tiny packets of  
new space, which contains energy, everywhere all 
the time, space can never be said to be empty. 
That won’t stop you from asphyxiating in space 
though, as empty is pretty relative, but when  
it comes to the notion of exploding when you get 
pushed out an airlock into a vacuum, that’s no  
more real than rapidly turning into a brittle ice 
statue that would shatter moments later if bumped. 
Explosive Decompression was really popular in 
science fiction and I’m glad to say has mostly  
been retired as a trope. Pressure differences 
can be brutal but the force just isn’t there  
to tear you apart. It’s a difference of just 1 
atmosphere, and you can experience the reverse  
by swimming down about 10 meters or 32 feet 
underwater, go about 3 or 4 times deeper and  
get about 3-4 more atmospheres of pressure. 
Normally space is basically 0 pressure and  
Earth air is about 1 atmosphere of pressure, 
so that difference isn’t that much. Nobody is  
getting sucked through a bullet-sized hole in 
the wall, maybe one that was almost as big as  
them would have enough pressure to squish them 
through but otherwise they just plug the hole.  
Nor does all the air rush out in moments. Poke 
a little hole in a space suit or space station  
wall and air will leak, but rather slowly, and 
you can just put your finger over it or tape it. 
The water in your plumbing is often under 
several atmospheres of pressure and yet a  
hole in a pipe can be covered and doesn’t rip 
things open, you could put your finger over it  
with fair effectiveness. If you’re wondering what 
a hole in a spaceship would be like to handle,  
grab a vacuum and turn it on and put your hand 
over the wand, or a bike pump and put your  
finger on the nozzle and press the pump handle 
about halfway down, compressing the air to about  
2 atmospheres pressure. If you’re thinking 
that a household vacuum isn’t a total vacuum,  
it’s probably also fair to point out that most 
space missions are at partial pressure too,  
keeping the oxygen content of air high but going 
low on nitrogen, to slow leakage. Leakage occurs  
at the rate of pressure difference, half 
your pressure, half your leakage rate. 
There’s no noise in space
In space, all is silence, and  
everyone knows that and it's mostly right. Scifi 
movies often ignore it to add in sound effects,  
and you can get some stirring battle scenes 
as they switch perspectives from a loud battle  
setting to one of total terrifying silence, as 
explosions dot the eternal dark void. And again,  
this one is mostly right but needs caveats. 
First, sound is vibration and you will get it  
wherever there is a medium of matter to travel 
through. So anything hitting or landing on your  
ship or station still causes bangs and clunks. If 
you’re running around a voided ship or asteroid  
mine touching the ground, you’re going to 
feel vibrations through it and thus noise. 
Plus there’s no real place that is a total 
vacuum so there’s never really an absence  
of sound. There are plenty of places in the 
Universe where the interstellar medium is a  
lot thicker than local space, and indeed you can 
hear sound very high up in our own atmosphere,  
long after it would be unbreathable. We actually 
have heard a black hole that was in a galaxy  
cluster with so much gas that it vibrated it, and 
we can read that vibration electromagnetically and  
play it. It is decidedly eerie.
Black Holes Suck 
Speaking of black holes, the notion they suck 
everything in and destroy all matter nearby is  
another case of ‘not exactly wrong but yet, very 
wrong’ as naturally occurring black holes might be  
several kilometers across and absolutely fatal 
to touch or get fairly close to, but they are  
basically harmless compared to the Supergiants 
that formed them, millions of times brighter  
than our own Sun and many millions of Kilometers 
wide. They’re safer to be near than a planet even,  
as you are only in danger from them from the 
radiation they emit from slowly sucking in gas, or  
if you are so close that tidal forces will rip you 
asunder, and both of those would be vastly closer  
to that black hole than you could normally be near 
even a dim small star. They’re stealthy, to be  
sure, but you would detect the potentially lethal 
radiation long before it got dangerous to you.  
So the idea that a black hole is going to sneak 
up on your ship as it travels, even if for some  
reason you had no map to warn you, is just wrong.
So is the idea that you can’t escape a black hole. 
You don’t really fall into black holes anymore 
than you do stars or planets, and indeed less so,  
since only the most highly elliptical orbit 
would crash into a black hole event horizon.  
The entire reason they are surrounded by 
radiation is because getting into a black  
hole is nigh impossible. Particles of gas and 
dust fall toward it and generally miss, unless  
they’re almost perfectly on target, and then fly 
away, and some enter an orbital pattern. They spin  
around that star and have gained huge kinetic 
energy from the fall, and ram into each other,  
this causes a slow formation of an accretion 
disc and bits of matter occasionally falling in,  
and is really no different than a 
planetary ring, except higher energy. 
Your spaceship is either going to bend its 
trajectory a bit when passing that black hole,  
or simply enter an orbit of that black hole, 
probably a highly elliptical one. And most likely  
the former, as we tend to assume interstellar 
vessels are moving around 10% of light speed,  
if not, much more, and even a 10 solar mass black 
hole only has an escape velocity of 7% of light  
speed at a distance equal to the radius of our 
entire planet Earth, which is more than 20 times  
its own radius of 30 kilometers or 20 miles, 
which is just absurdly tiny in space terms.  
Moreover, it’s important to understand what 
actually happens as a ship hits a gravity well…  
which is to say, it falls and speeds up. This 
doesn’t make it harder to get out, it’s just  
like rolling down a hill then rolling up another, 
you have all that extra speed helping you on the  
climb, plus no air drag slowing you… though the 
accretion disc could serve that role of brake too. 
Also, you can then boost with your 
thrusters a bit to get out of that orbit,  
just like if you were around a planet. 
This is how slingshot maneuvers and the  
Oberth Effect work, letting a ship gain 
speed moving around a massive object.  
If you dally too long though, you will get slowed 
down by passing gas and dust, and get beat-up on  
by high-energy radiation – which can also slow 
you, and then you might fall in or be ripped to  
bits, but you might also use that local matter and 
radiation to power your way out of the black hole,  
and they might be a good place to refuel at 
or set up interstellar space station hubs like  
truck stops. See our episode: Colonizing 
Black Holes for more discussion of that. 
And if living and working near a black hole bugs 
you, remember that you are living even closer to  
a big ball of molten radioactive matter with 
a thin crust floating on it that we live on. 
Black holes may end up as the interstellar 
travelers’ best friend, allowing course  
corrections and gravitational slingshots that 
could never be done around any other body,  
at interstellar speeds and without crashing into 
them or burning up. Don’t get too close though,  
they are only mostly harmless. If you fall across 
the event horizon of a black hole, you’re stuck  
in there, even if you survived the trip, as this 
is specifically the distance at which light speed  
equals the escape velocity of the black hole… 
though that event horizon moves relative to you,  
and you’ll never actually reach it as you fall. If 
you had some way to move faster than light speed  
you might get out, though it should be noted 
that many FTL concepts, like the Warp Drive,  
would still be stuck in there, as their cheat 
method of crunching and expanding spacetime  
fore and aft is ineffective against the black 
hole’s own gravitational warping of spacetime. 
Nothing goes faster than light speed
The notion that nothing in the Universe  
can go faster than light is uncomfortably at odds 
with the issue that most of the galaxies we can  
see are now moving away from us faster than light 
speed, and yet there’s no contradiction. What we  
really mean is that if you’re trying to jog along 
and keep up with a photon of light, you’re going  
to lose, or at best keep-up with it if you’re 
another massless particle. However, space expands,  
and we assume bits and pieces of new spacetime are 
constantly emerging randomly everywhere, probably  
as tiny subatomic bits at the Planck Scale.
If you imagine a very long measuring tape  
where people are quickly splicing in new bits 
of tape between its end points, then the rate  
those folks work and how many of them there are 
is going to control how fast that tape expands,  
and as it expands, more people can fit in 
there splicing even more tape. It will grow,  
and once it is long enough, those folks will 
be expanding that tape faster than a sound  
wave could carry the voices of any of those 
people down the line to the guys on the end  
who now have to run away faster than sound.
This just scales up in space to light speed  
and the galaxies on the other end of our 
measuring tape aren’t doing any pulling.  
They aren’t moving locally at any high speed, but 
they are moving away from us faster than light,  
and we only see them now because the light from 
them reaching us left back when they were closer  
and moving away slower. The rate is roughly 7% of 
light speed for every billion light years between  
you and an object currently, double or half that 
distance, double or half that expansion rate.  
And again, nothing is moving in the Universe 
faster than light speed, it’s just over far  
enough distance that expansion is so fast 
that nothing moving at light speed could cover  
all the new space emerging between it and its 
destination as quick as that space is forming. 
The Edge of The Universe is 
13 Billion Light Years Away 
This means then that the effective edge of 
the Universe is 13 billion light years away,  
since things expanding away from us at light 
speed would presumably have been doing so since  
the Universe formed 13 Billions years ago. 
And everything about that statement is wrong.  
First, the current estimate for the Age 
of the Universe is 13.8 billion years,  
rounding comfortably to 14, but for 
a while the estimate was closer to 13  
and that number got rather stuck into 
common discussion, we should say 14.  
When I was a kid, back in the 1980s, the estimates 
were generally 7-20 billion years old, and you’d  
see 20 in a lot of the texts of the time, and 
that narrowed to 9-14 billion years in the 1990s. 
That was calculated off Hubble Shift and we 
were finding stars that might be much older  
than 9 billion years by then too. You’ve probably 
heard of stars estimated to be older than our  
Universe but almost all of that comes from having 
stars with plus or minus a couple billion years  
on their age having their upper margin fall over 
those same wide-margin of potential universe ages.  
Stars formed before the first billion years of 
the Universe had passed. So, if your estimate  
is saying the Universe is 13-14 billion 
years old and you’ve got a star calculating  
as 12-14 billion years old, there’s no real 
implication you have a pre-Universe star there. 
However if light from such a star, one made just 
after the Universe formed and 13 billion years  
ago, were to be detected today it would mean 
it was 13 billion years old and that’s usually  
how astronomers will describe it. The photon 
doesn’t have any sort of clock on it of course,  
but the longer and further it has traveled, the 
more red-shifted it is, and we can make pretty  
good guesses off it and its companions as to what 
wavelength it started off at, to see how much it  
red-shifted and thus get that age. It doesn’t mean 
it left that star from 13 billion light years away  
though or that it’s that far away now.
That photon covered that much distance,  
but most of that distance didn’t exist when it 
started toward us, and much of it emerged behind  
it afterward too, in terms of discussing how far 
a star or galaxy is from us now, at this moment.  
And if we wanted to send a reply or ship to that 
star or galaxy, it would be even further away and  
moving even faster away. Back when it left, that 
star was probably less than a billion light years  
from where we were then, not that Earth existed 
at that time, and now if we could just freeze  
everything, it would be around 45 billion light 
years away, and the return message would take  
45 billion years to reach that, again if we froze 
universal expansion. But since we can’t, at least  
with current technology, if we tried to send a 
signal to that spot, it would never reach it,  
as it is currently traveling away from us at 
somewhere around 7 times the speed of light. 
The Universe has no Edge
What we usually call the edge of the Universe is  
the CMB or cosmic Microwave background radiation. 
This is because the further back, or out you look,  
the more red-shifted everything is till it 
gets kind of dark because there were no stars  
or galaxies yet, then we get to a period that’s 
fairly high infrared because the Universe was  
still a pretty dense and warm place, and if you 
go back a little further you reach a place where  
it’s dense and warm enough to resemble the light 
from stars. Just a very hot plasma mostly made of  
hydrogen. It was even denser and brighter before 
then but we can’t see there because light emitted  
from then constantly scattered and absorbed rather 
than traveling very far before hitting something. 
There’s a critical point where things expanded 
and cooled enough that hydrogen shifted to a  
less absorptive state and things were just 
spread out more, and less likely to scatter,  
and this was about 380,000 years after the Big 
Bang. This Surface of Last Scatter is as far as  
we can see with anything electromagnetic and thus 
it gets dubbed the edge of the Universe a lot, and  
380,000 years is very tiny compared to several 
billion, so it’s close enough to the Big Bang,  
but if we ever get better at detecting 
neutrinos we could probably look all the  
way back to the first minutes after the Big Bang.
And this edge is only in a temporal sense. We have  
no idea where or if the Universe has an edge, 
only that we could never reach it without a  
faster-than-light spaceship, assuming space isn’t 
infinite. Some folks would say that there’s no  
space beyond that edge. That might be the case, 
but there’s no evidence for that. It’s one of  
those examples where folks are speculating and 
extrapolating off mathematical models and logic,  
not data, and that’s not really science anymore. 
It is entirely possible the big bang is merely  
a local event in a wider Universe or that the 
Universe big-banged but was already infinite when  
it did so. We examined this more in our episodes 
on the Big Rip and the Edge of the Universe. 
The Universe has no center
One of the governing principles of modern physics  
since Isaac Newton’s day was that the Universe 
has no meaningful center and that we certainly  
are not the center itself. That is 100% at odds 
with observable data incidentally. As we discussed  
a moment ago, we can see equally far back and out 
in every direction till we hit a wall of cosmic  
microwave background radiation, that surface of 
last scatter. This is literally a spherical shell  
around our planet that is expanding constantly 
out from us showing ever more redshifted photons  
from evermore slightly further away.
We aren’t the Center of the Universe 
Since we can see equally in all directions back 
to the Surface of Last Scatter, the default  
interpretation of that is that Earth is the Center 
of the Universe, that is what the science says. We  
choose, from habit and logical extrapolation, to 
assume that the Universe keeps going a long way  
beyond that and that either it is infinite, in 
which case a center arguably doesn’t mean much,  
or if it is a big sphere, it’s one in which 
we probably are of no place of specific note,  
and there may be places in the wider universe 
where folks can’t see beyond a certain distance in  
one direction, or it may be that things curve back 
on themselves, like the surface of a sphere such  
as Earth, or maybe the Universe is the surface 
of an expanding 4D sphere, though probably not,  
or donut, or like walking off the edge of an old 
video game and popping back in the other side. 
Key thing: We don’t actually know, but we got in 
the habit of assuming ourselves no place special  
back in Newton and Copernicus’ day, and that was 
very cosmologically and philosophically important  
to them at the time. Humanity and Earth are merely 
mediocre and not special examples of anything,  
and that’s essentially the default opinion 
of science, and perhaps ironically it is an  
opinion that is not scientific itself. It’s 
merely a speculation, albeit a very sound one  
based on logic, but not physical data. It’s fairly 
important though to be mindful of blinders because  
we discuss the Fermi Paradox a lot on this 
show and the default view from the available  
evidence is that there are no detectable alien 
civilizations, and that they probably don’t exist  
anywhere near us even on the galactic scale.
This is essentially the entire paradox,  
because if we’re not special and we’re not the 
center of the Universe, it should be absurd to  
approach contemplating the Universe from that 
perspective. It is probably no better an idea  
to assume Earth and humanity are tiny, mundane 
dots on the cosmological scale, a pale blue dot,  
as to assume we’re the shining center of creation, 
but more importantly we have a historic scientific  
basis for saying humanity isn’t central that 
is improperly conflating our physical location  
with our metaphysical importance, and it’s rather 
baked-into our thinking. It might be right too,  
but let’s poke at that notion a bit.
Earth Orbits the Sun 
To shift back home to Earth, we can continue that 
notion of us not being the center of the universe  
by pointing out that the Earth doesn’t actually 
orbit the Sun, nor does the moon orbit Earth,  
and nor is the Sun in any way the center of 
our galaxy. Orbits occur based on all the mass  
in play in an area, and in our solar system 
99.8% of that is in the Sun, 0.1% is Jupiter,  
and the other 0.1% is everything else, but mostly 
Saturn. How in play stuff is at any moment is  
based on its distance too. It can be seen as 
a quibble but if we’re contemplating life on  
other worlds, and how our early understanding of 
the Heliocentric Model and Copernican Mediocrity  
Principle altered our worldview and philosophy 
of science, we need to be mindful that other  
places aren’t going t2o see it that way.
Life that evolved on a planet around a close  
binary star system is in a good position 
to spot that, those stars seem to orbit  
something themselves, that they cannot see, and 
one can speculate how that might be impacting  
their early philosophy and religions. For our 
near term purposes, we really need to finish  
getting away from the notion that Earth and all 
the other planets circle the center of our sun,  
rather than orbit elliptically, as it 
results in a confused view of things. 
Of course being aware the earth orbits 
elliptically can cause confusion too,  
as folks often think Earth is close to the Sun 
in Summer. In truth the seasons have virtually  
nothing to do with how close or far Earth is from 
the Sun at any given moment, and Perihelion – when  
we’re closest to the Sun – takes place in Early 
January, and early July, the height of summer,  
at least for the Northern Hemisphere, is our 
aphelion, our furthest distance from the sun. 
Earth’s orbit is fairly circular as these things 
go, and we define its normal distance from the Sun  
as 1 astronomical Unit or AU, but it gets as close 
as .983 AU at Perihelion and 1.017 AU at Aphelion.  
That’s 3.5% further out than when closest, which 
also gets 7% more sunlight than when furthest.  
This is hardly trivial, it’s just dwarfed 
by the effect of axial tilt. Other planets  
with greater eccentricities – which is most of 
them – would likely have a weather and seasonal  
cycle strongly affected by that eccentricity, 
and even tidally locked planets around dimmer  
red stars can have significant seasons as a 
result of that eccentricity, and made all the  
more weird by them potentially having orbital 
years a few months or even weeks or days long. 
Speaking of Red Dwarfs though, we often hear 
our Sun called a fiery yellow dwarf and that’s  
really wrong in every respect. To our eyes it 
definitely has that golden shade but all stars  
are white light sources with a peak wavelength 
of radiation, and our sun’s peak is a blue-ish  
green. Alternatively most of the photons coming 
off of it are actually in the infrared. Indeed  
most stars emit the majority of their light in 
the infrared range of the spectrum we can’t see,  
as did the typical incandescent light bulb. And 
even the dimmest and coolest red dwarf is still as  
white a light as those old bulbs were. This isn’t 
surprising as most stars are red dwarfs, though  
again, they don’t look red at all, and the entire 
cataloging process is basically a flawed one of  
it being much easier to see big, bright stars. 
The Copernican or Mediocrity Principle failed us  
there, we saw the abnormal giants most, brighter 
than our own sun, not the normal stars, most of  
which are tiny and dim compared to our own.
A star’s visibility over distance is based  
off of its brightness, diminishing with the 
inverse square of that distance, so one that’s  
a hundred times brighter is visible 10 times 
further away. However, space is 3-dimensional,  
so that same volume of space contains 10-cubed 
or a thousand times as many stars. Meaning that  
our early observation of the universe 
contained virtually nothing but giants,  
and very few stars even as dim as our Sun, which 
is bigger than 95% of all stars and 10,000 times  
brighter than the dimmest red dwarf, yet there are 
stars a million times brighter than our own Sun. 
Needless to say, the Sun is not in any way on 
fire either. While oxygen is the third most common  
substance on the Sun, there are no molecules; 
everything is glowing hot plasma, cooling itself  
off by radiating waste heat as sunlight, and 
fusion occurs deep below in the core, and very  
slowly too. Your typical ton of solar core matter 
emits about enough power to run a light bulb,  
it’s just that there is so much of it and it 
will keep doing so for billions of years before  
dying. And our Sun is short-lived compared to 
most. It will live only 10 billion-ish years  
and the overwhelming majority of stars that ever 
formed thus far in our Universe are still alive  
and kicking. Of the half a trillion or so stars 
in this galaxy, perhaps 10 billion have become  
white dwarfs, just a couple percent, and only 
a tenth of that, perhaps a billion total have  
gone supernova and become neutron stars, and 
only about a tenth of that became black holes. 
Of course our Sun will die someday and this is 
part of why we talk about wanting to travel to the  
stars and colonizing other worlds, and this takes 
us to our penultimate misconception for today,  
that time on spaceships runs much, much slower.
Now, this isn’t wrong but there is a tendency  
whenever we see discussion of spaceships that 
don’t have FTL for us to say they’re moving  
nearly at light speed, but the reality is that 
in a No-FTL Universe, you aren’t likely to be  
plowing through space at 99.9% of light speed. The 
energy needed for that, even ignoring practical  
engineering and the rocket equation, is literally 
2000 times what it would take to move at 10% of  
light speed. And at 10% of light speed, your clock 
is only moving half a percent slower than normal,  
or about 7 minutes a day or 6 months a century, 
and at 1% light speed, it’s only 4 seconds a day  
that you’re saving, 26 minutes a year. That’s not 
really letting you sneak away from the Grim Reaper  
by slowly crawling forward in time, and even at 
99.9% of light speed, your clock is only moving 20  
times slower than normal. You don’t even get down 
to half normal time flow till 87% of light speed. 
Faster is always better if you’ve got the 
energy and ability to do it, but when it  
comes to trying to escape local time, instead of 
using more energy than the entire modern planetary  
economy uses in a whole year to accelerate 
one person to a high time dilation rate,  
why not use that same energy to power that economy 
and all its research labs and crack the secret  
of freezing and restoring people from Cryo? Or 
maybe even some advanced type of stasis field? 
In the end, even though our Sun is 
one of the shorter lived ones and  
stars will keep forming and living 
for many trillions of years to come,  
they do eventually stop forming naturally, 
and that takes us to our final misconception,  
that the Universe Ends when those last stars 
do, and this is a dual misconception because  
it would seem very unlikely any natural stars will 
even form in our galaxy a billion years from now,  
simply because a vast galactic civilization 
isn’t likely to let them form. Artificial fusion,  
energy by dumping matter down black holes, 
or by the slow evaporation of black holes,  
or even by vacuum energy, are all plausibly on 
the table as superior ways to keep the lights  
on for your stellar empire than by actual 
starlight. And that doesn’t even contemplate  
higher Clarketech options, which they would 
have had billions of years to research before  
the cosmological event horizon sweeps away all 
the stars from sight that you haven’t colonized. 
Indeed, as we saw in our civilization at 
the End of Time Series, that time after  
the stars all burn out and all is swallowed 
in darkness might be a far brighter, longer,  
and more populated era of civilization 
than all those which came before combined. 
There are still so many things we don’t know about 
the Universe, and likely many other misconceptions  
we have about it, but hopefully one of those will 
turn out to be that in the end all must rundown  
and die from entropy, and that it will turn out 
that the clock can be wound back up, or that the  
sum total of reality is far bigger than even 
the seemingly endless enormity of our Universe.
So it’s the end of another school year 
and for a lot of folks it’s a time of  
transition in life.. we’re just not sure where 
that’s supposed to be. I didn’t find my niche  
till I was in my 30s and these days there 
really is no one-size-fits-all approach to  
pursuing or creating your dream job. To 
find your niche, and to take advantage  
of the opportunities when they come up, 
you need to explore and acquire skills. 
For me, when it came to making this channel a 
reality, not just an occasional amateur hobby,  
that involved having to learn everything from 
graphic design to marketing, how to edit audio,  
how to film on camera, how to do 
animations, improving my writing,  
and many more. It was very daunting, but it was, 
and is, doable, especially with a good partner,  
like Skillshare, and their community of 
learners. Skillshare is a great resource for  
quality videos on those topics and many more, but 
one that I’d particularly recommend is Danielle  
Krysa’s “Creative Breakthrough: 8 Exercises to 
Power Your Creativity, Confidence & Career”. 
This channel has a lot very smart and creative 
people on it, where coming up with a good idea  
isn’t the problem, it’s that roadmapping 
to developing it into a success that is,  
and believing that you can actually do it. 
Starting with the “Power of Aha Moments”,  
her videos on Skillshare help explore how to 
move from that basic idea into the something more  
formed and practical. Along with how to manage 
your creative talent to keep your confidence high,  
banish blocks and silence self-doubts.
Maybe you want to start a business or write  
a novel or develop a game or become a youtuber or 
podcaster. Maybe you just want to learn to paint  
or take a better photo, no goal is too small. 
Skillshare can even help you find more time for  
your goals by helping you with productivity and 
time management, for which I’d highly recommend  
the videos there by my friend, Thomas Frank.
Take control of your future and make it a reality,  
and let SKillshare help you, try them out 
today by using the link in this episode’s  
description. The first 1,000 people to use the 
link will get a 1 month free trial of Skillshare.
So we normally have our livestream Q&A the 
last weekend of every month but I will be down  
in Frisco, Texas that weekend to help host the 
International Space Development Conference, so  
the plan is to have the livestream next weekend, 
Sunday May 21st, but I’m also going in for some  
minor surgery on my nose and tongue earlier that 
week, so we might need to cancel and I’ll probably  
sound a bit different. Hopefully in a good way, as 
that’s rather the point, it’s supposed to be the  
next step in fixing my speech impediment, but 
the livestream is at the tail end of the main  
recovery time for the surgery so I might not know 
till the last minute if I’m good to do the show. 
Speaking of the show this weekend is our Scifi 
Sunday episode, on May 14th, where we explore  
the grim realities of super-urbanized Hive 
Worlds, then we’ll have its companion episode,  
Hungry Aliens, on May 18th. And in two weeks, 
on May 25th, we’ll talk about how to bend space  
and warp reality. Then we’ll head into June to 
look at exploring and settling the Kuiper Belt. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
