Archeology has long utilized advanced new 
technologies to help us recover our ancient  
history. There is a certain poetry in using the 
tools of the future to uncover our past, much  
as we use those experiences of the past to help 
us better navigate a safe path into the future.
Last Fall, I attended an event that was a mix 
of both a technology & futurism conference and  
a camping retreat, as it seemed like a great 
place to fish around for some episode topics,  
meet some fun thinkers, and take a brief 
vacation. My Fellow Youtuber and long-time  
friend, Cody Don Reeder, from Cody’s Lab was 
there too, and on the last day of the event  
we decided to attend a talk by Professor 
Brent Seales on Archeology and a technique  
he’s been developing for scanning old, damaged 
scrolls that we can’t unwind anymore and which  
might be scrunched up and soaked in sediment.
It was an inspiring talk. Using modern scanning  
and AI, they can virtually unwind the scroll and 
read it. It’s a fascinating approach which we’ll  
be talking about at more length in a little 
bit, but it made me want to see what other  
advances were being made in Archeology. I was 
impressed to see how much technology was being  
adapted to archeology to help us explore and 
recover our shared past; in areas like geology,  
medicine and many more, which we’ll look at 
today. There’s a lot of amazing ideas to cover,  
so settle in, grab a drink and a snack, 
and hit those like and subscribe buttons. 
One of the key things to understand when going 
into today’s topic though is that archeology  
suffers from the problem of being inherently 
destructive. Digging around and opening up  
sites means that important context about what 
was near what might be lost, and cleaning up old  
art or relics can damage them - though where 
we’re at right now is a big improvement from  
the past. For example, Athens today has much of 
its ancient Greek past visible, but in the late  
19th century when that was all excavated, the 
Ottoman, Byzantine, and Roman layers were often  
recklessly destroyed to get to that. We have so 
many sites where we know there is new knowledge  
to be had but they’re afraid of damaging a 
lot of it in the process of recovering it. 
On the flip side, time all on its own can ruin 
things further, and while a relic that’s already  
thousands of years old might not suffer much more 
waiting a century for better and safer technology,  
it is one more century for time and natural 
disasters like fires, earthquakes, and floods  
to strike. Or worse yet, wars - bombing in the 
first and second world war destroyed many museums,  
and many archaeological sites continue to be 
leveled and looted in conflicts today. We have  
many damaged books and scrolls in our possession, 
slowly decaying further because we know if we  
open them now, they’ll simply crumble to dust.
But even beyond that, it is very common for us  
to find artifacts because a farmer’s plow 
or construction crew’s excavator smacked  
into them and dragged them up out of the ground. 
That’s not generally very good for those objects,  
and as soon as someone moves it, the context 
might be scattered and destroyed. The artifacts  
also may not be recognized for what they are, and 
even if they are, they might be quietly destroyed  
or sold discreetly and anonymously, in a hope to 
circumvent any regulation that might shut down  
operations there until it’s been evaluated. It is 
also hard to know purpose if something gets moved,  
if something was buried with someone for 
ceremonial purposes or used in a kitchen,  
that’s important info, and lost 
if it’s scattered many paces away. 
And that’s a good place to begin our discussion, 
because any recovery process has to begin by first  
discovering an archeological site, only then can 
we work to dig it out and classify, organize,  
and interpret what we find inside. And this is 
where LIDAR and ground-penetrating radar can help. 
If you have a field or a construction site, 
the ability to detect things of archeological  
interest by GPR, or ground penetrating radar 
is huge. At the moment, we still need some  
reason to think it is worth the effort to bring 
GPR equipment into a site and check. While we  
do have some other techniques, like using soil 
electrochemistry to help survey for buildings,  
GPR has been a huge benefit over the traditional 
method using excavation and shovel tests to narrow  
down where the site actually is and finding 
objects tends to involve setting up a grid and  
picking just a few spots to dig and sift through, 
and it is very time-consuming and labor-intensive. 
GPR, which can be used to build maps of large 
areas without any excavation[a], including  
knocking over a house that might be on the 
buried site, can help you figure out the likely  
layout of an ancient village and start making good 
estimates where things of interest are, but again,  
at the moment it’s a bit prohibitive for finding 
new sites. That may well change as fundamentally,  
a GPR device is relatively cheap, 
in the tens of thousands of dollars,  
but likely to get much cheaper with time and 
scaled up production and use. Indeed the usual  
frequency range is 10 Megahertz to 2.6 Gigahertz, 
and 2.4 GHz is what most internet Wifi is done at. 
Given the various other data you can lift with the 
right software, like where rocks are at and how  
land might settle if plowed or built on, I really 
would not be surprised if it became routine to do  
GPR scan of all construction sites, and maybe 
even farm fields, or the entirety of all land,  
including the now submerged spots near 
rivers or coasts. In a case like that,  
and with the help of either AI or volunteers 
or both, we might be able to inspect every bit  
of Earth’s surface in the coming decades and find 
virtually every relic humanity left in the ground.  
At the very least, cheaper and easier scanning 
makes it much more palatable to those working on a  
piece of land to let it get scanned and only have 
those critical bits with buried material get roped  
off. You can remove things faster too if you know 
where everything is buried at, and I could imagine  
robotic excavation making that even easier.
Not that we’re always looking for human relics  
either. Sometimes archaeologists are not looking 
for items or ancient buildings. They’re trying to  
investigate how the landscape itself was. Rivers 
and lakes seem like permanent features to us,  
but they can change course or disappear 
over the centuries. The kind of trees  
and grass that grew in an area can help us a 
lot too, when trying to understand a place. 
The technique to investigate this aspect is called 
"auger survey". It requires collecting a deep soil  
sample and analyzing it. The kind of soil or 
fossilized seeds contained in the sample can  
give us incredible data about our ancient past.
To collect these precious samples, a long but  
small-diameter bore tube is used, akin to how 
we can survey other worlds, like Mars or Europa,  
or gather ice cores. Right now, auger surveys 
are done by hand or by small petrol engines.  
It's a tiresome and time-consuming activity. 
But we can easily imagine a Mars-like rover  
helping our future archaeologists.
If robotics and automation technology  
continues to keep getting cheaper and 
better however, this method could become  
much more common to do, like with LIDAR as well.
LIDAR, short for light detection and ranging,  
rather than anything laser or radar, lacks the 
ability to penetrate into the ground like GPR has,  
but in many ways is even better for finding small 
objects in the ground, if they’re on the surface,  
or poking out. A plane flying overhead with LIDAR, 
releasing thousands of pulses of light per second  
from overhead, can quickly spot relatively tiny 
things like a tombstone fragment. Its impact on  
Archeology to date is already huge, helping 
us find over 500 new Mesoamerican archaeology  
sites of both Olmec and Mayan origin, 
some dating back to as far as 1400 B.C. 
When it comes to detecting objects and revealing 
telltale signs of an artificial origin, like  
right angles and straight lines, the frequency, or 
wavelength of the electromagnetic radiation you’re  
using controls your resolution. Loosely speaking, 
your resolution is about the same as your  
wavelength, and a radio pulse with a wavelength 
of meters isn’t letting you image details smaller  
than that. You could see a statue was there, 
but only as a blob, whereas something in the  
millimeter or micrometer range lets you see that 
statue's fingernails and buttons. Or the writing  
engraved into a piece of stone. And LIDAR can go 
through leaves too, up to 4 bounces, and by having  
a plane or drone fly overhead releasing thousands 
of pulses a second, each from a slightly different  
spot, that lets you roll over a forest and 
find things on the ground, or poking out of it. 
You can do this to a jungle too, as we used LIDAR 
to find a 1200 year old city lost in the Cambodian  
jungle. It also helped find other related sites 
near Stonehenge, 60 giant pillars forming a  
mile wide super-henge around it. It’s been very 
useful for other sites in England and New England  
for that matter, and even in the Everglades 
of Florida. It can be used under water too,  
depending on clarity it can penetrate anywhere 
from a few feet to over a hundred. It’s very handy  
for finding underwater obstructions near shores 
or in rivers for boats to safely travel. And  
one dangled by a cord underwater near the seafloor 
rather than from a plane overhead could do better. 
Archaeology rarely gets the funding that one might 
wish. The sheer value of LIDAR for other uses,  
much like GPR, means it can benefit from 
improvements made for other purposes and  
even scans done for other reasons, which 
include everything from terrain mapping to  
law enforcement applications. Automated 
Drones are the big future of LIDAR,  
but they have handheld ground units these 
days too and it is another thing that I  
would not be surprised to see have a future 
incarnation as a feature of your smartphone,  
though that might be a bit optimistic. Scanning 
and digitization of archeology in general is  
huge though, and will only improve with ever 
more and better data. [b]Using photogrammetry  
and structured light scanning is allowing us to 
learn things about artifacts we never knew before. 
As I was putting this episode together and 
asking folks in and out of archeology what  
the big new techs helping the field out 
were, the one I heard over and over and  
most enthusiastically was LIDAR. It’s not just for 
finding objects in the middle of nowhere either,  
LIDAR can be used to help spot cracks and leaks in 
the basement, for instance, or where water might  
flood across a field that isn’t quite flat. That’s 
very handy for helping properly apply drainage to  
a worksite or farm field, as well as water and 
fertilizer, and even pollutants in the water. 
And we have other scanning methods that 
can penetrate rocks or higher layers,  
such as through magnetometry, or tiny robots 
that can snake their way into old ruins,  
through tiny cracks and fissures, or by 
drilling small holes. And this means we  
don’t need to necessarily dig something up. It’s 
a weird way to look at doing archeology, but in  
many ways our goal is to leave things buried if we 
can[c]. Often this is because we suspect we’ll be  
better at learning from the site without damaging 
it in the future, which has turned out to be true  
and likely will only continue to be more true 
with more time. It is hard to be patient where  
curiosity is concerned, especially since time also 
damages things. Non-destructive scanning offers  
us the chance to strike a good compromise, 
leaving things buried for future excavation  
while learning much of those secrets now.
So we don’t really want to excavate some old  
village, not if we can make a digital recording of 
its layout without ever needing a shovel, except  
maybe to grab some specific artifacts which might 
have art or writing we couldn’t otherwise see. 
Artificial Intelligence though might let us 
get around even that. As I mentioned near  
the beginning, it was a talk on using scanning 
techniques and AI to unwrap ancient and damaged  
scrolls virtually that got me wanting to do an 
episode on Archeology. In addition to classic  
X-rays, there are many frequencies of light, 
not to mention other non-photonic radiation  
methods like electron microscopes that can 
pass through things opaque to our vision. 
You can spot things of different density and 
makeup, like a layer of parchment where you  
could see the difference between ink soaked-in 
from writing a letter, and a spot left blank,  
and we could tell how deep that is and thus 
build a complete three dimensional image of  
all the paper or parchment pages or layers 
and where the ink was, or even where two  
different types of ink were used, colors 
or some other writing medium like pencil. 
Conceptually that’s easy enough to convert into a 
virtual book or scroll you can use without having  
to open it, except the virtual version is on 
your computer and doesn’t require much software.  
But what if part of that scroll had gotten wet, or 
was under a leak that was dripping muddy sediment  
on it. Or if a chamber of papers in some basement 
depository got flooded and was left to dry, and  
after opening a few and seeing them rip or they 
just got left alone to get mildewed. Or a shelf  
collapsed and crushed or mashed some damp ones.
I probably don’t need to sell anyone on the value  
of archeology and history who is already several 
minutes into an episode titled “The Future of  
Archeology”, but if you need extra reason why 
document recovery is valuable to a society,  
then keep in mind that forensics often need to 
restore paperwork that’s been damaged by fire,  
water, shredding, time, or all of the above. 
So a lot of these techniques will be valuable  
to more than just understanding our ancient 
past but solving modern crimes too. Truly,  
the job of detective and archeologist often 
overlap and that certainly applies to the tools,  
whether its destroyed incriminating documents or 
ancient scrolls, and you can use the modern ones  
for real evidence of how these processes work.
As an example, by taking newly made scrolls  
with known writing and patterns on them, 
and subjecting them to similar damage,  
we can teach an AI to take a scan and unwrap 
and repair that scan to show us the original.  
This is easier said than done of course. And this 
brings us to the Digital Restoration Initiative,  
because there are vast numbers of damaged 
ancient scrolls that we have recovered  
over the years that have been wisely left 
untouched as they couldn’t be safely unrolled. 
Virtual unwrapping and Digital Restoration got 
their start back about the turn of the century  
with the repair of some of the burn damage to 
the Beowulf Manuscript that occurred back in  
the 18 century, and we see it progress in the 
last couple decades with unwarping of old pages  
and virtual unwrapping of scrolls. Trying to 
repair the scrolls found at Herculaneum after  
the place was buried by Volcanic Ash almost 
20 centuries ago takes far more skill though.  
If you’ve seen those recovered scrolls or the 
En-Gedi Scroll believed to be from the 3rd or  
4th Century BC, it's not hard to understand why.
They don’t look like some decaying and brittle  
scroll like we see from dusty ruins or libraries 
in movies, they look like a burned stick and I,  
for one, would not even have thought they were 
manmade just from the sight of them. There’s  
nothing to carefully unroll here and carefully 
decipher, they’re ruined. But we can 3D scan  
them in incredible detail and let an AI go to 
work. I’ll link the Digital Restoration website  
for folks who want the deep dive on either 
the scanning process or the AI’s function,  
but for complexity, I’d say it's like 
trying to put together a jigsaw puzzle,  
except you don’t know what the puzzle is of, 
and someone threw the box and pieces into  
a trash compactor or fireplace, then dumped 
the remains in a pit and filled it with mud. 
Now there are limits on what you can do with 
things like this, and as we discussed in the  
case of Roko’s Basilisk - the idea of an AI being 
able to resurrect the dead by scanning their  
brains - you need something that is essentially 
intact as data, such as being buried in ash or  
fossilized. Corrupted data can be repaired and 
guessed, something truly scrambled would not be.  
So while we can learn a lot from a damaged 
scroll or body that was preserved this way,  
you can’t unburn the Library of Alexandria or 
un-cremate someone whose ashes were scattered  
to the wind. But you never know when you’ll 
find an old chamber, sealed canopic jar,  
or crypt that’s in horrible condition but actually 
has kernels of preserved data for us to use and AI  
will be invaluable in that role going forward, 
probably also in terms of helping us find good  
places to search or recognize apparent garbage 
that actually is a priceless relic of the past. 
While we usually associate archeology with digging 
up old sites and trying to make sense of broken  
bits of pottery and art, we may see a future 
by exploring humans themselves. As an example,  
using AI, it might be possible to feed in various 
modern and ancient language examples and guess  
or extrapolate our way back to various earlier 
languages [d]or ones from periods in between two  
better-documented ages, or neighboring locations.
We may even be able to use improved models of  
human psychology and sociology to help us 
determine more about day to day life in  
some ancient culture, where we know some action 
was being done but not the intent or purpose,  
[e]and often have to guess rather wildly. You 
might find the idol of some old god surrounded  
by bodies of dead children and not know if they 
were sacrificed to some blood-hungry dark god or  
brought there when sick for hope of healing 
and laid to rest there for protection in the  
afterlife. Indeed over the centuries the idol 
might have served both roles as the culture  
shifted, and the signs of that change could be 
very hard to spot but present among those ruins. 
Our ancestors were complex folks, and changed 
much with time and place. Primitive does not  
mean dumb or simple. They were not us, but 
at least for many thousands of years back,  
their brains were basically the same, 
and fundamentally there is a common  
shared origin and much exchange of ideas and 
that’s through language, written or spoken,  
as well as art and technology.
But we can also exchange data  
through our DNA and as we build up a more 
complete picture of humanity’s DNA pool,  
we should be able to not only better connect 
old DNA to now, in terms of cultural migrations,  
but help restore damaged DNA samples to be more 
accurate. As an example, the half-life of DNA  
is sometimes given as 521 years, which is an 
approximate figure, unlike radioisotopes. We  
have DNA found in ice cores that are half 
a million years old, not half a millennia. 
Generally, the period called a half-life is the 
time in which DNA we might gather from bones would  
have had half the bonds in a piece of DNA break. 
So, if we imagine a book that had half its letters  
get randomly smeared or erased, we can imagine 
using AI and a dictionary and a knowledge of word  
frequency and combinations to reconstruct that 
book. But your body contains trillions of cells  
with DNA in them, with very little variation 
in those from each other. So not only could  
we potentially reconstruct a damaged book, but 
with a billion identical copies of that book,  
each damaged but randomly so, we should be 
able to produce a very accurate replica,  
of that original manuscript, and the same should 
be true with some organism who contains trillions  
of mostly decayed samples of the same DNA.
As DNA extraction and reading gets easier,  
we might be able to take some bones which 
are 5000 years old, where 10 half lives  
of DNA passed, and where only 1 in 2^10 or 
1024 bonds remain intact in a strand of DNA,  
and by looking at millions of them, reconstruct 
a perfect copy. That most of that DNA will  
not have changed between person to person and 
century to century just makes it a bit easier. 
Needless to say that opens the door not just 
to tracking human migrations of the past  
but also to recreating extinct animals, and we 
discussed that more in our episode De-Extinction,  
and a greater knowledge of genetics can 
also let you make educated guesses to  
fill in blanks based on what you know the 
needed functions are, same as a mechanic  
might look at a smeared blueprint of a car and 
just know that it is a car and it needs a fuse  
box and a carburetor and that if they’re missing, 
that’s probably what the two smeared spots were. 
On that note, and to close out on a more far 
future note: If it is possible to use AI to  
unwrap damaged scrolls and inspect the DNA 
in old bones to reconstruct undamaged DNA,  
maybe it might be possible to reconstruct 
a well-preserved brain. We contemplate this  
technology for brains frozen in cryo for future 
resurrection, and if luck found us a well-frozen  
body or one very untouched, we might be able to 
bring them back by copying their brain digitally  
and doing some repairs and educated guesses.
Sadly, the most obvious candidate, ancient  
Egypt and their habitat of mummifying people 
and putting their organs in sealed canopic  
jars won’t work here, for whatever reason, they 
did not value brains and just discarded them,  
though probably by liquifying the brain by 
whisking it rather than pulling chunks out  
through the nose as often gets said. Perhaps some 
other culture we might find might have kept them,  
rather than tossing them out, who knows what 
unknown kingdoms and cultures remain still buried  
under the sands of time? And if so, perhaps 
we might one day be able to resurrect a few  
first-hand witnesses of ancient times, who spoke 
ancient tongues and performed ancient rituals  
and lived daily lives we can only glimpse a 
shadow of right now. Nor can we ignore the  
possibility of using it on future worlds if we 
discovered relics of ancient alien civilization  
or abandoned human colonies or derelict 
spaceships or habitats we had to investigate. 
Either way, while our ancestors of the past 
may not have valued brains and discarded them,  
we have no desire to discard our own 
knowledge of the past, and as we saw today,  
our toolbox for peering into that past grows 
ever bigger the further we walk into our future.
Today we were talking a lot about 
how to decipher ancient texts and  
ruins that are terribly damaged by time, but 
while we might want to decode old documents,  
we typically would rather nobody was 
decoding our private correspondence,  
let alone some internet hacker or other entity 
covertly monitoring your web activity. This is  
where a Virtual Private Network, like NordVPN, 
can help protect us. NordVPN is the fastest VPN,  
and with 1-click you can protect yourself by 
routing your internet traffic through one of  
NordVPN’s thousands of servers spread all over 
the world. That also lets you avoid viewing  
limitations based on country so you don’t 
miss your favorite content, like this show,  
which is apparently unavailable some place, 
or that British scifi show you can't watch  
unless you’re in the UK. This also means while 
we’re traveling, we can still do all our online  
shopping and viewing from home, virtually.
NordVPN is more than just a VPN though,  
their Threat Protection shields me from malware, 
trackers, and ads while their Dark Web Monitor  
notifies me if someone leaks my credentials and 
their Meshnet allows me to connect to my devices  
remotely and securely. My data is always 
protected by next-generation encryption,  
and NordVPN doesn’t track or share what I do 
online. And now with their new Proxy Browser  
Extensions, NordPVN has made it even easier to 
protect your privacy, let you bypass censorship,  
and keep you safe while you browse, use 
browser-based tools, or play browser games,  
and even customize it to decide which website 
sees your real IP address or your VPN’s IP. 
To try NordVPN out, risk free with a 30 day money 
back guarantee, go to NordVPN.com/isaacarthur,  
and enjoy NordVPN on up to six 
devices, on any major platform,  
with 24/7 customer support to help you whenever 
you need it. That’s NordVPN.com/isaacarthur. 
So today we were looking at decoding and hacking 
our past, and next week we’ll look at the concept  
of simulated universes, and how we might hack or 
escape them if we’re inside one. And next Sunday,  
March 26th, we’ll have our Monthly Livestream 
Q&A, before closing out the month of March  
on March 30th with our 2-hour special, 
The Advanced Spaceship Drive Compendium,  
where we will take a look at nearly a hundred 
different star drives, from existing tech to the  
entirely hypothetical. Then we’ll head into April 
to look at the concept of galactic Habitable Zones  
and their implications to the Fermi Paradox.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting our website, 
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s  
episodes early and ad free on our streaming 
service, Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
