This episode is brought to you by Wealthfront. 
The planet Mars is named after the God of 
War. How fitting would it be if humanity's  
most potent weapons of war were used to 
turn Mars into a fertile green paradise?
I tend to be rather openly pro-nuclear and 
unlike a lot of folks who are I don’t tend  
to feel a need to add on a disclaimer about 
the danger of nuclear weapons themselves,  
for the same reason I don’t say I 
like hydrocarbons or solar power  
except for concerns about flamethrowers or 
folks roasting ants with magnifying glasses.  
Now on the one hand nukes are a tool like 
any other, something I tend to emphasize,  
and on the other they are a tool that unlike a 
hammer, crush cities not thumbs when misused. 
So I don’t like to be too blasé about the 
value of nuclear weapons, as that does  
include enormous destructive potential, but I 
think folks lock on to that so much that they  
ignore the other uses a rapid release of 
massive amounts of compact energy can have.  
One of those is as a spaceship drive, and as we 
looked at a few weeks back, the Orion Project for  
using nukes to accelerate spaceships remains our 
only currently viable interstellar spaceship drive  
with known technology. Nukes may endanger worlds 
but they also offer the key to reaching new ones. 
Another of those uses for nukes, as we 
will see today, is terraforming planets.  
And while nuking Mars to make it livable 
certainly has some problems which we’ll discuss,  
a lot of the objections I hear are typically 
grounded in the notion of “Nukes bad”. 
This even comes from a lot of physicists and 
mathematicians, and an example that came to  
mind recently was someone beating up on Elon 
Musk for suggesting the Nuke Mars approach  
on the grounds that it involves using – by one 
calculation – a couple hundreds thousands bombs,  
which was objected to both on the grounds that 
that’s more bombs than existed at the height  
of the Cold War and because it would leave 
Mars an uninhabitable nuclear wasteland. 
Musk’s approach, which is one that predates him 
by decades, is to melt the ice caps on Mars at  
the poles by detonating nukes directly over them 
to superheat them, and basically create a big  
cloud of water, but more importantly it unlocks 
all the carbon dioxide gas in those poles too.  
Now there’s multiple methods for nuking Mars 
to life and we’ll cover them, but in my opinion  
this was just a reckless comment attributable to 
either a dislike for Musk or Nukes or both. It  
also seems to have set off tons of incestuous 
articles online quoting each other about how  
it doesn’t work, but the math and research 
of the objections seems lazy in most cases. 
For one thing, it wouldn’t be accurate to say that 
nukes are cheap but most of their cost when you  
see price tags on them tends to be the delivery 
system, missiles and bombers are expensive.  
Uranium, even enriched uranium, is pretty 
cheap, and even plutonium is pretty cheap  
when scaled-up for mass production. 
They also scale up in blast size,  
the calculation I just mentioned was done with 
megaton H-Bombs in mind, but bigger ones do not  
scale up in cost as quickly as they do in blast 
energy. So too, they don’t scale up in Fallout. 
When a nuke goes off there’s radioactive 
elements like Uranium and Plutonium that  
didn’t get fissioned, radioactive fission 
products, and new radioisotopes generated  
by the vast energies released. Hydrogen Bombs, 
the big powerful nukes measured in the megatons,  
are generating almost all their energy by 
the fission of hydrogen isotopes ignited by  
a smaller fission blast, so a 100 Megaton H-bomb, 
or fusion bomb, is not generating a thousand times  
more un-fissioned uranium and plutonium 
fallout as a 100 kiloton fission bomb is. 
Now the second part of fallout is those 
radioisotopes made by collision of gamma rays  
from the blast with other material, mostly the 
air and ground, and dispersal in those fallout  
models – which are usually considered 
education guesses anyway – is a lot more  
dubious on Mars with its thin air and low gravity.
Regardless, one key thing about Fallout that tends  
to get missed in most fiction on the topic is 
that when we refer to long term effects, we mean  
cancer and radiation poisoning getting people 
years later. We don’t really mean a radioactive  
landscape decades after the bomb. Very radioactive 
things tend to be very short lived things,  
they’re very radioactive because they are rapidly 
decaying, and that’s part of why you can emerge  
from your fallout shelter some months or years 
later without dying. The other part is that there  
are radioisotopes all over the place on Earth, 
including Uranium, but they are spread all over  
and vertically too. Dirt and rocks stop radiation 
very well, but fallout from a recent blast  
is leaving all those radioactive materials 
right on the top layer to be absorbed by you,  
rather than a layer of rock or dirt on top, 
between you and the radioactive materials. 
Now as we have discussed in our other 
looks at Mars, the regolith it has  
instead of soil is already toxic so if you 
want to live on it and grow stuff in it  
you need to engage in some serious processing, 
and initially you are still living domes and ones  
with floors not just walls or ceilings, where 
you are going to be processing local regolith  
to get the toxins out of it – and radioisotopes 
if you like – and probably tumbling the stuff  
in big algae and bacteria vats to get it turned 
into soil you dump on the floor of that dome. 
Key thing there, this nuke the poles approach 
isn’t about Mars magically turning green overnight  
or on its own once nuked, and all the 
radioactive fallout – which is pretty  
minimal in this context anyway, is long 
since decayed, scattered, and buried. 
Now, a nuke being detonated in a nearly airless 
height above a bunch of ice isn’t generating  
any long-lived radioisotopes of that water 
vapor and carbon dioxide that I’m aware of,  
but even over frozen rock or if buried 
and blasted so as to maximize debris  
we’re still talking about an environment folks 
in domes and wearing suits when outside them  
could instantly and safely go colonize, that 
very same year, and which is going to be very  
minimal within a century and a century is a lot 
shorter than most other terraforming methods. 
As to cost, I’m not sure why but in discussion 
of nuclear terraforming it seems popular to  
point out that the US has spent something like 
5 or 6 trillions dollars, depending on inflation  
calculations – building and maintaining its 
nuclear arsenal. In reality that figure is  
less than a tenth of that, when it comes to just 
building, maintaining, and testing those bombs.  
This is sort of like calculating the cost 
of high-explosives like TNT by adding in the  
building and maintenance cost of tanks and 
cruise missiles which is rather off-target,  
pardon the pun, when trying to get a cost 
estimate on some dynamite for road construction  
through a mountain pass. It’s hard to take 
articles on the topic seriously when they  
use that figure since it either means the writer 
is lazy, doesn’t know why this figure is bad, or  
is intentionally using a flawed example. None of 
those options inclines one to feel any confidence  
in the article or author on other matters.
Nukes, again, are not cheap, but it's mostly not  
about dollars per megaton of explosive yield. The 
B83 gravity bomb for instance has a price tag of  
about 5 million bucks, and an arsenal of a million 
of those is only running you 5 trillion dollars,  
though that probably needs a couple 
of decades of inflation adjustment.  
We never had a million nukes, not even close, and 
as another example of cost not matching yield,  
a lot of other bombs – even other simple 
gravity bombs – cost more but with lower yields,  
because a lot of the time getting a 100 kiloton 
bomb on target and inside a hardened bunker  
gets the mission accomplished when dropping 
a 10-megaton nuke nearby wouldn’t get them,  
and it was never the objective of either side in 
the Cold War to be able to blow the planet up. 
So yes nukes are expensive and dangerous 
but no, the cost of building even a million  
multi-megaton nukes is pretty trivial compared 
to getting a whole extra planet to call home,  
especially when you’re building 
simple and big bombs and lots of them.  
As too dangerous, in terms 
of making Mars uninhabitable,  
that’s just absurd. Living worlds with complex 
ecologies and weather tied to each other in  
feedback loops may be vulnerable to nuclear 
fallout, a dead planet with no ecology is not. 
All that said, this isn’t really the best approach 
to either melting those caps or using nukes for  
Terraforming Mars. Nukes are a cheap and rapid 
power supply and something like melting an ice  
cap is a great example of when they represent 
a good approach, but critically, we estimate  
that even getting all that water and CO2 into 
the air and keeping it there wouldn’t raise the  
temperature enough to really be habitable by 
itself, best guess is about 10 Celsius higher. 
Alternatively, something like a big solar mirror 
array focusing light down on those polar icecaps  
can be retasked to just add more sunlight and heat 
to Mars afterwards and on a continuing basis. Now  
just because you build giant mirrors and lenses 
for warming Mars doesn’t mean you can’t still  
nuke those poles, but for a context, if we assumed 
we could deploy a nuke on Mars of 1 megaton for a  
mere millions dollars, then that means we got 4.2 
billion joules per dollar. Also worth noting that  
you do have to get a nuke there and at the moment 
that would mean a billion dollar rocket, but let’s  
handwave that for now. A couple square meters 
of shiny aluminum foil and wire frame to make it  
into a nice solar mirror is presumably costing 
us less than a dollar, again ignoring the cost  
of getting it there, and is producing roughly a 
kilowatt of sunlight pointed down to Mars. So 4.2  
million seconds later, it's caught up to that one 
dollar of nuclear bomb, and 4.2 million seconds is  
just seven weeks. If you built 10 of those, and 
they stayed in orbit for 700 weeks or 13 years,  
they’d have dumped as much energy down on Mars 
as that one nuke did and for a whopping 10 bucks. 
Now that’s an oversimplification, this particular 
approach is about blasting the ice cap quickly  
with enough energy to melt it, and Antarctica 
is still a sheet of ice after millions of years  
of receiving something like a megaton bomb’s worth 
of energy from the sun every second. And again,  
that’s basically the notion here, to detonate 
bombs over the Martian Poles at such a rate of  
energy release that it’s acting as a second sun. 
To pull that off with a reflective sun mirror  
would require one with several trillion square 
meters of surface area, or something like a square  
solar sail a thousand miles or more on each side, 
and for each pole, but they are going to keep  
producing heat long after those poles melt. They 
also don’t have any problems with transport, like  
crashes while leaving Earth or getting hijacked.
They are way easier to manufacture locally too,  
such as from all the metals in either of Mars' 
two miniscule Moons, Phobos and Deimos. Those  
two moons are tiny compared to our Moon but 
still contain vastly more metals than such  
mirrors would require, and we can also move 
materials off Mars far easier than Earth.  
See our discussion in Springtime on Mars 
and Colonizing Mars for more details, but  
note that this math is going to vary not just by 
our current technology and space infrastructure,  
but also by the planet you’re seeking to 
terraform. As an example, an Orion Drive ship  
arriving in another solar system might find worlds 
where such nuclear approaches are better suited,  
and be fairly expert and comfortable with 
building and maintaining nuclear devices. 
Though as we noted in our episode on that earlier 
this month, they are likely to use hybrid drives  
employing both nukes and concentrated light 
or lasers, so they might be expert at making  
mirrors too. Also everything always depends on 
the economics and politics of the situation. On  
the one hand, folks with self-replicating 
machinery that can turn out massive cheap  
solar panels from local asteroids or moons 
are likely to go that path. On the other hand,  
folks with better machines able to self-replicate 
and make nukes might find that much faster.  
And on a third hand, since there might be many 
limbed aliens or cyborgs doing this, they might  
be fleeing a world that nuked itself into oblivion 
and wouldn’t use nukes for terraforming even if it  
meant taking centuries longer and enduring greater 
hardship and efforts. And I think that shouldn’t  
be ignored given a lot of the responses that 
tend to pop up whenever someone suggests using  
nukes for this purposes, ‘nukes bad’ tends to 
be the core reason, even when supported by data,  
even good data in some cases, again, I don’t 
particularly advocate nuking the Martian poles  
but strictly on the grounds that it seems 
like it wouldn’t be an optimal use of effort. 
I also want to note that as crazy as it 
sounds to us, setting off billions of dollars  
worth of nukes everyday is still trivial 
compared to our current planetary economy,  
and we’re talking about building a whole new 
planet here. And that’s our current planetary  
economy, any real effort at terraforming or even 
colonizing Mars is likely to be at least a century  
out from now, for anything beyond a few small 
bases anyway, and is likely to be in the context  
of a planetary economy that’s as muscular in 
terms of industry to our current one as our  
modern infrastructure is to the 19th Century.
This is not the only way to use nukes to  
terraform either though, as I mentioned. 
Some aren’t needed for Mars, but work well  
on planets that already have a lot of air, 
or superhot and deadly atmospheres anyway,  
like Venus, where you might want to nuke 
it to rapidly blow the atmosphere off. 
Comets are another great way to add greenhouse 
gases and normal air and water to Mars too,  
particularly ammonia as a source of much needed 
nitrogen. Comet impacts are hugely more powerful  
than nuclear bombs – something detractors 
of the nuke approach sometimes note – but  
one has to remember that comets aren’t exactly 
sitting around with buttons on them waiting for  
you to trigger them so they can fly off and hit 
Mars. If you want one to, you need to find some  
that are on pre-existing paths that won’t 
need much Delta-V to shove them into Mars,  
then you need to give them that delta-v, and 
amusingly a nuke is a magnificent way to do that,  
by ablating a ton of material off the comet to 
act as a rocket plume and change its trajectory. 
Three notes on this though. First, while it is an 
excellent way to add energy and heat to a planet  
while adding material it might need too, like 
nitrogen, you still have to find enough comets  
with low enough delta-v, and honestly it’s not 
good odds you’re going to find many with under  
a kilometer per second of change needed. For 
context, a big comet of about cubic kilometer  
of volume masses about trillion kilograms, and 
at best you need a million joules for each of  
those kilograms in terms of blast or rocket 
to get that kilometer per second of delta-v,  
so we are already talking a couple 
megatons of nuke or hundreds of  
millions of liters of rocket fuel to tweak 
that comet onto an intercept trajectory. 
Second, that’s going to take 
a long time to get there,  
potentially centuries. There are only a relative 
handful of icy comets that aren’t out past Pluto  
or even further where things will need centuries 
of travel even if you lucked out on a pathway that  
was just part of a single orbit rather than a 
long corkscrew of many orbits to get to Mars. 
This, the polar trick works because you’re 
melting ice, and here we are talking about  
dumping ice on Mars instead. Now amusingly that’s 
actually fine, things hitting planets are usually  
doing it with more than that planet’s escape 
velocity since they accelerate as they fall  
toward the planet in addition to any other 
speed they had. Martian escape velocity is 5  
kilometers per second, so any object falling 
to Mars is moving at least that fast, and a 5  
kilometer per second object massing a kilogram has 
12.5 megajoules of kinetic energy, meaning every  
trillion kilograms of ice or rock slamming that 
planet is hitting like 3000 megatons of nukes. 
Also, as we said, that it was ice didn’t really 
matter, as that was at least 12.5 megajoules of  
energy per kilogram, and this is several times the 
energy needed to not only melt a kilogram of ice  
but to further warm and boil it. We went over 
the scale of this more in Springtime on Mars and  
some of our other Mars episodes but basically you 
really need to hunt to find enough comets to have  
any real impact on Mars in terms of making oceans 
or even atmosphere, like stealing all the ice from  
the Rings of Saturn many times over again. That’s 
okay though because they hit Mars so fast that the  
water will be boiling from the kinetic energy 
even if you do it slowly enough to add your  
ocean over a century, where a few centimeters of 
rain every day is needed just to get to a modest  
kilometer of ocean depth in that time.
Now air is thankfully a lot lighter,  
so you only need around a thousandth 
as much material for an atmosphere,  
and Mars needs nitrogen but it's got plenty of 
Carbon dioxide and water in those ice caps for  
atmospheric purposes and another use of nukes 
is to bake oxygen right out of the rock itself.  
People tend to think of rocks as being full of 
metal and oxygen being something in the sky but  
in truth oxygen is the largest component of most 
rocks and vaporizing a couple kilograms of Martian  
regolith is going to get you about a kilogram of 
breathable oxygen. Nukes are fantastic at such  
vaporization and while rock takes more energy 
to melt than ice, it’s still in that general  
zone where you might expect megatons of nuke to 
yield you a lot of oxygen, and water vapor too,  
though also lots of other things you might not 
want to breath initially. Not all bad mind you,  
you could get some good greenhouse gases out that 
way too. Though similar to a volcanic eruption  
you also have the option for cooling a planet, 
again outside of Mars we won’t always want the  
same approach and we’ll discuss using nukes for 
handling a Snowball Earth scenario in a moment. 
On some planets you might be 
able to set of volcanoes too,  
especially with a superior knowledge of tectonics 
that we might acquire in centuries to come, and  
much like nudging a comet, such an application of 
a nuke might take that already energy-dense item  
and use it to get orders of magnitude more 
energy by setting off a volcano or sending  
a comet or asteroid on a collision course.
But orders of magnitude are important to remember  
for another case we often hear about, which is 
to give Mars a magnetic field by nuking its core.  
Now this is an example where nukes really should 
not be seriously considered, where you drill down  
to the Martian Core to drop nukes in there 
and get it molten and spinning to generate  
a magnetic field. The reality is that the mass of 
a planetary core makes its polar ice caps or even  
its entire first kilometer deep of the surface 
look miniscule in mass and energy needs. And  
in this case, as we have discussed before, rather 
than using enough nuclear blasts to half detonate  
the planet – and utterly wreck the surface – 
you can just put a fairly modest electromagnet  
at that planet’s L1 point with its sun.
We’re talking on the large side for a modern  
nuclear reactor, or a major hydroelectric 
dam, and obviously in a place where solar  
power is abundant and reliable. Orbital magnetic 
satellites powered by solar also work with this,  
and simply make way more sense than throwing 
trillions of nukes down a bottomless hole to  
melt half the planet and try to spin it. I think 
folks assume that just because this is how Earth  
gets its magnetic field this is how we need to do 
it, but to be honest a big molten ball of metal  
spinning around is a terribly inefficient and 
impractical way to generate a magnetic field,  
inferior to methods we have had longer than we’ve 
had light bulbs. On the whole, there’s a definite  
case for using nukes to terraform Mars in various 
capacities, but I don’t think this is one of them. 
Now speaking of half-melting a planet, to close 
out for the day, while there’s probably more  
cons than pros to a nuclear bombardment 
of Mars specifically to terraform it,  
depending on how various technologies roll out 
in the near future, some planets are better  
advantaged for nuclear terraforming. I pointed 
out how you might use it to blow atmosphere’s  
off planets as an alternative to the slower sun 
shading method we looked at for Venus in Winter  
on Venus. And I mentioned importing icy objects 
with nukes from places like Saturn’s rings,  
and such rings are not unique to gas giants and 
you might use nukes for rapid clearance of orbital  
debris around a candidate planet, blowing all 
the material down to the world or away from it. 
The last one I’ll mention though are worlds that 
might be iced over. We believe there’s a high  
probability that Earth has been totally covered 
in ice, possibly several times, and this is called  
the Snowball Earth theory and it would seem likely 
that many worlds we encounter would be in such a  
state and could be removed from it rapidly by 
nuclear bombardment and blowing greenhouse gases  
into the air while thawing out the ice, whose 
reflective surface was keeping the planet cold.  
This is probably a very viable method for 
shocking a world out of an ice age too. 
A final thought then, we see the potential role 
for nukes in terraforming but in most cases see  
better paths as well, and yet in all cases we 
say better mostly in the context of economics  
or assumptions of better technology. We tend to 
assume we will have fusion working for instance,  
in some form other than fusion bombs, and 
scifi tends to always show us getting fusion  
long before we get self-replicating machines, but 
either could be as little as a generation away. 
If the overused quip proves true about fusion 
energy being 20 years in the future, and always  
will be, then self-replicating technology might 
be fairly sophisticated a century from now while  
fusion is still limited to the lab. Such being 
the case a small rocket of self-replicators landed  
on a random asteroid might be able to rapidly 
transmute it into a giant nuclear powered machine  
gun firing megaton warheads by the thousands, 
in which case suddenly this becomes a means of  
spaceship propulsion, comet propulsion, and planet 
terraforming that is much, much more attractive. 
And needless to say if folks can dump a vial of 
nanobots on a rock and turn it into a nuclear  
machinegun, it definitely behooves humanity 
to have a few additional planets to call home,  
even if we’re forging these new 
worlds with radioactive hellfire. 
So today’s topic is fundamentally about 
terraforming planets so people can live there  
centuries from now and that’s the sort of long 
term investment that can be daunting, but like  
a lot of investment, the sacrifices in the short 
term can pay off huge in the long term. That can  
be even more daunting for folks with their own 
personal finances too, the risks and decisions  
are both entirely theirs, but the principal 
remains the same. Ultimately, it’s like so many  
sacrifices of time and energy almost all of us has 
done before. The problem with investing though,  
whether it was the stock market or real estate or 
even cryptocurrency, was that it was always seen  
as needing a big amount of money and knowledge to 
get started. It’s a scary thing to try to start,  
I remember knowing investing was important in my 
early 20s, I was still in my 30s before I was able  
to get the funds, knowledge, and courage to do it.
Technology has been making all that easier though  
as we see more and more assets moving to 
make investment easier and friendlier,  
and our newest sponsor, Wealthfront 
is leading the way on that shift. 
With Wealthfront, you don’t need tens of thousands 
of dollars and hundreds of hours of education  
to get started. You can start small with 
just $500 and learn as you go, letting them  
advise you and taking the wheel when and as you 
want. Most folks know they should be investing,  
they don’t need to be told it's a good idea, 
they just need a quick, easy, and safe way to  
get started. Their app is excellently laid out and 
intuitive, signup is fast, easy, and transparent. 
I think what I liked about them the most when I 
was going through their demo was how easy it is  
to get a very smart automated investment plan 
tailored to you in place, that you could also  
slowly take control of as and where you wanted. I 
don’t offer much investment advice but one that’s  
pretty eternal is knowledge is power, and you 
should be aiming to take knowledgeable control  
of your finances eventually, but its nice to start 
with a system that competently handles that for  
you until you feel comfortable taking the reins.
And they’ll make recommendations but you’re  
in charge, whether you’re aiming for retirement 
or socially responsible investments or buying  
into crypto, they’ll help make that a 
clear and easy process. Use the link  
in the episode description to get started with 
Wealthfront and begin building your future today!
So we were talking about planet terraforming 
today and I’ve been thinking we need to  
return to our Outward Bound series and cover 
some of the places we haven’t visited yet,  
and there are tons of them. So this weekend 
during our Livestream Q&A we will be asking  
for what places you would like us to visit next in 
the Outward Bound series and we’ll take the 5 most  
mentioned and interesting suggestions and put them 
in a poll over on Community Tab right after that  
Livestream, for you to vote on. That Livestream 
Q&A is going to be on Sunday, January 30th at 4  
pm Eastern time, and I hope you’ll join Sarah & 
I for that to get all your questions answered. 
After that we will jump into February for a look 
at the Future of Solar Power. Then we will take a  
couple episodes to contemplate Kessler Syndrome, 
the risk of a cascade of orbital debris around  
Earth, and the implications it might have on the 
Fermi Paradox as well as other scenarios, natural  
or artificial, which might imprison a civilization 
on their homeworld. One other case folks often  
mention for that are worlds where the gravity 
is too high to let them send rockets into space,  
Super Earths, and so the next week after that 
we will examine those and how life might evolve  
on them and how we might colonize them.
Now if you want alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to the 
Channel and hit the notifications bell, and if you  
enjoyed this episode, please hit the like button, 
share it with others, and leave a comment below.  
You can also join in the conversation 
on any of our social media forums,  
find our audio-only versions of the show, 
or donate to support future episodes,  
and all those options and more are listed 
in the links in the episode description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
