We think very highly of 
the human brain, after all,  
it's what lets us think about anything 
in the first place, but Nature is vast,  
and our primate brains are not the 
end-all and be-all of neural engineering.
There’s a lot of talk about artificial 
intelligence these days as it rises in  
prominence and moves from scifi into household 
usage, but it’s not the only type of AI out there,  
we have Animal Intelligence and 
maybe even Alien Intelligence. 
To truly understand our minds or those we 
might create or encounter out in space,  
we need to look beyond our basic notion 
of human IQ to consider not simply where  
animals might fall on an IQ chart, but the 
strange ways in which they can excel at some  
type of thinking compared to other animals of 
similar intelligence or even exceed humans. 
Nor is IQ, intelligence quotient, the only metric 
available, and when we’re talking about animals,  
we might be better off using EQ, and in this 
case we don't mean emotional intelligence,  
which is itself a good example of a specialized 
type of intelligence, but rather Encephalization  
Quotient. This type of EQ, is an alternative 
to just measuring brain mass overall or as a  
percentage of body mass. EQ is a measure used to 
compare the brain size of an animal to what would  
be expected given its body size, providing 
insights into the potential intelligence and  
complex behaviors of the species. Developed as 
an attempt to quantify the cognitive abilities  
of different animals relative to their size, 
the EQ is calculated by comparing the actual  
brain mass of an animal to the expected brain 
mass for an animal of that size, based on a  
standard scale derived from many species.
Humans have the highest EQ, indicating a  
brain size significantly larger than what 
would be expected for their body size,  
which is associated with high intelligence 
and complex problem-solving abilities.  
The concept of EQ is particularly useful in 
evolutionary biology and comparative neuroscience,  
as it allows for the analysis of brain evolution 
and the development of cognitive abilities across  
different species. We’ll see some interesting 
applications of this today, but even it doesn’t  
seem to let us paint a full picture of what 
nature has to show us, let alone the minds  
we might create or encounter in the galaxy.
I think this is an easier notion for folks to  
wrap our heads around these days as we see AI 
that excels at something that previously only  
rather smart humans could do. When I was 
a kid learning arithmetic, for instance,  
calculators were still relatively uncommon, and 
there was talk of how calculating was a waning  
skill because the machines would do it, we got 
this more when home PCs with spellcheck started  
becoming more common than typewriters when I 
was a young teen. And it was this realization  
that this hard mental task for us was actually 
very simple for a purpose built device. Modern  
supercomputers are finally matching humans for 
raw processing power, but those early devices  
definitely did not. It’s just that we were 
retraining our brain to do those tasks and  
essentially using a sledgehammer to put a pushpin 
into the wall, in terms of brain power used. 
Honestly even that sledgehammer description falls 
short, most of your brain is dedicated to motor  
control and very advanced data analysis, 
particularly of filtering out irrelevant  
information. This is why not remembering what you 
had for breakfast last month is not a bad thing  
or, in general, the way we tend to miss sleight of 
hand in magic acts. We have advanced filters for  
ignoring stuff that usually doesn’t matter because 
our eyes process huge amounts of data constantly. 
Here our brains still outperform AI, and those 
bits of our mind used for conscious thought are  
small in comparison, but still so massive that 
it’s like directing a tsunami at a region of the  
map in order to fill a cup of water, and about 
as precise, which is why that calculator, with  
less brain than even the simplest of animals, can 
do sums and figures faster than you and without  
error, and the same is true of early spellcheck, 
though that often did and does result in errors or  
missed corrections, as it’s not just a bigger math 
problem but a vastly more complex kind of problem. 
For sheer raw brainpower, humans are the top 
of the pyramid, and generally that goes on to  
primates than mammals and various birds, 
but you get some interesting exceptions,  
especially at specialized tasks.
Many animals excel in ways that  
challenge our understanding of intelligence 
and mental capabilities. These animals  
demonstrate exceptional skills in 
areas such as memory, problem-solving,  
communication, and emotional intelligence, often 
surpassing human abilities in specific tasks.
One of the most remarkable examples of animal 
intelligence is found in the realm of memory.  
Clark's nutcracker, a bird native to the Western 
United States, showcases an extraordinary memory  
by hiding tens of thousands of seeds over dozens 
of square miles each fall and remembering where  
it buried them months later. This feat of spatial 
memory and recall far exceeds the average human  
capability to remember locations and details. 
It would be nothing for a spreadsheet of course,  
requiring a storage space well below a single 
megabyte in size, but brains are not set up well  
as a spreadsheet. What’s more, while the bird 
recalled them with amazing accuracy for months,  
they began making more errors in a 
study after half a year, and that  
really picked up in a check made at 285 days.
Which makes sense in an evolutionary context,  
why would that information be of any value after 
a period where those seeds they stored from last  
year are now appearing again in plain sight 
on plants for them to come eat fresh and hide  
some more of. Brains are expensive for animals 
to keep and maintain, and storage space on our  
loose parallel of a harddrive is too. That feat 
of memory would impress even on the human scale,  
while being trivial in computing terms, 
and at the same time, while impressive  
in that regard, Clark’s nutcracker is not 
particularly noteworthy in other contexts. 
This is often the case for birds, and 
bird-brain is a bit of a misnomer since  
it implies stupidity but they are often 
shockingly intelligent in specialized ways,  
especially for the size of their brains, both in 
raw mass and proportional to their body weight. 
In the domain of problem-solving, crows and 
other corvids have proven themselves to be  
incredibly adept. Research has shown that crows 
can use tools, understand water displacement,  
and even craft tools from materials they've never 
encountered before. These tasks require not only a  
grasp of causal relationships but also the ability 
to plan several steps ahead, a level of cognitive  
function once thought to be exclusive to humans.
Indeed while we often point to other primates  
using basic tools as a sign of their intelligence, 
the New Caledonia Crow has been known to craft  
spears, hooks, and scoops for getting at grubs 
and other hard-to-reach goodies. Some scientists  
believe that their hooks are equivalent to fishing 
hooks, something we haven’t found human examples  
of older than 20,000 years, a decently long time 
after Neanderthals had disappeared. If that is  
true, that means that New Caledonia Crows 
are not merely equivalent to Homo Erectus  
or Neanderthals in tool usage, but rather that 
they are equivalent to us, Homo Sapien Sapiens.  
If that’s our standard for evolution to reach 
technology, then we have at least two current  
and long-unrelated branches of creatures reaching 
that point on Earth, using very different brains.
Dolphins, too, exhibit intelligence that 
in some aspects surpasses human abilities.  
They communicate using a complex 
system of squeaks and whistles,  
and there's evidence to suggest that 
they may even have names for each other,  
known as "signature whistles." Beyond 
communication, dolphins demonstrate  
self-awareness, as seen in mirror tests where 
they recognize themselves, indicating a level  
of consciousness and self-recognition 
that is rare in the animal kingdom.
Emotional intelligence is another area where 
animals can outperform humans. Elephants are  
a prime example, in addition to having 
larger brains than us, pound for pound,  
elephants can display profound empathy, mourning, 
and even conducting rituals for their dead. This  
is not exclusive to us and them, we’ve seen 
mourning and grief in dogs and gorillas. Even  
rats in some experiments will attempt to rescue 
a fellow rat trapped in the experiment before  
going after food provided in the experiment.
Such behaviors suggest a deep emotional complexity  
and understanding of death that parallels human 
emotions, challenging the notion that humans are  
uniquely capable of experiencing deep emotional 
connections and empathy. So we are not the only  
animals known to display deep upset at the 
loss of family and packmates, though humans  
and elephants both seem to exhibit profound 
and extended periods of mourning and loss. 
There’s no obvious parallel for that with 
a computer or AI, but let us not overlook  
the importance that might have on a 
civilization developing. After all,  
a large portion of our most ancient and enduring 
pieces of workmanship are death-related,  
the pyramids are best known for that but tombs 
and burial mounds dot every corner of this planet,  
and we’ve found burial sites for humanity 
at least as far back as 100,000 years ago. 
One wonders at the evolutionary advantage 
of protracted mourning. Grief would surely  
be a crippling thing in any animal that 
produced a litter of young every year,  
and we’ve usually assumed it was an unfortunate 
byproduct of the evolutionary advantages of  
emotional attachment… which would tend to imply 
it evolves away over time. Indeed some wonder if  
psychopathy might indicate an evolutionary attempt 
to evolve away from emotional attachments that  
might impair survival, something we’ll discuss 
more next month in our Fermi Paradox episode on  
evolutionary and technological Time bombs. But 
I would hesitate to assume grief and protracted  
mourning have no advantages and that it’s simply 
a bad side effect of another advantage or genetic  
scrap-code waiting to get evolved away.
Some have been suggested, like extreme and  
long-term grief at the loss of someone often in 
nature being the product of a bad choice, don’t  
do X as it can get you killed, and ruminate on 
things like X to think of ways to avoid it. Shared  
feelings of loss can lead to increased cohesion 
and cooperation among surviving members, which  
is beneficial for the survival of social species. 
Strong social bonds can enhance group stability,  
resource sharing, and collective defense.
However, even without those, I think in a  
high-tech and abstract thinking way, you can 
definitely point to how mourning and loss push  
human thought forward. I disagree with portrayals 
of ancient Egypt as being death-obsessed,  
but it clearly was a big theme for them and they 
certainly helped push a lot of engineering and  
technology forward. It encourages you to try 
to solve problems you’re not currently facing,  
if you’re remembering ones 
that hurt others in the past. 
Intelligence is not necessarily something you 
need to wait for on million-year evolutionary  
time scales either. Raccoons are notorious for 
their intelligence and many have adapted well to  
the human and urban landscape. Indeed those living 
in urban areas seem to be selecting for greater  
cleverness. These city-dwelling raccoons exhibit 
significantly higher intelligence levels compared  
to their counterparts in the wild, which can 
probably be largely attributed to the unintended  
consequences of human behavior. By securing 
their food in places inaccessible to less cunning  
creatures and resorting to pest control to remove 
raccoon nests, humans have inadvertently applied  
a form of selection pressure that favors smarter 
raccoons. And possibly friendlier or cuter ones. 
For the first half of this channel’s history 
I lived at my cottage in Geneva on the Lake,  
a little resort town here in northeast Ohio, 
and used to go out on my porch to smoke,  
before quitting four years ago. That porch 
was near where I kept a bird feeder that local  
racoons raided regularly along with hunting frogs 
from my pond. One of them, who I later nicknamed  
Trash Bandit, had gotten much bolder, probably 
by noticing my cat freely sat down next to me,  
and eventually got to the point where I would feed 
him cheerios, while he stood next to the steps.
Survival in urban environments demands a 
higher level of intelligence, leading to  
an intriguing speculation: the presence 
of an intelligent species might catalyze  
the evolutionary advancement of other species 
on their planet. It would certainly fit with  
the idea that predator-prey cycles frequently 
pushed improvement in intelligence and reflexes.  
Evolution can also happen in quick bursts, 
some mutation pops up and is so advantageous  
it spreads quickly and also forces reactions 
via selection pressures on everything else in  
that environment, even if it isn’t in an obvious 
predator-prey relationship with that organism.
I should note that this dynamic isn't 
necessarily universally beneficial.  
For instance, the Red Tail Hawk is 
generally considered one of the most  
intelligent birds out there. They are also 
reportedly becoming heavier and less active,  
and are content with scavenging on garbage 
and roadkill rather than pursuing traditional  
hunting. Ironically, this adaptation might 
seem like a smarter, energy-efficient  
strategy. Such observations raise questions about 
intelligence and adaptability across the cosmos,  
and of course we often encourage 
folks to work smarter, not harder. 
Pigs, who have an unfair reputation for laziness 
and sloth from rolling around in mud and filth,  
are also legendary for their problem-solving 
abilities, and able to get out of virtually  
any pen we could design. They also have 
33% smaller brain size than wild boars,  
and most domesticated animals show smaller brains 
than their wild ancestors, and yet they’re still  
pretty impressive and probably adapted a bit 
to humans. Even chickens can be surprisingly  
intelligent, and even as I’m writing this 
my kids have been racing around the yard  
for the last hour trying to catch one of two 
roosters, whose an escapee or exile from our  
coop far behind the house and whose been cawing 
outside my window every morning for some days,  
so we’re trying to fit him for a collar designed 
to make him crow a bit quieter. A month later as  
I’m recording this, we have not yet succeeded.
And they’ve given him a name now so I’d feel  
bad about explaining what the usual retirement 
policy for spare roosters is, or enacting it.  
But the rooster clearly views it as a game since 
whenever they give up, it will emerge from cover  
and chase up behind one of them, and this has 
been going on for quite a while now. But chickens  
are another example of surprising if specialized 
intelligence in nature, in addition to the complex  
if vicious pecking order system of hierarchy they 
have, they do have specific and distinct clucks  
and noises that they make to inform others of 
threats from above, like an eagle, versus ground  
threats or the discovery of food, there’s a 
good article on it in Scientific American’s  
May 2017 issue that explores it, quote:
“The chickens' calls are “functionally  
referential,” as behaviorists would say—meaning 
that they refer to specific objects and events  
broadly in the way that words used by 
people do. In a chicken hearing the calls,  
the sounds appear to create a mental 
picture of that particular object,  
prompting the bird to respond accordingly—whether 
to flee a predator or approach a food source.” 
End Quote. Functionally referential signals 
and communication are also big in mammals and  
of course are critical to the very concept of 
language, where for humans it can get way more  
sophisticated, but shouting fire to warn people 
of fire and setting off a group reaction would  
be one example. Language is something we now 
can put AI to use for, and is another example,  
like problem-solving, where we often get 
surprised by what nature has produced. 
Complex Problem-solving is also not a trait 
limited to mammals and birds. Octopuses provide  
fascinating insights into animal intelligence, 
particularly in their problem-solving abilities  
and use of camouflage. These solitary creatures 
can solve puzzles, escape from enclosures,  
and even use tools, demonstrating an ability 
to learn and adapt. Their ability to change  
color and texture, to blend into their 
surroundings in an instant, not only  
speaks to their survival skills but also to an 
extraordinary sensory and neural adaptability. 
And also another example of advanced intelligence 
emerging separately by evolution, and indeed way  
further off than any mammals or even bird brains. 
All of our furry or winged cousins track back to  
a land creature just over 300 million years ago 
and share some basic brain architecture with each  
other from that common origin. The octopus on the 
other hand has a donut-shaped brain that wraps  
around its throat rather than being mounted above 
the mouth and throat as we think of as normal. 
And if we’re trying to contemplate alternative 
intelligence for insights into the alien mind,  
few things are more alien than the Octopus. They 
have blue blood due to them having copper in it,  
like Spock from Star Trek, on account of 
having hemocyanin in their blood rather  
than our iron-containing protein hemoglobin, 
but that’s not too strange, some other critters  
do like horseshoe crabs, scorpions, spiders 
and many others who are adapted for deep-sea  
or low oxygen conditions. Some critters 
have clear blood or green blood too, which  
is the color Spock’s blood gets described as.
The octopus also has no bones, color changing  
skin, and is adapted to a different atmosphere… 
so pretty alien, but it’s their brains that  
are really weird. Not just the donut shaped 
part, their tentacles also have sub-brains,  
resulting in a very different architecture.
Yet, Octopuses show some surprisingly human-like  
intelligent behavior, which is all the more 
impressive since they have nowhere near as many  
neurons as we do. We have nearly 100 billion 
neurons, whereas the octopus has about half  
a billion. Neurons are not a great corollary for 
intelligence, even just counting cortical neurons,  
humans have less total neurons than whales and 
elephants for instance and some critters are a  
lot smarter or dumber than their relative neuron 
count would imply. But there’s a loose correlation  
at least, and as an example, a crab or lobster 
has more like 100,000 neurons, a millionth what  
humans have and several thousand times less than 
an Octopus. Of that octopus’s 500 million neurons,  
around 180 million are concentrated in the 
central brain with around 50 million in each  
of its 8 tentacles, and this distributed brain 
may account for some of its weirder mental feats. 
While Octopuses or octopii in general show some 
stunning intellect, the Larger Pacific Striped  
Octopus, or LPSO, is probably the one best known 
for its intelligence and gregarious nature. They  
are not solitary, like most octopii, and 
atypically non-lethal in their breeding  
habits. Other octopii are cannibals, 
where mating is lethal, and typically  
the last meal of the female too, who starves 
herself to death guarding her clutch of eggs,  
which is thought to be an evolutionary 
failsafe to keep her from eating them,  
thus both male and female only ever reproduce 
once, if that. The LPSO does neither and again,  
isn’t solitary, and theoretically this could lead 
to passing on knowledge to future generations  
along with permitting traits which might 
be vulnerable during protracted periods  
of maturation. Our big brains and bodies can't 
work without parents protecting and feeding us. 
So this is an example of a possible pathway 
toward a civilization, insofar as we see a fair  
amount of brain, some impressive problem solving 
ability, and an evolution away from cannibalism  
and lethal reproduction toward social behavior. 
Not including whales and dolphins, as mammals,  
the octopus might be the most plausible path to an 
intelligent civilization in a post-human period,  
especially in one where surface life got wiped 
out. Which is always easier than total extinction. 
For instance, a close-proximity supernova could 
massively damage an atmosphere and its radiation  
shielding properties, which would not spare 
that ocean entirely, but would be far worse  
on the surface, and the same for volcanic ash or 
impact debris, which can block sunlight in general  
for a while but can also blanket the ground in a 
suffocating fashion, yet is merely nutrient in the  
sea. So too, a high-proximity supernova - which 
many worlds have probably experienced and maybe  
repeatedly, might tear off a lot of an atmosphere 
instead of just blasting its ozone layer, but much  
of this would regenerate from evaporation of the 
ocean afterwards, and things living deep under sea  
could survive scenarios that even obliterated all 
the cockroaches, or even burrowing hive creatures  
like ants… which we’ll return to in a bit.
I should note that the kindred of the octopus,  
the squid, has its own impressive nervous system. 
The reaction rates of squids is very impressive  
and the giant squid axon, in spite of not 
being myelinated, which slows conductive rates,  
is still an impressive 25 meters per second. One 
way of looking at Intelligence is to view it as  
how much processing you can do, which is both 
how many circuits or neurons you’ve got firing,  
and how fast the signal travels. What you do 
with that processing matters too of course,  
but in the raw speed sense, a creature which 
evolves very fast reflexes can rapidly dominate  
its environment and has the basic building 
block in place to evolve a brain that is very  
high-speed and thus overpowered for its size.
And an oceanic creature can circumvent a lot  
of the heat and cooling issues a large brain 
can present, so might be easier for evolving  
them. It’s also a decent example of the 
potential differences between raw brain  
power or speed versus intelligence. Squids 
have amazing reflexes, but they don't show the  
level of intelligent behavior that octopuses do. 
Cuttlefish have very complex social interactions,  
even possibly to the point of approaching 
language, but they don't exhibit the tool  
use and escape skills that octopuses do.
In this regard it isn’t that hard to imagine  
some alien squid or octopus evolving a smart 
civilization under the seas, especially on  
planets with less land surface area or which 
had received frequent or recent astronomical  
catastrophes. Whether or not they could develop 
technology is something we’ve discussed before  
in our episode on Technology without Fire, and 
will more in the upcoming episode Oceanic Moons. 
Needless to say there’s lot of areas where animals 
outperform humans, and the line between the mental  
or cognitive and other advantages can be blurry. 
For instance a bear is obviously stronger than us,  
but a smaller bear with faster reflexes might 
be more physically dangerous in a fight. Extra  
sensory capabilities shouldn't be ignored too, 
especially in how they can solve problems. 
If you can see in other spectrums, or 
have a sensitivity to magnetic fields  
strong enough to see by them, like sharks 
seem to, that might give you some insights,  
but if your eyeballs have developed to process 
images at higher frame rates than ours, which is  
in the tens of frames per second, or has evolved 
to let you focus on multiple things at once,  
then you might be a lot better at certain types 
of multi-tasking or develop a language based  
of very rapid visual signals that was much 
higher bandwidth than our audio equivalent. 
Even something minimal like a better hearing 
system that gives you twice as much brain  
devoted to managing it, might result in the 
ability to have very complex languages that  
everyone could learn very fast. In a civilization 
with 10 million words that everybody knows,  
and few are true synonyms of each other but 
more distinct, you have some options for  
conveying complex and abstract ideas quickly 
and clearly. Indeed it's been suggested that  
modern humans had more developed chins 
for more and better linguistic options  
compared to neanderthals and might 
have allowed superior communication. 
A species developing a language to help hunt 
and gather has a real big and quick advantage to  
encourage them doing this if instead of shouting 
over a few seconds a one-sentence general plan,  
you can accurately convey what would take us whole 
pages of explanation and clarification because  
you’ve got 10,000 distinct words for position, 
location, and attitude, including separate ones  
for each individual limb, pair of limbs, or 
objects you’re holding in one. You don’t just  
scream “Watch out!”, you in a brief moment can 
convey that the threat is a large eagle descending  
from a specific trajectory and speed towards a 
given spot or person, and as everyone knows, this  
type of Eagle is prone to throwing curveballs by 
switching targets to the left at the last moment.” 
So too, how those senses and the brains adapted 
to manage and process their input might give them  
insane advantages in things like grasping math, 
statistics, geometry, or science. To the point  
that some solitary critters might actually be able 
to develop advanced engineering from basic tool  
use in a single generation, especially if they 
were long-lived, and we have no real reason to  
assume an alien biology would age on anything like 
our timetables. Normally with alien intelligences,  
we tend to assume they have a lot of 
shared evolutionary traits with us,  
this is why we often say that artificial 
intelligence made by us might be more alien  
in its thinking than actual aliens, since they 
maybe have evolved long, long ago in a galaxy far,  
far away but still under Darwnian pressure. 
Which an AI would not have, initially anyway. 
And we tend to assume that means an ability to 
have a spacefaring civilization that has at least  
some concepts for escalation and diplomacy, 
concepts for rightful possession and theft  
or murder. Parents, children, siblings, 
friends, neighbors, and having been at  
various points in their life in an advantaged or 
disadvantaged position relative to some of them,  
to give concepts like mutual aid, 
defense, mercy, fairness, and so on,  
even if they might be weird or vicious in our 
eyes. A lone intelligence evolved from a species  
of sibling cannibalism and mate-killing isn’t as 
likely to have those, it would seem, and thus be  
a very alien intelligence compared to other aliens 
too. Nor is a solitary intelligence the only way  
that can get alien, a hive mind can be too.
As we mentioned a moment ago, one of those  
advantages might be fast explanations between 
social members, and speaking of fast explanations,  
the notion of hive intelligences that can 
pass thoughts and even complex imagery back  
and forth telepathically is a popular one in 
science fiction but you could have naturally  
evolving radio antennae and brains evolved to 
send rapidly compressed copies of whatever their  
eyeball saw to each other. Potentially even 
something weird like an evolved encryption  
pattern that only relatives could see because it 
used a segment of your DNA as the encryption key. 
But whereas the idea of a solitary creature 
evolving technology without evolving cooperation  
and social skills can be a scary one, the hive 
mind can be just as scary, either because that  
hive mind may truly be a solitaire creature that 
just happens to have many sub-minds composing it,  
no more individual than our organs or cells 
are, or because it’s members might still have  
individual minds of impressive scope and 
yet be really fond of adding new members  
with a zeal the most fanatic missionary might 
quail at, and to which resistance is futile. 
See your science fiction show of choice for more 
options for that, or our episodes on Hive Minds  
or technological telepathy for a more deliberate 
and scientific take. In those we noted that you  
might have sub-minds that could merge together 
into temporary minds, where you don’t just have  
a dozen sub-systems that can merge into a greater 
mind for bigger problems, but instead where 5 out  
of 12 of them might merge to form a distinct mind 
to deal with a problem specific to them, and where  
that has a unique personality but also is not 
exactly an individual, it’s personhood is hazy  
and it is often in a dream state of hibernation.
It is just one of millions of perturbations and  
combinations of some of those twelve minds joining 
up that form semi-unique and temporary hive minds.  
One parallel for conceptual purposes is the way 
human cliques tend to work, with most of us in  
multiple and entering or leaving regularly 
or with varying degrees of involvement that  
aren't static either. It wouldn’t be too hard 
to imagine that escalating with biological or  
technological telepathy added to the mix either.
You could have brains of naturally evolved  
creatures that were like that too, indeed, 
even ignoring multiple-personality disorder,  
which is still debated in psychology and 
at best poorly understood neurologically,  
we all have what we might call ‘sub-personalities’ 
that we tend to wear for different situations,  
and those could obviously get to be a lot more 
distinct to the point of even being separate  
individuals sharing a body, like a two-headed 
monster, or ten-headed hydra, but could also be  
some in-between point that was practically to 
the point of running multiple apps on the same  
computer, and mostly unrelated to socializing, 
just a brain evolved to be more compartmentalized  
with conscious thought and by having multiple 
ones that might share a lot of the same neurons. 
Or as an extension of multiple brains, as the 
octopus isn’t the only organism with chunks of  
brain scattered around its body, and we even 
see that in some insects like grasshoppers and  
bumblebees, and less pleasantly, mosquitoes and 
cockroaches. Ducks sleep with half their brain at  
a time and the two halves of the human brain have 
distinct jurisdiction, left brain, right brian. 
We do also have two-headed snakes, and while 
most of these are short-lived some have lived  
many years. They have even reproduced though their 
offspring are normal and one-headed. Polycephaly  
occurs as a birth defect in many organisms 
including mammals, though almost always very  
short-lived and with one non-functional, so it 
isn’t just snakes, they just tend to have a modest  
chance for survival in this state, and we also see 
it fairly often in turtles. And again, at least on  
earth, those that survive to breed are not passing 
this on as a genetic trait, but we could imagine  
it as a hereditary mutation, as could variation of 
networked sub-minds, and we might see that in some  
alien, but I think we almost certainly see it in 
artificial intelligence and in this century too,  
as it implies some serious thinking 
advantages for some specialized tasks. 
While all these examples highlight areas where 
animals outshine humans in specific mental tasks,  
they also prompt a broader reflection on the 
nature of intelligence itself. Even in the case  
of human brains and chimps, where we’re taught to 
think ours is basically a chimp brain upgraded,  
this isn’t really right as theirs function 
differently. Chimp brains do chimp things, human  
brains do human things. Chimps have been shown 
to outperform humans in some areas like working  
memory. We aren’t descended from them, they’re our 
cousins and have been mentally evolving too. As we  
learn more about our minds and animal minds, 
we keep finding that as smart as we are, we  
don't have a monopoly on intelligence, and don’t 
understand intelligence as well as we thought. 
This understanding pushes the boundaries of what 
constitutes intelligence, suggesting that it  
encompasses a wide range of skills and adaptations 
that are finely tuned to an animal's environment  
and survival needs. The traditional human-centric 
view of intelligence is being challenged by the  
recognition of these diverse forms of cognitive 
abilities across species, and as we learn to make  
AI and ones that outperform us massively 
at some tasks that we once thought the  
realm of only the human or even the genius, 
while still being dumber than any mammal.
We still understand so little about our minds, 
and much of that has come through studying  
other minds, first animals and now artificial 
ones. By studying and appreciating the ways in  
which animals excel, we not only broaden our 
understanding of intelligence but also gain  
a deeper respect for the rich cognitive 
landscape shared by all living creatures,  
and which may only grow as we forge artificial 
minds. This perspective encourages a more  
inclusive view of intelligence, one that values 
the remarkable abilities of animals and recognizes  
the intricate web of cognitive skills that 
define life on Earth, and perhaps even beyond.
We were talking about intelligence today 
and one of the smartest decisions I ever  
made years back was to switch away from 
cheap disposable razors to a safety  
razor. They’re a great example of 
how small costs can quickly build up,  
and the last stat I saw was that the average 
cost of razors per year, disposable or electric,  
was over a hundred bucks each, whereas its been 
a few years since I last bought a box of razor  
blades for my safety razor and that cost about 5 
bucks at the time. I’m very glad to see the rising  
trend of folks switching back to safety razors, 
like Henson’s, as they do give a better shave  
and aren’t emptying your wallet while filling 
the landfills with plastic and razors blades. 
When Henson shaving sent me one of their razors to 
try out though, it brought the total safety razors  
I’ve owned in my life up to three. My original I 
lost while deployed in Iraq almost 20 years ago,  
then there’s the one I was using till last 
week, and now there’s my Henson Razor,  
and I figured it would be a good product because 
Henson has a great reputation but I was genuinely  
surprised how much better a shave it gave.
Henson’s uses precision manufacturing to aerospace  
standards - they helped manufacture pieces for 
a Mars Rover and the Space Station, so they  
get the importance of quality. This makes a razor 
where the blade fits in tight, and that stops the  
vibration and flexing of the blade that causes a 
lot of the irritation and razor burn people often  
get from shaving. That tight tolerance on the 
blade position, exposing only 27 microns of razor,  
also makes it easier to adjust to shaving 
with one if you’re new to safety razors. 
Stop wasting money on disposables 
and elaborate 5-blade cartridges,  
one 10-cent blade is all you need if it’s 
held in place by precision engineering  
like Henson shaving offers. Try it now though, at 
henshonshaving.com/isaacarthur, and Henson Shaving  
will throw in a free 100 pack of razor blades, 
if you use promo code IsaacArthur at check out,  
and you’ll see why they have a stunningly low 2% 
return rate. Stop wasting money on disposables and  
start getting a better shave at a fraction of 
the cost, go to hensonshaving.com/isaacarthur. 
Last year we had a pair of episodes on 
super-populated Hive Worlds and the idea of  
Hungry Aliens, and I ended up doing a companion 
video on Space Freighters on Nebula to discuss  
interplanetary shipping. This weekend we have an 
extended and remastered version of that episode  
coming out, looking at Space Freighters, 
what they’ll carry and who will crew them,  
on Sunday May 26th. Then we’ll wrap 
the month up with a trip to Ganymede,  
the largest of the moons of Jupiter and indeed 
the largest moon in our solar system, and we’ll  
ask if perhaps humanity might settle this moon. 
After that we’ll head into June to look at what  
sorts of Jobs in Space and the Space Industry 
there are, both now and in the future. Then we’ll  
return to the Fermi Paradox and continue today’s 
discussing on the nature of intelligence to ask  
if our mind’s themselves may be a ticking 
timebomb waiting to inevitably ruin us. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can 
also help support the show by becoming a member  
here on Youtube or Patreon, or checkout 
other ways to help at IsaacArthur.net.  
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes 
early and ad free on our streaming service,  
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content like 
Machine Monitors, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
