Some might argue that the journey is just
as important as the destination.
When you’re travelling at high speed through
interstellar space,
this takes on an entirely new dimension.
We recently discussed the concept of a Generation
Ship, a type of interstellar vessel designed
to cross the vast expanse of deep space and
keep its crew alive, or at least their descendants,
as such voyages can take many decades or even
centuries to reach the nearest stars.
During that episode we also discussed some
alternative approaches such as freezing people
or using robots, cyborgs, or artificial intelligence
to do the job, concepts and technologies which
have emerged in recent times, and which, even
if they don’t replace the generation ship,
are likely to be incorporated into it to address
some of the problems which emerge as we learn
more about space travel.
And we’ll be exploring those new problems
and potential solutions as we follow up on
that first episode.
Today we will be looking mostly at the ships
themselves, the engineering concerns associated
with getting such ships up to speed, keeping
them powered during flight, and slowing them
back down when they arrive.
Next time we’ll look more at the problems
of transporting whole ecologies on such ships
and transplanting them to alien worlds in
“Exporting Earth”, and we’ll follow
that with a deeper look into the psychological
and sociological difficulties in “Ark of
a Million Years”.
But for today, our focus is on that core ship.
How do you get it moving, how do you keep
it powered, repair it, maneuver it around
obstacles, and finally, slow it down on arrival?
Big problems, and part of the solution to
those big problems is with big ships.
They can carry more shielding, proportionally,
than smaller ones.
They can carry more people of course, allowing
not just more hands to work on a problem,
but a wider range of specialization and expertise.
They can also carry more backups.
But no matter how much we prototype these
ships, there’s always a risk of catastrophic
failure from something deemed acceptably improbable
or simply something we didn’t even know
was a danger.
So in this regard, it’s not just about a
ship carrying more backups and redundant components,
but having backup ships.
Not just a colony ship, but a colonial fleet.
Yet our title, Exodus Fleet, does not simply
refer to one such colonial fleet migrating
out from our solar system.
We’ve discussed first colonial ventures
before, today we’re a bit more interested
in when interstellar colonization has entered
its pinnacle phase.
Not one or two early experiments to the nearest
systems but a massive operation hundreds of
years later.
In the Outward Bound series we’ve looked
a lot at the colonization of our solar system,
and indeed even colonizing the Oort Cloud,
and our first trip to Alpha Centauri.
In those videos, we’ve usually taken a few
minutes to reference how this or that interplanetary
colony could serve as a foundation for interstellar
travel.
We will not repeat all of that today, but
what we saw was a budding solar empire gearing
up to levels of industrial might that dwarf
anything we have nowadays, decades after the
Industrial Age.
They have room, and resources, for trillions
or even quadrillions of people to live with
a degree of prosperity that would awe kings.
These are also civilizations that probably
do not regard our solar system as having 8
planets.
For all the discussion of Pluto and other
dwarf planets, it’s easy to forget that
originally we had two classifications, minor
and major planets.
Dwarf planets were added in between later,
and arguments about that topic have tended
to eclipse that there are nearly a million
identified planets in our solar system.
These may be minor planets but each one can
be home to new civilizations and nations,
and those living on them are likely to view
the solar system as quite a cluttered place,
consisting of much more than a Sun, 8 planets,
and some other stuff.
Similarly they will probably better realize
what we tend to overlook in discussions of
colonization.
That we will want to colonize every star system,
directly from this solar system, within at
least a few hundred light years of us, and
that those number in the hundreds of thousands.
We will not be building a handful of colony
ships, we will be building millions of them
over the course of a few centuries.
Launching dozens or even hundreds of them
every single day, ships carrying tens of thousands
of people and measuring kilometers in length,
probably each taking years to build and outfit,
so that at any given time the drydocks of
the solar system may have a million or more
vessels under construction.
Such a task seems daunting, and yet only a
civilization creeping up on full solar colonization,
what we call a Kardashev-2 civilization, has
any motive to send out more than a few colony
ships.
Until mankind has settled most of those million
minor planets, until we number ourselves in
the hundreds of trillions if not quadrillions,
there are only a few reasons to settle another
solar system.
Even just a few colonies outside our solar
system gets some of our eggs out of the Sol
basket, plus the voyage gives you a lot of
data and experience for doing it in the future,
and the work of colonizing a system on the
other end does too.
Simulations, even incredibly realistic ones,
can never match the real thing since the simulators
can’t program in what they don’t know.
Unmanned probes can tell us a lot, but manned
trial voyages make sense to acquire real data
to overcome and adapt to any unforeseen issues
in future missions.
But beyond that, you have no real reason to
colonize more until it is practical and desirable,
but once you do, it makes sense to do it big.
You have the resources to do it big too, if
you can do it at all, because all the devices
and tech that let you miniaturize such missions
also make it easy to go about it in a grand
fashion.
A self-replicating von Neumann probe sent
to colonize and terraform the galaxy can stop
at its first destination and get to work replicating
copies of itself, then terraform that system
while some of the copies journey to new ones,
or it can just stop at the nearest asteroid
in our own solar system and replicate there
first.
Or it can just build tons of giant spaceships
humans could man too.
It’s hard to guess how humanity will roll
out to the stars, but just as two examples,
on the extremes, we might grow our population
locally on the slow side, just 1-2% population
growth a year as we have in the last century,
and sometime around the year 3000, as we’re
filling up most of the easy targets in our
solar system and number around a quadrillion
people, decide we need to build several million
ships and send them all off crewed with tens
of thousand of people each.
Such an endeavor would use up not even a single
percent of our economy to build by that point,
even if we were doing it with modern production
rates, and use such a small percent of our
population that most of us may know only a
single colonist who was a casual acquaintance
at most.
On the flip-side, someone might get a clanking
self-replicator going in the next few decades.
Indeed I’d actually be surprised if that
didn’t happen, and such things are not,
in and of themselves, dangerous in the way
popular culture imagines Skynet or any sort
of grey goo.
Nothing very sophisticated need necessarily
be involved, and it’s certainly possible,
since nature and humans produce stuff all
the time, the difference being that nature’s
modern complexity is the byproduct of billions
of years of trial and error corrections, and
humans are smarter than our factories, and
can function in a versatile fashion when incorporated
into one, saving a lot of trickier steps in
automation.
Were that to occur, we could start building
giant ships in space a few years later, and
if we could talk 100 Million people, about
1% of our population, into getting on board
these, say 100,000 people to a ship or small
fleet of ships, we could launch 1,000 expeditions
a year later and settle most of the star systems
within a hundred light years of us.
There’s no ifs on that, no other missing
technologies.
All you need is a self-replicating machine,
be it a tiny nanorobot or a factory complex,
that before breaking down is able to make
two complete copies of itself and do at least
some other work while it’s at it, like refining
metal and making simple hull plates for a
ship.
All the other tech we discuss here can help
with that, make it easier and better, but
nothing else is actually needed.
It’s making all these interstellar ships
small enough we can build them, and yet still
large enough able to survive the journey with
its crew and equipment intact that’s hard
and high-tech.
Here on SFIA, we tend to like to incorporate
fusion into spaceships, tech we don’t have
yet, but if we got it that gives us interstellar
travel, as it would be capable of providing
the necessary speed, the power to live through
the journey, and the ability to slow down
on arrival.
That last one is the trickiest part.
Since we have discussed fusion a lot for spaceships,
today we are going to look at an alternative.
There’s quite a few, but we settled on the
lowest tech and fastest one we could come
up with.
This will incorporate the Stellaser we looked
at in Colonizing the Sun, a stupidly powerful
and long range laser that requires little
more than large mirrors orbiting close to
the Sun.
We will also use fission or radioactive decay
power plants for the journey’s power source,
explosives for any fast maneuvering, and we’ll
review a few options for slowing down.
Fusion is still nicer, even if you are using
the Stellaser to get up to speed, since it’s
all self-contained, but it isn’t actually
necessary.
Ship size is also highly variable, as is overall
design, and is ultimately very dependent on
available technology.
The higher your tech, the smaller your ship
can be and safely bring along everything you
need.
But this is mostly a matter of scale.
Hypothetically, while a generation ship could
cross the cosmos at 1% of light speed or lower,
this should never be necessary.
We should have no problem at all keeping a
laser on a big target like several square
kilometers of reflective sail till way out
past Pluto, and if the ship and crew can handle
a 1 gee acceleration, the equivalent of normal
gravity, they’d be out past Pluto in just
two weeks and cruising off at 4% of light
speed, arriving at Alpha Centauri in a century
and any of those 1000 or so nearest solar
system in under 2500 years.
This is, incidentally, slow enough to brake
from using some of our existing fission based
designs.
This is important, since you have to be able
to slow down on arrival, but we’ll come
back to that in a bit.
The longer you can keep that laser on the
ship, the faster it can go, and speeds far
in excess of 4%, or even 40%, of light speed
are on the table.
We talked about that more in Interstellar
Highways, but to do this you need to either
make the sail bigger or the laser more focused,
and eventually that becomes impractical unless
you have stations along the way helping out
to re-focus the beam or emit one themselves.
Those stations need power and your ship needs
power once it’s off from the laser, and
keep in mind once you’re light-days away
from the source, they need days to even be
aware that there’s a problem if the beam
goes off target.
Also it doesn’t have to be a light beam.
Microwaves are handy, as we discussed in power
satellites, so is a particle stream.
For that matter you could do what we decided
to call a Pacman ship, one that catches up
on supply or fuel pods launched ahead of it
and eats them, or where the pods are launched
afterward, but faster, and catch up to the
ship.
The big constraint on acceleration with a
manned ship is what the crew and cargo can
handle, so a pod whose structure and contents
can handle 100 gees instead of one, can accelerate
to a final speed ten times higher than the
manned ship could on the same track length,
for however far your laser can stay on target.
Trying to coordinate all those pods to reach
the ship, or be caught up to by the ship,
at the right time and place and at a speed
it can intercept safely, is a bit tricky,
but you can afford to lose some of those.
Moreover, it means the ship needs some way
to maneuver a little bit.
We want that anyway though, so that it can
change directions to a new system if something
turns out to be wrong with their destination
as they approach.
The most logical one, for this setup, would
be an ion drive.
They are slow to accelerate, but provide a
great acceleration to fuel mass ratio, so
long as you’re patient.
They can let you make some course corrections
and grab some supplies, and firing them up
occasionally to do that also helps makes sure
they’re still working as they should.
We’ll get to what’s powering them in a
moment, but those pods represent our first
example of what we mean by a colonial fleet.
They can be strung out behind and in front
of you, gathering information, acting as relays
from back home if signals are getting weak
or you’re off your original course, giving
you advance notice about any dangers in front
of you, mapping out the destination system
and alternate systems ahead of you, and so
on.
Now if you do see something dangerous in front
of you, you’ve a number of ways to deal
with that, and the sooner you see it the better.
We talked about that more in the Interstellar
Travel Challenges episode, but if you haven’t
got much time to dodge something ahead, you
either need to vaporize it, which takes power
or explosives, or dodge it quick, which an
ion drive can’t do.
Ironically shaped explosive charges on your
outer hull are probably best.
They can sit there for long times and still
be detonated as fast as thought, or even your
navigation computer’s thought.
So long as you’re not getting excessive,
it can give you a quick shove to the side
without damaging the ship or killing everyone
inside from too fast of an acceleration.
You don’t want to be standing on the ground
of a rotating section of a ship when it suddenly
bucks at 5 gees for a second and you find
yourself twenty-five meters off the ground
and falling back down.
Needless to say everything in there just experienced
that too, so as you plummet, you’re doing
that alongside all those nice ponds and forest
critters you landscaped in there.
So the ship wants to do the minimum shove,
and you do want that automated, so it can
react as fast as possible and with the smallest
shove needed to dodge some unseen rock it
can’t vaporize in time.
The case we just mentioned was extreme, and
potentially very lethal to many inside, but
less so than getting hit by a few kilograms
of relativistic space debris, and having a
computer figuring out what the options are
and picking the least horrible action is ideal.
This is another reason you want a fleet, not
a ship.
The bigger your ship is, the harder it is
to dodge, and ultimately you have to worry
about any lone ship getting destroyed by an
improbable event.
However a pack of ships moving together, but
say 100 kilometers apart from each other,
gives a lot of redundancy.
They don’t need to actually leave or arrive
at the same time either, they can use a little
slow thrust to get into formation for the
long voyage, and at 100 kilometers apart,
nothing they could encounter would cause a
chain-reaction threat to each other, even
a ship with an antimatter drive isn’t carrying
so much energy that if it exploded it would
destroy it siblings at that range.
It’s still close enough for shuttling back
and forth too.
These ships may all be plowing through space
at a decent percentage of light speed but
they are not moving relative to each other,
and there’s no air to cause drag between
them, so a shuttle can just pop back and forth
between such ships.
That wouldn’t take much fuel but it doesn’t
actually have to take any.
Truth be told those ships don’t really need
to be that far apart, but this is space and
they can just launch tethers between each
other for a pod to ride around on.
Indeed if they’ve got enough tethers and
those are strong enough, they can actually
use those as winches to move each other around.
It’s weird to think of them this way, but
in many ways, for these long voyages through
emptiness, these are not ships, they’re
space stations, and they could assemble all
sorts of stuff between each other during the
mission.
Indeed, they might all sit at the outer corners
of a very large thin mirror being used to
keep a beam on them longer than otherwise
possible.
Once they are at cruising speed, everything
is relatively stationary, they can drop a
telescope off to a side, extend pods out serve
as temporary extra space, and so on.
All of these ships are likely to have a lot
manufacturing capability of their own and
considering the voyage duration, a temporary
structure behind the ship made for some extra
elbow room that has to be brought in and recycled
eventually isn’t likely to be a concern,
as ‘temporary’ is decades or centuries.
Your big concern in that regard is that, depending
on your speed, you have a rather large radiation
wind coming in from plowing through the interstellar
medium.
The faster you go, the worse this is, the
faster your exterior add-ons will break, and
the shorter you’ll get to use them.
So there’s presumably a velocity at which
these shanty towns around your armada get
pointless.
Though you can also carry such things behind
you, shielded from that by your ship.
The other handy part about those multiple
ships is that when the time comes they can
all split up for multiple destinations, rather
than just one planet in a solar system.
You wouldn’t be likely to head straight
for a planet you want to terraform, it makes
more sense to set up your space infrastructure
first when you arrive, rather than landing
and having to rebuild all that launch ability
when you need it, which is probably right
away, since a planet needing water for terraforming
is best bombarded with icy comets before you
start building homes on it.
But what is powering everything?
Initially that Stellaser beam of course, and
they can turn that on low and just let it
send a decent trickle of diffuse power for
quite some time after you’d be out of main
pushing range.
Potentially, this works for the whole trip,
but I personally wouldn’t trust that on
its own.
After that, of course, if you’ve got fusion,
that would be nice, but if not, we have both
fission and passive decay, radioisotope thermoelectric
generators.
Fission is handy on such ships, pound for
pound of fuel, it’s almost as energy dense
as fusion, and if radiation and waste is a
concern, you can tow it behind you and kick
your trash out the side, where it will sail
off into the void never to trouble humanity
again, unless a big wad of fission products
slams into some alien civilization’s home
world at relativistic speed of course, which
might cause a diplomatic incident.
But an RTG holds some interest for us too.
These produce a nice, long, stable, albeit
inefficient power supply, and so long as you
pick an isotope with a half-life similar to
your voyage time, you have an object supplying
energy, and heat, which ships need in the
interstellar void, that is so dumb-simple
and durable that it is foolproof.
Many of them would ironically make excellent
radiation shielding too, and decay into byproducts
that are quite safe and handy.
If you’re worried about skills and abilities
being lost during a voyage of many centuries,
or even millennia, a bunch of RTGs running
some very sturdy LED lighting might keep a
habitat lit that whole time and livable.
I wouldn’t want to bet my colony on it though,
since you have a lot of time for things to
break, hence why you need onboard manufacturing
ability and the expertise to use it, but there’s
not many things as sturdy or reliable as an
RTG.
Okay, now the big challenge, slowing down.
Reaching your destination as fast as possible
is nice, but the faster you go, the harder
it is to slow down, and we would like to do
it with no fuel.
At all, not one drop.
This is easy on Earth, if you want to slow
down, just wait, friction and drag will get
the job done.
But in space we have neither.
Except we actually do.
There is no vacuum, just relative degrees
of emptiness, and the faster you are going
the more you are slowed when you hit any random
speck of space dust.
As on Earth, we can slow down faster by extending
a parachute, so we hit more space dust.
This won’t be viable to slow you all the
way down probably, but every bit of speed
you can lose this way saves you fuel.
A lot too, under the classic rocket equation,
a ship that massed a megaton, half fuel, half
payload, changes speed 69% of whatever the
exhaust velocity of that propellant is.
To do double that, it would need to be 750
kilotons fuel, and 250 kilotons payload, and
to quadruple that it would need to be just
60 kilotons of payload, and 940 of fuel.
So even though your parachute might cost a
lot of mass itself, if it can let you slow
down from 40% of light speed to just 10%,
that is an immense savings in fuel.
Another option is the Bussard ramjet, which
originally looked promising as a way to propel
a ship by having it magnetically suck in passing
hydrogen gas and slam it down a nozzle to
collide and fuse and produce thrust.
Only on examination it turned out that it
would actually lose more energy than it would
take in, causing the ship to slow down.
Not good for propulsion but just fine for
braking.
And so too, a magnetic field dragging on a
huge volume of charged particles in the interstellar
void, is also a good giant parachute.
Somewhat energy demanding though, similarly
that physical parachute, even if it’s just
a couple molecules thick, has to be rather
massive, though you could probably use it
for forward shielding or make it during the
voyage, stick it out to slow you down, drag
it back in and recycle it once you’ve slowed
and it’s taken damage.
Ideally we’d like to use a laser to slow
us down, but there isn’t one on the other
end yet.
This is one case where extra ships are handy
as you can all transfer a lot of fuel to one
ship in your fleet, have it pick up some extra
speed while slowing its sister ships down
a bit, so it arrives sooner, and then build
a stellaser at their destination to slow them
down.
Robotic probes could do this, or even a satellite
which simply includes the mirrors needed for
the stellaser.
Of course the point of such a pushing laser
is to focus light.
As you approach a star, you will be getting
more and more anyway.
Even a probe with a rather large solar sail
won’t slow down too much before ramming
into a star this way, but if it is concentrating
that light to shoot behind it or power a laser
beam, it could push on another probe behind
it, which can slow more and thus have even
longer to decelerate from light from that
new Sun.
As can the one behind it.
Indeed they can do some sun-diving and use
that mirror braking on the Sun’s atmosphere
before colliding or disintegrating to slow
even more, giving them more time to push on
their siblings.
Each one of these can be taking more and more
detailed photos of the system as they go in,
and as this chain proceeds you eventually
get one slow enough to finish braking in the
Sun’s upper atmosphere without being destroyed,
and now you have a big mirror near a Sun,
and then another, and now you have a Stellaser
that can push on your incoming fleet.
Smart self replicating probes might be nicer,
but this is a comfortably low-tech approach
that works, and involves no dangerous AI either,
though at least AI used here are just a few
months or years ahead of your Armada, not
roving hundreds of light years ahead and mutating
outside your scrutiny.
You could also use these probes to skim past
the star, do a course correction, and keep
bouncing light to their siblings on their
way out to the next star.
It’s a little debatable if we can say this
doesn’t use fuel, since you are still using
mass for those probes, but overall it’s
a nicer approach than most others on the table
with our current tech, and of those, the most
obvious one is probably to slow down by launching
hydrogen bombs in front of you.
Of course that works for these too, since
they are essentially just a giant sail, and
they could detonate a bomb quite a long way
ahead and slow down on that themselves, which
gets around the problems of detonating a nuke
right in front of your manned ship.
The other nice thing is you only need that
last probe, or last two probes, to carry a
full-sized pair of mirrors for a stellaser,
and the number of ships and mass of those
ships doesn’t matter too much toward that,
especially since you could send in another
bigger pair of mirrors for that first stellaser
to slow down, your whole fleet can now slow
down as can any subsequent vessels following
behind you, who can follow even faster now
that the infrastructure is in place.
Once down to more modest planetary speeds
you can use the usual array of methods to
finish slowing if you need to.
Not all of those require fuel either, for
instance gravity-assist, so often used for
speedings ships up, can also be used to slow
them down.
We’ll look more at how big these ships need
to be in the next installment of the series,
Exporting Earth, in order to contain all the
ecology we’d need, but for today we’ve
established that even just with current technology,
we’ve got what we need to reach other solar
systems far faster than the original generation
ship concept envisioned.
So we were talking about how to get out beyond
our solar system today and how we’d be able
to use the Sun to power those efforts.
While the basic principle is sound, there’s
still so much we need to understand about
our own sun before we can visit other ones.
There’s a lot of other reasons to go study
the Sun up close and our friends over at Cheddar
have just released a video discussing those
reasons and what NASA is doing to find out
more.
I’ll link it in the video description.
They’ve been sponsoring science videos like
this one and recently started their own channel
covering topics like this and many more, and
I’d suggest checking it out and don’t
forget to subscribe while you’re there.
Hey guys I'm Patrick Jones from Cheddar and
I'm here today because we made a video that
I tihnk you're really gonna like.
It's all about two upcoming missions from
NASA and the European Space Agency to study
our Sun.
So if you like Isaac's channel, like we do,
we think you'll like our video and our channel.
So come on by!
Next week we have a two-parter, as we team
up again with Joe Scott of Answers with Joe.
We’ll examine 5 ways the world might end,
then what we could do to prevent those happening.
The week after that we’ll be discussing
what sort of careers folks might pursue in
an increasingly automated workforce, in Jobs
of the Future.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Also as a quick note I did an interview with
Matt Ward of FringeFM a little while back,
and I’ll leave a link to that in the video
description too.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
