This episode is sponsored by Skillshare
I had a really good time travel joke to start
the episode with,
but it turned out none of you liked it.
So today we start off our sixth year here
on Science and Futurism with Isaac Arthur,
and I am your host, Isaac Arthur.
As we travel from 2019 to 2020, Time travel
seemed like a good topic, and I figured we’d
start by discussing why we don’t think it
can work under known physics, then talk about
what the implications would be if it turned
out we were wrong.
Of course[a] the thing I always take as the
biggest proof time travel isn’t possible
is that nobody is offering package deals for
temporal vacations. If time travel were possible
we should see folks from the future and the
past everywhere, and every when, and not just
a few secretive folks with a time machine
like we see so often in science fiction. People
don’t really seem to look much at what the
extended and expanded use of such a technology
would be. While that may be forgivable when
a story contains such technology having just
been invented, so everything revolves around
a prototype or its first use, this doesn’t
really work with Time Travel since its being
invented and used at any point means it’s
basically been invented and used at all points
in time. If you managed to invent time travel,
you ought to be able to walk out of the machine
a moment later and be welcomed by all your
admirers and descendants from when you hopped
back in time to, say, cure smallpox or similar.
Needless to say, a lot depends on how time
works, which depends a lot on what time actually
is, and honestly we still don’t really know.
We’ll try to look at how time travel might
function, or not function, under a few of
the main concepts folks have offered for explaining
time later in the episode.
First though, let’s talk about the issue
with time travel under modern relativity,
and then under modern quantum mechanics, where
they don’t quite match.
In relativity, time is a flat linear thing
plodding on at a set rate in the same way
planets are flat; which is to say they aren’t,
unless you build one that way, but they usually
look flat, or fairly flat, at low altitudes,
get up high and it doesn’t look flat at
all. Space-time, on the other hand, looks
rather flat at low gravities and accelerations,
but when those are high it doesn’t look
flat at all.
On a curved planet you also can only see so
far because of the horizon, and something
much the same applies to space-time curvature.
The ‘edge’ of the Universe is actually
our cosmological horizon and as far as we
can see, but we’re pretty sure it keeps
going on a long way after that. As we look
further from Earth in any direction we see
objects receding away from us at faster and
faster speeds, eventually so fast they can
no longer be seen because space expands between
us and them faster than light can cover the
new space being added.
Or so we assume, we obviously can’t see
those places, but if it didn’t we’d actually
be at the center of our Universe. And indeed
we are when we normally reference the Universe
as that’s shorthand for the Observable Universe,
which practically speaking is all there is
since we can never see or speak to or travel
to the rest, without some sort of faster than
light technology.
The problem is that the faster you go, the
more energy you need to get to that speed
and the more you need for each increment higher.
More and more of your total energy is of the
kinetic or potential variety, rather than
mass-energy, that E=mc² thing. The more your
total energy is not mass, the slower time
is passing for you. If you look at some object
that appears as stationary relative to you,
like say a coffee cup you’re holding, all
of its energy is just mass energy. Almost
all anyway, there’s a little heat energy
in that warm coffee which is trivial compared
to its mass energy, which is the rough equivalent
of a dozen megaton hydrogen bombs, hence why
coffee is so great for giving you energy presumably.
If you were to add an equal amount of kinetic
energy, or speed, to that coffee cup, it would
now have half of its mass energy in the form
of kinetic energy, zipping along at 86% of
the speed of light. Since only half of its
energy is now mass energy, it will experience
half as much time as would a stationary object.
If we were to double the cup’s kinetic energy,
with only one-third of its energy being mass
energy and two-thirds of its energy is kinetic,
and the cup would experience time at one-third
of a stationary object - and it would be rocketing
along at 94% of the speed of light.
It’s impossible to actually reach the speed
of light because it takes more and more energy
- kinetic energy - for each percent closer
to light speed you go. It took the same energy
to get from 86% of light speed to 94% as it
did from starting at rest and up to 86%, and
in fact it takes 7 times that to get to 99%,
22 times that to get to 99.9%, and 70 times
that to get to 99.99%. So we say you can’t
get to light speed because you’d need infinite
energy to do that.
But I think this sometimes gives people the
wrong impression that you could actually hit
light speed if you just had some phenomenal
power source. Mass is essentially what experiences
time and things without mass, like photons
or gravitons, experience none. All objects
split their energy between motion through
space and motion through time. How much time
you have pass is all about what portion of
your total energy is your mass energy, go
99.99% of light speed and time runs at a 70th
the normal speed, and I think it’s easier
conceptually to ask how you’d ever eliminate
all your mass entirely, infinite power or
not, as that’s the only way you can move
at light speed.
Time slows down until you hit light speed,
at which point it stops entirely, and as a
result photons and gravitons and other light-speed
particles don’t experience time, whereas
ultra-low mass particles like neutrinos, which
move at nearly light speed, experience very
little time. If you could go faster than light,
then by that relativistic equation, you would
be experiencing time not just very slowed
down but running backwards. Again that’s
the usual explanation and I imagine most of
you have heard it before, for my part I think
it’s a bit easier to ask first, how would
you ever remove all your mass to be going
light speed, and second, how you would somehow
have a negative mass to be going backward
in time. See the Things Which Will Never Exist
episode for discussion of negative mass and
other negative quantities.
It is not coincidental that virtually every
proposed type of faster than light travel
relies on negative mass or energy, which we
have not yet detected or created a single
particle of, contrary to some grossly inaccurately
titled popular science articles. For this
same reason, we always point out that almost
all these methods open the door to time travel.
When it comes to normal matter at least, we
could not move so much as a single atom at
the speed of light if we used every bit of
energy in the entire Universe, and we’d
need more than infinity to make it move backward
in time.
We might get around these issues somehow one
day, but hopefully it’s a bit clearer why
FTL and time travel so often get phrased as
an impossibility not just some technical issue
that can be solved by sheer determination.
It’s not like traveling to the Moon, it’s
like making 2+2=5, and when we say this or
that theory might allow FTL or time travel,
what we usually means is that the theory doesn’t
explicitly forbid it thus far.
One of those methods that does get kicked
around is using a wormhole, and those require
the use of negative mass or energy, and actually
only let you travel back in time to when the
wormhole was created, a result of closed time-like
curves or CTCs. This is a worldline, or path
through space-time, that leads eventually
back to the exact same coordinates in space
and time. Think of it like any curved path
you might walk down and end up coming back
to where you started, like a circular running
track, only you also come back to when you
started.
Now assuming we had this option invented,
somehow, it might make for some interesting
civilizations. You can’t go back and see
the dinosaurs or end some war in ancient history
before it began, but you can go back to the
moment it was invented and built. Isaac Asimov
uses this sort of time travel in his novel
The End of Eternity, which happens to be my
favorite book by him. There, a group of time
travelers called the Eternals, who live in
a pocket of space-time, and can travel anywhere
inside time between when the device was invented
till the end of the Sun, and use the death
throes of the sun dying as their power source
for time travel.
The book spends a fair amount of time looking
at how that impacts civilization, since they
are not secret time travelers and actually
engage in trade between centuries. Indeed
that was the original purpose and they later
began trying to change events to engineer
better futures by making very tiny and calculated
changes, like sabotaging someone’s vehicle
not to start up before they’d have gone
on to attend some major event that shaped
them into being a dictator or similar. You
can see our episode, the Butterfly Effect,
for an idea just how small you could make
a change and expect it to have world-altering
effects a few centuries down the road. Trying
to predict those in terms of an outcome is
far harder of course.
We’ll discuss that scenario for a civilization,
one that can travel back to the time such
travel got invented but not before, in a bit.
First though, I mentioned quantum mechanics
is a bit different than relativity for time
travel and it actually offers us many pathways
that could either allow time travel or just
sort of trick us into thinking we had. One
of those is the notion that you aren’t traveling
to your own past but one very similar, out
of the multiverse concept of the Many-Worlds
Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. We’re
not going to get into the weeds of how Quantum
permits, or might permit, time-travel, but
here you’re not actually traveling to your
own past so you don’t have to worry about
the Grandfather Paradox, because it’s not
your past you’re changing, just something
very close to it.
The grandfather paradox is where you go back
in time and accidentally kill your grandfather,
I assume accidentally anyway, and as a result
are never born and can’t travel back in
time to kill him. Needless to say that’s
an extreme case but it’s the notion that
something you do in the past would cause you
not to be able or interested in doing the
trip after you made that change. You travel
back in time to save JFK from being assassinated
and now you no longer have a motivation to
do so.
Against that we have the self-consistency
principle, which is that you’d inevitably
have events between when you went back to,
and when you left from, play out so as to
make the trip still happen. Conceptually this
is like water evaporating from the ocean and
falling down as rain on land. That water can
take any number of paths back down to the
ocean again but still gets there. For instance,
you go back to next week with today’s winning
lottery numbers but write yourself a note
saying you need to make that trip. It’s
not that any given action is predestined to
happen the same, just that only those various
sequences of events that lead back to causing
you to get into that time machine actually
continue to exist while all the others essentially
poof out as hazy possibilities that can’t
exist. The raindrop can fall many places and
follow many courses to flow to the same place
and time. Many timelines are possible but
only those that lead to a self-consistent
time travel event can be stable and exist.
That one works a bit better under the Copenhagen
Interpretation of Quantum, which is the Schrodinger’s
Cat version where it’s alive and dead simultaneously
till observed, as opposed to Many Worlds where
in one universe it’s alive and in another
it’s dead, and you just don’t know which
one you’re in till you opened the box and
checked. As an analogy to self-consistency,
events are in quantum flux till observed,
like with the cat, at which point only one
possibility has happened and the others wink
out, and only a self-consistent time travel
event could be observed. This presumably results
in no option for paradoxes, always a problem
with time travel, as no paradoxical sequence
will not wink out.
This paradox issue is a sore spot in some
science fiction franchises. What exactly was
the point of the crew of Voyager going back
in time to fix histories they didn’t like,
when it was made clear elsewhere in the franchise
that this wouldn’t change their history
at all, only create a different history for
someone else to enjoy, one among infinity?
Another, more interesting possibility for
paradox avoidance is that as the Many Worlds
branch off from one another, some branches
are pruned. Only the branches that contain
no violations of the laws of physics or logic
remain on the tree. And so, if you did try
to kill your grandfather, then starting at
the moment of his near death, the universe
would branch into the histories where you
succeeded and the histories where you failed,
and only the latter would survive. What you
would experience would be frustrating failure
after failure, because no matter how bizarre
or contrived a coincidence was required to
prevent you from killing him, only the histories
in which you failed and he produced your father
would be left. If this is true, there’d
be no reason for time travelers to worry about
causing a paradox, because the universe absolutely
would not let them.
And indeed you can argue it can’t possibly
be your true past anyway because the Universe
we’re in has a set amount of matter and
energy and if someone from next year just
arrived here now, they’d be adding mass
and energy, mass and energy that is interacting
with stuff like producing gravity. So even
if we transported you back in time to some
sealed underground bunker that little extra
mass is slightly altering the Earth’s spin,
how much gravity it exerts on the Moon, and
so on, changing the future, even if apparently
very little. Little effects can have massive
long term changes, again see the Butterfly
Effect, but from a multiverse perspective
it’s a different universe if even a single
atom is not exactly where it otherwise would
have been.
Conservation of mass and energy isn’t the
entirety of it, you can’t get around this
by just exchanging equal masses of material
between two times, they’d have to be identical,
the same state, to switch and not produce
changes to the state of the Universe, and
throwing something backward in time to replace
something identical in every way, which would
include positions and state of memories in
a brain or harddrive, is not meaningful time
travel. So you couldn’t just teleport data
from tomorrow back to today on your harddrive
so it told you tomorrow’s lottery numbers,
even though you wouldn’t seem to have changed
the mass or energy of the universe. And indeed
that sort of quantum teleportation, changing
the states on bits on a harddrive, is one
of those possible FTL or time travel notions
that gets kicked around and probably would
not work.
Another ‘cheat’ approach to quantum time
travel is that even though the odds of it
are beyond minuscule, there’s always a chance
of things assembling effectively at random.
So you could have a bunch of atoms randomly
assemble into a person with memories of being
from the 22nd century. Those odds, while again
vanishingly small, are still larger than the
total number of universe combinations in a
multi-verse where everything that can happen
will happen, so if Many Worlds Interpretation
is correct, there are universes where someone
identical to you right now has emerged in
the time and place your grandfather and grandmother
first met and interrupted their date raving
about being transported to the wrong date
and causing them not to meet and fall in love.
No grandfather paradox results from this though.
There’s also one where you think you’ve
invented time travel, blow yourself up turning
the machine on, and a copy of yourself identical
to the moment you threw the switch appears
at the intended destination time and place,
smugly convinced the machine worked. See the
Infinite Improbability Issues episode for
more craziness associated with Multiverses,
but while that technically isn’t time travel,
it effectively is for all practical purposes
except the paradox, and of course not being
something you can really choose to do.
Okay, that’s the not-too-quick overview
of the mechanics of how time travel and paradoxes
might or might not work, let’s consider
some scenarios for those if they did work.
What sort of civilization gets produced?
First, if the multiverse approaches work,
and lets you just travel there, adding mass
and energy to some place when you arrive,
this becomes really good news because it means
the number of possible Universes is now infinite,
rather than just very large. Many-worlds generally
assumes there’s a Universe for every single
possible combination and arrangement of each
particle, that’s a huge number but not infinite
because the mass of the Universe is assumed
to be finite, at least the pocket we call
the Observable Universe.
If I can add an atom to that, I now create
even more universes. One might argue it’s
still not actually infinite since you can
only put so much matter in the Universe without
collapsing it into a black hole, but as the
Universe expands that amount increases. You
also get FTL travel out of it, since you can
jump back in time, move in a direction, jump
back again, move again, and so on until you
are at a destination, like the Edge of the
Observable Universe. So the number of possible
realities you could visit and colonize is
either infinite or so large it makes no difference
and you never have to worry about the Heat
Death of the Universe because you could add
or subtract mass and energy and entropy from
any given time, or just move to a different
one.
Under more classic time travel you can avoid
heat death too, by invading your own past.
If the world was about to end you could jump
back to when it was younger and colonize that,
and it’s presumably fine to do so since
you can’t do it if paradoxes are a problem
as you’d erase the civilization that produced
you and your time travel device.
At the cosmic level you just jump back to
a billion years after the Big Bang every time
you run low on material. You might be wondering
if that proves time travel can’t happen
since clearly no one did that, but logically
that doesn’t quite hold up as it’s a bit
of a tautology, circular reasoning, which
is kind of appropriate for contemplating circular
bits of time I suppose. If the universe permits
no paradox of this type, time travel isn’t
possible so it doesn’t matter, but if it
does it’s because you are getting new realities
out of it, and there will be realities for
every possible scenario including a reality
that never had time travelers arrive in it
prior to time travel being invented there,
we’d just be in such a Universe. Or one
where the footprint was minimal.
Of course you also have the Self-Consistency
angle as an option too, you jump back in time
and colonize the Early Universe but the pattern
of possible futures leading to us only allows
the ones where we’d be ignorant that occurred,
like they died off or grew very slowly and
distantly from us so we hadn’t noticed these
temporal colonists yet.
Tenses are rather confusing in time travel
too, how do you refer to your own future that
is your world’s past or vice versa? I often
get a bit confused when writing scripts on
the show just because I often refer to things
like last week’s video, also discussing
problems with Time, which came out December
26th, except that it is not January 2, 2020
as I write this, it’s October 28, 2019.
When I finish writing this script and upload
it for the crew to edit, I’ll get to work
on making the video for November 7, Cybersecurity,
it can get rather confusing at times and yesterday,
Sunday October 27th, I was doing a live chat
session after our livestream on our Discord
server and started referencing people to our
Space Pirates episode for a detailed explanation
of what I was discussing at that moment, only
that episode hadn’t come out yet. I’ll
also sometimes reference episodes that don’t
exist, because some bit of material got removed
from the draft for time constraints or to
improve the flow of the episode, and I forgot.
Those unused scripts or versions of scripts
are similar to timelines that never happened,
due to changing time, and presumably there
are ones where those episodes were made.
That’s probably a small hint at the sort
of tense confusion time travel civilizations
would get. How do you refer to something you
plan to do yesterday, or that you already
did tomorrow? If this sort of travel is common
and non-paradoxical, because it’s a sequence
of multiverses, how do you phrase an explanation
to your friends when you come into the office
in the morning sporting much longer hair and
beard and say you just came out of a timeline
where your wife died in a car accident so
you had to skip back and fix that, and how
it was a very nice funeral and then the two
of you went on a vacation afterwards because
it was a bit stressful.
How about when a longer-bearded copy of your
co-worker Bob walks in and say it’s going
to be a busy day, and then one with an even
longer beard comes in and says, “Good news
everyone, tomorrow we closed the deal with
our new client, but we all need to do some
extra overtime last weekend”.
It would tend to seem like cohesive timelines
would utterly breakdown too, and you might
get weirder day-to-day options like dating
apps that let you swipe forward or back, instead
of left or right, to find the girl or boy
of your dreams from a different century and
sit down on your first date and see what your
future would look like.
Now in fiction we often get some sort of rules
preventing tons of time travel, concepts like
inertia of future events or changes requiring
more effort the further back you seek to make
them. But often it’s actual legal rules,
and that’s problematic because it doesn’t
really seem enforceable to have temporal police.
Someone just goes back in time and prevents
them being formed. If they’ve got some widget
that prevents such things happening, some
sort of time shield, then they can presumably
build a bigger one that protects their whole
civilization too and folks can go do as they
please elsewhere.
I get a time travel device and nothing is
stopping me from taking some classes in Latin
and Roman History, grabbing lots of textbooks
and schematics and modern widgets, and jumping
back to Caesar’s day and setting myself
up as Emperor, or jumping forward to the future
to get some life extension treatments and
awesome cybernetic enhancements and then jumping
back to the past to set myself up an immortal
leader. If you do have that infinite number
of timelines option, this might be a better
alternative to virtual realities where you
can be whatever you please as it might be
cheaper and easier and more real-feeling to
just hurl folks to other timelines. There
should always be one where the only difference
with your normal history was that someone
identical to you popped up at a given time
and place, at which point it diverges.
We usually say technologies like FTL and time
travel only exacerbate the Fermi Paradox,
the big question of where all the aliens are,
because it now means you have to contemplate
aliens from a much broader region of space
and also ones from the future jumping into
the early universe. But this is one alternative,
that nobody spreads out to the stars because
they just colonize earlier parallel histories
of their own world, and we just happen to
live in a timeline where that hasn’t happened.
Confusing stuff that’s giving me a headache,
so I’m going to close out here and get to
work on the Cybersecurity episode for November
7, 2019, which I already finished as I record
this on November 1st, 2019, but first let
me wish you an excellent 2020, now that 2019
is over.
When contemplating time travel, or fantasizing
about it, which I imagine I’m not alone
in doing, one common problem is all those
missing skills you’d need to actually have
to live back then, whenever then was. We have
a very skilled based society compared to prior
eras but they had a lot of skills we generally
lack, so if you just popped up in some ancient
kingdom you’d have a rough time surviving
without knowing the language or how to do
things like grind grain or swing a sword around.
But we do live in a far more skill-based society
than in olden times and it’s always handy
to be acquiring more skills. Plus it’s nice
to just have them, even when they aren’t
meant for career purposes they offer fun new
hobbies and a feeling of confidence that you
can get stuff done.
That’s why I like Skillshare. Skillshare
is an online learning community with thousands
pf classes in a wide range of topics like
design, business, technology and many more.
Even just those focusing on productivity or
time management, like Thomas Frank of College
Info Geek’s course, Productivity Masterclass.
A premium membership is less than $10 a month
and gives you access to that course and all
the rest, and you can try it out for free.
Join the millions of students already learning
on Skillshare today with a special offer just
for my listeners: Get 2 months of Skillshare
for free. To sign up, visit the link in the
description and get 2 months of unlimited
access to thousands of classes for free. Act
now for this special offer, and start learning
today.
So that will wrap our show up for the day,
but we’ll be back next week to our alien
civilizations series to take a look at alien
conspiracies and aliens who conspire, and
ask what sort of motives they might have for
a given conspiracy. The week after that we’ll
return to the Moon, to look at what industries
might arise there and help us develop an interplanetary
society, in Moon: Industrial Complex.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, visit our website IsaacArthur.net
to donate to the show or look over our inventory
of over 200 episodes or our awesome SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great year!
