Dostoyevsky said, “The mystery of human
existence lies not in just staying alive,
but in finding something to live for.”
So our purpose today is, well, purpose.
Purpose is a pretty tricky topic for Futurism
because one of the major purposes of technology
is to make life a lot easier, and the basic
purpose of humanity is to survive, and help
the tribe survive.
That’s wired into us by Evolution, and in
truth almost all our day to day motivations
can be traced to have some connection to it.
So when technology comes by and grants near
universal prosperity, our purposes from day
to day survival should decline if not outright
disappear.
Should that happen, we must ask what will
fill the void?
It is entirely possible a lot of folks might
simply pursue happiness and pleasure as their
main purpose, hedonism, and while that’s
not for me and I take a dim view of that mindset
nowadays, it’s hard to condemn when the
individuals aren’t causing other folks any
problems.
Nor is personal happiness a bad objective,
but most of us feel a life devoted only to
the pursuit of maximum happiness and pleasure
is a hollow one.
Imagine for the moment our default post-scarcity
civilization from the perspective of an individual
living in it.
And I don’t mean the blatant Utopias, or
those that seem to be, but hide some terrible
problems down underneath with the Morlocks.
I mean the kind implied by a lot of the tech
we discuss here.
It’s the year 2300 and you are living on
Earth.
You’ve been doing it for a very long time,
since I do mean you and I, not our descendants.
As we’ve discussed before, there is a decent
chance we, personally, will still be alive
and kicking in centuries to come.
You are a cyborg.
You probably don’t look like it, but your
body is flooded with tiny little machines
that fix damage and you’ve probably got
millions of tiny bits of circuitry woven around
your body and brain.
You can probably remember watching this episode
quite clearly, though of course could easily
pull it back up again if not.
You do not have to exercise, your body just
stays in shape.
You can eat as much as you want of whatever
you want, and whenever you want it.
You can have that slice of cheesecake without
thinking of calories, and then go run a marathon
and, even though you’re not that great at
it, you would have broken every Olympic record
set back in your youth.
The concept of ‘youth’ is also fairly
arbitrary to you, since you can pretty much
look like whatever age you choose.
You don’t really think of yourself as particularly
impressive, weighed against your friends and
neighbors, but if we dropped you in the past
you could beat up a whole platoon of elite
soldiers while speed reading an entire book.
You learn fast, and you never forget what
you learned or observed unless you want to.
You never get sick or old unless you want
to.
While you’re not really any smarter, stronger,
healthier, or wealthier than the average,
you live in a mansion and can buy pretty much
anything you could ever have reasonably wanted
in your youth, so long as it isn’t ridiculously
over the top, unique, or requiring another
person, and you can get most of the more ridiculous
things in virtual reality anyway.
Plus there are really good psychologists you
can visit if you’ve developed some addiction
to collecting or hoarding.
They’re good too, they could sit down with
someone with nicotine addiction from the twentieth
century and that person would walk out without
ever having so much as a craving again.
Your civilization presumably has some way
of keeping excessive things reined in, be
it simple cost draining your bank account
or social scolding from the town council that
has to approve more over-the-top acquisitions
like when your neighbor decided he wanted
a solid gold house and they said no.
You are not a lazy, stupid two-legged cattle
enjoying some paradise, all but vacant of
mind and ability.
You’re more like Bruce Wayne, rich, athletic,
and smart, only you are not the Batman because
there’s no crazed villains going around
and everyone you know is more or less on your
level.
Most folks you know are carrying around knowledge
equivalent to Ph.D.s in many fields, because
they learn easier, teaching technology has
vastly improved, and they are often centuries
old.
You’re a superhero, but with no one to save.
There is no global hunger to fix, no homeless
folks to build houses for, no vast injustices
to deal with anymore.
You can certainly spend a lot of time kicking
around your palace having fun, but you won’t
really loll around the place because you don’t
really get tired.
You might not even need to sleep, but if you
do, you wake up full of energy and you don’t
have days where you are under the weather
or your allergies are bugging you or you’ve
got cramps or a migraine or any other minorly
annoying ailment.
You will die someday, but mostly likely at
a time of your choosing, or by some pathway
of intentional risk.
You might remove the various safeguards that
keep you alive, and start doing risky things
until you either die or change your mind and
restore those safeguards.
Hunting lions with nerf bats was a popular
activity for a while, until people complained
it was upsetting the lions and banned it.
You’ve heard that jumping off the Orbital
Ring without a parachute into shark infested
sections of the ocean has become popular as
a replacement.
You basically have anything you could ever
want in life, and access everything else through
virtual reality, and have eons to enjoy them,
all guilt and shame free, since everyone else
has that same access, and no one is less fortunate.
So what do you do with your time?
What, exactly, is your purpose?
I encourage you to think of yourself in this
context, not some hypothetical person, as
it helps to circumvent the assumption everyone
would turn lazy and useless.
We tend to have a higher opinion of ourselves
and we generally know our own motives and
goals better than others.
I tried to think of what I would do.
That one was easy enough in some respects,
I’d probably keep doing some variation of
the stuff I do now.
I like my work and while I love having a larger
audience these days, I was quite happy when
the channel had hundreds of subscribers, not
hundreds of thousands.
External validation is nice, and useful too
as it helps you keep on track and refine and
improve what you do, but it’s rarely our
main motivation for our hobbies.
Hobbies, assuming you can make a living at
it, also make for great jobs and the general
point of a post-scarcity civilization is that
you can do something you want without needing
to worry about where you next meal is coming
from.
A thing that gets missed a lot in conversations
about robots replacing workers to increase
production at lower costs is that motivation
begins to trail away when nobody much cares
about cost anymore.
I tend to suspect you get a tipping point
where improved automation shifts away from
cost efficiency toward trying to eliminate
positions where the supply of folks wanting
to do it is way less than the demand.
That might help a little with folks trying
to find purpose in existence.
Particularly on things such as creativity
or scholarship, vitally important but not
part of our core production for survival,
we already tend to view that as something
for humans, not automation.
Partially because such things are harder to
automate, but I also suspect because we feel
those are our tasks and perhaps should remain
so even if they could be automated.
And that’s the key point of course.
A future high-tech civilization might turn
into one where nobody works or learns or ever
stirs themselves from the couch because they
don’t have to and don’t want to, but I
don’t think that scenario is too likely.
More likely is that most people want to be
doing something, have a megaton of skills
and talents, and have problems finding anything
to do, so end up sitting on the couch, same
as some second-string player on a championship
team waiting for the coach to call them off
the bench.
That might be a rough existence, regardless
of what luxuries life affords you, if you
always feel like a backup being held in reserve.
We should also consider the effects of post-scarcity
on our current perception of what qualifies
as ‘purpose’.
Humanity has been focused on immediate survival
and resource acquisition for as long as we’ve
existed.
It seems fair to assume that no longer having
to worry about such things would probably
change our psychology to some degree.
Given the chance to do and be whatever we
please without having to worry about the minutiae
of everyday tasks, we’d likely find our
society beginning to change its core views
and ideals.
Without having to worry about keeping the
factory running, food on the shelves, or staying
in ideal health, humanity might begin thinking
on scales which seemed previously out of bounds
due to considerations of the logistics and
manpower involved.
With these no longer at issue, humanity might
just start moving toward ever larger endeavours.
What tasks can occupy the mind of an immortal?
This, in many ways, is why it’s so easy
for me to imagine us building all those megastructures
we discuss and colonizing the galaxy.
This is also why I suggest thinking of yourself
in these conditions, not other people.
It’s easier for us to assume other folks
will turn selfish or lazy than ourselves,
and that outcome is possible, but I think
it far more likely the citizens of such a
civilization would be rather impressive in
terms of things like knowledge and experience
and motivation.
And it could be us too.
Any time in the next few decades some laboratory
somewhere might announce they managed to make
a tiny little robot that was able to follow
very simple orders, one of which included
making a copy of itself from materials on
hand.
A few years after that it’s over, because
that’s a universal assembler and if you
have those you’re instantly post-scarcity
and instantly biologically immortal.
Such a technology is not guaranteed, see the
Drexler-Smalley debate for the potential hurdles
and how they might be insurmountable, but
that’s not the only path to either of those,
just one that definitely does both.
Given something like that, we, you and I,
might be sitting down a few centuries from
now chuckling about this topic.
I can’t see myself or most of my friends
going to seed.
While I can see a lot of them saying they
would, since many are older than me, those
who either talk of retiring or have even done
so are back doing stuff a couple months later.
They’re not doing it full time, they travel,
spend time with the grandkids, putter about
with their hobbies, etc.
Many get up an hour later and sit about in
their pajamas, but many also do not, waking
up and getting at it just as early as before,
and the ones who do just go about it at their
own pace.
They are certainly no drain on society, either
ethically or in terms of resources, and the
latter is fairly irrelevant in a post-scarcity
setup.
Of course most of those folks also have some
sort of cause, usually several, that keep
them motivated.
And we certainly have no end of good causes
for folks to jump on board these days, we
have a lot of work to do before we have a
society where peoples’ only concern is finding
something to do with life.
When those go away, we do have a problem.
Now mind you, not every purpose has to be
grand and noble.
Indeed, those doing them don’t even have
to believe they are grand and noble but often
feel that way even when it’s probably not
that important objectively.
If someone’s purpose is designing the very
most fashionable clothing for dogs, and they
feel that’s very vital to civilization,
I’m not going to pretend I think it is,
but I won’t knock it either.
“Whatever keeps you going” is a phrase
I use with a lot of my friends these days,
and I don’t think most catch what I mean
by that, which is that I don’t really care
what they do so long as it keeps them happy,
and isn’t destructive to them or others,
but it’s a sentiment I suspect will get
a bit more common as time goes on and technology
progresses.
In the grand view, and in the long term, they
probably don’t matter too much, but then
again, I’m not so sure anything else does
either.
I usually find the best way to deal with Existential
Dread about the purpose of one’s existence
or the meaning of life is just to pick something
that feels right and roll with it, and cheerfully
ignore such contemplations.
I suspect that is also a sentiment that will
get more popular in time.
We have things a lot better off in almost
every respect than our ancestors did, but
at least most of them didn’t have to worry
about problems of that sort much.
Admittedly it’s kinda hard to worry about
whether or not existence matters or free will
truly exists when you’re engaging in hard
manual labor all day hoping to avoid disease
or injury long enough to see half your kids
survive to adulthood.
I don’t think I need to sell the point too
hard that people need a sense of purpose to
life, or that any community or culture needs
to have some mutual goals and aims in order
to stay bound together.
We’ll list that one down as a self-evident
truth, indeed in our original discussion of
post-scarcity civilizations a couple years
back, we actually made a sense of purpose
one of the six criteria you had to meet to
be considered one.
The question is what those are.
Again they don’t necessarily have to be
grand and sweeping, or even be perceived as
such, a coach of kids sports team certainly
can point to that as a good purpose serving
a lot of good ends but I don’t think most
would call it world-changing.
You’ve got skills and you put them toward
some good end, and it makes you feel like
there is a point to getting out of bed in
the morning.
The problem is, again, in a post-scarcity
civilization there’s a lot less of these,
even of the mundane kind.
There’s no soup kitchen to go donate money
or time to, because nobody needs that, and
you probably can’t even go feed animals
because someone will have already taken that
in hand.
Don’t put it past us to decide to tweak
nature so every lion on the planet just thinks
it ran down and ate an antelope, and every
cat got its mouse, even though the mouse is
just fine and isn’t over-breeding because
we released some virus or nanobot system to
lower their reproductive rates.
Same thing goes for building great big megastructures
or launching colony ships, our topic for two
weeks for now.
I get asked why I always aim for very big
colony ships with lots of people, or even
manned ones at all when some self-replicating
robot could probably get there faster and
terraform the place, and quite probably even
populate it with vat-grown kids it raised
and taught itself.
Personally I don’t think we’d do that
much, because I tend to assume we’ll actively
sabotage things which eliminate purpose.
A concern for high-tech civilizations is that
an AI might come into existence, get very
smart very quickly, and wipe out its creators.
That’s a valid concern, but another is that
even if it’s very friendly toward people
and benevolent, it might basically turn us
all into its pets.
We’ve talked about that before and I’ve
suggested that it would be smart enough to
see that problem and probably start making
up important stuff for us to do that it couldn’t.
A common hand wave in science fiction is to
have tasks that for some reason only people
can do, not computers, to ensure that there’s
a reason to have crews on board ships.
Tons of examples, in Gene Roddenberry's Andromeda
for instance they had method of space travel
called a Quantum Slipstream that had to be
navigated and for some reason an Artificial
Intelligence had only a 50/50 chance of getting
it right whereas an organic person could do
it right 99.7% of the time by “Biological
Intuition”.
That’s obviously a bit of handwaving nonsense
by the writers to justify a crew in the show,
but I could easily imagine an AI making something
like that up to make folks feel needed.
Indeed that’s my preferred theory for the
Matrix Trilogy.
The idea presented, that the machines keep
people around as batteries, is dumb.
So is the alternate one where they used us
for certain specialized processing.
However, the idea that the whole thing, including
the so-called real world in its post-apocalyptic
dystopian glory, was just a simulation by
an AI programmed to make folks feel happy,
fits better.
That the world outside the Matrix is just
another layer meant for folks with a rebellious
streak.
Thing is, you don’t have to be an AI to
come up with this plan.
You could have the powers that be, regular
old humans, just conspire to come up with
stuff like that to make citizens feel useful,
and indeed, they and their minions get a nice
sense of purpose engaging in a struggle to
keep the masquerade going.
It’s not too hard for me to imagine that
happening.
Not just that some folks might think there’s
a need for it and contemplate doing it, or
try to do it, but that by and large people
will turn a blind eye to it.
Even if it was something that seems patently
absurd, like the government coming out and
telling everyone there was an unknown threat
they didn’t dare disclose, and the only
way to combat it was to make widgets, ones
that had to be crafted or at least tested
by actual humans, I think that might actually
work.
Amusingly those folks running the show could
cheerfully sit down for polygraph tests because
they’d think it was true, the unknown threat
was just purposelessness, and anyone who saw
behind the curtain is probably a good convert
to help run the show.
But I don’t think, ultimately, that it would
be necessary.
You can find stuff for people to do that probably
does matter, and no one really has much motive
to peek behind the curtain or believe folks
who have and shout out about what they saw.
Not because they’re dumb or gullible, but
because we all know we need a purpose and
don’t see any advantage to ripping apart
ours or anyone else’s.
A few weeks back we were talking about whether
or not aliens would find us boring and never
visit Earth for that reason.
We poked some holes in that, and one of those
was the notion that super-intelligent entities
are better at multitasking.
Talking to a single normal human might be
very boring to them, the capacity to simultaneously
talk with hundreds or even quintillions of
them probably changes that.
That episode hasn’t aired yet at the time
I’m writing this one, but I would guess
someone will object on the grounds they’d
have more interesting things to do.
I might be able to keep track of a dozen mice
at once, but I’d still rather play a video
game or chat with a human friend, and presumably
the same might apply to an advanced intelligence.
I can’t actually argue that point, but I’d
note two things.
First of all, that very argument is predicated
on the assumption there are more interesting
things to do, which presumably means a lack
of purpose isn’t an issue for them and thus
also presumably means it wouldn’t be for
a post-scarcity civilization.
But secondly, I’d ask what exactly that
is?
What do they do?
Folks talking about this will often suggest,
half-jokingly, that maybe the megabrain super
intelligence spends its time trying to find
the last digit of Pi.
But they wouldn’t, they know there isn’t
one and if they’re that smart they would
also know there’s no intrinsic value to
that.
You don’t even need the first 40 digits
of Pi to have a value accurate enough to calculate
the volume of the Observable Universe down
to Atomic precision, and we had that back
in the 1600s, and the mathematical proof it
was an irrational number, one which has infinite
digits, in the 1700s.
Don’t go digging for some purpose to efforts
to calculate it, the only one I’ve ever
heard is that it’s a handy way to test supercomputers
or generate random numbers.
Neither of those is limited to Pi and both
imply another useful purpose rather than those
digits themselves.
Obviously some folks find it interesting,
but I think it’s mostly just about setting
a new record.
Again, whatever keeps you going, but I can’t
really see a supermind finding it anymore
fascinating than I do.
And for the most part I tend to be more interested
in what cool things science can do for us
rather than the specific rules themselves
and for their own sake.
I think you either have a limit, at which
point you have actually figured out all the
laws of the Universe, or maybe it is one of
those endless things with another box inside
a box every time you open a new layer.
If the former, you have to find something
else to do with your time, and if the latter,
there’s presumably a point where, like calculating
digits of Pi, you decide it is a box in a
box in a box and also stop seeing any tangible
return on your investment of time and decide
to call it.
If it’s just endless rules, than it becomes
like the rulebooks for a role-playing game,
where you initially are glad at all the new
options each additional supplementary rulebook
offers but eventually get irritated they keep
adding to it as it offers no new substance.
In regard to the Fermi Paradox, I consider
that a decent rebuttal to the idea aliens
just all have some great purpose they share
that keeps them too busy and interested to
ever say hi to primitive neighbors.
In regard to our topic, I just point it out
as an option for folks who are bored with
their fellow man or need some purpose to throw
themselves at for eternity.
I just don’t see it as particularly more
compelling than many of the other options
on the table or particularly more noble a
quest than someone spending a century building
a new sandcastle every day to be swept away
by the tide.
If they enjoy it, and it keeps them going,
and they’ve nothing more important to occupy
their time, have fun.
Even if you did feel you had no great purpose
and felt you needed one, you could trick yourself
into having one, even without using a high-tech
path like visiting a brainwashing center to
have yourself convinced manufacturing paperclips
was your calling in life and the most noble
goal.
That’s another point back to AI of course,
and one advantage of researching them, by
trying to figure out how to give artificial
minds a purpose that keeps them safe and sane,
we also can figure out better how to do that
for ourselves.
We’ll talk more about brainwashing later
in the year.
Fundamentally though I just don’t see us
running out of purposes, and of course we
talk about a lot of those on the channel.
Colonizing Space, Mega-engineering, and projects
closer to home like geoengineering and ecological
repair.
And those will be common topics in our schedule,
which we’ll get to in a moment, for the
next few months, and later this fall we’ll
look at some truly staggering projects we
can do right here on Earth like Colonizing
the Oceans or turning desert or tundra into
rich ecosystems.
But Ecological Repair, like reforestation,
isn’t something that has to wait till the
distant future or requires vast national efforts.
There’s a lot of groups working on that
right now and one of them is our new partner
Ecosia, they’re a group that raises funds
by having a search engine where the ad revenue
it generates is used to plant trees.
Something just that simple and they’ve already
planted about 30 million and are adding a
new one every second.
Good search engine too, they don’t sell
or give out anyone’s data, on the other
hand, they do make their fundraising and expenses
very visible and transparent, so you can see
how effective they are.
If you’d like to help them out, you can
just take the link in the video description,
ecosia.co/isaacarthur, install it for free,
use it for free, and every time you use it
you’ll help plant a new tree.
All right, as mentioned we’ll be looking
at colonizing space for the next few weeks
and we’ll start by visiting Ceres, the largest
of our asteroids or the smallest of our dwarf
planets, and discuss ways to colonize that
and talk about colonizing the asteroid belt
in general.
The week after that, we’ll take a first
look at Generation Ships, mighty arks in space
for transplanting civilizations to distant
stars, something we’ll spend a few episodes
examining, how we make these ships for settling
the galaxy.
And then the week after that we’ll join
up with John Michael Godier to discuss some
of the implications for a galaxy that’s
been settled by us, if we never encounter
any other civilizations in it.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
If you’d like to discuss this topic more,
you can leave a comment below, or join in
the discussion on our Facebook or Reddit Groups,
Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur, or our
new Discord Server, all of which are linked
below in the video description.
Until next time, this is Isaac Arthur saying
thanks for watching, and we’ll see you next week!
