We have gazed upon the Moon with 
wonder since the dawn of humanity,  
and named its craters as seas, but 
could those become true seas one day?
Welcome to science and Futurism with Isaac Arthur, 
and I am your aforementioned host, Isaac Arthur.  
Today we will be discussing if it could ever be 
possible, let alone practical, to Terraform the  
Moon. To give it seas and sky and make it a 
beautifully blue and green gem in our sky. 
The simple answer is yes, it can be done, though 
it is a monumental task and how practical it  
is will depend a lot on both your available 
technologies and how badly we want to do it.  
Today we’ll be discussing several different 
approaches and what is involved in each. 
But let’s begin by laying out some basic 
principles of terraforming, the main hurdles  
to doing it to the Moon, the advantages 
it has, and some misconceptions involved. 
First, there’s two basic camps of terraforming, 
which are meant to make them more Earth-like,  
and that’s terraforming and para-terraforming. 
There’s no truly distinct line between the two  
but para-terraforming tends to manifest 
in options like a dome on a planet full  
of pressurized and breathable air, or artificial 
lighting to match Earth’s sunlight duration and  
spectrum. There’s also bioforming, which is when 
you alter organisms to fit an alien environment.  
You might adjust everything’s biology to be 
content with a 27 hour day on one planet,  
or more overtly, give humans and other mammals 
gills so they could live on a water planet. 
With very few exceptions, we should assume 
all of humanity’s efforts off of Earth will  
use a mix of all three options, both 
over the course of the endeavor and in  
the final product. Even on earth we may opt 
to para-terraform our tundras or deserts,  
and exact matches for Earth should be rare in the 
galaxy. In nearly every case you have the ability  
to use one of those options far more heavily 
than the others if you prefer that approach. 
For bioforming, you can probably cook up some 
form of life that can live on a radiation scorched  
airless vacuum with sufficient effort, even 
if it means a total overhaul of everything to  
use silicon-based life in place of carbon. You 
can get heavy-handed with terraforming to take  
a planet with a 27-hour day and slow its rotation 
to 24, by extreme efforts. For para-terraforming,  
we tend to view this as the active use of 
technology to replicate Earth-like living  
conditions. You might alter daylight by use 
of orbiting mirrors and shades, or gravity  
by centrifugal force. An extreme version of that 
might be creating an incredibly elaborate virtual  
world like in The Matrix on some barren rock and 
plugging everyone there into, while covering the  
rock in power collectors and robotic factories.
In all of these cases there’s likely to be a sweet  
spot for each planetary setup that varies by what 
the colonists want and what their technologies  
make most economical or practical. And that is 
likely to change with time. For instance, there  
are something like a million planets in just this 
solar system – the 8 we talk about that no longer  
includes Pluto are the Major Planets, and that’s 
basically the objects more massive than our Moon,  
Pluto is smaller and less massive than our Moon.
There’s a couple other moons bigger and more  
massive than our Moon too but there are probably a 
hundred dwarf planets akin to Pluto kicking around  
the outer solar system and millions of minor 
planets, a large portion of which are asteroids.  
In a future solar empire, every last one of 
these will be para-terraformed in some fashion,  
and Earth will stand as the crown jewel, hub of 
trade and knowledge. This will likely continue  
even as we expand out into billions of stars in 
this galaxy, because almost every colony among  
the stars will maintain some sort of lifeline 
with Earth. They would bring a lot of practical  
experience and knowledge about how to make 
dead rocks livable and a lot of industrial  
might and manpower to the interplanetary economy.
Terraforming options will be very dependent on the  
resources you can commit to the project. If the 
Moon is the brightest jewel in the heaven’s next  
to Earth, itself the center of a powerful 
empire or confederacy of growing worlds,  
then the sheer amount of muscle they can throw at 
the Moon is almost unimaginable. In the meantime,  
no place is closer to us and easier for 
us to exert efforts on. We can get stuff  
to the Moon much easier than Mars or Venus.
That includes signals, as signal lag from the  
Moon is only a bit over a second each way, not 
many minutes like our inner solar system, hours  
for the outer system, or years to neighboring 
stars. That means you can run robots on the moon  
controlled by people here on Earth. And while 
more advanced AI seems certain in the future,  
ones able to work fairly autonomously even 
if we limit it to very-subhuman intelligence,  
the sheer advantage of a more automated industrial 
base makes everything about space travel and  
development enormously easier and gives you a 
larger amount of resources to throw at projects. 
The Moon’s proximity to Earth and its low 
gravity also makes it our natural first base  
to launch not just interplanetary colonization, 
but build up efforts in Earth orbital space,  
as bulk raw materials and fuel can be gotten 
off the Moon for just a few percent of the  
energy cost of getting off Earth with its thick 
atmosphere and high gravity. For this reason,  
the Moon is likely to be heavily mined and home to 
a lot of manufacturing, for the build up of space,  
and thus is likely to eventually have a lot 
of muscle to turn efforts to improving its own  
livability, long before a place like Mars might.
Indeed, I would go so far as to argue the Moon  
will be the first place we terraform, even if it 
might be a more heavy case of paraterraforming and  
thus might not be the first place to decently 
approximate a naturally livable planet. Though  
again, unless we find some decent twin to Earth in 
a neighboring solar system, every other candidate  
would also need a lot of para-terraforming, 
with Venus maybe being the easiest, not Mars. 
This hardly makes it easy and we should begin 
the major challenges for terraforming the Moon by  
mentioning that it is also an advantage. The Moon 
is one of the few objects that gets Earth-parallel  
levels of sunlight. Mercury, Venus, and the 
Aten Asteroid Group get more or equal lighting,  
but most objects are further away, 
at least for most of their orbits. 
As such, the Moon is not just a place where 
solar power is practical, but which needs no  
more filtering of sunlight than our own Atmosphere 
provides us. However, nice as that is, there’s  
two problems with that lighting. First, that 
filtering our atmosphere does is hardly trivial,  
if our air suddenly became transparent to all 
that ultraviolet light and ionizing radiation  
we would be burned badly. Second, the sun 
rises and sets on Earth and the Moon both,  
there is no dark side to the Moon except in the 
sense of the back side of it being invisible to  
us here on Earth. The Moon orbits the Earth and 
always shows it the same face and it does this  
once a month so that’s how long its day is too.
For the sake of discussion, yes it would be  
possible to unglue the Moon from its tidal locking 
with Earth, and if it were terraformed with seas  
and sky they would act like a lubricant against 
tidal breaking, cutting down on how much effort  
had to be exerted to keep the Moon at a 24 
hour day. The rotational energy of a sphere  
rises approximately with the square of its angular 
velocity. If you want to spin the Moon almost 30  
times faster, so it rotated every day, you are 
talking nearly a thousand times the rotational  
energy it has now but it’s actually very tiny 
compared to Earth’s, it’s around 3 x 10^23 Joules,  
whereas Earth’s is almost a million times higher, 
so even spun at Earth’s rate of once a day, it’s  
far lower mass and radius means it would still 
only need a thousandth of the energy Earth did. 
And indeed that once-a-day Moon’s rotational 
energy would be a little under the amount the Sun  
produces every second, and only a small fraction 
of the sunlight hitting the Moon during a period  
it would need for tidal locking to reoccur if left 
to its own devices. So keeping the Moon spinning  
once per day is entirely doable. This is arguably 
still para-terraforming since it would require  
continuous technological effort to keep it from 
slowing down, as opposed to simply putting various  
mirrors in shades in a 24-hour orbit of the Moon.
I think we need to acknowledge a conceptual  
difference with para-terraforming though, with the 
idea that para-terraforming is where things are  
more immediately vulnerable to breakdown. A fleet 
could come by and wipe out those orbital mirrors  
and shades. As could some Kessler syndrome event 
of cascade collisions of orbital junk. Neither  
would be likely to spin a planet or moon 
back down again to a lower rotation. While  
para-terraforming efforts might need regular 
maintenance, a breakdown of civilization for  
a century or two after some collapse of an 
empire or disaster isn’t going to result in  
that planet de-terraforming. This is obviously a 
very gray and somewhat arbitrary distinction too,  
but I think a degree of vulnerability or 
time-sensitivity is implied with para-terraforming  
and that its absence tends to be where we 
consider it more in the line of terraforming. 
So could we spin the Moon up?
Yes, and we might too. We could  
do the same with Venus, to give it a day length 
like Earth’s instead of its backwards day-night  
cycle longer than its own year, but since 
Venus is nearly as massive and wide as Earth  
we would need to give almost three-quarter’s Earth 
rotational energy to match our day. Alternatively,  
Mars, at a tenth our mass and half our radius 
would have only a fortieth Earth’s rotational  
Energy for the same day length, and already 
has one only about half an hour longer,  
so it already has about 95% of that energy.
For Mars, we might add to its rate of spin,  
and angular momentum, by dropping comets on it to 
bring it valuable volatiles like water, ammonia,  
and methane. It would not be hard to coordinate 
all your incoming drops of those to add angular  
momentum to Mars. That’s no small task but if 
you’re planning to add those to Mars you might  
as well do it that way and get the free rotational 
bump. Especially since dropping an object onto it  
to add spin means it impacts at a slightly lower 
velocity, since it’s coming in near the equator  
and in the direction of existing spin. Less 
crash damage. Doing it the other way around,  
to subtract spin, would produce stronger impacts. 
But you can also magnetically drain a planet’s  
rotation as a power source, by building a 
planet-sized dynamo around the planet. You  
can add spin that way too, but must pay energy in.
You also have the option of launching material off  
a planet, or Moon, and using that momentum 
to shove your planet’s rotation up or down.  
When we think of exporting large amounts of raw 
material off the Moon, or Venus for that matter,  
we can imagine a large mass driver or 
space catapult that launched so as to  
add or subtract spin. Two opposing launchers 
could ensure that the spin remained the same,  
adding when one launched and subtracting when 
the other did, so you could get a body to the  
right spin then keep it there. A directed energy 
beam from the Sun could do it too, though radiant  
pressure alone is not your best option. A beam 
of ionized particles or concentrated solar wind  
isn’t a great thing to hurl at a planet with an 
atmosphere you want to keep either, but would  
also work on an initially airless planet.
You could build big towers up into space  
with giant reflectors on them, or deflecting 
magnets – it’s quite easy to do without any  
gravity or air constraints -- and use them 
like a big solar windmill to spin the Moon,  
or any other body for that matter. However, I 
think you would opt for timing your landings and  
launches so they added inertia. And a big mining 
hub like the Moon in an automated Kardashev Scale  
civilization might be belching out entire megatons 
of matter every moment at interplanetary speeds,  
while receiving large amounts of other materials, 
which is a lot of inertia changing hands. 
In any event, the key notion there is that you are 
likely to try to piggyback a lot of terraforming  
operations onto existing projects to save effort. 
I would not be surprised if we saw rotational  
changes done while terraforming planets, and 
you might piggyback off the para-terraforming  
effort too. Our vastly cheaper alternative 
to spin a planet, at least in the short term,  
is erecting a big solar shade and mirrors to 
keep the normal sunlight off the planet and  
bounce it down in a proper 24-hour pattern. This 
is ideal for a place like Venus as we can then  
cool it down over a couple centuries and make 
it livable and use mirrors to bring in a 24-hour  
day at Earth-level of intensity and warmth.
You can make them wavelength selective too. This  
lets you add more light of a given wavelength 
to a planet for other stars than our own,  
or to remove most of the harmful ultraviolet 
light. Given that such shades and mirrors need  
to be only a few micrometers thick, even though 
they must have a combined surface area similar  
to the planet or Moon they are on, this is not a 
big investment of mass. Over time they may become  
a hassle to repair and replace and be viewed as 
not as good as the real thing. In which case,  
such shades might be large power collectors and 
you could beam that energy down to the planet as a  
power source for the people and industries below.
A shade like that would represent a huge amount of  
power and a constant one, there’s no night time 
or weather at some planet’s L1 Lagrange point,  
so you could use your surplus power as your 
civilization grew, or from outside your peak  
hours, to help spin that planet up, and when 
you get there you just recycle your orbital  
shades and mirrors and enjoy a natural day. 
Or most of them anyway, this sort of orbital  
infrastructure is likely to be a common feature 
on any planet or moon we settle on as it has so  
many advantages and is relatively cheap to deploy.
It's also a bit trickier on a moon than a planet  
since the Moon’s own L1 Lagrange point is with 
Earth, not the Sun, and the same for it’s L2,  
so you need to orbit them around the Moon at a 
radius of about 6000 miles or 10,000 kilometers  
for a period of one day. You would likely use 
the same big thin sheets for mirror and shades,  
and just give them some internal power collectors 
and gyros so they could rotate themselves to  
either bounce light away from the Moon or add 
light to it, and they’d spin to reflect light  
away when in between the Moon and Sun. This 
amounts to building a micro Dyson swarm around  
the Moon to keep light out and I suspect you would 
instead try for an orbital ring around the Moon  
that just had a big opaque circular shade on it 
moving to interpose with the Sun, and a similar  
approach is probably a good pick for Mercury due 
to its decidedly strange days. You just open or  
close your sun shade or mirror on that ring 
to the amount needed to match what you want. 
This is a decidedly clunky approach though, 
and combined with the vastly lower energy  
requirement to achieve proper spin, is why I think 
we might see that brute force rotation adjustment  
occur. Which would make for some impressive 
tides once we got air and water in place,  
as Earth would cause a lot more tidal warping 
on the Moon than the Moon does to us, which is  
why it’s tidally locked in the first place.
We obviously haven’t got time today to run  
through all our options for terraforming in the 
same length, but this topic is one we have tended  
to skim over in our other terraforming videos like 
Planetary Terraforming Techniques, and I think  
it applies more to the Moon. Alternatively, we 
devoted an entire episode to get a magnetosphere  
around Mars – which is much easier than folks tend 
to assume and doesn’t involve nuking its core. And  
the same options can be applied to our Moon.
But it brings up our other challenge for  
terraforming the Moon, and that’s the issue that 
things aren’t very heavy on the Moon because of  
its low gravity, and that combined with its lack 
of a magnetosphere makes giving it an atmosphere  
very hard. Or rather having it keep an atmosphere 
once put on. If we just opened a magic wormhole  
to the Moon and dumped an atmosphere on it, it 
would not instantly fly off, but the leakage  
would be awful. We can’t model that well enough to 
give useful figures but while it might be several  
lifetimes before any appreciable drop occurred, 
it wouldn’t be the same geologically long process  
it was on Mars of a few hundred million years.
And if you spent a thousand years shipping in an  
atmosphere and have to replace your atmosphere 
every several millions years, then that just  
means you went from having 10,000 mega-freighters 
dropping air off every month to just one swinging  
by to replenish miniscule losses. Alternatively 
if you needed to replenish it on a timeline of  
centuries, I think that becomes unsustainable, and 
we don’t know what that timeline would look like  
for a terraformed Moon. It also represents a lot 
of air, as you need more air over any given area  
on a lower gravity planet than on Earth, 
because the lower gravity makes the same  
amount of air have less weight and generate less 
pressure down on the surface. You get a very tall  
atmosphere as a result, and a thicker one in 
terms of there being much more air above you,  
which would change the visual properties of 
the sky, particularly near dawn and dusk. 
Now the reality is this atmospheric loss issue 
is a hard problem to solve, there are several  
mechanisms for atmospheric loss and they all 
happen faster when you have lower gravity,  
or are hotter, or have no magnetosphere protecting 
you. The Moon has lower gravity than Mars,  
is closer to the Sun than Mars and has it shine 
on spots for two weeks straight to further heat  
things, and has no magnetosphere of note.
The easy para-terraforming fix is basically  
to dome over everything. As we saw recently in our 
episode the Domes of Mars, it is indeed possible  
to build diamond hard domes – diamond is just 
carbon after all – with multiple panes that are  
crystal clear, filter out harmful sunlight, and 
help protect against micrometeors. You could make  
them sturdier than the steel armor on a battleship 
if you wanted and in that episode we detailed a  
number of backup and emergency protocols to make a 
dome a safer place to live than under an open sky. 
Which is part of the problem. I’m not sure you 
would ever not have those domes up given the  
advantages they have if big and crystal clear. 
Indeed so long as they are tall enough to hold  
in a normal atmospheric depth, so that 
the pressure was much lower near the top,  
you would not only still get weather but 
have very slow leakage out of a given dome  
even if a huge hole was punctured into it.
The Moon’s low gravity is still a good deal  
higher than what is needed to hold particles of 
air moving at room temperature velocities. That’s  
generally a few hundred meters per second and 
the escape velocity of the Moon is around 2400  
meters per second. Some particles will move faster 
than that but the distribution of speeds falls off  
very sharply, especially for heavier molecules 
like nitrogen, oxygen, argon, and carbon dioxide.  
What’s mostly going to strip them off is high 
speed ions. Typically a hydrogen atom or lone  
proton from the Sun ramming them at roughly a 
million miles per hour, which is not hyperbole.  
A strong magnetic field bends most of those 
out away from a planet, or moon, and prevents  
all those collisions, and thus is even more 
important than gravity for holding atmospheres. 
Again, see that episode about making a 
Magnetosphere for Mars for details on how,  
though there we recommend deploying a solar 
powered magnet at the Martian L1 with the Sun,  
and have the same problem as solar shades for 
applying this to a Moon, so you would probably  
use the alternative approach of a large orbital 
ring to generate a magnetic field, which could  
also serve as useful landing and launch platform. 
It would be a lot less visually intrusive than  
the solar shade and mirror approach too.
I am generally of the opinion that an  
artificial magnetosphere would be installed 
almost everywhere we settled too, and even  
Earth might deploy one just to further cut down on 
the ionized particles coming in – which represent  
dangerous radiation to those on space stations 
or ships. This is a paraterraforming option,  
and one where if it breaks down you aren’t in 
immediate danger, so not a jugular vein option,  
and neither are very tall and strong domes 
on the Moon, which if nice and clear don’t  
represent any sort of visually unpleasant effect.
I suspect that even with a magnetosphere and an  
economy able to import air to replace that lost 
by slower leakage, you might still have those  
domes up. I think it would come down to the 
net leakage rate and if the cost of replacing  
that was higher than maintaining domes. You would 
likely keep that artificial magnetosphere anyway.  
This would minimize energetic particles hitting 
your domes which would cut down on their own wear  
and tear and cut down on losses from cracked or 
leaking domes. You would probably have a very  
thin atmosphere above the domes anyway just from 
leakage. This also means if you have short domes,  
which get all their pressure from being a 
sealed container stuffed with air, rather than  
by weight of air like on earth, that when cracks 
or ruptures do occur your air spilling out is not  
being stripped off by solar wind very quickly 
and can be recovered from this over-the-dome  
atmosphere and pumped back down into domes.
But that circumvents the gravity issue a bit,  
which is our last big problem. As we discussed in 
Moon: Megacity, if we could develop the ability  
to artificially create black holes then you 
could stick one in the center of any body,  
be it an asteroid or a modest planet like Mars 
and pump hydrogen and helium into that to generate  
power and add mass. You just surround it with a 
shell so your black hole is separate. You can also  
skip on doing this at the core in favor of placing 
many of them at a shallower depth in a grid around  
the planet or Moon. We discussed black hole 
tech more last week, and again Moon: Mega City,  
covers your gravity options in more detail.
As noted there, if you wanted full Earth-like  
gravity on the Moon, which has 7.4% of Earth’s 
surface area, you would need 7.4% of Earth’s mass,  
and the Moon only has 1.2% of Earth’s 
mass, so you would need to add 6.2% to it,  
roughly 5 times what it has now. That’s a lot of 
hydrogen and helium to ship in from Jupiter but  
isn’t even a thousandth of Jupiter’s mass, and we 
might do this to Jupiter’s 4 big Galilean Moons,  
which are all comparable to our Moon in size, 
and much closer to Jupiter for shipping purposes. 
Adding mass to the Moon would also raise tides 
on Earth, though at the level of planetary  
engineering we’re discussing, the increased 
erosion on Earth from that would be miniscule  
to correct for compared to everything else. 
This obviously would help a lot for maintaining  
an atmosphere and one more like Earth’s.
But if you are using domes and artificial  
magnetospheres this question comes 
down to whether or not lower gravity  
is biologically adaptable. If it is, I suspect 
you don’t try messing with the Moon’s mass. 
We know zero gravity is bad for our health, we 
have no idea what lower gravity does and how  
much is enough, but we tend to assume the Moon’s 
gravity isn’t optimal for our health or those of  
other terrestrial flora and fauna, though that 
low gravity might make for some trees so tall that  
they laughed at redwoods. This is an example where 
we just don’t know yet. You are likely to see a  
large change in how ecosystems work in low gravity 
though, see our life on low gravity planets  
episode for discussion of that, but as a simple 
example, ecological balances might shift a lot  
if your trees are taller and flying is easier, and 
indeed running changes in low-gravity too, as each  
springing step takes longer to lower your foot 
down to the ground for the next one. So a given  
predator-prey relationship might change massively 
and disrupt ecologies you try to put in place. 
This is where bioforming might be a better 
option than para-terraforming or even  
terraforming options. You genetically tweak 
organisms to better handle lower gravity and  
re-balance your ecosystems. As we mentioned, 
it is likely that every place we settle will  
have its own unique blend of terraforming, 
bioforming, and para-terraforming that it uses,  
and which might change at any time. A given planet 
or moon might not have a unified government able  
to make policy decisions on terraforming and 
that’s why paraterraforming will often work  
better. It’s a lot harder to complain if one of 
the countries on your planet is using domes than  
it is to if they’re mass altering genetics 
or bringing in tons of cometary bodies or  
putting a black hole in your planet.
And my assumption is that by the time  
most larger bodies like the Moon, Mars, or 
Venus have enough people to justify a planet  
wide terraforming operation, rather than 
habitation domes and their parallels,  
that they will also have developed multiple 
governments, be they sovereign or simply large  
sub-divisions with different opinions than their 
neighbors on where their planet or moon should go. 
That time, intent, and willpower equation 
is the last big aspect of terraforming,  
as while it might seem like a monumental task 
to bring in a quadrillion of tons of nitrogen  
from Venus or the outer solar system, and many 
times that in water or hydrogen to make seas,  
it is in some ways easier to ship that than 
to decide to keep doing it. If I need to bring  
in 100 quadrillion tons of water to give 
the Moon nice deep seas in those craters,  
then that’s something like a trillion oil tanker 
deliveries of water or ice, and if you had one  
arriving every single second of every single day, 
that’s about 30,000 years’ worth of deliveries. 
All the while folks who might have been building 
their homes and towns in those craters might be  
having second thoughts about how much you really 
need a sea there and if it really needs to be full  
depth. Though with Earth hanging huge in their 
sky, far larger than the Moon is in our sky,  
they might have that as a constant reminder 
of what terraforming success looks like. 
It’s a long term project but in a civilization in 
which mass automation makes mega-projects viable  
and which would likely see the Moon second 
in power and influence in the interplanetary  
settlement era only to Earth, I think the 
resources would be there. Indeed you might  
maintain willpower simply because radical life 
extension technology might make it so people  
survived from the earlier days who still 
dreamed of completing the project. While  
others might be quite used to the lower gravity 
and the monochrome wasteland beyond the domes  
and prefer dwelling underground anyway. They 
might object to terraforming further. Later  
generations might push the project once more 
and seek to terraform the Moon after a pause. 
Inevitably the question comes down to how 
Earth-like you want your new home to be,  
and how Earth-like your descendants want 
it when it’s been made more habitable but  
they’ve adjusted too. Time will tell where the 
happy medium lies. The political landscape of  
those descendants will shift as the physical 
landscape shifts. It will also shift with the  
capabilities of technology to reshape a world, 
and the balance point of practical and possible,  
will all help determine the fate of our Moon 
and of all those other worlds we come to. But  
we saw today the many ways the Moon might 
be terraformed, so we know it can be done. 
And for my part, I think a day will come 
on Earth when we look up at that Moon in  
the sky and see another sky, of white 
clouds over blue seas and green lands. 
We were discussing the differences between 
terraforming and para-terraforming today  
and part of that line between them is their 
susceptibility to damage from poor maintenance,  
sabotage, or attack, and we’re seeing more and 
more these days how vulnerable our infrastructure  
is to cyberattacks and ransomware. This 
is almost always preventable and in most  
cases just using two-factor authentication, not 
repeating passwords, and using Virtual Private  
Networks, like NordVPN, will keep you safe.
NordVPN lets you surf anonymously from many  
different secure servers around the world while 
maintaining high-speed performance. You have  
every right to your privacy, websites are not 
entitled to know your data without even asking,  
many sell it and even good actors can 
get hacked and your data with them,  
exposing you to attack and fraud. Let NordVPN be 
your first line of defense, try out their fast,  
easy to use and intuitive interface that you 
can test out today with a 30-day money back  
guarantee at https://nordvpn.com/IsaacArthur.
One of NordVPN’s best features though is NordVPN  
Proxy Extensions, that lets easily control which 
sites you visit with or without the VPN on,  
split tunneling, so you can log into your bank 
with your real IP while going to other websites  
with the IP of the VPN server you’re using. And 
you can set up different VPN servers on different  
browsers, including loaned and borrowed devices.
Use the web safer and hassle free with NordVPN. Go  
to https://nordvpn.com/IsaacArthur and try it out 
risk-free with Nord’s 30-day money-back guarantee.
So that wraps us up for today but we have 
a bonus episode this weekend, Sunday,  
February 25th, on the topic of Vacuum Trains and 
other hyperfast transit systems. Next week we’ll  
be finishing the month on February 29th, as we 
leap into the topic of life on colony ark ship  
carrying people to new worlds that will carry 
us ahead into this leap year and into March,  
where we’ll head back to the dawn of time 
for a look at Primordial Planets. Then we’ll  
continue our discussion of terraforming 
by asking if it is ethical and when,  
and what sorts of challenges future civilizations 
will face on deciding whether or not a planet  
should be terraformed and to what degree.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Topopolis: 
The Eternal River, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
