The Search for ExtraTerrestrial Intelligence, 
SETI, is all about finding alien civilizations,  
and the bigger they are, the easier 
they should be to spot, and there’s  
few things a mega-civilization 
might build bigger 
than a Dyson  Sphere.
One  of the biggest topics this channel covers is 
the idea of massive space habitats and whole  
clouds of trillions of them being built around 
stars – conglomerations referred to as Dyson  
Sphere or Dyson Swarms – and another is the Fermi 
Paradox, the big question of where all the aliens  
are in a Universe so old and vast that it seems 
impossible that other civilizations would not  
have arisen yet. Today we’ll be discussing the 
connection between these concepts and if such  
Dyson swarms exist, how they would be visible to 
us if they do, and why they might not be visible,  
get hidden, or even not be built in favor 
of other approaches by alien civilizations. 
All the way back in this show’s first official 
season 1 episode, the Fermi Paradox & the Dyson  
Dilemma, we discussed how Dyson Swarms should 
be an inevitable project of any spacefaring  
civilization, and in many ways that discussion 
is the reason this show exists. We spend a lot  
of time talking about what big, high-tech 
civilizations might do and why the apparent  
absence of these sorts of structures, such bright 
and loud displays of their existence, would seem  
to indicate there are no Loud Alien Civilizations 
or perhaps even any alien civilizations at all. 
There are a lot of reasons to question that claim 
and we’ve discussed many of them over the years,  
five recurring ones I want to address today are:
1. Could we actually see a Dyson Sphere? 
2. Couldn’t such a powerful civilization 
hide their Dyson Sphere from us? 
3. Wouldn’t a better power supply than 
fusion eliminate the need for a Dyson Sphere? 
4. Where should we be hunting for 
Dyson Spheres, or groups of them? And, 
5. What about all those Voids, Dark Matter, and 
stuff like that? Couldn’t those be Dyson Spheres? 
And I suppose the first thing to do is to answer 
what a Dyson Sphere or Swarm actually is. This  
naturally has to be a vague answer since it’s 
really just an assumption that since planets  
generally only get a tiny fraction of the light 
their Sun emits, not even a billionth in Earth’s  
case, that civilizations will seek to find ways 
to capture and use more of that energy. While the  
basic concept is named for Freeman Dyson, it is at 
least as old as Olaf Stapledon’s 1937 novel Star  
Maker, and the usual notion is that this is a vast 
collection of physically disconnected artifacts  
using that power, much as buildings, plants, and 
farms make use of sunlight and land here on Earth.  
But the notion of a big hollow spherical shell 
people lived on like an immense inverted planet  
is what got stuck in the public imagination, so we 
tend to use the term Dyson Swarm to emphasize that  
this isn’t a big hollow shell around a star. 
Usually anyway, as we’ve discussed elsewhere  
the big hollow sphere option is doable too.
Either way this is where the Kardashev Scale  
pops in, as astronomer Nikolai Kardashev 
suggested a few levels of astronomically  
detectable alien civilizations. One is for those 
who had significantly altered the spectrum of  
their planet, presumably peaking out at total 
usage of their sunlight and its emission as  
Thermal Infrared light at the frequency associated 
to the temperature of their planet and life forms.  
The second level is just a nod to the idea of a 
Dyson Swarm, that they will have significantly  
changed the spectrum of their home star, 
their Sun, by surrounding it with lots of  
power collectors and the equipment using them.
And again the notion is that they’ll eventually  
completely encompass their star. Though in 
neither case do we just take that for granted,  
as we’ll discuss in a moment. Level 3 is just 
the extension of this notion to assume they’ll  
eventually do this to every star in the galaxy, 
and that’s as far as the Kardashev Scale goes,  
though we did decide back in our Grabby 
Aliens episode that any civilization that  
did that to an entire Supercluster or 
more of Galaxies would be Kardashev 4,  
and anyone doing that to the whole Observable 
Universe or a Hubble Volume would be Kardashev 5. 
Our interest today though is Kardashev 2 or K2 
civilizations, ones with a Dyson, and we need  
to start by emphasizing that detecting these does 
not pivot on them being fully-encapsulated stars.  
Stars have certain characteristic frequencies 
that they emit based mostly on their mass and age,  
but lots of little anomalies can creep in. 
For instance if a star was being orbited by  
two planets that hammered into each other, you 
would have a long period of time in which a big  
dust and debris cloud orbited that star absorbing 
way more sunlight than those planets used to emit,  
and re-emitting it at the frequency 
and wavelength corresponding to their  
temperature. That’s going to be a big smear 
of Infrared along with reflected light. 
Would we confuse that with a Dyson?
Well maybe, this was one of the preferred  
solutions for Tabby’s Star, along with options 
like a swarm of disintegrating comets. Something  
like that is not stable. The fragments will 
start reforming into bigger objects and the  
solar wind will blow the dust away over 
time too till it clears out. Given time  
we would see that effect but we’re talking 
centuries not days to notice that difference. 
Still that’s not the only aspect of Dyson 
detection, because such a dust cloud would  
reflect lots of normal sunlight away rather than 
absorb it all, and a Dyson Swarm might reflect a  
lot of sunlight too, but that’s not optimal and 
more to the point, it would match up with the  
characteristic absorption and transmission rates 
we would expect for dust made mostly of the same  
elements in the same composition that the star 
itself and its neighbors had. A trillion solar  
panels absorbing sunlight and reflecting some 
away and emitting some as infrared just doesn’t  
have the same spectrum a cloud of dirt, ice, and 
rock has. Nor are they likely to be distributed  
the same way in terms of distance and density.
Other natural phenomena that we might confuse  
with Dyson Swarms are distinguishable this 
way too. And the simple answer is that we  
truly could be fooled fairly easily nowadays, 
but not for long or with superior gear and  
observational time. Fundamentally science is 
about hunting for patterns and anomalies then  
trying to determine what natural - or artificial 
- process is causing them and how. Until you’ve  
nailed that down to a tiny margin of error you 
never stop trying to account for an anomaly,  
and it is very unlikely anything purpose-built 
is going to have identical characteristics to  
something natural - a leaf might resemble a solar 
panel but not on inspection. So the object will  
stick out the more you look at it. The exception 
to that of course is if the purpose was stealth. 
Aliens wouldn’t expect to be able to hide 
this way either as they presumably are only  
interested in hiding from possible threats 
and they will assume anyone bigger and older  
than them probably saw their planet’s 
atmospheric biosignatures even before  
they started transmitting radio waves. They’re 
going to assume long range interest in them too,  
alien astronomers noting the interesting but 
probably natural dust cloud and checking in on  
it regularly as time passes and their models 
improve and wondering why it wasn’t matching  
expected decay rates. This also goes to our 
general notion that intelligence recognizes  
intelligence and that artificial never 
looks natural without an effort. Nobody  
is accidentally hiding, and while an old and 
weathered flint arrowhead by itself might make  
someone wonder if it was natural or artificial, 
someone’s buried house or garage full of various  
tools and appliances is not going to have 
anyone wondering if it was natural or not.  
The Giant’s Causeway may look like a road, 
on first glance, but not for long and is  
also missing secondary indicators, like road signs 
along the way or signs of being carved by tools. 
So how far away could we see a Dyson sphere 
right now? That’s also a tricky question  
because it depends on what kind of star it is 
to begin with. A Supergiant that someone has  
built a vast starlifting array around might 
be a million times brighter than our own Sun,  
while the vast majority of stars are only a few 
percent as bright as our Sun or less. By default  
we tend to look for copies of our Sun and think in 
terms of that, and there’s some justification in  
this case. See the crux of the hunt for Dyson 
Spheres isn’t really about finding just one,  
the assumption is that anyone who builds one will 
build more and nearby. We wouldn’t expect them to  
stop at their home system, and we wouldn’t expect 
their home system to be some enormous supergiant  
whose lifespan is barely a million years. That’s 
not really a conducive spot for life to evolve. 
Alternatively we have no strong reason to think 
smaller red dwarf stars would be inhospitable to  
life and they live far longer than even our Sun. 
So, if you’re hunting for a civilization that  
built multiple Dysons, checking out those bigger 
stars makes sense, as they are visible far further  
away and would be prime targets for various 
stellar engines. Those come in a lot of types too,  
from simple power collectors to literal star 
drives designed to move that star like a big  
spaceship. From massive habitat cylinders 
mimicking the conditions of their homeworld;  
only a billion times more numerous, to ones 
designed to run enormous computers on which  
artificial intelligence or uploaded minds and 
entire simulated universes could exist. These  
change light spectrums, and indeed they might 
change a smaller star’s spectrum to match their  
home star by the technique of star boosting, which 
should also be rather noticeable astronomically. 
And they are not limited to harvesting sunlight, 
they can perpetually refuel their star with  
hydrogen brought from gas giants from afar 
while pumping all those heavier elements out  
of it via starliftng, reaping thousands of 
planets worth of heavier elements. They can  
power massive telescopes and transmitters, they 
can grow food to feed quintillions. They can run  
massive super colliders for science or alchemy. 
They can build armadas of spaceships to colonize  
the galaxy and push them up to interstellar 
speeds with massive beams of matter or light. 
Needless to say, when folks ask why you or 
some alien civilization would want to build a  
Dyson Sphere, the reply is “why wouldn’t you?”, 
because there’s so much you could do with one,  
or many, that’s why we can really only see it 
not being done either because a civilization  
went extinct or found something better, and 
we’ll return to those points in a while. 
As to if you could build one, see our Dyson 
Spheres episode for the various options in greater  
detail but the answer is yes. Even a single larger 
asteroid would let you produce enough thin metal  
foil and solar collectors to englobe the Sun. 
Other applications do take a lot more mass,  
but once you get to this stage, you now have 
all the energy you need to disassemble whole  
planets if you need to. Jupiter on its own 
masses as much as every other planet, moon,  
and asteroid in our solar system combined, and 
has a metal-rich core far larger than Earth,  
and the Sun itself contains a thousand times that.
Some stars will have more, and indeed Jupiter is  
not particularly large or noteworthy as planets 
go, it’s just our local behemoth. Bigger Stars  
have more sunlight and need more mass to englobe, 
but also will tend to have far more mass on hand  
to build with, and small red dwarfs only half 
a percent the brightness of our sun would still  
have the power to light ten million Earths, and 
proportionally far more metals on hand per unit of  
sunlight they emit, as such a star, half a percent 
as bright as our Sun, probably masses fully a  
quarter of what our Sun does, so effectively 50 
times the mass per watt of light to build with. 
This doesn’t really answer the question of 
how far we could see one, and the answer is  
how far off could we see that star normally, and 
adjusting for how far we could see its change in  
peak spectrum. Sunlight gets absorbed but only 
temporarily, things emit thermal radiation based  
on their size and temperature, and as they 
grow hotter they emit exponentially more,  
some object twice as hot would emit 2^4 or 16 
times the light, something 10 times as hot 10^4  
or ten thousand times as bright. Our Sun actually 
emits thermal radiation that we call sunlight,  
the actual power is all derived from 
gamma-rays and fusion deep in the core. 
So things absorbing light grow warmer 
until they reach an equilibrium where they  
emit as much as they get, just at a different 
frequency. We usually assume Dysons are built  
at about our planet’s temperature, a 1/20th 
of the Sun’s surface temperature in Kelvin,  
which means needing 20^4 or 160,000 
times as much surface area as the Sun,  
the square root of that or 20^2 or 400 times the 
radius of the Sun. This is actually decently wider  
than Earth’s own orbital distance from the Sun, 
as Earth’s reflects a lot of sunlight, unused,  
and has a night side. A highly reflective object 
can be closer to a star without being as hot, so  
could a long thin object like an O’nEill cylinder 
that had its axis pointing toward its sun,  
for a low cross-section. We might expect a habitat 
devoted to tending a large collection of power  
collectors near a star to take this attitude.
But there’s no requirement a Dyson be that large,  
indeed a power collector probably would be as 
small as you could get it without melting the  
device. And for that matter you might manage a 
star whose spectrum you didn’t like, or which was  
prone to flares, by englobing it in something like 
a Tungsten sphere that would emit a nice steady  
light just like a classic incandescent bulb, which 
might be preferable to some White-hot Type-A star  
blasting the area with vast amounts of Ultraviolet 
light. This is how you deal with hotter stars than  
our sun to cool their light, starboosting, 
again, is how you deal with cooler ones. 
Build a Tungsten globe around our Sun at twice 
the diameter the Sun’s photosphere is, and that  
is a Dyson sphere that will quickly rise to that 
equilibrium temperature and give off the exact  
same amount of light the Sun does, but since it’s 
twice as wide and thus has 4 times the surface  
area, it will reach equilibrium at a temperature 
corresponding to surface a quarter as bright per  
unit. That would be about 4100 Kelvin, slightly 
hotter than the brightest red dwarfs in the low  
K-type Orange Dwarf Star range, like 61 Cygni 
B, a K5 Main Sequence Star. Except that it would  
mysteriously look twice as wide as our own Sun 
while 61 Cygni B and other main sequence stars  
of its temperature are just over half as wide 
as our Sun. So again, effective but not covert. 
Now that’s okay, if we saw that and at a distance 
and quick glance we would probably assume it  
was a star leaving the main sequence, which gets 
brighter and wider as they expand to be subgiants  
and eventually supergiants. Except we could then 
compare it to other examples and measure its mass  
and realize it was off. There’s not the right 
absorption and emission spectra for elements  
like sodium or nitrogen that would be in many a 
star’s atmosphere. Alternatively, another Dyson;  
a partial one in terms of habitats, might show 
the sorts of emission and absorption spectra  
we would expect from a life-bearing planet, 
a biosignature like lots of Oxygen and some  
Carbon Dioxide, only at thousands or millions 
of times what a normal planet might show. 
Of course, we determine what’s normal by 
observation so it is always possible some  
type of star we take for granted as natural is 
actually the baseline model for stellar engines  
that basically every civilization builds so 
they’re scattered all over the Universe at  
a fairly normal density and we tricked 
ourselves into thinking it was natural 
That doesn’t work either though. Generally, 
if something is an artificial construct we  
would expect them to be regularly produced until 
candidate systems ran out, and more importantly,  
we would expect to see them to be far rarer 
in the distant past. And astronomy is history,  
we can see 10 billion years back to when 
even the oldest stars were younger than  
ours was when life crawled out of the sea.
We would expect an artifact to grow rarer  
the further out we peered in space since we see 
back in time when we do that, and we call this  
TEA or the Time-Elapse Argument of the Fermi 
Paradox, that any phenomena suspected of being  
an artificial construct should grow rarer the 
further away or back in time we look. If it isn’t,  
then it's probably natural, and Quasars are an 
example of that. We wondered if they might be  
alien signals originally. Indeed, realizing they 
were brighter objects than not just stars but  
entire galaxies didn’t make us think they had 
to be natural either, we just wondered if they  
might be mega-Dysons, Kardashev 3 civilizations.
But as we mapped them out and checked the distance  
over the decades, we found it was very rare to 
find any within a couple billion light years,  
and that they were most common about 10 billion 
light years away or 10 billion years ago. 
That needs a caveat though. We can see quasars 
that far away because they are insanely bright  
but we can’t distinguish individuals stars that 
far off very well, we generally see even fairly  
close galaxies in our own supercluster as fuzzy 
dots even through powerful telescopes, and that’s  
not really looking far enough back in time to 
apply TEA. Hubble really extended that range, and  
James Webb even further, with the current record 
holder for most distant star being Earendel, whose  
light took 12.9 billion years to reach us, and 
yes for Tolkien fans it is named for the father  
of Elrond and the first king of the Numenorians, 
and Aragorn’s 62-times great grandfather, the one  
from the Simarillion who the Valar set to sailing 
the skies with a Simaril as a star in the sky. 
Since I am a fan of the Lord of the 
Rings I think this is a very proper name,  
along with a huge chunk of Pluto being named 
Mordor now, as opposed to always mining ever more  
obscure bits of human mythology. But I digress…
We don’t really have vast archives of individual  
stars in distant superclusters to check for what’s 
normal, especially normal modern stars. Webb is  
specifically designed for seeing early galaxies 
and some 13 billion year old star visible that  
far off is probably not a good baseline for the 
kind life-bearing planets would have developed by. 
So, we always need this context on detection 
that we can only talk about lone Dysons  
in our own galaxy and maybe its nearer neighbors, 
Andromeda, Triangulum, and the Council of Giants  
ringing us. Our assumptions for looking beyond 
are the idea of detecting truly giant examples  
that might rival a quasar or Birch Planet, 
or large groupings of Dysons in a galaxy,  
showing us a dark sphere in the visible range 
but emitting much light in the infrared. 
So to restate, we could easily miss a 
Dyson, particularly a partial Dyson,  
even in our own galactic backyard, even if we 
were looking right at it, but that window is  
closing rapidly as we build up our catalog and 
observational abilities and analytical toolbox. 
We simply assume folks would keep building these 
things and that they would give off lots of other  
artificial telltales too, when inspected, much as 
a city will not be confused with a natural hill  
or rock outcropping, from the million different 
signs of artifice present, from the big neon signs  
saying welcome to the text and logo-covered 
trash floating down the river from it. 
Same with a Dyson Sphere which has the power 
to make welcome signs seen galaxies away,  
but they also produce the trash of waste heat 
and other telltales. And if we missed one now, we  
won’t for long, and it wouldn’t take much to raise 
our curiosity so that we stared at it and saw the  
abnormalities for signs of artifice, not nature.
Which takes us to question 2, “Couldn’t such  
a powerful civilization hide 
their Dyson Sphere from us?”. 
This one is even harder to answer since you 
can’t just say “No” when we’re talking about a  
civilization older and more powerful than your 
own. We don’t know what they can or can’t do,  
but we’ve never learned how to break the rules 
of the Universe in centuries of studying them,  
and there’s no real reason to assume they 
have or that they’ve found some vast supply  
of cheat codes. We’ll discuss that option 
in a moment but let’s assume for the moment  
that they can’t break the rules. In this case 
we can then say the answer is no because this  
question is usually asking why they can’t stop 
themselves from emitting any radiation and the  
problem there is that you could, very briefly, 
then you’d burn up from all that absorbed heat. 
Something we tend not to think about is that the 
average temperature of our own solar system is  
hotter than the surface of our Sun. After all, 
virtually all the solar system's mass is in the  
Sun, whose core is far hotter, and even most 
of Earth is murderously hot, since only the  
upper crust is survivable and the mantle and 
core are both hotter than the surface of some  
dimmer suns. Only that tiny fraction of the solar 
system’s mass that makes up smaller dwarf planets,  
asteroids, and moons is cooler than Earth’s 
surface. It would take very little sunlight  
focused on them to warm them all up too.
Key notion here is that there aren’t vast  
reservoirs of cold out there to be storing energy 
up in as heat. Earth’s not a rare warm place with  
most things being cold as Pluto, conglomerations 
of mass tend to be hot. Not surprising either,  
the laws of thermodynamics tell us all energy 
eventually ends up as heat, which includes chunks  
of matter falling in on each other under gravity 
to form a planet or moon or stars. Usually, you’re  
lucky if you can use a packet of energy to get 
some work done without at least half of it ending  
up as heat. But even some 99.9% efficient process 
just means you leak your energy into heat slower  
with each use, it doesn’t really change that 
it all ends up that way and has to be radiated  
away if you don’t want to turn into a crisp.
If you have technology that ignores the Laws  
of Thermodynamics then yes, you can shield 
yourself from emitting waste heat – maybe – it  
still wouldn’t seem likely you could hide 
yourself completely with no leaks but this  
works well enough for two big reasons. First, you 
don’t really need a Dyson sphere at that point,  
you can just keep recycling your power supply, and 
there’s less need to venture into the emptiness  
of interstellar space for more resources around 
other stars when you have an effective infinite  
pool of them, depending on how, and how well, 
your Thermodynamics-breaking Clarketech works,  
of course. Second, and just as importantly, these 
folks aren’t hiding themselves, they’re just being  
efficient, and that makes a big difference.
We’ll come back to the special case of dumping  
the harvested energy or heat into black holes in a 
bit, but by and large any effort to hide a Dyson,  
where that’s the intent, is basically futile 
and they know it. And it takes vast efforts  
and energies to hide yourself, and for no reason 
since it doesn’t work. So you’ve blacked out your  
civilization at enormous expense, great, any 
older civilization probably was sitting there  
watching you wondering why you thought hiding 
now was going to erase all the evidence of your  
existence already meandering out into the galaxy 
at light speed from when you invented radio or  
when your distant ancestors evolved photosynthesis 
and other atmospheric biosignatures were present. 
Plus, maybe you beat your light emissions, but 
what happened to your gravity? You suddenly shut  
that off? Big old mega-civilization with 
huge telescopes and computers not gonna  
notice your star disappearing along with all its 
gravitational influence on neighboring bodies?  
You presumably are afraid of big dogs who could 
hurt you, with big fleets of star destroyers,  
not planets and civilizations like ours 
currently is. So hiding from us doesn’t  
achieve much, and those bigger, older alien 
civilizations aren’t just limited to telescopes. 
If you’re afraid they have fleets of battleships 
at their disposal, then you may take for granted  
that they have vastly more cheap and effective 
probes to send out for periodic flybys of places.  
Plus they probably have this same technology you 
do, otherwise they wouldn’t really be a threat  
to you given its essentially unlimited energy to 
run your factories and guns and spaceships. Which  
means they probably know the little give away 
telltales that let them detect a cloaked ship  
or outpost, let alone an entire star.
But if you have this technology,  
it works well enough for the Fermi Paradox because 
you’re not actually hiding, not suffering a cost,  
you just have a very efficient engine that is so 
good it doesn’t make a lot of grinding and noise  
and fumes, and so people don’t really see or hear 
it. Of course you probably put running lights and  
sirens on it so they can, remember this is 
a civilization with vast energy supplies and  
who do not feel expansionist, which generally 
implies they don’t view it as advantageous….  
Which since they’re intelligent presumably means 
it actually isn’t and that they aren’t worried  
about invaders. So they hang bright neon signs 
up to let people know they’re there in case they  
have anything interesting to offer.
To touch on the black hole case,  
and segue into our third question, “Wouldn’t a 
better power supply than fusion eliminate the  
need for a Dyson Sphere?”. Since energy equals 
mass, one thing you might be able to do with all  
the power of a star at your fingertips is focus a 
lot of its energy into one single place and moment  
and create what we call a kugelblitz blackhole.
These are smaller-mass black holes, presumably in  
the 100 kiloton to 10 megaton range that are very 
good power supplies. Indeed they make fusion look  
weak. Such black holes are believed to give 
off Hawking Radiation, which can be easily  
converted into electricity, indeed far more easily 
than fusion. They are 100% efficient at this,  
whereas fusion in stars runs at 1% matter to 
energy conversion, and only for the fraction  
which is fused from hydrogen to helium, generally 
only about a tenth. So, matter dumped into a black  
hole can actually be tapped as it falls, for 
harvesting energy much more efficiently than  
what is possible with stars or fusion, and what 
isn’t converted into energy on the fall can be  
picked up later from the Hawking Radiation.
Normal mass Black Holes emit 100% of their  
mass as they evaporate, and mostly as high-energy 
photons, and they only seem dark when they don’t  
have matter falling into them, radiating vast 
amounts of power, and only then because they just  
live so incredibly long that their power output 
is tiny, it’s just a steady stream for eons. The  
smaller they are, the faster they evaporate. If 
you mastered making and feeding kugelblitz black  
holes then you probably Dyson every star you come 
across with cheap thin collectors and use it to  
make black holes which you beam excess sunlight 
into along with slowly feeding the black holes,  
and you make many smaller ones with lifetimes of 
your preference. They’re sort of your ultimate  
battery, as they can store energy without leaking 
much of it, even over periods of time that make  
the entire history of the Universe look miniscule. 
See our Black Hole playlist for discussion of that  
topic in detail, including surviving and 
thriving after the deaths of all stars. 
Such a process isn’t likely to be either subtle or 
100% efficient either, so it is unlikely anyone is  
trying this approach for hiding, it’s just the 
sort of thing that might make you harder to see  
than the typical Dyson Swarm. Maybe you’re 99% 
efficient at capturing mass and energy into your  
black holes, which would be very impressive when 
contemplating the mechanics of such an effort,  
so your Dyson sphere only looks 1% as bright as 
an entire star… not really all that well hidden,  
being millions of times brighter than a planet 
still, but we could easily miss that these days. 
But why have a Dyson Sphere if a black hole is so 
much more efficient? Well, this is a key issue,  
you may have vast amounts of power but you still 
need to radiate your waste heat, you still need  
to derive energy from matter initially too, which 
stars make a great convenient supply of, and you  
presumably still want your civilization all packed 
together. In which case it would generally pack  
as a sphere, emitting infrared light, just like 
a Dyson Swarm. And Dyson’s swarms aren’t dense,  
at least not the de facto one we usually envision 
building around our Sun, while actual density  
varies by brightness, dimmer is denser, brighter 
more sparse, they are very spread out. I think  
the popular notion of a Dyson Shell englobing the 
Sun with an inverted megaplanet makes people think  
a Dyson would be dense, and a Dyson Swarm crowded 
with objects and constantly at risk of collisions. 
In practice it would appear more like 
a thin fog composed of water droplets,  
which would partially obscure the view of that 
star, and indeed the scale is about right too,  
it may take quadrillions of little water droplets 
to fog an area and it might take a quadrillion  
giant O’Neill Cylinders to appear to ‘fog-up’ and 
opaque a star. But remember that these behemoths  
which are kilometers or miles wide are still 
spaced out in a sphere hundreds of millions  
of kilometers or miles in diameter and containing 
a volume of space over a trillion-trillion cubic  
kilometers or miles in size. So a quadrillion 
behemoth O’Neill Cylinders would still each  
have a vast empty volume around a thousand 
kilometers or miles wide all to themselves. 
They can always spread out wider, but they 
can’t get more packed, as a system average,  
or they melt, and that density goes inverse 
to the diameter of the spherical blob,  
a ten times bigger blob can handle a hundred 
times more heat radiation but contains a thousand  
times more volume, so one tenth the density.
And that could be a star, or a binary star,  
or a black hole, or ten trillion individual fusion 
reactors, or kugelblitz black holes, or some weird  
bit of Clarketech that pumps energy from the 
vacuum of space or even from another universe.  
Unless you have some cool way to get rid of that 
heat, you can only get so dense without melting.  
And even some process like pumping power out of a 
parallel universe then pumping heat back into it,  
is probably missing large amounts, 
and if that process is 90% efficient,  
that just means your Dyson is 10 times denser 
than we’d expect, but otherwise the same. 
So too, you can only get so dense without 
collapsing-in under your own gravity.  
As to why you would, well if you have teleporters 
and transmitters that utterly ignore distance,  
you don’t need to be close, but otherwise 
every message you send and every trip you  
take will be slowed by having more space 
to cover the more spread out you are. 
Since something like a Dyson Sphere is already 
very spread out, you don’t really want more  
elbow room, and the implication of a better 
power supply is that you would need that to  
radiate your waste heat. So, basically every 
better power generation option just results in  
something that looks like a Dyson Sphere from 
a distance, but might seem a bit off when you  
double-check properties like gravity as it 
might be way more power emission than the  
apparent mass should need. Which again might 
trick us for a bit but not anyone who's been  
in the spacefaring game for centuries. And 
that’s why we hunt for Dyson Spheres and  
don’t really care if it turns out artificial 
fusion or something better is available,  
indeed we tend to assume it is, because it 
wouldn’t really change anything observationally. 
And this takes us to question of “where 
we should be hunting for Dyson Spheres,  
or groups of them?”, and of course the basic 
answer again is everywhere, and presumably from  
the perspective that civilizations don’t 
perpetually build more and more of them,  
which doesn’t work well with our assumptions of 
how intelligent life should operate under known  
science. Nonetheless if everybody builds 
and keeps building more and more of them,  
the only way we wouldn’t see a Universe covered 
in them is if by seemingly freak coincidence folks  
could only start recently, like if no intelligent 
life had arisen till the last few million years. 
In the absence of that observation we are left 
with the assumption that space is either empty  
of intelligent life that exists anywhere or at 
least persisted long enough to build a Dyson  
or that some flaw is in our reasoning. Since we 
don’t really lose anything by hunting for Dyson  
Spheres if none existed because no aliens exist, 
we opt to assume the latter is true for now,  
that we just have a flaw in our reasoning 
that could permit lone Dyson Spheres. 
If so, where to hunt? Well again we’re looking for 
an anomaly of radiation, probably Thermal Infrared  
from between just under freezing temperature to 
just under boiling temperature of water. That’s  
best conducted where very little noise is present, 
so not in binary systems or close clusters. That  
would generally mean also looking mostly up or 
down in the galactic plane, or at a sharp angle,  
to minimize all the interference of tens of 
thousands of light years of thick galactic disk  
in the background. And preferably at stars where 
many of them in a spot are of the same age and  
metallicity, as that raises our odds of spotting 
an anomaly in absorption or emission spectra.  
I would say one with a nice big planet 
around it to help with mass measurements,  
but only a partial Dyson would be likely 
to have a planet still visible in it,  
either englobed later or disassembled. Essentially 
any places where things aren’t very dense and  
thick but where what is there isn’t peculiar 
in some other obvious way that’s going to make  
detecting other anomalies difficult. Though with 
the caveat that we would expect any intelligent  
civilization to show multiple types of 
anomalies that differ them from nature. 
The alternate path of course is 
just to hunt for all anomalies,  
and this is a great approach too since we’d be 
doing it anyway. It’s not like modern astronomy  
on finding something unusual plops it in a drawer 
or gets out an eraser. So we find it, study it,  
and if that phenomena indicates potential or 
undeniable artificial aspects, there we go. 
What about finding groups of them? Well that’s 
mostly easier as your technology and therefore  
your odds of noticing an anomalous large region 
of infrared improve, or you find that there  
is too much infrared present in a location 
compared to other frequencies. But it also  
implies interstellar expansion was considered a 
good approach and doesn’t leave much of a reason  
why they would stop, and in the grand scheme 
of things it would be pretty rare to spot a  
civilization that was in between their first Dyson 
and total galactic coverage, as this is probably  
about a million year period, compared to 4 billion 
years to get on the interstellar stage and who  
knows how many eons thereafter. Tiny window but 
possible, there are many billions of galaxies so  
many someones ought to be in that window, and 
of course we have to remember we don’t know if  
there might be constraining factors that make 
civilizations stop growing, or growing in that  
fashion, after a few hundred stars. Maybe they 
inevitably discover multiverse portals and opt for  
faster travel to those and their endless bounty.
This takes us to our last common question about  
hunting for Dyson Spheres, which is if we 
might already have found a bunch of them.  
“What about all those Voids, Dark Matter, and 
stuff like that? Couldn’t those be Dyson Spheres?” 
We gave this a longer discussion in our episodes 
on the Fermi Paradox and Cosmic Voids as well as  
our Dark Matter episodes examining possible 
candidates, and we’re running long today so  
we’ll keep it simple for now and you can refer 
to those episodes for the detailed breakdown. 
The short answer is that Cosmic Voids really 
aren’t that empty, they’re empty like a Tundra  
or Desert is, plenty of stuff there, but just 
that it looks barren compared to a city or  
jungle. And so if those empty voids are empty 
because they’re full of Dyson Swarms and other  
megastructures of even grander scope, and then 
for some reason they left vast bits untouched,  
like entire galaxies, which wouldn’t seem a 
good fit for an analogy to a nature preserve. 
They would also have to have found a way to shut 
off gravity too, since those vast regions should  
be pulling on their neighboring superclusters if 
they were full of stars. Which again is possible,  
gravity manipulation is right up there with 
beating entropy on the list of accomplishments  
any advanced civilization should be working 
hard for, and unlike entropy, there are no  
hard physical barriers to some sort of directed 
gravity or anti-gravity, even if we have no clues  
on if or how it could be done. That still doesn’t 
work well though for voids since again, astronomy  
is history and we can see those voids and early 
galaxies way back at the dawn of the Universe and  
they’ve expanded more or less how we would expect 
based on our admittedly limited understanding of  
dark matter, dark energy, and early inflation.
Needless to say we might be tricking ourselves,  
since those are all mysteries we’ve been working 
to solve by assuming the Universe is natural and  
thus we might be plastering right over blatant 
proof of early intelligent mega-civilizations,  
but unless they were early-forming Boltzmann 
Brains or life from some prior iteration of  
the Universe carrying over to ours, it 
would seem hard for those civilizations  
to have gotten up and running in the first 
billion years of our Universe. Mind you,  
those other two options are on the 
table, Boltzmann Brains and entities  
from earlier iterations of the universe, which 
is possible in multiple cosmological models. 
So voids aren’t a good fit but they aren’t 
entirely closed. Dark Matter really is though  
and for a simple reason, its only known 
properties are that it interacts little,  
it exerts gravity, and it isn’t moving faster 
than normal objects orbiting around a galaxy.  
Which would be perfect for stealthy civilizations 
who converted their home system into a cloaked  
Dyson… except it's evenly spread everywhere and 
everywhen. Dark Matter is very evenly spread,  
beyond clumping near galaxies, and it has been 
visibly so for as far back as we can look,  
and hasn’t been growing or decreasing in 
quantity. So if they are Dyson Spheres,  
we’d be talking about civilizations that have done 
nothing to noticeably alter the Universe around  
them in over 13 billion years. Which is possible 
but is sort of like looking for a civilization of  
ghosts here on Earth, whose persons and properties 
are invisible, and who make no effort to talk to  
us or alter the world we can see. They might exist 
but it's debatable if it even matters if they do. 
That’s a good closing note then. On 
the one hand, there are no signs folks  
are building Dysons Swarms, while on the 
other it would seem so logical to do so,  
and while our default assumption from that might 
be that no one is around to build them or that  
building them doesn’t make sense, it still does 
make sense to keep looking for them. Eventually  
we’ll gather more data and maybe become a Dyson 
ourselves with all the resources that implies,  
which we can use to continue our search 
while also better understanding of why  
and how such enormous conglomerations 
of megastructures get built or not. 
In the end, the absence of evidence isn’t evidence 
of absence, and there is still so much more for us  
to learn about the Universe that no avenue of 
inquiry should be ignored, and Dysonian SETI  
remains one of the best options for searching 
for Extraterrestrial Intelligence that we have.
So summer is nearly here and if you’re in school 
or have kids in school, it’s a great opportunity  
to forget everything you or they studied hard at 
to learn over the school year. The best learning  
is continuous learning, no multi-month breaks, 
just a little every day, and new material building  
on the old, which keeps the old fresh while adding 
new skills. Exercising and strengthening the mind  
is very like diet and physical exercise, a little 
everyday does wonders. And just like those,  
it helps to have the best equipment, best plan, 
and best partner, and if you’re looking to  
maintain and improve your skills in math, science, 
or computer science, that partner is Brilliant.org 
Brilliant’s visual, hands-on approach is such 
an effective and engaging way to learn— it makes  
building a daily learning habit easy. Interactive 
learning has been proven to be 6x more effective  
than passive learning, like watching lecture 
videos, so Brilliant helps you learn by doing.  
Create programs with drag-and-drop coding, 
interact with charts and graphs, and play  
around with so many stunning visualizations.
Brilliant’s storytelling makes even abstract  
ideas relatable. And beautiful, interactive 
visualizations let you really engage with  
concepts, so you actually understand them.
Brilliant makes it easy to build a daily learning  
habit, and you can try everything Brilliant 
has to offer, for free, for a full 30 days,  
by visiting brilliant.org/IsaacArthur or 
clicking on the link in the description,  
and the first 200 people will get 20% off 
Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
Incidentally, since we were talking about 
SETI and detecting signs of alien life today,  
there’s inevitably the question of if there 
are any existing signals or signal candidates,  
and a couple months back my good friend 
John Michael Godier released a great video  
quickly highlighting 8 New Alien Signal 
SETI Candidates. Also, for folks wanting  
more on the actual astronomy and spectrum an 
alien Dyson Sphere might have, Matt O’Dowd  
over at PBS Spacetime did a great look at that a 
couple years back in their episode “How to Find  
ALIEN Dyson Spheres”. Both are great channels for 
not only the Fermi Paradox but space in general. 
And you can never have too many great 
shows helping explain the Universe or  
clarify Misconceptions about it, and that’s 
what we’ll be talking about next week as we  
look at common misconceptions about Space, Life, 
the Universe, and Everything, on May 11th. After  
that we’ll have our Scifi Sunday episode, on 
May 14th, as we explore the grim realities of  
super-urbanized Hive Worlds, then we’ll have 
its companion episode, Hungry Aliens, on May  
18th. And in three weeks, on May 25th, we’ll 
talk about how to bend space and warp reality. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, 
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
