The galaxy has many stars orbited by many 
planets, and many of these are orbited by  
immense icy moons, but could others have 
oceans on their surface, or even life?
In the early 24th millenia a colony 
ark fleet arrived around Cygnus X-1,  
a black hole super giant binary 7200 light 
years from Earth, where they had used the  
black hole to permit them to decelerate down 
from a high fraction of light speed. This had  
become a common way of seeding regions of the 
galaxy, to send out massive fleets propelled  
by enormous pushing beams to distant black holes 
where they could use the powerful gravity of the  
object to slow down with little to no fuel.
Of course, a black hole orbiting very close  
to a blue supergiant just waiting to go bang is 
not an ideal place to set up your civilization,  
and a rough place to break a fleet at, so they 
planned to complete their maneuver then drift  
over to a nearby system in which Astreas, as 
G1 sun just a bit brighter than our own was  
orbited by some planets, including an immense gas 
giant named Zephyr that dwarfs even Jupiter. From  
here they would set up their alpha base where 
they could resupply and from which splinters  
of the fleet could radiate out to from this 
new hub of humanity’s galactic expansion. 
As the vanguard of the fleet completed their 
maneuvers around the Cygnus X-1 and left the  
region of massive radiation and lighting around 
the binary, they turned their telescopes on the  
Astrea-Zephyr System to learn more details of 
its minor planets. They soon saw a beautiful  
oceanic moon around Zephyr which they nicknamed 
Aquarius. Aquarius orbited Zephyr at roughly  
the same distance Ganymede does Jupiter, but even 
though Zephyr is roughly the same size as Jupiter,  
it’s more than twenty times as massive 
and Aquarius orbited it a bit less than  
once every 24 hours. With its atmosphere 
protected by Zephyr’s power magnetosphere,  
Aquarius is also warmed by a strong mix of light 
from Astrea and tidal heating heating from Zephyr. 
It was, in short, a very plausible place where 
life might have emerged. The journey to Aquaris  
was next to nothing compared to the journey 
Cygnus had been, of many thousands of years,  
but would still give them much time to speculate 
about the growing mysteries of Aquarius.
While speculation about Aquarius was rampant, most 
did not expect to find anything beyond perhaps  
simple life there, or perhaps semi-intelligent 
animals, as other expeditions had reported  
occasionally in the past twenty millenia 
of interstellar exploration and settlement. 
And yet, once they arrived and sent down robotic 
probes, they found an ancient civilization that  
had evolved beneath its turbulent waves.
The civilization of Aquarius, named simply  
the Aquarians, until such time as their own 
name for themselves might be discovered,  
had begun in the abyssal depths, where light 
from their parent planet and distant sun  
barely reached. Aquarius is quite massive for a 
moon, more than any moon in humanity’s original  
solar system, and yet still far beneath that 
of Earth. As such its gravity is lower and the  
pressure rises more slowly with depth.
The Aquarians were beings of incredible  
intelligence and adaptability, evolving from 
simple bioluminescent creatures into complex,  
sentient beings capable of thought, emotion, and 
intricate communication through patterns of light  
and sound. Their bodies were sleek and adapted 
to high-pressure environments of the deep sea,  
with large eyes to capture the faintest 
glimmers of light and limbs that could  
manipulate their surroundings with precision.
The Aquarians developed a society that was  
harmonious with the ocean, building structures 
that floated in the dense waters and harnessing  
the energy of thermal vents to power their 
emergent technology. Technological progress  
was a slow thing though, with no fire to help 
them and prod on discovery. They recorded their  
history by carving it into stone and dated 
it by their seasons of over a decade in  
which the Zephyr orbited Astrea, and the number of 
those seasons recorded in the tens of thousands.. 
As millennia passed, the Aquarians explored 
every crevice of their underwater world,  
discovering the ruins of even older civilization 
that had once thrived and then vanished into the  
depths. With the help of their new human friends, 
who appeared to them merely as sleek artificial  
probes, they were able to determine that those 
ruins were of a prior civilization that lived in  
floating rafts destroyed over a million years 
ago by a supernova in the region, which they  
think might have sterilized all the life near the 
surface and melted the small polar ice caps which  
were just beginning to reform in recent millenia.
The first Aquarians escorted to the surface to  
see their night sky went at night to help 
protect their vision, designed for the  
darker ocean depths, and at first, even knowing 
better, they thought Zephyr must surely be this  
bright sun they’d been told of, for it glowed far 
more brightly than Earth’s own moon and dominated  
the sky, hundreds of time larger than our own 
Moon, if dimmer in its reflected light for its  
size than our moon, being further from Astrea. A 
translation of their Elder’s first comment after  
seeing was later carved into the commemorative 
plaque on that first floating spaceport,  
“I wish our eyes were built like yours, friends 
from the stars, for surely such an awe-inspiring  
first glimpse deserved tears of joy.”
They had no name for Astrea or Zephyr till then,  
and so kept the one their visitors had given them.
The Aquarians were quite bright and peaceful,  
and a deal was struck quite rapidly with their 
human visitors to permit complimentary settlement  
of this region of space in exchange for assistance 
uplifting their civilization’s technology to  
permit both surface settlement and space travel of 
their own and logistical aid finding and settling  
their first handful of colonies. In truth though 
both the Aquarians and humans were more fascinated  
by finding and exploring those ancient ruins 
on Aquarius to see if it was the remnant of an  
older branch of their species or possibly some 
outpost or settlement from some other visitors. 
The news of all these great discoveries would take 
tens of thousands of years to percolate out to all  
of humanity’s ever growing presence on the galaxy, 
and perhaps in that time word would come of other  
worlds with other civilizations upon them.
And so, the civilization of Aquaris rose  
from the depths of their oceanic world 
to become explorers of the galaxy,  
leaving a legacy that would inspire countless 
others to look beyond their horizons and to  
wonder what lies in the uncharted waters of space.
Of course, it has re-opened the argument of what  
to call a body orbiting a sub-stellar object 
like Zephyr, is Aquarius a moon or a planet?  
And should the Aquarians be consulted 
for their preferences on the matter?
The Sun and the Moon have dominated our night 
sky and our thoughts of space since the dawn of  
humanity, and yet other civilizations might arise 
on large moons around even larger planets. We’ve  
talked about trying to settle icy moons of gas 
giants, like Europa or Ganymede around Jupiter or  
Titan orbiting distant Saturn, but today we’ll 
be zooming in on Moons big enough for oceans,  
and not simply subsurface oceans but also those 
like we have on Earth, open to Sun and sky. 
The story of moons like this is 
very different from Earth’s own,  
or those moons around our own gas giants. It’s a 
place where the moon doesn't need its own magnetic  
field to keep an atmosphere, because its parent 
planet has a field so immense it wraps it in its  
protective shell. It’s one that doesn’t need 
the gravity a full planet has for that either,  
because it gains so much of its warmth from tidal 
heating that it doesn’t need as much from its sun,  
and the powerful solar wind and radiation in bound 
from that Sun is diminished by the extra distance. 
And yet it is one on which life 
might easily arise in the deep seas,  
with a world churned by even more powerful 
tidal forces than those earth experienced  
during the time in which we believe life might 
have arisen around thermal deep sea vents. 
Whether or not that’s how life arose on Earth, 
it’s certainly a plausible mechanism for life  
arising on another world, and we shouldn’t assume 
what happened here is the normal way it happens  
everywhere, let alone the only way. We tend to 
assume if you’ve got a decent energy flux through  
a place where the basic building blocks of life 
can be present in high density and in a decent  
chemical solution like water, or maybe ammonia, 
that you have a chance of getting life. Volcanic  
thermal vents on the ocean floor are a great 
option for that, so are tidal pools, or drainage  
basin lakes where something like phosphorus 
might accumulate in quantity. So too are comets,  
panspermia remains a distant runner up to those 
other mechanisms but still is in the race. 
And what’s interesting is that all of 
those options are either just as probable  
on an oceanic moon of a large gaseous planet, 
but arguably stronger factors than on Earth. 
And one critical thing about moons is that while 
they tend to be tidally locked to their planets,  
not only might this not be the case for a 
moon with deep seas and atmosphere around  
a very large planet, but it doesn’t result 
in the the eternal night and day sides we  
get with a planet tidally locked to a star.
Of course a lot depends on what we’re calling  
a star here too, or a moon, because the dynamics 
are very different if we’re considering a body  
orbiting a sub-stellar object like a brown 
dwarf, too small to be a true star but too  
large to be thought of as a true planet 
either. And these sub-stellar objects  
likely are as numerous as the stars themselves, 
maybe even more so, which is important to keep in  
mind as we contemplate life emerging on them.
It is possible such a world, like Aquarius,  
might not even be tidally locked, for the force 
of gravity that slows such worlds down till their  
rotational rate matches their orbital period 
does so by acting like a brake on a wheel,  
and if you grease that, with seas and sky, 
the process should slow greatly. It’s also  
powerfully controlled by distance, and the orbital 
distance that a sub-stellar object could keep a  
large moon stable at is closer to that of a star 
than a planet. For ease of calculation I treated  
Zephyr as 25 times more massive than Jupiter, 
about double the minimum to be a brown dwarf  
but only a third the minimum to be the dimmest of 
red dwarfs. Your orbital period, when discussing  
a smaller object orbiting a much larger one, 
goes with the inverse square root of mass,  
so 25 times the mass, one fifth the orbital 
period at the same distance, a hundred times the  
mass, a tenth the orbital period.
Zephyr is 8000 times more massive than our Earth,  
so something orbiting as far away as our moon 
orbits us would do it about 90 times faster than  
our Moon, a few times a day rather than once 
a month. Looking from the other perspective,  
it’s only about a fortieth the mass of our Sun, 
meaning things at the same distance take 6-7 times  
longer to orbit Zephyr than our own sun, also 
called Sol. In Zephyr’s case we intentionally  
placed the world at Ganymede’s distance as it 
orbits Jupiter every 172 hours, a little over 7  
days, so would orbit Zephyr at a fifth that, 
34 hours. If Zephyr were 50 Jupiter masses,  
it would be a 24 hour day at Ganymede distance.
Jupiter and Zephyr would both look the same size  
in the sky at that distance because gas giants 
and brown dwarfs are all about the same size, they  
just grow denser, at a certain point dense enough 
to ignite true fusion and become a red dwarf. 
Jupiter is thrice as massive as Saturn, which is 
itself the least dense planet in our solar system,  
Earth is actually the densest, but while thrice 
as massive, Jupiter is only 20% wider and 73%  
greater in volume than Saturn. The brown dwarfs 
we’ve found are all of a similar size to Jupiter,  
just denser, and even the smallest red dwarfs, 
M9 main sequence stars, are only about the size  
of Jupiter, and about a tenth the radius of 
our own Sun while being a tenth of its mass,  
so a hundred times denser than our Sun or 
Jupiter, on average which are fairly close in  
density. Basically the density of gas giants, 
sub-stellar objects, and stars begins rising  
sharply after Saturnine masses and peaks for red 
dwarfs before dropping again in larger stars. The  
heat of fusion in their core begins fighting back 
against gravity, boiling the star, so to speak,  
and pushing it apart. Every star reaches a 
balance point based on its mass and composition,  
and we call this hydrostatic equilibrium.
This matters for moons because it means they  
can be close enough to these titanic bodies to 
get periods of a day, thus letting them be tidally  
locked and yet Earth-like if their planet orbits a 
sun, and yet they could be further away and still  
enjoy that protective magnetosphere of the host 
planet, or sub-stellar object, as well as tidal  
heating. Today we’ll also explain the mechanics 
of tidal heating and tidal locking for that matter  
too, though we’ve covered that in more detail in 
past episodes so will give it a lighter treatment. 
For today we’ll also assume something orbiting 
either is a moon, and refer to brown dwarfs  
as planets when they’re orbiting a 
star. Simply for ease of discussion. 
Now, why the focus on oceans?
Partially because even though the magnetosphere of  
that big planet might shield the moon, you might 
still have some radiation coming in that might be  
rough on life not protected by a thick hide or 
a couple inches of water. Indeed in some cases  
the radiation might still not allow any surface 
life, land or sea, with everything keeping itself  
tucked just a little under the water where light 
could still usefully reach for photosynthesis. 
It comes down to our case where a planet is 
getting a large mix of its energy flux from  
both tidal heating and sunlight from the star the 
planet is orbiting. Water is less common in our  
inner solar system because while both hydrogen 
and oxygen are abundant, hydrogen tends to get  
pushed out by the solar wind. Once we get deeper 
out in space, objects with vast amounts of ice  
get far more common. Jupiter’s own moons have 
tons of ice and we also believe there are large  
subsurface oceans thawed out by Jupiter’s tidal 
heating and insulated by that ice layer up top. 
It does not seem too much of a stretch to 
assume we could have a bigger moon that got  
more sunlight than the Galilean moons of 
Jupiter but was shielded by distance and  
their planet’s magnetosphere from the 
hydrogen stripping effects of its sun. 
And so it seems fair to assume a moon warmed by a 
gas giant could have surface water, and because it  
would have begun its existence with a far higher 
ratio of water to rock than we have, it would  
be quite likely it would have less land than us, 
having deeper oceans that any volcanoes would have  
to rise above to create surface land. Possibly no 
dry land will exist as a result, it's really hard  
to say as we don’t know enough on that matter 
yet and it would probably depend a lot on the  
gravity of that moon too. Such moons may have no 
land area, or limited archipelagos, and may have  
ice caps and icebergs floating around, or not.
In the case of Astrea, our G1 sun Zephyr orbited  
with, or was a binary to, assuming it was a 
main sequence star, it would be about 20% to  
30% brighter than our Sun, and a few percent more 
massive, and thus only have a habitable zone about  
11-15% wider and with fairly parallel orbital 
periods. I placed Zephyr out at more Saturnine  
distance for our tale to make its surface light 
from Astrea a much smaller factor in its energy  
and less important for life evolving there and 
shifting to the surface. But if Aquarius was as  
close to its sun Astrea as we our to our own, 1 
AU, or astronomical unit, then it would probably  
be too hot, even ignoring the tidal heating.
But how much is this tidal heating? People  
talk about it a lot but rarely give much math, 
including myself, and while the math is only an  
approximate model, it's not a very complex 
equation so let’s walk through it briefly. 
Let’s start with a point of reference though. 
Earth gets 3.7 Terawatts of tidal heating,  
3.2 from our moon and 0.5 from our Sun, or about 
85% and 15% respectively. And yet that only makes  
a minuscule fraction of our energy as again we get 
3.7 Terawatts from Tidal heating but a whopping  
173,000 terawatts of solar energy striking Earth 
from the Sun, almost 50,000 times as much. We’d  
have to be over 200 AU from the Sun before the 
tidal heating we got from the Moon matched the  
influx from our sunlight. That’s more than 
five times the distance to PLuto and nearly  
double the distance to our furthest known dwarf 
planet, 2018 AG-37, also known as Far-Far-Out. 
So what are the factors for tidal heating that 
lets us talk about warming a planet’s moon? 
Well, we may think of this as the energy of tidal 
friction that’s working to tidally lock that  
object or which is grinding on it as it moves from 
its closest to furthest point of an elliptical  
orbit, so we should not think of it as a constant 
force on geological times lines, but then neither  
is the luminosity of stars, they brighten as they 
age, though they are bright early on when in their  
proto-star phase, even if that’s getting absorbed 
by all the remaining gas and dust of formation  
that’s it's now blowing away from itself and its 
newly-minted planets, and that’s from heat of  
gravitational collapse, which all the planets and 
moons have too and from which they slowly cool,  
while internal pockets of radioisotopes decaying 
and tidal forces work to keep them warm. 
For an already tidally locked moon, this tidal 
heating is coming from that elliptical orbit,  
and rises with the square of its eccentricity, 
which is a number between 0 and 1, where 0 is  
a perfectly circular orbit and as you 
rise toward 1 it grows more eccentric,  
the ellipse more stretched out toward eventually 
a parabola instead. Double your eccentricity,  
quadruple your heating, triple it, nine times 
as much, et cetera, and ignoring other factors,  
like other moons or planets, this will mean any 
moon around a planet or planet around a star will  
grow more circular in its orbit with time.
The other two factors I want to note are the  
radius of the satellite and its orbital period 
or distance, the two are interchangeable for a  
primary of the same mass so we’ll go with period 
as more intuitive. The bigger the radius of the  
satellite, the more bits of it get yanked relative 
to each other because it's wider. To explain that,  
a moon orbiting a planet might have the side near 
the planet experiencing 1% higher gravity than  
its center does, and the far side about 1% less, 
meaning the near side gets yanked on a lot more,  
and also, being bigger, there’s more of it 
to yank, and heat up. The closer it is to  
that planet, the stronger the effect, 
or as alternate way of viewing it,  
the more frequently it orbits that planet, 
the more times it’s getting yanked on. 
Again, that's an intuitive explanation, 
mathematically it means that while heating  
rises with the square of eccentricity, it also 
rises with the fifth power of that moon’s radius,  
and drops with the fifth power of its orbital 
period. We’re skipping discussion of the Love  
number, density of bodies, uniformity of them, or 
the radius of their parent planet, and at least  
in the last case it doesn’t vary with bigger ones 
since they’re all about the same size as Jupiter. 
Our Moon is a quarter the radius of Earth, so 
an Earth-sized moon, all things being equal,  
is getting 4 to the fifth power more 
heating, or roughly a thousand times more,  
and to emphasize how big a factor something raised 
to the fifth power is, something twice as wide as  
the moon would get 32 times the heating, not a 
thousand, while something twice as wide as Earth  
would get more like 32,000 times the heating, 
as opposed to a thousand, and right there would  
result in the huge difference between solar 
heating and tidal heating we noted on Earth,  
where it was 173,000 Terwatts versus 
3.7, a difference of almost 50,000. 
On the flip side, the longer the period of orbit 
around that primary, the less that heating,  
so for our case of Aquarius orbiting Zephyr 
at the same distance Ganymede orbits Jupiter,  
but one fifth the period from Zephyr 
outmassing Jupiter 25 or 5 squared as much,  
means it is getting 5 to the fifth or 3125 
times more tidal heating than Ganymede,  
throw that in on a bigger and wider body, and 
suddenly tidal heating is a very dominant factor. 
Those Galilean moons also tidally heat each 
other quite a lot but let’s ignore that for  
the moment to shift to another point. We’re 
seeing that a large gas giant a bit closer  
to its star’s normal habitable zone than Jupiter 
could quite possibly have a big warm oceanic moon  
on it from a mix of tidal heating and sunlight, 
where neither might otherwise be sufficient,  
but that’s heating pre-tidal locking.
Moons take a while to lock, all the  
slower when bigger or further from their 
planet, and stars also warm with time,  
so we could have some interesting cases of 
increasing sunlight replacing diminishing  
heat from tidal locking to keep a moon on the 
warmer side, all with an atypically high water  
content from what we’d expect from a totally 
sunlit object of the same mass and temperature. 
Now, when it comes to tidal locking, the 
energy of a body’s rotation and orbit is  
actually quite enormous. Earth rotational 
energy is 214 billion-billion-billion joules,  
and used to be about 4 times higher we think, 
back in the primordial days of earth when the  
moon was closer and not tidally locked. Which even 
drained out at a rate over a hundred million years  
is still an order of magnitude more than our 
current tidal heating. But its orbital energy  
is around 12,000 times that high and a larger 
moon of a brown dwarf could easily have more  
orbital energy than Earth does around the Sun. So 
particularly if we imagined an icy outer planet  
being captured by a brown dwarf orbiting a star, 
with a high initial eccentricity, it becomes very  
plausible that we end with a large oceanic moon 
being heated by a strong mixture of sunlight,  
tidal heating from that giant planet, and tidal 
heating from interacting with their moons.
The habitability of oceanic moons mostly 
comes down to them having energy flux, warmth,  
and water. The jump between a place like Europa 
and our hypothetical planet Aquarius is that  
now it can get significant surface lighting 
involved in biology. And again, it may not be  
tidally locked at all, a relatively eccentric moon 
in a more distant orbit and with seas and sky,  
potentially several million miles from its 
primary, could have an arbitrary day length  
same as a planet can. At such distances, even a 
brown dwarf of the top range of mass, might be no  
bigger in its sky than our moon or Sun either.
It’s a funny thing about main sequence stars,  
their brightness rises so sharply with 
surface temperature that their habitable  
zones expand rapidly with their mass, meaning 
those tiny dim red ones look far larger in the  
skies of planets warm enough for life, while 
enormous giant stars actually would look like  
ultra-bright but tiny suns from their Earth 
Analogues, and so things like total eclipses  
we have where the sun and moon are about the 
same size are very uncommon, while a planet  
closely orbiting a gas giant would get them almost 
constantly unless that gas giant itself orbited  
in the habitable zone of a dimmer red dwarf.
Or again a decent way outside that habitable zone,  
since tidal heating would move that effective zone 
outwards. For today we’ll skip the terraforming  
angle beyond saying if you’ve got some big icy 
moon, one with enough mass you want to settle it,  
you can make it an oceanic one with 
orbital mirrors or a lagrange point array,  
and you can add huge floating raft cities if 
you want, or even floating continents. You  
could potentially be nuking the underwater 
surface to spawn dry land by volcano too. 
The native ecology is more fascinating though, 
because life as we understand it requires an  
energy source, and while on modern Earth, life 
relies primarily on sunlight for photosynthesis,  
on such oceanics moons or subsurface icy ones, 
life forms can instead depend on chemosynthesis,  
deriving energy from the chemicals emitted 
by hydrothermal vents. Similarly, oceanic  
moons could have hydrothermal activity on their 
ocean floors, providing the necessary energy for  
life. With sufficient tidal heating, possibly even 
robustly enough for large and diverse ecosystems,  
they may be able to add photosynthesis to that.
The chemical building blocks will all be there and  
I suspect we’ll find more moons that fit the bill 
than Earth-like planets. Their long term stability  
is harder to speak to, but so long as they 
change slowly enough for life to adapt and move,  
then once established they should be places life 
could dwell on indefinitely. I suspect we're as  
likely to encounter life on such moons as on 
planets we find, and in the case of those with  
subsurface oceans, maybe even extraterrestrial 
life in this solar system, on Europa or Callisto. 
In summary, the habitability of oceanic moons 
still has a lot of unknowns that requires further  
investigation. While they offer promising 
conditions for life, such as the presence of  
water, energy sources, and organic compounds, 
they have their challenges too, and probably  
many we don’t even know about yet. The continued 
exploration of these mysterious worlds may one  
day answer the question of whether we are alone 
in the universe, or even in this solar system.
I generally try to limit the math we go into 
during our episodes, but as we saw today, even on  
something like tidal locking and orbital mechanics 
of a moon, it can be a fairly intuitive concept  
even if the math can be a bit intimidating. But 
math doesn’t need to be intimidating, you just  
need good partners to help you learn it. If you’ve 
got that, there’s no distance you can't cover,  
whether it's professional growth or in your 
own journey to the stars, and Brilliant.org  
is a great place to start that journey.
Brilliant helps build your critical thinking  
skills through problem solving—not memorizing. So 
while you’re building real knowledge on specific  
topics, you’ll also be becoming a better thinker.
Build real knowledge in minutes a day—with  
fun lessons you can do whenever you have the 
time. Learn through problem solving and doing,  
with hands on interactive content that’s 
fun, immersive, effective, and intuitive.  
Brilliant.org’s content goes from the basics 
all the way up to advanced materials on Math,  
Science, Data, Probability, Computers, 
and AI, start where you need to and go  
as far as your dreams can take you.
You can try everything Brilliant has  
to offer for free for a full 30 days, just 
visit brilliant.org/isaacarthur or click  
on the link in the description. You’ll also 
get 20% off an annual premium subscription.
So that wraps us up for today but this Sunday, 
June 16th, we’ll be looking at another place  
to live, and a very nice one at that, as 
we examine the idea of Paradise Planets,  
places even better than earth for us to live. 
Then we’ll ask what would have happened if  
dinosaurs had never died off, on June 20th, and if 
we may have seen a world with a mix of big mammals  
and dinos, or even if they might have developed a 
civilization one day. After that we’ll explore the  
idea of hollow planets, both notions that Earth 
might be one, and that maybe it will become one  
in the future. Then we’ll wrap up the month with 
an examination of free will and quantum mechanics. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show by becoming  
a member here on Youtube or Patreon, or checkout 
other ways to help at IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like In-Situ 
Resource Utilization, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
