We like the idea of living on a rotating space habitat,
but what if we create alien ecosystems by doing just that?
One of our favorite topics on this channel
is space habitats and megastructures,
particularly rotating habitats.
Without having access to an unknown technology
or planet-sized masses of material, the only
way we can currently realistically create
artificial gravity in a space habitat is by
spinning a cylindrical or ring-shaped structure
so that centrifugal force and inertia mimic
gravity, which we call spin gravity.
On Earth, ecosystems arise in all places,
from the sub-zero temperatures of Antarctica
to muggy rainforests to sweltering deserts.
In order to understand an ecology, we need
to understand the context of its environment
as this plays a large role in defining what
that ecology will look like.
So, a fish that has adapted to have antifreeze
in its bloodstream, like some of those in
Antarctica, would not do too well if suddenly
transported to the brine of the Dead Sea as
its adaptations are to the cold, not the high
salinity and higher temperatures of the Dead
Sea.
So with that in mind, what would the environment
of a rotating space habitat be like?
These spinning habitats are often shown by
themselves in space, even on this channel,
but in practice you would almost never be
able to see one from the outside.
They’re more likely to be inside of a sheath
that’s imbedded inside a protective asteroid,
separated from the sheath by vacuum so they
can rotate without friction.
There will also likely be superstructure and
auxiliary facilities nearby.
These structures are a likely future homes
of humanity, more so than the various planets
that we might terraform.
But we’ve never talked here before about
what it might be like inside them in terms
of the environment, ecology, and weather.
In fact, most people are surprised to learn
that an enclosed manmade structure would develop
weather systems--but they do, particularly
when the whole thing is spinning and Coriolis
forces become a factor.
Even if you designed a habitat to replicate
Earth’s environment as closely as possible,
there will still be some major differences;
and factors such as size, shape, rate of rotation,
and lighting can radically alter the dynamics
of an ecosystem.
To avoid confusion we will refer to the spinning
section of a habitat as the ‘drum’.
Another term, before we jump into today’s
topic, is the ‘axis’, the imaginary line
down the middle of the drum, around which
it rotates.
The axis will come up a lot in this episode
because it will be a fairly important and
weirdly behaving place in our habitats.
We often envision some sort of artificial
sun that runs along that central axis like
a cable, but the axis might also be an open
space where you can enjoy zero-g recreation
without a space suit, riding powerful winds
or drifting along slowly among the clouds.
This is a key first environmental difference
with Earth as a drum is just a pressurized
can.
On Earth, air pressure is caused by kilometers
of air sitting on top of more air, weighing
it down.
Gravity holds the air there and keeps it from
leaking off the planet, even though there’s
a vacuum all around us.
Inside a soda can, where the pressure is a
great deal higher than the rest of Earth,
it’s the walls of the can keeping the material
inside and the sheer quantity of gas packed
in there that causes the normal pressure.
Another difference in environment comes into
play too.
Stick a needle in Earth and the air doesn’t
go anywhere, stick a needle in the drum of
a space habitat, and it flows out like water
down a bath plughole.
Needless to say, making sure punctures don’t
happen or can be patched quickly is an important
part of habitat design.
However, this also means that the air inside
is not structured like on Earth.
In a small drum the air pressure is about
the same at the axis or perimeter, even though
the gravity is zero on the axis proportional
to the distance from the axis.
Halfway to the axis, get half the gravity.
So in a small drum like that, plants and animals
adapted to alpine climates with freezing temperatures
and low atmospheric pressures wouldn’t do
too well unless the climate of the drum was
specifically designed to be alpine.
In the smaller habitats, the weather for the
entire drum is likely to be the same, so very
stable and niched ecosystems are likely to
arise.
I imagine that there would be all manner of
habitats and somewhere, someplace in the billions
we construct, there will be any environment
you could imagine, from the tropical, to the
alpine, to the downright weird, like recreating
ones with a high oxygen content that favored
massive organisms, such as from the carboniferous
period.
In the much bigger drums, the pressure will
vary with distance from the axis, and on the
really big ones like McKendree Cylinders,
Bishop Rings, Banks Orbitals, or Ringworlds,
pressure will vary with altitude like on Earth.
The air gets thinner as you rise until you
get to near-vacuum, but gravity remains essentially
the same.
Needless to say this results in very different
weather than where the gravity rapidly drops
off but the air pressure does not, and the
mid-sized drums would be a bit of both, a
big drop in gravity and pressure as you approach
the axis.
That also means on the bigger ones you don’t
actually need a closed habitat drum, or ring,
because the air sticks there from spin gravity,
but it can still spill off the sides and fly
into space, so you need walls along the sides
that rise quite high to prevent that, called
rimwalls, as opposed to caps that the normal
cylinders have.
One option is to stylize these as mountain
ranges, and very tall ones at that, since
while it’s hard to breathe atop Earth’s
tallest mountains, there’s still atmosphere
there and far above, whereas to contain the
atmosphere of our ring habitat, the mountain
walls will have to rise all the way up into
the vacuum.
These are very alien environments as we have
nothing like them on Earth.
One can imagine over time that critters could
evolve to survive or even thrive on the tops
of the mountains in a near vacuum.
We already know that some organisms can exist
in a vacuum too, such as tardigrades.
I, for one, am excited to see what life in
this alien environment will evolve.
Who knows, we may even be able to borrow their
exotic genetics for our own use in our crops,
animals or maybe ourselves.
Even on the smaller habitats, like Bryan Versteeg’s
Kaplana One Design, a cylinder won’t have
flat end caps.
Sharp corners aren’t structurally ideal,
whereas a pill shape, or a cylinder capped
by a hemisphere on either end, offers advantages.
Those are still spinning but have lower gravity
as you go up, and you’d likely still stylize
them as terraced slopes akin to hill or mountains.
This results in an interesting difference
from Earth too.
On Earth, mountains have a timberline, a height
at which trees can’t grow anymore because
of inhospitable conditions.
You would likely still have these on the largest
rotating habitats due to changes in evapo-transporative
forces.
However, on the more modest ones, you might
actually get the reverse.
Gravity is lower near the axis, which helps
trees to grow taller, but the air pressure
isn’t dropping off, and for a lot of drum
sizes you will have a tendency to get higher
humidity as you rise.
Depending on drum size, while on Earth it
can rain during the day or night, these would
be more prone to raining at night when the
light goes off and all the water vapor condenses
and falls down, as rain or snow.
Interestingly, I’ve never seen a depiction
of a space habitat with snow, but I imagine
it would be quite spectacular, an entire artificial
world clothed in a sparkly white winter wonderland.
Redwoods, the tallest of trees, rely on fog
for their water farther up, as it’s hard
to transport water that high.
If you’re on a cap mountain, with higher
humidity and lower gravity, trees could potentially
grow far taller than on Earth, with their
canopies spread far wider.
Imagine that sight, vast, interconnected canopies
supporting their own layered ecosystems like
we have in rainforests on Earth, but supersized,
potentially with two mostly segregated ecosystems,
one on the ground, one in the canopy above.
They’d be fun mountain forests to visit
too, as the lower gravity would make hiking
around much more comfortable and safe.
I think your goal in building most such habitats
is to mimic Earth as much as you can, but
some variation might be welcome, and probably
unavoidable too given the increasingly alien
environment the closer we get to the axis.
It’s also fairly easy to make floating landmasses
or structures inside the habitat drum.
You just hang things from the tethers down
from the axis.
You’d probably have a lot to tethers hanging
down as spokes anyway to ease transport around
the place and put platforms for observation
or maintenance on these.
Birds would adapt easy enough to low gravity
flight and other animals might be transported
up there or learn to climb or hitch a ride
on the elevators.
We have plenty of organisms living in the
air too and if the gravity is low, flight
or buoyancy can become easier, you might get
weird seaweed equivalents floating around
the sky, patches of skyweed blown by the air
currents in the microgravity.
End caps are the best place to locate your
mountains, since they would place less stress
on the hull.
However, your cylinder need not be smooth
any more than it need be flat-capped, and
you can distort the habitat’s hull to create
hills and lakes, you can also use some light
but sturdy material like aerogel to fill those
fake hills.
Though, for your typical drum, you’d have
a problem keeping the drum structurally sound
if you modified it too much, and even aerogel
isn’t so light you could disregard that
mass if you were piling it into mountains.
So you’d probably limit yourself to hills
and valleys and save the mountains and canyons
for the sloping caps.
This also means that you are getting that
normal feature of rivers running down out
of the mountains into lakes below, and same
as the caps don’t have to be flat, the drum
itself need not be a cylinder, it could bulge
near the middle for instance, and there gravity
would be a bit higher and you’d get a belt
of water.
You could also have one cap smaller than the
other, a truncated cone, and on the skinnier
end things would be a bit lower gravity and
maybe a bit more arid, while the thicker end
would be where your lake was that all the
rivers ran down to.
This inevitably brings up the topic of erosion,
rivers cause it, rain causes it, and so does
wind.
Weather in a drum is normally going to be
fairly mild, enough that you might need to
take steps to get some decent wind and storms
in them to support an ecosystem’s seasonal
cycle.
However, this means that you’ll need to
take steps to maintain the interior.
As even gentle rain or wind wear away at the
landscape over time.
Now the weather on such habitats will for
the most part be similar enough to Earth without
much monkeying around, but more mild.
We’ve focussed on rotating habitats, but
the reverse is true on bigger artificial worlds
we sometimes discuss like Supramundane planets
or Mega-earths.
The two biggest factors for weather are sunlight
and spin.
A Saturn-sized planet turning once every 24
hours to mimic Earth, just a hundreds time
larger in surface area, is going to have some
vicious winds.
As would donut shaped planets like the Hoopworld.
Actually, wind speeds on gas giants are almost
always in excess of the most violent hurricanes
of Earth.
On those, you can break it up by including
mountain ranges for them to slam against and
slow, and you can use this trick inside smaller
rotating habitats to help funnel the air around
to create more variation and focus areas of
high wind for ecosystems that need it.
They can also be used to help vary temperature
and precipitation, if you don’t want a single
climate across the habitat.
For that matter, you will also want to vary
your lighting levels, spectrum, and duration
to simulate seasons.
Seasons are pretty critical to ecosystems,
impacting everything from pest control to
reproductive cycles, though one handy thing
about such habitats is you can arrange those
to be different in severity or duration than
on Earth.
The weirdest thing about the sky on rotating
habitats though is that it doesn’t exist,
look up on one and you see your neighbors
backyard hanging overhead.
There’s many ways to deal with that, if
you feel a need to, but the most blunt force
trick is to stick another small cylinder painted
blue inside your drum, maybe with lights in
it to fake stars at night.
You could stick a lot fins and baffles on
such a thing, that could be folded up or extended
to push the air around, not really an elegant
solution but it does work, and it would be
pretty natural looking, even without getting
sophisticated and using LED screens, it's
not like painting a sky mural on your ceiling.
Though if your sky cylinder is covered in
a ton of pixels faking the normal sky, day
or night, I could easily imagine companies
buying billboard time on those.
However, you shouldn’t need to go that route
on larger ones at all, air distorts and absorbs
light and water vapor does too, and as mentioned
in many of these it will tend to accumulate
toward the axis in the day time.
You should get normal enough cloud formations
and haze breaking up your view of the other
side of the drum, and it might get a lot more
since your artificial sun might need cooling.
There’s many ways to light a drum, you can
let light in through side panels in the drum
or through the caps using mirrors, you can
have a big lightbulb down the middle like
a fluorescent tube, but if you’ve got a
fusion economy you probably have a big Sun
on a trolley that moves along the axis.
Such a thing likely needs coolant and may
use water as the working fluid for turning
its turbines for power generation, and so
would be quite the cloud factory.
Indeed that’s what we call the nuclear plant
in the town over from me, since it’s always
visible by the clouds the cooling towers put
out.
Picturing a big white or yellow sphere on
a trolley, trailing clouds, is probably not
quite right though.
In some you might have a noon-spectrum lamp
in the middle and red on the edges, pointing
their light at an angle, to simulate twilight.
This would have the downside of having different
times of day throughout the station and that
might not be desirable.
I don’t really want time zones in my O’Neill
Cylinder the size of modest island.
In this regard the big light bar stretching
down the middle might be preferable, everybody
gets the same light at the same time, and
you can dim it and change colors to do your
day cycle.
Doing that, though has interesting effects
on the ecosystem of that habitat as the angling
of the sun that many mosses, plants, and animals
rely on would not happen.
This could cause rapid divergence in those
habitats from the original ecosystems that
they were installed from.
The trolley sun works better on a rotating
donut habitat, not one we see much.
We’ve got hoopworlds, where you live on
the outside of a very large donut, and we’ve
got smaller toroid space station designs that
spin like a Hula Hoop for gravity, but this
is a bit different.
On this type it’s the same as a normal rotating
habitat only it’s quite long and has no
cap, those ends meet and it forms a hoop.
To avoid confusion with hoop worlds or ring
worlds, we will call this a Circle Habitat.
It can spin like this, and not just around
like a normal hoop, for the same reason everything
is a rope if it’s long enough compared to
its width.
Even the sturdiest iron bar can be easily
tied into knots and bows if long enough compared
to width.
The big brother of this is the Topopolis,
the largest rotating habitat you can build
with conventional materials and the only one
that can rival a mega-Earth for living area,
we’ll discuss those more in the future.
For now, the neat thing about these, is that
if you have a trolley sun moving down the
internal axis of one, it will rise and set
just like normal, as it comes around the curve
of that torus’ interior.
Though you might use multiple such trolley
suns spaced around to get the right day night
spacings.
You’d also get a steady breeze moving along
with the trolley suns as they moved.
So while these would seem at first to be more
exotic than a rotating cylinder, they would
actually mimic Earth’s environment more
easily.
Incidentally you’re not necessarily using
reflected sunlight or fusion power for these
suns either, kugelblitz black holes of the
feedable type are ideal for fakes sun inside
rotating habitats or as sun-moons orbiting
artificial planets, provided we filter out
the dangerous ionizing wavelengths or convert
them to other wavelengths.
The amusing thing about using black holes
and their Hawking radiation for lighting is
that the bigger your space station is, the
smaller the black hole you need to light it,
since they grow more luminous as they get
smaller, but even at the size of an O’Neill
cylinder, the mass needed for such a black
hole sun is less than that of the station.
Of course you cannot throttle such things,
they give out their power continually, though
you might be able to reflect it back in when
you don’t want it, but you might have the
same problem with fusion plants too, which
might not be able to ramp power production
up and down over a period as short as a day,
and regardless, there’s no night in space,
for all that we talk of it being the Ocean
of Night.
So if you’re getting your power to light
the inside from solar or reflected mirrors,
at night that is going to waste.
You could have two drums, one lit and one
not, at any given time that shared it, or
just let it go to waste, but you could also
store surplus power in the drum itself.
You might want a pair of drums anyway, as
without it the habitat could suffer from precession,
which is the rapid flipping of the habitat
end-over-end.
That would be a nightmare for the structural
integrity of the station and the ecosystems
on the habitat too.
Alternatively, since a cylindrical habitat
is basically a giant flywheel in a vacuum,
you could slow it down a little, lowering
gravity, during the day to augment your sunlight
power supply, and then dump that power into
spinning it up at night.
It might be interesting to live some place
where the gravity was normal at dusk and dawn,
but maybe 10% lower and higher at noon and
midnight.
Get a little spring in your step midday and
be a bit more lethargic at night.
Needless to say that would do peculiar things
to not only the weather, but also to the ecosystem,
and peculiar isn’t necessarily bad.
As we saw in Exporting Earth, you’d often
have to augment the food supplies for the
local critters if you wanted to ensure they
were numerous enough for both decent gene
pools of any given species and a decent diversity
of species.
One interesting thing about these habitats
would be their ability to maintain distinct
species, like you see on isolated islands
on Earth.
While they aren’t as genetically diverse,
you do see unique species not found anywhere
else because of that isolation.
This can be an advantage, especially if you’re
trying to conserve some rare species of salamander,
squirrel, or deer, and all things being equal
a simpler ecology is easier to maintain.
The downside is that in order to keep the
ecology healthy you may need to intervene
more to keep it on track, because the less
complex the ecology, the less redundancy there
is, and the easier for a single failure to
destabilize the whole thing.
Now you can have some complete ecologies in
fairly small places, even a single petri dish,
and even ones including more than microorganisms
can be fairly small and complete, or close
to it, but by and large we have to accept
that any artificial habitat significantly
smaller than a continent is going to have
some gaps we’ll have to plug with artificial
means.
We do have some habitat designs that big or
bigger, and for those, we have an easier time
creating a stable ecosystem.
You might need to maintain a gene bank to
artificially insert diversity through cloning
or genetic modification, or bring in stock
from neighboring habitats.
You might need to augment nutrients or fill
ecological niches with artificial roles, like
tiny robots drones that mimicked bees for
pollination.
You might use bees or hummingbirds for pollination
but have to modify them and other organisms
that navigate off the Sun or magnetic fields,
so they could navigate off what the habitat
has instead.
In small habitats you might need to tinker
with their genetics so they used something
else, and it might be amusing if a habitats
bees and birds navigated off the wifi signal
inside… which it would presumably have,
especially since by default a cylinder habitat
is a giant faraday cage so signals from outside
need to be received and repeated inside.
Now speaking of bioengineering, all such environments
will need constant maintenance by people,
not just ecologically, but also mechanically,
and for their landscape, and since the critters
living inside might need some genetic tweaking,
you might as well get them to do some of the
work for you.
This has some amusing implications.
There’s a theme park in France where they
recently trained some crows to pick up trash,
and while getting critters to collect trash
and take it to deposit site in exchange for
food might be hard to do in the first generation,
over time or with active intervention, it
could be done with many critters.
One can probably engineer it to be instinctual
if needed, but it’s likely that for many
species after you train the first generation
or two, parents would teach their kids what
to do and which bits of trash are safe and
what they got for them.
I can imagine after some generations squirrels
fighting over cigarette butts or bottle caps
as enthusiastically as lions fighting over
a kill.
However, one should hope humans in the future
are not such litterbugs that they could support
an entire species picking up their trash,
so it’s an amusing example that hopefully
wouldn’t be needed but it highlights how
in these environments, doubly artificial by
both their nature and them being human habitats,
rather than dedicated eco-preserves, your
ecology will either need tons of intervention
or needs to be adapted to include humans and
our constructs as part of that ecology.
And if you’re not exactly replicating nature,
by fundamentally adapting species to fit this
artificial environment, it’s worth considering
using them as part of the maintenance crew.
Let’s take an example: Inside such habitats
you need a lot of rock and soil and things
like sedimentary rock don’t occur naturally
off Earth, so you have to make it and even
things like basalt, which is common on the
Moon, is a bit different than Earth’s, whereas
granite is not something you’ll find on
moons and asteroids and will be a pain to
make.
As it erodes down you’d have to constantly
replenish it and dredge your lakes so they
don’t fill in.
One might imagine that crabs or coral or other
shell producing critters might be tweaked
to maintain the land by creating it, those
are made of calcium carbonate and many rocks
are mostly that too.
With a bit of tweaking, while they’d still
have their normal food chain, you could set
up an ecosystem that self-sustained far more
than on Earth by altering or maintaining the
landscape too, much as beavers do in a way,
in exchange for additional food.
As we mentioned in Space Farming, while you
can obviously farm the interior of a habitation
drum, you’d likely do most of your food
production in simpler, cheaper and more optimized
auxiliary space farms near the habitat.
So you could produce extra to bribe and pay
the critters who can now live in greater numbers.
One might also imagine how that might mutate
down the centuries as they slip into these
ecological roles and add new niches, more
scavengers and pirates too, the hawk swoops
down on the squirrel not to eat the squirrel,
but to steal its bottle caps, and the squirrels
bury their bottlecaps for the winter, so they
can take them in to the recycling center for
food in the lean months.
Now of course all this could probably be done
with machines instead, and maybe better, but
on the higher end of genetic engineering and
machine creation the line gets rather blurry.
People often say humans are the apex predator
and the pinnacle of evolution and biology,
which may be true, as we say here though,
there is no machine on this planet as artificial
as the typical human, nothing more manmade
than us.
So it’s a blurry line and one that will
get blurrier if you decide to extend this
maintenance ecology outside your habitation
drum.
I mentioned that organisms that can survive
the radiation blasted ruins of space, and
on the outer skin of the drum, they might
do well living just under the surface, same
as something can live in ice, just under the
surface too.
We’ve already got ecosystems in the permafrosts
and glaciers on Earth, so it’s not a stretch
to believe something couldn’t gain a foothold
on our drums too.
Also again the drum in unlikely to be exposed
to the void anyway but be surrounded by some
protective sheath.
Our preferred material for making rotating
habitats is assumed to be graphene, which
is made of carbon, we are carbon-based life,
so one might imagine creating organisms which
live on the hull and go around eating damaged
and micrometeor scarred sections and replacing
them with newly spun bits.
They might be more machine than organic, or
based on an entirely different organic chemistry,
but not necessarily.
Again we’ve got some very bizarre and robust
extremophiles already and often find new ones
dwelling and even thriving in environments
we’d call barren or even toxic.
Finding things that eat plastics or metals
or silicon or possibly graphene wouldn’t
be that weird, and as time passes they become
more likely.
Where evolution is involved, if there’s
a niche, a food source, something will eventually
exploit it.
We’ve now created a new ecosystem outside
of the drum, one that might evolve into a
very alien one too.
This makes mutation a concern as well, because
if you make a bunch of organisms that eat
graphene hull plating and spin new bits, you
will eventually end up with ones that eat
undamaged sections and others that adapt to
eat each other.
This would tend to happen with self-replicating
machines too, and I should note that we can
do things to curb their mutation rates, but
we can also do that to biological organisms.
There’s no particular reason you can’t
build a checksum function into a robot’s
equivalent to DNA, one of many methods we
use for data integrity when copying it, to
cut down on mutation, and you could probably
build that into normal DNA and biological
organisms too.
Though we have many methods to control such
populations, like building in a requirement
for a specific nutrient they can only get
at one place, so they have to stick to that
area and it’s easy to spot mutants when
they come by.
That’s assuming you’d want to stop such
mutation.
Personally I think that’s fascinating and
something we’d want to let progress.
If things got too troublesome, you can just
purge the current species or build a new habitat.
There’s a habit in science fiction of having
us come across artificial worlds and habitats
abandoned by their makers or who went primitive.
I think that’s unlikely but it makes folks
focus on how long such places would last without
maintenance.
To me, that’s a bad way to look at it, the
Earth isn’t static; it’s likely most planets
that started off like Earth lost their atmosphere
or oceans, and if they ever had life, lost
it with them.
Our planet has changed a ton over the eons
and is always changing, mountains rise, oceans
sweep them under, forests turn to plains and
back to forests then get swept under by glaciers
or torched by volcanoes.
Count it luck none of these changes ended
all life, though it certainly ended most of
it, we’re mutant leftover survivors of those
species that managed to barely survive many
catastrophes that changed the world immensely
and took most of its inhabitants off the table.
An artificial world would need maintenance
in general, but if you’re clever you might
make one self-sustaining and even more stable
and enduring than Earth.
There’re endless options, and while I think
most habitats would try to mimic Earth as
close as possible, I’d imagine almost all
of them would choose to have at least one
peculiar feature that stood out.
Be it gardens in the clouds or a sun that
gave very long sunsets or environmental controls
that made sure it was always Sunny on Sundays.
Or freakishly tall trees with enormous canopies
spread out across the lower gravity sky, home
to whole ecosystem living in those branches.
Or ones that incorporate calcium carbonate
into their bark and die as small limestone
mountains.
Or squirrels that rob tourists of their chewing
gum so they can turn the wrappers and gum
in for treats.
A little uniqueness never hurts, and who can
say what other interesting things might emerge
over time?
We’ve a lot of announcements for today and
we’ll get to those and the upcoming schedule
in a moment.
First, I wanted to mention that while a big
focus for today was designing the ecosystems
on these habitats to match up well to human
settlements, Anthropic Ecology if you would,
we’ve also mentioned before that you could
use habitats like these as dedicated nature
preserves too.
Some species don’t do well with humans and
even those who do tend to change a lot, so
closed off ecosystems helps preserve them
against extinction and you can't get more
closed off than a space station.
However it’s surprising how often critters
we thought went extinct turn out not to have,
Lazarus Species, not to mention just how many
species we never even knew about, or at least
that biologists didn’t know about, and our
sister channel Cheddar recently released an
episode discussing that and how modern technology
is letting us crowdsource our investigations.
I’ll link it in the video description and
end titles.
They’ve been doing a lot of great videos
recently and sponsoring many others like todays,
and I’d suggest checking it out and don’t
forget to subscribe while you’re there.
I also wanted to thank Bryan Versteeg of Spacehabs.com
for lending us a lot of the footage of his
Kaplana One Space Habitat.
He’s one of the best space artists out there
and has brought to life so many of the futuristic
concepts we look at here.
If you want to see more of those, check out
his website Spacehabs.com, linked below.
I recently sat down with John Michael Godier
on his new radio show Event Horizon for an
interview, and as you’d expect the two of
us had a lot to talk about, so it ended up
needing to broken into two pieces, the first
of those will air tonight at 5 pm Eastern
time, 2100 UTC, which gives you plenty of
time to check out Cheddar and some of John’s
prior interviews with folks like Robert Zubrin
and Andy Weir, author of the Martian and our
November book of the month, Artemis.
We also have our second End of the Month Livestream
coming up this weekend, Sunday October 28th
at 2 pm Eastern, 1800 UTC, we may start bringing
guests on for those in the future, but while
we’re still learning the ropes, I’ll be
there this Sunday afternoon answering all
your questions about SFIA and our episodes.
Lastly for announcements, while we have all
the episodes available as audio-only for download
at Soundcloud, and on iTunes, I recently added
them all to Google Play as well.
So we took a look at artificial habitats today
and how their ecologies might change over
the generations, and we’ll be looking at
some more of these structures of truly grand
scales in coming months.
We do often spend a lot of time far ahead
in the future and a common comment made here
by viewers is that they wish they could live
to see such things, a sentiment I certainly
share.
With that in mind next week, we’ll be joining
up with SENS Research Foundation to explore
some of the science behind aging and extending
the human lifespan, and we’ll dig down into
the biology and other science of it next week.
One thing we didn’t discuss much today is
how you turn the barren asteroids you’d
be making these habitats out of into good,
healthy soil, and get stuff growing there.
In two weeks we’ll be discussing how to
transform our deserts here on Earth into verdant
forests and lush jungles or farmland, and
we’ll talk a bit about how you do that aspect
of terraforming too.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notification bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
