The world may be a sphere, not flat, but as
we’ll see today, a Flat Earth is a pretty
cool place to live.
So today we return to the Megastructures series
to look at how and why you would build a flat
or flat-ish planet, as well as a few interesting
variations on it.
Now, before we delve into the topic, I should
note that we’ll be assuming that gravity
is being provided by classic use of mass,
not centrifugal spin as we often use for rotating
habitat examples or any high tech type of
artificial gravity like we so often see in
science fiction.
With that in mind, our options for construction
are limited to using ultra-strong material
or what we call active support, which is basically
pushing on something to keep it from falling
down.
We’ve discussed both many times so we’ll
mostly bypass it today, but if you’re new
to the channel you may want to jump over to
the Upward Bound series or early Megastructures
episodes for a more detailed explanation.
Building a flat planet, often called a Discworld,
is decidedly tricky even by the very high
standard of building an artificial planet
to begin with, and even the simplest of these
would dwarf any engineering project humanity
has ever taken on, and to the same degree
our planet dwarfs such projects.
However it’s not really a scientific challenge
or super-high tech, just a matter of brute
force, to which more technology would doubtless
help.
This episode is not about the Flat Earth Theory,
I tend to take for granted anybody watching
SFIA assumes our world is a sphere so it would
be preaching to the choir, but the various
problems with that theory are also some of
the problems we have to overcome to make such
a planet have conditions that are either Earth-like,
or improvements to conditions on Earth, so
we will look at some of them.
That’s a good place to begin though.
When you’re getting ready to pile vast amounts
of matter in place to make an artificial world,
we tend to assume you’d go with a sphere,
like Earth, as it’s the version that’s
going to give you the maximum living area
for unit of mass.
That’s true enough but contains three flawed
assumptions.
First, it doesn’t actually give you the
maximum surface area for volume of mass, in
fact a sphere has the lowest surface area
per volume of any object, but what’s generally
meant in this context, by saying living area,
is something with Earth-like gravity, which
is to say, around as strong as Earth at any
point on the surface and pointed down at the
ground.
On a sphere, gravity always points down and
perpendicular to the surface, on a cube or
slanted.
It will also have the same amount of light
hitting every part of one side of that disc,
whereas we get less light near our poles,
which are tilted away from the Sun.
Now you don’t have to light one of these
artificial worlds with a classic star, but
if you are, it has some advantages and disadvantages,
because while a flat planet gets the same
light everywhere, and a spherical one loses
a lot of real estate to being too hot or too
cold.
When you build a flat planet orbiting a star,
the whole thing has mostly the same climate,
meaning you have less real estate but you
can use every little bit of it.
The third flawed assumption is that you actually
care about how much mass you are using.
It takes far more mass to make a classic mass-gravity
planet than a spin-gravity one of the same
living area, by many orders of magnitude,
which we covered the specifics of in the episode,
“Mega Earths”.
So if you’re making a spherical planet,
it already implies you aren’t trying to
optimize that.
If you’re already using a million times
the mass to build a spherical planet instead
of swarms of rotating habitats of an equal
living area, going up to two millions times
isn’t that big a deal.
Now you might say that highlights a problem
right there, you wouldn’t build these natural-gravity
worlds because they are mass wasteful.
Except they are not.
They’re not expending mass, they are storing
it, and it doesn’t matter what kind of mass
it is.
Earth masses about 6 Zettatons, mostly iron,
oxygen, silicon, and magnesium, but to produce
gravity, 6 Zettatons of Hydrogen and Helium
work just as well, and they are each far more
abundant than every other element combined.
The only source of gravity more abundant is
dark matter, and if we ever figure out a way
to capture and store that, it would work too.
Hydrogen is very valuable to civilizations
that run on fusion, be it artificial fusion
or from a star.
You’d need to store it somewhere and a big
spherical or disc-shaped tank that you’ve
slapped a layer of dirt, water, and air around
works just fine.
You’d have to haul it out of a gravity well,
but the energy released by fusing a kilogram
of hydrogen is so much more than the energy
needed to lift it out of an Earth-like gravity
well that it can be disregarded, and you could
have derived a similar amount of power from
it while dropping it down that well in the
first place.
When you're storing hydrogen gas for billions
of years, its very likely to leak out if the
gravitational pull isn’t much higher than
the kinetic energy of those hydrogen atoms
in your containment vessel.
So while you’d expect most folks to live
inside cylinder shaped rotating habitats,
you’d also expect a proportionally small
but still large number of these kind of artificial
planets that used natural mass-based gravity
as it serves as both storage and living area.
What the filler is would vary, it might be
their fuel reserves or their temporary trash
cans too.
By default we assume advanced civilizations
use hydrogen turned into helium for energy,
and helium is actually a pain to use for gravity
because you have to build very large to overcome
its low density, but they might be able to
fuse helium into carbon, or nitrogen, or oxygen,
or even go all the way up to iron, which is
great for building smaller natural gravity
planets as it is very dense.
Of course they might feed matter right into
black holes for power production, in which
case it doesn’t matter what type of matter
you use.
We’ll discuss many other advantages of flat
planets as we go, but think of it this way:
If you’re storing huge amounts of raw material
someplace, you might as well get some extra
use out of it by living there, and if you’re
engaging in the kind of stellar engineering
we’ve discussed for things like Starlifting
or extending a Sun’s lifespan, especially
the latter, you are going to end up with tens
of thousands of planet’s worth of excess
mass whose value is huge, but only in the
context of being able to use it billions of
years from now.
Which makes it perfect for a planetary storage
system.
Now if you go fill a giant hollow planet with
gas, you can actually rely on pressure to
hold the surface up, like a balloon, for certain
sizes and pressures anyway, or some superstrong
firmament material if you had it, but you’d
usually end up using a big spherical shell
made out of overlapping orbital rings, see
that episode for details or again Mega-Earths.
For nonspherical planets you pretty much have
to do this anyway, because on a flat thick
disc of a planet, gravity only points down
at the middle.
As you move out from the center it will start
tilting toward the center instead of straight
down, and left to its own you’d end up seeing
the disc deform to have a bulge in the middle,
what we call a Pancake Planet, and eventually
turn into a sphere.
A Pancake Planet has some advantages too,
you have a horizon on one from the curvature.
On a strictly flat planet you do still have
an effective horizon as the light traveling
through all that air will get blurry and bent,
but it’s a long way off.
Interestingly, on a big enough discworld,
like the Alderson Disc, a version billions
of times bigger in area than Earth, you would
have to consider the effect of gravity on
the light too.
If someone far off points a laser your way,
the beam will curve down and hit the ground
before reaching you, but, if they angle it
up a bit, it would curve down and reach you,
like throwing a ball which follows a parabolic
trajectory.
That would seem to give a horizon, BUT, that
whole disc will have light heading up at angles
too, which will curve down and reach you,
so that even though you are standing on a
flat surface, it will seem to curve up.
We’ll discuss Alderson Discs another day.
For our more modest flat planets, if we want
gravity to point straight down, we have to
distribute our mass differently and not uniformly.
To avoid that slanting effect as you move
out from the center, you need to increase
the amount of mass under you as you go.
Though you can also spin the planet like a
carousel to get centrifugal force, which would
push out, helping to counter the central mass,
and it will rise as you move out from the
center too.
Imagine for the moment our flat planet was
made of many concentric rings, each a bit
more massive than the next, growing as you
move to the edge.
We will also spin it, and we will balance
the whole process out for whatever combination
best achieves a mostly uniform gravity pointing
more or less downward.
It need not be perfectly uniform either, Earth’s
gravity isn’t after all, it’s lower or
higher depending on your altitude and latitude,
and it does angle near mountains and cliffs,
which pull you a bit sideways.
Now, since I raise those rings, let’s take
a moment to remind everyone what an orbital
ring is.
An orbital ring is a hollow ring around a
planet that is basically stationary relative
to the planet’s surface, inside it is a
vast amount of matter spinning around faster
than the normal orbital speed, and the net
momentum of the hollow, stationary part and
the inner spinning part just have to add up
to whatever the appropriate momentum would
be for an object of that total mass to orbit.
Visually, think a big long hose wrapped in
a circle with water spinning around that loop,
and again see the Orbital Rings episode for
the specifics on that.
We call that active support and we have a
few types besides that discussed in Space
Towers and Launch Loops and some other episodes,
but we’ll focus on the Orbital Ring.
We will make a ton of them, each a bit wider
in diameter, laid out as a disk.
We will pump a huge amount of matter through
them, probably hydrogen or helium, which we’ve
compressed to a high density, so it’s a
good chance it’s metallic hydrogen which
is handy if those rings are using magnets
or superconductors to keep the mass spinning.
You would increase the density in each subsequent
ring so it had more mass, or put more rings
below them.
Two quick notes, if for some reason you can’t
compress your hydrogen or helium enough to
keep things decently flat for a coin-shaped
disc to live on rather than a thick cylinder
you’d live on the caps of, you do have a
couple options.
First, you can use artificial black holes
instead.
Those do have magnetic fields you can push
on them with and they could orbit inside a
hollow tube just fine.
Second, if you’ve got to make it deeper
as you go out, you can opt to make it taller
instead, sloping your world up near the edges,
rather than the middle like the Pancake Planet,
those sloping sides, like a bowl, let you
add more mass and it also tilts the gravity
more outward, counteracting the slant toward
the center.
Some folks might object to living over top
of a bunch of black holes or ultra-compressed
hydrogen, but just as reminder, we all live
on top of a vast molten, radioactive ball
of metal.
The solid part we live on, the crust, is about
as thick and sturdy as that nasty skin that
forms on top of hot soup or pudding.
Assuming you can get those materials in the
rings dense enough, you can go ahead with
your entirely flat planet at this point, otherwise
you might need some curved geometry and we’ll
discuss a few other fun options later.
Your next step though is to lay down a normal
layer of artificial land and sea, and this
is obviously no easy process but in terms
of effort per living area, this phase is no
harder than terraforming planets or building
rotating habitats.
Your Flat Earth has no real horizon, but it’s
still better than a rotating habitat in that
regard, where the ground curves up and your
neighbor’s backyard hangs over your head.
Here it just goes on forever until interrupted
by air interference and blur, or landscape.
That’s another trick for handling gravity
slanting issues too, you can build many layers
of circular mountain ranges whose extra mass
yanks material toward them, keeping air and
water from drifting off too much, breaking
up horizons, and letting you tilt land to
match slants with less of an issue.
An Extreme form of this is the Ripple world,
where it just moves outward like a wave of
peaks and valleys from the center.
Differing from a ripple caused by dropping
a stone in a pond in that the further out
from the center you get, the higher those
waves would be, rather than attenuating off
in amplitude or height.
The planet would still look rather flat from
a distance, but to those living on it there’d
be more natural landscape curvature.
Playing with the landscape this way also helps
break up the weather and climate, again a
flat planet has the same lighting and temperature
everywhere on a given side, and while you
might prefer that over land wasted on equatorial
hot spots and frozen poles, a little variety
would be nice.
Speaking of lighting, that’s the next big
issue.
Now unlike the Flat Earth Theory, our flat
planet can just be orbiting the Sun and spinning
like a coin for day and night, and we can
tilt it too so it has seasonal variation.
The Sun would otherwise rise and set just
like normal, twilight and dusk are a bit different,
but there is still a horizon in this regard
for it to rise and set across and you’d
still get that noon blue and twilight red.
However, such constructs require huge amounts
of effort and energy that you likely can only
afford in scenarios where you can mimic the
Sun anyway, via artificial fusion or huge
mirrors or kugelblitz black holes, so we might
prefer to go the Flat Earth approach on this
one.
In the Flat Earth Theory the Sun is not a
giant far from Earth and nearly a million
times more massive, it and the moon are fairly
tiny objects that just circle over the Earth,
about where the equator is, a circle about
halfway out form the center of the disc, with
the north pole at the center, and the south
pole as a circle on the rim, both far from
the Sun and Moon.
Now this begs the question as to why the Sun
does not fall down, as I recall under Flat
Earth Theory this is because gravity is much
weaker and diminishes faster than in Newtonian
Physics, somewhat akin to an extreme form
of MOND – Modified Newtonian Dynamics – that
sought to explain dark matter as a false positive
caused by gravity getting weaker faster than
inverse-square at very large distances.
We are assuming throughout this episode that
gravity works more or less like Newton and
Einstein said it does and that we’ve no
artificial way of messing with it beyond piling
mass up somewhere or spinning things very
fast.
In this case though, we are obviously not
dealing with a typical star, so we need not
assume it is that massive.
Such an object needs to be putting down around
200,000 terawatts on our Flat Earth, assuming
it’s got the same land area as Earth, and
presumably be about 30 kilometers in diameter
to be about the same size as the Sun or Moon
in the sky if about 3000 kilometers above
the equator, implying each square meter of
that Sun-disc object was giving off about
7 gigawatts of power.
Imagine for the moment that our sun here was
a big flat mirror, or solar sail, and that
we were beaming lasers or light beams at it
that it bounced back down to the flat planet
below.
If you’ve seen the Interstellar Laser Highways
episode or any of the ones we discuss laser
propulsion spaceships in, you might remember
it takes either 3 gigawatts of laser per ton
absorbed or 1.5 gigawatts when bounced instead
to accelerate an object at 1g, or hold it
stationary against Earth’s gravity.
We’d have enough power per unit area here,
7 gigawatts per meter squared, for a very
thick mirror, indeed one thicker than battleship
armor rather than the thin foil we normally
think of for solar sails and mirrors.
So that part at least is easy, such a fake
sun can be held up either by its own internal
power generation or by light it is reflecting
from the true source.
That’s also more than enough energy to let
you steer the thing around in a circle.
Similarly, a big internal fusion plant could
be grabbing up trace atmosphere to superheat
and use as exhaust.
One problem is that for that size and power,
your blackbody spectrum corresponds to more
than twice the Sun’s surface temperature
which is obviously a problem for building
an object to generate this, since it would
melt to slag, and also be generating a lot
more ultraviolet light than we’d like.
Not as big a deal for mirrors though, since
they’d be reflecting most of the light away,
not absorbing it, and are of course mechanically
simple so can better handle heat anyway.
Now conveniently a black hole producing this
amount of energy via hawking radiation only
masses 40 kilotons, and even using just a
small portion of that as thrust would be enough
to keep it aloft, however it would only live
a couple months so you’d have to be constantly
feeding it.
You’d probably use many of them clumped
together with more mass, longer lives, and
less power output.
You’d also need to surround it with something
that could absorb all that gamma radiation
and spit it out as normal light, same as our
sun actually does.
We’ll discuss this more in Making Suns early
next year, where we’ll look at both building
the natural kind and all sorts of pseudo-suns
we can make via artificial power sources or
black holes, but for the moment we’ll just
say the mirror approach is probably the best
ones for doing this variety of lighting, where
the sun spins around over a flat planet and
you’d probably fake the Moon the same way,
or moons, if you wanted to.
You also need another sun on the other side,
unless you want to waste half your flat earth’s
potential living area.
The other option, which we’ll also discuss
more in Making Suns, is a Sun-Moon, the classic
geocentric one where the Sun is a moon-sized
object orbiting the planet.
Couple caveats, first, for any given object
there’s only one distance in terms of orbits
that is going to produce a 24 hour orbit,
which can be a pain for getting your sun in
the right place.
We can counter that by spinning the planet
too, with the Sun-Moon or backwards.
For instance, if the Sun did orbit the Earth
every 24 hours it would always hang in the
same place because the Earth spins that fast,
that’s a geostationary orbit, alternatively
if the planet spun backwards in such a case
the Sun would take less time to re-illuminate
the same place.
So we can do the same thing with a flat earth
to widen our options, but you can’t spin
such an object very fast.
Indeed that’s one of the problems with using
the real sun for lighting if you try to makes
these much bigger than Earth-sized, too much
centrifugal force on the sides.
If you want to scale a discworld up you need
to make it an ellipse instead of a circle
so you can spin it relative to the Sun without
getting extreme forces near what I suppose
we will call the Equator.
You might do that for one with a sun moon
too, since an orbit around a big disc is not
quite the nice circle or ellipse that it is
for sphere, especially a disk with a non-homogeneous
distribution of mass.
Now, your fake sun gives a lot more of its
light to your planet, proportionally, than
ours does, but it still wastes a lot if it
by radiating omnidirectionally so you’d
probably have a big spotlight or parabolic
dish arrangement for your sun rather than
a uniform lightbulb, and that helps a lot
for trying to get the fake Sun to be the right
size and orbital rate and brightness and spectrum.
You can also use the same trick as with the
hovering sun from earlier though, since all
that power can be used as thrust to let you
get around the normal orbital mechanics for
time and distance.
Of course you can circumvent all of this by
just having giant lights overhead that switch
on in sequence to fake a moving sun or using
a big spaceship that flies around lighting
you with its engines, sort of like Helios
and his sun-chariot from Greek Mythology.
Heck it might even land in some sea on the
rim to refuel with water for thrust and hydrogen
fusion fuel every night.
Seems kinda crazy as a very extreme effort,
these sorts of things, but keep it in context,
you just built a whole planet shaped like
a pizza, which dwarfs this type of fake sun
building.
Okay, that’s the basics, let’s add some
options for variation or adding these together.
One of these is a Roulette World, where like
a Roulette Wheel it bulges up on the rim and
middle.
Actually this is one of the variations used
for the Flat Earth Theory, and it gives you
better horizons and better light distribution
if you’re using that hovering but circling
sun approach.
It’s also much easier to build, since you
can have a central mass and a lot of other
mass orbiting normally in a hoop around it,
then just build a layer overtop curved to
keep gravity perpendicular to the ground.
You can later expand this with more rings
to create the Ripple World we mentioned earlier.
With any of these you also have to decide
what to do with the sides, or rim of the planet.
You can let it flatten off as a straight disk
so you’d sail over the edge of, but you
wouldn’t fall forever, and depending how
you did your lighting and mass distribution
this might be a forbidding dark frozen wasteland
or just a curved rim, maybe habitable.
Unless you’re building much smaller than
Earth, there’s no need to have rim walls
for retaining air or keeping things from falling
off as gravity still pulls on everything,
just not straight down relative to the ground
and of course so long as it’s lit, this
area, the edge of the coin, is entirely habitable
with gravity pointing the right way.
Curve it and it has horizons too and you can
just walk, sail, or fly around it to the other
side.
Assuming we’re using one lit by our own
sun, again you can just spin it on a side,
and so long as it’s not too big you don’t
have to worry about it flicking people off
the nominal equator, so don’t build one
bigger than a gas giant unless you also want
to start distributing your mass non-homogeneously
in that way too.
Which you can do, orbital rings aren’t the
only trick for that and need not be circles
anyway.
You can use what we call an Atlas Pillar for
instance too, which is essentially a space
tower, a straight structural member in which
accelerated matter shoves at the ends to give
it an arbitrarily high compressive strength,
one can think of these as orbital rings of
very high eccentricity.
See the Space Towers episode for details.
As to arrangements, if you’re providing
your own lighting or using beamed in light
off a big hovering mirror, you can put these
anywhere you please, but if you want them
using the Sun, then you’d put them in a
big ring around the Sun out as far as Earth.
You could pack in tens of thousands of them
in one orbital plane, which is about all you’d
have mass for if you were stealing that mass
mostly from the Sun via Starlifting, and of
course you’d need to go in closer as the
Sun would have gotten a bit dimmer as you
stole its mass and extended its life.
Since they are flipping around a lot of that
sunlight would be wasted so you’d probably
put a big thin Ringworld covered in solar
panels behind them or maybe a variation on
the Rungworld we discussed in Dyson Spheres.
There’s some weird tricks you can do to
allow you to travel easily, maybe even walk,
between such collections of planets, but we’ll
discuss those another time too.
As to why you’d ever build such things,
it’s worth remembering that any civilization
that can build such things is one powerful
enough to justify the efforts simply by saying
“Because we can”, however as mentioned
earlier, they do serve an actual purpose.
You can store mass in many ways, but if your
civilization is going in for the long haul,
you do need huge reserves of mass and ones
that can reliably be kept securely for astronomically
long times.
Quite possibly more than an entire solar mass,
as your home system might be grabbing additional
material from nearby systems.
Most storage spots would probably be spherical
shell worlds, and they’d only be a small
fraction of the places people lived, but there’s
no real major downside to using other geometries
that would prevent you from doing some for
novelty value.
A Flat Earth is going to be a major tourist
attraction and one which conveniently has
good weather everywhere on it, no polar or
equatorial variation, so you could cover it
with tons of archipelagos of snaky islands
and beach resorts for instance.
For that matter, you could also recreate earth-like
deep oceans, something that is very hard to
do with rotating habitats.
So this is an example of a type of megastructure
and artificial planet that you wouldn’t
build a lot of, but which you probably would
build some of.
So while in the past folks often incorrectly
believed the Earth was flat, in the future,
there will probably be folks who could say
that and be correct.
It does make me wonder though, if any of those
folks living on a Flat Earth might create
conspiracy theories that they actually lived
on a sphere.
It’s going to be a long time before we’re
building artificial planets, but they do seem
to serve a practical purpose, not just the
stuff of daydreams.
Of course they already do, we often use weird
geometries like flat or cube or hoop shaped
planets for teaching students how to master
working with gravity and if you going through
the episode today wondering about other strange
geometries and how you calculate their gravity,
or just want to improve your math and physics
skills, head over to Brilliant.org.
Brilliant focuses on teaching you practical
knowledge at your own rate, but they know
that to learn the material it helps to have
a lot of fun examples, and one of those is
the Flat Earth quiz that walks through the
math and concepts involved.
If you want to increase your own understanding
of that topic or others, and have fun while
you’re doing it, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription.
We’ll get to our schedule in a moment, but
as a reminder, we have our End of the Month
Livestream coming up tomorrow evening at 7
PM Eastern, and I hope to see you then!
Next Thursday we’ll be back to the Upward
Bound series for a look at Kickstarting Space
Industry, and we’ll review some of the options
that might be what get us into space in a
big way.
The week after that, we’ll make a trip to
the North Pole and Antartica to look at ways
we might transform the cold regions of our
own planet into livable places.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
