Science fiction has popularized asteroid mining
and cities in the sky, but could the future of mining be in cloud cities 
hanging far above distant worlds?
As we get ready to finally start returning
to the Moon and contemplating mining it to
get to the resources we need to settle the
rest of the solar system, it’s a good reminder
that very little of the actual resources in
our solar system – and probably most others
– is in conveniently-mineable low-gravity
airless moons and minor planets.
Off of Earth, in our own inner solar system,
Venus makes up more mass than everything else
there combined, Mercury, Mars, our Moon, Mars’s
own two little tiny moons, and the millions
of asteroids in the Belt, yet its surface
is covered with a terribly thick atmosphere
whose contents are more like something coming
out of rocket jet than what people inside
that rocket could live and breathe in.
Beyond the Belt, we have the gas giant, Jupiter,
which outmasses every other planet in the
solar system combined, and most of that remaining
mass is in its smaller sibling Saturn, which
itself has the largest moon in the solar system,
Titan, with a thicker atmosphere than Earth’s.
Most of the remaining mass is in the two ice
giants, Uranus, and Neptune.
All these bodies are surrounded by thick atmospheres
which make getting material off the surface
very difficult, and sometimes bordering on
the nonsensical to even discuss, with places
where the surface rains diamond or acid or
is a dense core that would crush and burn
any known material in an eyeblink.
And yet, the atmospheres of these places might
themselves be gold mines of resources and
that’s what we’ll be discussing today.
First, we’ll look at worlds like Venus and
Titan, then move on to Ice Giants and Hycean
Planets like Uranus and Neptune, then we’ll
move on to gas giants like Jupiter and Saturn,
where we can discuss setups like the Cloud
City of Bespin from Star Wars.
Finally, we’ll look at how to mine resources
directly from our Sun and other stars, or
even stellar remnants.
We’ll begin our discussion on Venus and
then move to Titan, each of which represents
a very different type of target but which
will likely use similar technologies for harvesting,
and the reason they interest us initially
is because their atmospheres have an abundance
of nitrogen.
Venus’s atmosphere is almost entirely carbon
dioxide, at 96.5%, and truthfully that doesn’t
interest us too much as a resource in space
colonization because carbon and oxygen are
both plentiful pretty much everywhere; but
virtually all the remainder of that is nitrogen,
and Venus’ atmosphere is nearly a hundred
times as massive as Earth’s, so while most
of Earth’s atmosphere is nitrogen and that
is vital to plant life, Venus has a supply
far greater than our own.
Oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen are the third,
fourth, and seventh most abundant elements
in the Universe, as a fraction of mass, and
in our solar system as well.
If you’re curious 1st and 2nd are hydrogen
and helium, and 5th and 6th are neon and iron.
Helium and neon are noble gasses, meaning
they only form molecules of just themselves,
monoatomic.
A molecule’s total mass is the principal
control on whether or not it gets blown away
into deep space by solar wind and radiation,
so the lighter molecules don’t stick around
much, and thus even though they are very common
in general, it’s very hard to find either
helium or neon in the inner solar system outside
of the Sun itself, which holds onto them by
sheer gravitational strength.
Hydrogen doesn’t do much better, but it
can bond to other heavier atoms, like oxygen
to form water, or carbon to form methane,
or nitrogen to form ammonia.
Unfortunately, nitrogen is less common than
oxygen or carbon, and by quite a lot, and
it isn’t as good at sticking around hot
planets.
Nonetheless if we want to be building ecologies
inside large space habitats like O’Neill
Cylinders, we’ll need a lot of nitrogen,
and if we want to terraform Mars or paraterraform
places like the Moon, we’ll need a lot more.
Regardless, nitrogen and carbon dioxide can
be separated in a variety of ways.
I don’t think a centrifuge would be the
most efficient process but it’s always an
option for separating cases of significantly
different molecular mass, especially if you
don’t need to worry much about purity.
Nitrogen is our main interest in early settlement
in this solar system but that won’t be true
everywhere and everywhen, so centrifuges are
an option that basically works on everything.
You suck in some gas and spin it fast, and
the same centrifugal forces that we use for
spin-gravity in rotating habitats will let
the denser molecules separate to the bottom
and the lighter ones float up, or toward the
center.
Carbon dioxide is nearly half again the mass
molecular nitrogen is, so it’s an easy enough
separation, and the centrifuges can be mounted
on the same type of buoyant stations that
we envision floating on Venus’s upper atmosphere,
which is heavy enough that a balloon full
of oxygen and nitrogen would float, so people
can live in blimps high above Venus.
You could potentially use your blimp’s engines
to run your centrifuges when not running your
propellers at full speed.
The key to any competitive mining operation
is going to be about overall efficiency, so
any place where you can get two for the price
of one, or use surplus resources for another
purpose that are only required for their main
purpose intermittently is probably a good
way to go.
Cryogenic distillation is another technique
for separating out nitrogen; and a popular
one here on Earth where nitrogen under pressure
and cooled will turn to a liquid right out
of the air.
The usual technique on Earth is to compress
a bunch of air, which will heat it up, then
let it cool to the local environment’s temperature,
about 10 Celsius or 50 Fahrenheit.
Then, once it’s reached that local temperature,
you release the compression, and the gas suddenly
expands and cools, and assuming you’ve left
it enough room to expand to the necessary
temperature and pressure it would liquify
at, it will condense just like steam will
and you’ve got liquid nitrogen.
It’s simple enough to separate liquid oxygen
and liquid nitrogen from each other too, on
Earth, though the process would be different
doing it for carbon dioxide and nitrogen.
Carbon Dioxide, for instance, is never a liquid
at standard pressure, but does have a liquid
form and even at room temperature for high
enough pressure.
We use this trick to get carbon dioxide out
of natural gas, a process we call ‘sweetening
of natural gas’, and for context, when you
burn natural gas in conjunction with oxygen,
the byproduct is carbon dioxide and water,
and you don’t want either in your combustion
mix.
We also have the mechanical molecular sieve
option, which is handy in cases where you
mostly have two molecules of very different
sizes and again don’t care much about purity.
Essentially you make very skinny filters and
press the gas through them, and the smaller
molecules make it through the sieve and the
big ones don’t.
Graphene, that wonder material we always love
for contemplating space elevators, is often
proposed as a material for making a molecular
sieve out of, and given that it’s simply
carbon, you don’t really need to worry about
running out of it on Venus.
There are quite a few other methods of separation,
and I would imagine a competent chemist would
know even more that I’ve never heard of,
but those are the big ones in terms of near
universal effectiveness and simplicity.
Given that Venus is full of carbon dioxide,
it’s likely that our ever-growing pool of
knowledge about carbon sequestration will
come in handy there and offer some other methods.
We also can cheat by letting temperature remove
most of the carbon dioxide by first shading
the planet so that it cooled, and then rained
carbon dioxide into oceans below it, a technique
for terraforming Venus we discussed in detail
in our episode Winter on Venus.
This technique may be fairly limited in application
at the galactic scale.
It’s hard to say how many Venusian planets
would be in the galaxy, with its thick atmosphere
but ultra-slow rotation and minimal magnetopshere,
unlike most of the others we’ll discuss
today which ought to be very common.
The advantage Venus has going for it is that
we have a huge supply of power available and
all day round, since a refinery can hover
in Venus’s atmosphere, sucking the local
air in while crawling across its surface and
staying perpetually in sunlight, as Venus’s
day is so long, hundreds of Earth’s days,
that a blimp moving at human-jogging speed
could keep up with the sunset.
A nonstop high-intensity solar power supply
is a powerful industrial tool and also allows
options like a mass driver floating high in
the sky for firing pods of nitrogen off to
planets or space habitats awaiting them.
Those pods might be made of artificial diamond
or graphene made from that plentiful carbon.
On the flipside, Titan, far out in orbit of
Saturn, does not have that abundant solar
power.
However large cold moons with large quantities
of nitrogen probably are common enough.
Titan’s atmosphere is somewhat thicker than
Earths – not a hundred times as thick like
Venus – but it’s 95% nitrogen and 5% methane.
That methane provides a plentiful source of
hydrogen so you can float around as a blimp
here too, or by scooping helium from Saturn
which we’ll get to later.
But you can’t have floating blimp refineries
full of normal air because oxygen is a bit
heavier than nitrogen and Titan’s atmosphere
is virtually all nitrogen, so an oxygen habitat
is going to sink unless you keep it at partial
pressure which you could do.
Titan has very low gravity and is rich in
hydrocarbons you can burn as fuel for engines
and to heat air like a hot air balloon – and
Titan’s local air is much cooler already.
You have mundane ways to keep a refinery floating
there.
Or alternatively flying under power and connected
by a tether to the ground below that it just
orbited around a big circle in, with that
tether scribing a cone shape, pointing apex
to the ground.
And you could run trams up that elevator line
from surface mines.
Titan’s atmosphere is tall, but the gravity
is low and the orbital speed lower.
While a conventional space elevator doesn’t
work there, it’s for the same reason it
doesn’t on our own moon, and as we discussed
recently in lunar space elevators, for these
moons which are tidally locked to their parent
planet, you end up stringing it out to their
L1 point rather than the local equivalent
of geostationary.
Or to the L2 point behind that moon, opposite
Saturn, or even trailing further beyond that,
which allows a nice whip-launch of cargo back
into the system.
In this regard, Titan is our better source
for nitrogen and offers a very low power option
for getting it.
There are lots of other places we can get
it too, as we discussed in our episode Comet
Mining, but this might be the optimal one
for habitats around Earth and the inner system
out to and including the asteroid belt until
it was exhausted of that nitrogen.
Without knowing the available future technologies
better it’s hard to say if any of those
other options will become superior options
to Venus in that regard.
What Titan has that Venus hasn’t got is
hydrogen, and while the other planets in the
outer solar system have oceans more, they
are trickier to access without a fusion economy
or some extreme bruteforce engineering.
Before we move on to those it’s worth asking
if we are interested in anything besides nitrogen
in these atmospheres and perhaps the hydrogen
available in methane or ammonia or water vapor.
And in the short term the answer is basically
no because they haven’t got anything else
in their atmosphere that we wouldn’t find
all over the place anywhere else we were working.
At most other elements might be shipped in
simply because they were viewed as cheap by
being a surplus waste product of another refining
process, like oxygen would be from metal refining
on the Moon.
Outside of our solar system though, that could
shift.
Pluto, for instance, has no significant atmosphere,
nor does any other dwarf planet we have, but
Titan proves objects in that mass range can
have them and there is nothing stopping a
planet out past the frost line from being
more in the Earth- Mass range.
We may even have some out in the Scattered
Disc or Oort Cloud.
And those might have large quantities of neon
or argon, or other noble gasses like krypton
or xenon in their atmospheres.
We wouldn’t want to rule out finding planets
with phosphine in the atmosphere, or other
molecules with elements we wouldn’t normally
think would float about in the air for long.
Worlds with volcanos, normal or cryovolcanic,
will also be spewing lots of atypical elements
into the air, sulfur for instance, and sometimes
even into orbit.
And for today we will assume cases like that
would count as atmospheric mining still.
There’s also the question of what still
counts as atmosphere, which is a question
that comes up when we start contemplating
Ice Giants like Uranus and Neptune and Hycean
Worlds, hypothetical super-earth planets with
massive oceans under an atmosphere that’s
largely hydrogen but may still hold life.
On a place like Neptune, we speculate it might
rain diamonds at certain altitudes, and that
the atmosphere might be deeper than our entire
planet is wide, not just a thin layer around
the planet like ours is.
That obviously provides a motivation for mining
the atmosphere – again, it rains diamonds
– but emphasizes that atmospheric mining
has a lot of different types and levels.
In the same way, I just said Earth’s atmosphere
is a thin skin on our planet, but that’s
a touch arbitrary.
Go more than mountain-high and we can’t
breathe anymore, but there’s no distinct
end to our atmosphere and most of our satellites
and space station are placed inside that atmosphere,
as we generally want things as close to the
ground as we can get them without any significant
air drag de-orbiting our satellite or station.
You can mine up at that altitude to, and we’ll
return to that when we get to mining the sun
later in the video, but atmospheric mining
can vary from skimming off ions in a near
vacuum up in orbit, to mining so deep into
a mega-atmosphere that the pressure would
crush a submarine, and where you might need
something as hard as diamond to build your
facility out of.
It’s a good place to start looking at alternatives
to buoyancy for keeping your refinery up in
the air too.
One advantage ice giants have over gas giants,
and more so with Hycean Worlds, is that your
atmosphere is not just hydrogen and helium.
We get significant if tiny amounts of ammonia,
water, and methane and that methane is thought
to be the reason Uranus and Neptune are blue-green-tinted.
We also have trace amounts of other hydrocarbons
like ethane, acetylene, methylacetylene, diacetylene,
and carbon monoxide.
But to mine a place like Neptune or Uranus
tends to imply you are no longer interested
that much in hydrocarbons for energy, so what
might really interest you here is the deuterium,
which is at a high concentration, and likely
vital for a fusion economy.
And the same for Helium-3, which is vital
to the harder but arguably more desirable
aneutronic fusion reaction.
Nonetheless you can float in there, you refine
out hydrogen and that is likely to be your
main export from that world, that or possibly
deuterium, and both are lighter than the average
volume of air on Neptune or Uranus, or probably
any other ice giant, gas giant, or brown dwarf.
On planets like this though, you can only
use hydrogen, as even helium is too heavy
to float a blimp.
However, your basic refinery might be floating
on its own huge storage tanks of hydrogen
or deuterium awaiting shipment, and might
even be able to let one free to float up higher
for pickup, or on a tether to reel it back
down for refill after pickup.
Those heavier-than-methane hydrocarbons are
thought to be far down, in a band about 100
miles wide at the bottom of Uranus’s stratosphere,
where the temperatures are colder than Antarctica
and the pressure is still only about a hundredth
to a ten-thousandth Earth-normal.
So a buoyant refinery is probably down at
the bottom of this layer and using hot hydrogen
to keep the place floating.
Buoyancy gets easier as we drop into the troposphere,
and about where the pressure would be equal
or bit greater than Earth-norm, we start seeing
methane cloud formation, and for the next
hundred or so miles below that the pressure
rises to the point where a tough submarine
could barely withstand it and cloud layers
of ammonia and ammonium bisulfide, and below
that, water clouds.
There’s no limit beneath this where buoyancy
stops working, and indeed it works even better
at lower depths, but it all comes down to
what you make that can withstand the pressure.
We've explored some extreme tech options in
our episode Accessing Earth’s Core, and
in both cases, there is an unimaginable amount
and variety of resources down there if your
tech can survive it.
We can easily imagine running huge fusion
plants or fusion candles, which we’ll discuss
in the gas giant section, and these might
be enormous submarine city refineries made
out of diamond or some other super-hard material,
but it’s also likely we might use refineries
up in the higher atmosphere suspended as orbital
rings, with long tethers connecting to diving-bell-like
gathering devices which grab material and
are pulled or float back up.
We discussed that more, along with the Neptunian
Chainsaw – a planet-sized bucket excavator,
and Chandelier cities hanging from such orbital
rings, in our episode Colonizing Neptune.
When it comes to gas giants and brown dwarfs,
we don’t have to abandon buoyancy for our
cloud cities yet, but it gets a lot more iffy
and requires true immensity to make it work.
Of course, we can’t rule out future options
like anti-gravity which is presumably what
kept the Cloud City of Bespin floating in
Star Wars: The Empire Strikes Back, the best
film of that franchise.
But we want to mine these places if we can
because they contain very nearly everything.
Not including our own sun, Jupiter makes up
almost three-quarters of our solar system’s
mass, with very nearly all of that remaining
quarter in Saturn, with Neptune and Uranus
making up very nearly all the rest.
We want that matter, and we want all of it,
and let’s discuss how we get it.
Now on Jupiter I could well imagine having
harvesting facilities the size of continents
– though still looking tiny compared to
that planet - that were nearly hollow and
full of hot, pure hydrogen.
That will float, and on board you have all
your separating gear as your huge facility
spins out hydrogen, deuterium, helium, helium-3,
methane, ammonia, neon, and more, and just
mashes some of that methane into graphene-walled
tanks that then fill with high-pressure gas
or liquid, and those tanks might run down
a massive linear accelerator or mass driver
right into space.
Or maybe it’s on an orbital ring, or down
from that ring are your tethers that have
extractors at their end or that connect to
that buoyant continent, or maybe are just
sucking air in.
For some context though, Jupiter’s atmosphere
varies a lot by altitude, but it’s a violent
and eternal storm.
So if I wanted to make a diamond-hard domed
habitat there, where the floor and dome and
everything else is generally only massing
on an order of 100 kilograms a square meter
– which is hardly thin and frail – then
I need to be thinking about the structure
under me, or over me, like an iceberg, and
one kilometers deep and hollow and full of
hot pure hydrogen, or that buoyancy isn’t
working.
If it isn’t, this is where we have to either
use suspension from an orbital ring or active
powered flight.
Of course, if you’ve got great big fusion
reactors and a fusion economy, this seems
decently plausible, and then some sort of
mix of aircraft carrier or Marvel S.H.I.E.L.D.
helicarrier seems a real option - but maybe
with a dome on it, and the giant cannon running
down its spine is for launching its cargoes.
Or giant bullets, after all a structure like
this might attract pirates or tempt enemy
attack to cripple the fuel supply in a solar-system-wide
conflict.
And it helps to have big guns if Darth Vader
shows up trying to push you around or altering
your deals further.
This is one of the reasons why we always talk
about there being no such thing as an unarmed
spaceship, or atmospheric mining vehicle of
this type.
The sheer power involved in running the things
tends to be convertible into a decent and
insanely powerful weapon system.
The same is true of fusion candles, which
are basically a non-stop nova in the sky,
blowing two jets of superhot plasma out, one
it uses like a rocket flame to hold itself
up, and the other for blasting matter into
higher orbit or beyond.
You can use these to jettison huge amounts
of matter off the planet for easier access
– potentially right down a magnetic funnel
into a storage tank.
But you can also use it to move planets around
a solar system or take off their upper layers
to get to the goodies below.
There are a lot of them too, heavier elements
we think of as being from terrestrial planets
or asteroids are vastly more abundant overall
in those gas giants.
It’s just mostly down in the cores and at
a far lower overall ratio, since they’re
still mostly hydrogen and helium.
I should also note that we could see a need
to be extracting megatons of hydrogen or deuterium
from Jupiter every day to run a true fusion
economy of major interplanetary civilizations,
the kind you describe on the Kardashev Scale.
Between fueling spaceships for interstellar
launches and running anything that solar power
from the sun isn’t optimal for, you can
use a lot of hydrogen.
Indeed, if you were trying to replicate the
power output of the Sun, you’d need to burn
600 megatons of hydrogen every second and
even Jupiter or Saturn’s massive supplies
would only run it for tens of millions of
years.
And indeed, one of the things you might do
atmospheric mining for is to bring the fuel
from gas giants and brown dwarfs to stars
or stellar remnants to refuel them.
It emphasizes the sheer immensity of our Sun
that it’s only halfway through its ten-billion-year
life and that giants like Jupiter or Saturn
could only extend that life by a few percent.
But one of the ways you can extend that life
is by removing non-hydrogen elements from
a star and that’s where mining a star’s
atmosphere, called starlifting, comes into
play.
Star lifetimes are about how quickly a star
either runs out of fuel or builds up fusion
byproducts that poison the process.
By removing helium and other heavier elements
from our sun, we can extend our Sun’s lifetime
many times over without needing to add in
more hydrogen from Jupiter or Saturn or other
extrasolar hydrogen sources.
This is a solar powered technique, as you’re
right by the sun and using enormous mirrors
to bounce light back down on the sun to further
heat it while using the available energy to
run large electromagnets.
We discussed this process in detail, along
with some alternative methods, in our episodes
Starlifting and Refueling Our Sun, but all
the matter on the Sun’s surface is ionized
plasma and reacts strongly to electromagnetic
effects.
Thus, you can funnel matter off the Sun, aided
by heating it up to locally increase solar
wind output, and then separate it electromagnetically
too.
Indeed you might do this process by default
on red or orange dwarf stars by star boosting
them with polar statite mirrors, which heats
that star up to make a larger habitable zone
around that star’s equator and of a more
sun-like spectrum, gaining those resources
and that more habitable star in the process.
As for separating the harvested material,
an ion of iron and one of neon and helium
and hydrogen all have different masses and
will curve or accelerate differently in a
magnetic or electric field and so you can
use that plus the sheer enormity of space
to separate those ions at a low cost, which
is also solar-powered.
So the process powers itself rather than needing
something else, you’re just using the sun’s
own sunlight to power its harvesting and cleaning.
Folks wonder sometimes why taking the surface
off a star would get you those heavy elements
or helium from the core, but stars are like
bubbling pots, some more than others, and
while the concentration grows in the core,
the reason stars go supernova from core poisoning
of iron is because near the end the rate of
fusion is going so fast that nothing has time
to percolate around much.
So you can use this trick even on big stars,
indeed it’s easier on them, but only if
they’re not too close to exploding yet.
Were that the case you would need some other
approach like opening a wormhole into their
core.
So, how much matter is in the Sun?
Well ignoring the hydrogen and helium, about
7,000 times Earth’s own mass, and that mass
is pretty parallel to what we find elsewhere,
as it’s what the solar system formed out
of, the hydrogen and helium and neon just
blew away relatively quickly from most other
things.
Every other mine we might run in this solar
system, whether it’s on an asteroid or floating
over Venus or drifting around the deep atmosphere
of Neptune, all of them combined, won’t
add up to even 1% of the material we’d get
out of the Sun.
Folks wonder sometimes where we’d get the
material for a lot of these megaprojects we
talk about on the show all the time, and that’s
your answer.
And that trick works in any star system, better
in some than others, but it means even low
metallicity stars with no planets are going
to be able to offer rich pickings compared
to mining an asteroid belt.
Even a pure hydrogen and helium star could
be sucked up to run a huge particle collider
to make heavier elements, if you needed to.
Albeit with a much higher capital investment,
but I’d emphasize that while starlifting
is a huge project, it really isn’t a high
tech one, it’s just mirrors, solar panels,
and electromagnets.
Doubtless more tech helps, but it isn’t
necessary, and it offers you vast resources.
And it lets you profit, and build and grow
while extending the lifetime of that star,
to me that’s the definition of a positive
symbiotic relationship and a nice counterpoint
to folks who sometimes hear us talk of harvesting
the galaxy and compare humanity to locusts
consuming all in sight.
Lastly, if harvesting stars isn’t enough,
you can use this sort of technique, in conjunction
with harvested gas giants, to even rekindle
stellar remnants – very, very carefully
– those stellar remnants can be factories
to make heavier matter.
We think of all our elements being made in
supernovae from dying giant stars but that’s
not the case, even for the heavier elements
not made in smaller stars, a lot of the material
arrives from white dwarfs exploding from gaining
too much new mass or from neutron stars colliding.
Now, while we might detonate a white dwarf
to liberate some of the matter inside it,
generally this sort of process is better conducted
in slower steps.
We can use the insane gravity near neutron
stars or black holes to run processes not
seen outside of supercolliders.
We may be able to use these to produce heavier
elements far more efficiently than they did
themselves when they died.
For more on options like that, see our Black
Hole series, particularly Colonizing Black
Holes.
All in all, it shows you don’t need to do
all your mining deep down inside dark holes,
but can be out in the sunshine and fresh air,
and that the future of Atmospheric Mining
is a pretty bright one, especially when it’s
a star’s atmosphere you’re mining, of
course.
So today we talked about mining planetary
atmospheres and the stars themselves, after
we’ve exhausted the easier to grab resources
like comets and asteroids.
We’ve discussed mining comets and asteroids
before, but I thought it would be interesting
to explore the life of an Asteroid Miner,
to ask what that would be like and what reasons
people might have to become an asteroid miner.
That’s out now exclusively on Nebula, our
Streaming Service, where we release a lot
of Bonus Content, extra episodes and extended
editions, and where every regular episode
of the show also comes out ad free and a few
days early.
By signing up for Nebula at https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
and using code isaacarthur you get access
to bonus content like Life as An Asteroid
Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters,
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will, Conformal
Cyclic Cosmology, Colonizing Binary Stars,
and more.
Using my link and discount it’s available
now for just over $2.50 a month, less than
the price of the drink or snack you might
have been enjoying during the episode.
However, this month, September 2023, you can
also get a lifetime membership to Nebula,
for as long as both you and Nebula exist,
for $300.
Which goes to developing more and bigger Nebula
Originals and platform improvement, and if
you sign up using my code, isaacarthur, a
third of that goes directly to the channel,
and I’ll place the link for that option
in the description right under the normal
one.
Either way you join Nebula you get access
to all our content early and ad free, including
the audio only podcasts, and access to tons
of bonus content from our show and many other
amazing creators.
So for those curious, not only is this our
first episode of Year 10 of the show, yesterday
was my birthday and yeah the show’s birthday
and my own coincidentally coincide a few days
apart and wow has it been an eventful year.
On a personal note it’s also the anniversary
of my first date with my future wife Sarah.
And also the anniversary of when we got the
bios for our kids and acknowledgement that
we were being formally considered to adopt
them.
We’re still waiting for that process to
finish up but we do finally have permission
to post photos of them and say their post-adoption
names, which is a great birthday present,
and if you’re curious, they are Kristofer,
Isabella, and Geometry Arthur, ages 7, 6,
and 5 respectively, and I’m very grateful
they’ve come into my life, major distractions
and stress though they’ve been this last
year.
Hopefully year 10 of the show and 44 of my
life go a bit more calmly than this last one
did, even if it has been a very good year.
Not least because I love my job making this
show and I have one of the best audiences
anyone could ever hope for.
So that’s it for today but we have our Livestream
Q&A on Sunday, September 24th, at 4 pm Eastern,
and then on the 28th we will have an exploration
of what traveling the galaxy as an adventurer
or lone wanderer will be like in Have Space
Suit - Will Travel.
After that we’ll jump into October to explain
what Vacuum and Zero Point Energy are, on
October 5th, and then we’ll have an episode
not on spaceships, but the factories that
will make them, on October 12th.
Then it will be time for Sci Fi Sunday, on
October 15th, where we’ll contemplate entire
planets turned into giant factories, in Forgeworlds
& Industrial Planets.
Then we’ll ask the big question of if Life
Extension Is Ethical on October 19th.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
