As ever more automation works its way into 
our legal system and courts, we must ask what  
challenges and advantages AI has in justice, 
and if AI will come to be our judge and jury. 
Welcome back to Science & Futurism with Isaac 
Arthur for another Sci-Fi Sunday here on SFIA,  
where we take topics common in science fiction and 
try to look at them through the lens of science.  
Our topic today is Automated Justice, because 
who wouldn't want their fate decided by the  
digital offspring of calculators and spam filters? 
We’ll look at using computers and AI to help in  
legal decisions or even as judges themselves, and 
what the misconceptions about that are in science  
fiction and what some of the pros and cons are 
to this approach, which has many advantages and  
challenges, along with ethical conundrums.
It’s not really a debate that we can make  
a computer able to act as a judge or jury — 
After all, we trust them with our playlists,  
our love lives on dating apps, so why not our 
legal disputes? Rather, it’s a matter of how much  
input humans should have into that process. To 
do this, we need to first look at two key issues:  
first, what is a justice system and, second, 
how much input should humans have into it? 
The justice system structure
Needless to say, before we can tackle the question  
of the role that AI can play in the justice 
system, we need to understand a little about the  
justice system and its current challenges. The 
justice systems we have are layered. I’ll talk  
about the US system, but a layered court structure 
is almost universally adopted world-wide. 
At the top end, we have the US Supreme Court, 
whose members are like the Avengers of legal  
decision-making—minus the cool outfits and 
superpowers, of course. That court rules on  
precedent, policy and legality, and all the final 
say after other lower layers have acted. In many  
ways it's the weakest of the three branches of US 
government, but it is also arguably more powerful  
than the other arms of government, Congress and 
the Executive branch, because it can overrule  
both of them. The judges on this court are 
also not democratically elected by the voters,  
other than indirectly, and appointments are for 
life. The importance of this will become relevant  
later. Lawyers do appearances in this court on 
behalf of their clients. As we go down layers, the  
method of appointment or election varies by state, 
and for instance in my home state of Ohio we have  
a supreme court whose members are all elected to 6 
year terms and cannot run for office after age 70. 
At the opposite end of the spectrum, we have small 
claims courts for civil disputes between people,  
such as damage to a vehicle or compensation 
for someone stealing their cat. These are  
for small matters up to a certain ceiling, 
such as twenty-five thousand dollars. The  
people typically appear themselves 
and the evidence provided is informal. 
There are also criminal courts at the low 
end of the spectrum too. These typically  
hear minor traffic matters like failing 
to stop at a stop sign or petty theft. 
Wedged between the minor leagues of small 
claims and the Supreme Court's all-star game  
are a smorgasbord of courts and tribunals, each 
with their own exciting flavor of bureaucratic  
complexity. These deal with a variety of matters, 
from bankruptcy, international trade disputes,  
to administrative appeals of decisions 
from different government sources,  
and family law disputes to name just a few.
Many of these courts and tribunals have  
different evidence systems, restrictions on what 
can be litigated or presented and limitations on  
what the court can order as compensation or 
compel the losing party to do. There is no  
universal system that every court follows. 
The point here is that AI may have a role  
to play in streamlining, enhancing, or even 
replacing some of these courts and tribunals. 
Challenges
Our current justice system is far  
from perfect and is often not good at dispensing 
true justice. The biggest challenge has been one  
of funding. As population growth has taken off and 
more people have become empowered to take legal  
action, the courts have been put under increasing 
pressure. Cases often experience years of delays  
before courts reach a final determination. When 
one of my friends took over as judge of our local  
municipal court, about a decade back, she had a 
backlog of almost 9000 cases to handle. As the  
old saying goes, “Justice delayed is justice 
denied.” Courts are mostly publicly funded,  
and are not cheap to run. They aren’t in the 
public eye much and are an easy target by  
politicians and bureaucrats to help balance their 
overburdened budgets. Courts are like the middle  
children of government spending—often overlooked 
and perpetually short on allowance. Though like  
every other department, they also have their fair 
share of waste and abuse, which AI has shown great  
promise at helping identify and reduce.
Such underfunding threatens the ability  
of the courts to provide effective access to 
justice, not only for protecting constitutional  
rights, but day-to-day resolution 
of criminal and civil matters too. 
To address delays and caseload burdens on courts, 
stopgap tribunals and systems are created. While  
these have often been successful in reducing 
caseloads on the courts, they typically have a  
dark side. They offer limited damage awards, 
restrict or largely eliminate the evidence  
permitted, and often do not get to the core of the 
case. These stopgap tribunals and systems seldom  
provide true justice as a result, akin to putting 
a band-aid on a broken leg and calling it first  
aid. They prevent people from truly getting their 
day in court. Most of these supposedly “temporary”  
stopgap tribunals and systems all too often 
become permanent fixtures in our justice systems. 
On the criminal side, plea-bargains play an 
ever-increasing role in relieving pressure on  
the courts. Judges, prosecutors and bureaucrats 
are happy, because they don’t need to go through  
or fund a case, and a defendant mostly loses their 
appeal rights after agreeing to the plea-bargain,  
eliminating even more potential 
litigation and court time and costs. 
Failure to take a plea-bargain can exact a high 
price to a defendant, because if the court finds  
them guilty, the defendant faces a system heavily 
geared to penalize them for having put the court  
to the effort of holding a trial. Plea bargains 
are like mystery boxes; sometimes you get a slap  
on the wrist, other times it's a one-way ticket 
to the big house. There are many instances of  
defendants being railroaded by highly unfavorable 
plea-bargains, even when they are innocent. 
Victims of crimes also dislike plea-bargains, 
because they don’t get their chance to have  
their day in court, and they often correctly 
believe that the penalty the defendant receives  
in a plea-bargain is insufficient 
for the crime they committed. 
Even in civil courts, there are increasing 
moves to eliminate a lot of the caseload  
by encouraging - and sometimes insisting - 
that litigants restrict down their claims,  
and on parties undergoing alternative dispute 
resolution processes, such as mediation. While  
that can sometimes be beneficial, it often results 
in extra time, money, and effort being spent by  
the litigants just to get their case before 
a judge. It can also be trauma-inducing if a  
victim has to confront and retell their story in 
dispute resolution and then later again in court. 
Back in the day, evidence gathering was the legal 
equivalent of a treasure hunt—except instead of  
gold doubloons, you'd hope to find that crucial 
misplaced comma that could turn the case in your  
favor. It was an extensive process of combing 
through every single document that the litigants  
had, unlimited depositions, where you take oral 
evidence, lots of inter-party communications  
and mini-disputes within the main court case. In 
contrast, these days, judges may often restrict  
the number of depositions and interrogatories or 
the length of depositions, and increasingly use  
that power to cut down on the amount of evidence 
that is gathered and presented in the main  
hearing. While that often simplifies the court 
case, it runs the genuine risk of eliminating  
evidence and issues that could actually correctly 
swing the decision in favor of one litigant. 
So in short, there are considerable 
issues with our current justice system,  
more than I’ve mentioned thus far and of course 
many are subjective, everyone’s mileage varies.  
It’s therefore important, when considering AI as 
a possible addition to or replacement of a court,  
that we cannot judge AI against an ideal and 
perfect justice system, because that’s not the  
real justice system. The real question comes 
down to whether AI can improve the current  
justice system?
Sci-fi tropes 
The big thing early sci fi and its tropes tend 
to get wrong about artificial intelligence and  
machines is that the only thing they all have in 
common is that they are designed with a purpose  
in mind. A calculator’s job is to add numbers 
and a drill’s job to put holes in a material and  
both can do that better than you or I, because we 
designed them to do that. They are purpose-built,  
and have been improved on with time as 
would be any other machine we might make. 
I don’t know if humans have a general purpose or 
what that purpose is but it isn’t adding numbers,  
drilling holes, vacuuming floors, manufacturing 
widgets, going through case law or rendering  
judgements. Primarily because we tend to believe 
that humans have the right and obligation to find  
out and choose their purpose and not too many 
of us like memorizing laws, though some of us  
do enjoy it. Therefore, we should, in theory 
at least, be able to make machines able to do  
routine tasks better than we can, though in 
the case of automated justice it depends so  
much on what we mean by judgment and justice, 
and even mercy. We’ll come back to that last  
one a little later. Before that, though, let’s 
consider AI in the law and the roles it can play. 
Current use of AI in law
AI is already being employed practically in  
the law. For example, AIs are being used to sortl 
through mountains of data to identify information  
relevant for discovery in a case. This has 
eliminated the time-consuming and expensive use of  
junior lawyers, paralegals, and clerks to manually 
undertake this task. Some lawyers might mourn the  
loss of tedious paperwork to the unfeeling claws 
of AI. Most, though, are probably happy that  
this is gone, as it’s not something that clients 
particularly understood the importance of anyway,  
and it often ends up yielding nothing for finding 
a “smoking gun” in the mountains of paperwork. 
AI is also being used to generate legal opinions 
and court filings. Often these are of good  
quality, but sometimes they aren’t. For example, a 
New York-based lawyer was recently fined after he  
misused ChatGPT, relying on it for research for 
a personal injury case. He ended up submitting  
fake citations in a court filing, because he 
didn’t double check the output it produced. 
It’s important to realize, though, that 
we are at the outset of the AI revolution,  
and the quality of output is constantly 
improving. There will come a time when  
the AI will get the information correct, or 
at least as correct as a human lawyer would. 
AI has made good inroads into streamlining 
what lawyers spend their days doing,  
removing or at least minimizing the drudgery of 
legal practice. This is increasingly allowing  
lawyers to offer better value-for-money to 
their clients. However, we’re not here today  
to talk about lawyers and the use of AI in their 
legal practices, but the justice system itself. 
Roles in the justice system
So what roles could AI play in  
the justice system? To understand this, we need to 
delve into what the current roles are in a court.  
And we’ll limit discussion to a civil court case 
for the moment. The court’s roles can be loosely  
categorized as: minion, functionary, gatekeeper, 
expert, hearing, and auditor. I’ve given these  
roles quirky names that are not the actual 
names of the positions in the various courts,  
because they vary from court to court and 
jurisdiction to jurisdiction, and sometimes a  
role might combine two of them or spread it among 
other roles. Let’s explore each of these in turn. 
The minion role, not to be confused with 
those yellow creatures many kids adore,  
and many adults too, involves the thrilling task 
of ensuring that your lawsuit isn't filed under  
'L' for 'Lost Cause.' Administrative staff 
mostly currently handle this in the courts.  
When a person files a document at court, it 
needs to be categorized, prioritized, and filed  
appropriately. Even automated non-AI systems can 
do this type of checking. Current AIs are more  
than capable of effectively filling this role.
The functionary role is a step up from minion.  
This involves deciding on the validity of a 
document. For example, if a lawyer files a case  
in the wrong court, or they file documents late, 
or the documents filed are lacking an attachment,  
or mandatory information. Some non-AI automated 
systems can detect and reject such filings,  
especially with a little human oversight mixed 
in. However, an AI would be more appropriate  
for performing most of this role, because it 
involves some basic understanding of language  
and the particular laws that apply. Again, current 
AIs could be easily trained to do these tasks.  
As with most things, we do not replace all human 
oversight or review, just limit it to making sure  
all is working and improvements can be understood 
and made, and errors detected. A lot of times  
our concern will be avoiding a black box people 
don’t understand, or have forgotten how it works,  
and thankfully tasks like these are fairly 
transparent and simple to understand,  
thus good candidates for heavy AI use.
We now move on to the first role that needs to  
be carried out by a judge or someone like a judge. 
The gatekeeper is like the bouncer of the legal  
club, deciding who gets in and who's left arguing 
with the velvet rope. It’s basically shaping the  
case, making sure that irrelevant evidence is 
kept out, and nuisances to the court and the  
litigants is minimized by preventing litigants 
from going down unnecessary rabbit holes, and  
eliminating issues that aren't strictly necessary.
In recent years, case management has become the  
norm, basically getting the court involved early 
to dispose of issues and control the case so it  
doesn’t grow out of proportion. The gatekeeper 
role ensures the case proceeds smoothly to trial,  
and often encourages the parties to settle 
through mediation or other processes to avoid  
the need for a hearing in court, which again 
has its pros and cons. Gatekeepers not only  
shape the case but also maintain its focus 
by keeping out any irrelevant evidence that  
might confuse or distract from the main issues, 
which is at risk of being subjective of course. 
In addition, gatekeepers can help streamline 
the process by eliminating any issues that  
are not essential to the main issues in the 
case. This can ensure a more efficient legal  
procedure and reduces the potential 
for undue delays or complications. 
Over time, gatekeepers have become more 
important, mainly because they help ease  
some responsibilities and workload from the 
hearing role. Much attention has been given  
to the gatekeeper role recently because it cuts 
down on costs. Cases and issues heard during the  
hearing role are considerably more expensive in 
time and funding. By shifting some of the burden  
to the gatekeeper role, the theory is that 
the entire system can operate more smoothly  
and efficiently. And again we’re focused on civil 
not criminal cases at the moment but arraignments  
and grand juries fill a similar space.
However, as mentioned earlier the gatekeeper  
role also has a dark side in that limiting 
the evidence or issues that reach the hearing  
stage can prevent litigants from achieving 
true justice. One significant disadvantage  
is the power the role holds over redirecting a 
case or restricting the court's consideration  
of specific aspects of the case. This power 
can hinder the pursuit of truth and fairness,  
if misused or applied too rigidly. That’s not 
necessarily the fault of the gatekeeper. Often,  
it's the funding pressures and legislation put 
in place to govern the case. Limiting the case  
is often what bureaucrats want to achieve to 
minimize costs and time spent dragging the case  
through the court system, holding up other cases 
in the queue, which delays them getting their own  
justice in a timely fashion.
Expert role 
Let’s tackle the expert role. Experts in court 
are like guest lecturers, except the students  
are a judge and jury, and the final exam could 
involve handcuffs. They help to educate the  
decision makers, be they the judge or a jury, 
in how to interpret the technical evidence in  
a case. Experts don’t have firsthand knowledge 
of the events that happened, but they can help  
piece together parts of what happened looking 
at what remains after the event. So an expert  
could testify whether a bullet was shot from a 
particular gun from the markings on the bullet. 
You might be surprised that I added in the expert 
role as a court function. Often, experts can be  
partisan, favoring the person who paid them. 
However, in many legal systems, experts have to  
swear to be impartial and are considered to be 
impartial by the court. In some jurisdictions,  
experts can be appointed to sit alongside a judge 
in cases involving complex technical issues and  
can rule on the technical aspects of the case 
overruling the judge on those technical issues. 
Much recent research has made AI systems into 
experts. AIs are like the know-it-alls of  
data analysis, except they might actually 
know it all. AIs excel at focussing on a  
particular field or issue and painstakingly 
analyzing mountains of data to spit out an  
opinion on what that data represents. It’s 
pretty much what caused the genesis of AI. 
Even today, a lot of the expert evidence in 
cases revolves around an expert explaining  
that they plugged in the relevant data into an 
expert model and it concluded some result from  
that evidence. Judges and juries are easily swayed 
if the machine generates a match for fingerprint,  
DNA, or other biometric data. In fact, there 
has been a worrying trend for juries to  
exclude other expert and actual evidence 
in cases, and focus almost solely on the  
expert evidence of the match the machine found.
There is no doubt that AIs will become experts  
in cases in the future. We are pretty much 
already there, their role is simply expanding. 
Hearing role
We've arrived at the main course,  
the courtroom drama—the bread and butter of legal 
TV shows where the only thing missing is dramatic  
background music. The hearing role is actually 
divided into a number of different functions, all  
tied around running an efficient trial or hearing, 
including acting as a gatekeeper to control what  
evidence can be presented, how witnesses are 
handled by the lawyers, what the jury can  
and cannot be told, and keeping a record of the 
proceedings so that any appeals from the court’s  
decision have the full court record available to 
the higher court. And of course, there’s also that  
little function of deciding who won and who lost.
The hearing role is conducted by a variety of  
actual people. There are court reporters that can 
provide the record of who said what in the trial,  
the judge deciding on the gatekeeping 
issues of what can be presented or not,  
and the judge or jury making the 
final decision, to name just a few. 
Auditor role
Ultimately, litigants often apply for a review  
or appeal of a decision. This brings us to the 
auditor role. This is where another higher court  
gets to consider the gatekeeper and substantive 
decisions made by the other roles in the process  
for correctness. Litigants typically use this to 
change the outcome of the case or to improve their  
position, for example by reducing or increasing 
the damages, or in criminal cases to get the  
guilty verdict tossed out or get a new trial.
A separate auditing function is a monitoring one,  
where the auditor keeps track of decisions 
that have been made and whether these are  
appealed. This can identify a variety of 
factors, such as cost overruns, trends, and  
anomalies in the decision, such as differences 
between how various courts perform against one  
another. Is one court consistently punishing or 
rewarding a given behavior, or type of person,  
more or less than others?
Where and how does AI fit in? 
Let’s turn our focus now to how AI can be 
used to satisfy those roles or at least  
augment them. And again, as we discussed 
in our episode human-machine teaming,  
often we see superior results from using a 
human with an AI over what either would produce. 
There are several ways in which AI can improve 
upon the current minion role. One way is through  
natural language processing (NLP). NLP allows 
machines to understand human language and process  
it just like humans do. This means that they can 
accurately categorize and prioritize documents  
based on their content, rather than relying 
on pre-set rules or templates. Additionally,  
AI can learn from past cases and decisions 
made by judges, which can help AI make  
more accurate classifications in the future.
Another way that AI can improve upon the minion  
role is through machine learning algorithms. These 
algorithms permit it to learn from experience and  
improve its performance over time. By analyzing 
large amounts of data, it can identify patterns  
and trends that may not be immediately apparent to 
us. This can lead to more accurate classification  
of documents and faster processing times.
So, AI can augment the minion role by providing  
real-time updates on case progress and summaries 
of where a case is at. By tracking the status  
of each document and automatically updating 
case files, AI can help litigants, lawyers,  
court officials, and judges stay informed 
about the status of a case at all times.  
This can reduce delays and ensure that cases 
move through the court system more quickly and  
efficiently. This can also help the government 
and public help oversee and monitor performance. 
Let’s now move on to the functionary role. You’ll 
recall that this involves making decisions on the  
validity of a document or other evidence presented 
during a case. Currently, this is often done by  
human judges or clerks who review the documents 
and determine whether they meet certain criteria  
before allowing them into evidence. However, 
AI can be used to automate many of these tasks,  
such as identifying relevant keywords or 
phrases in documents or determining its  
authenticity, based on digital fingerprints 
and corroborating evidence it has access to. 
One way that AI could augment this role is 
by providing real-time feedback to lawyers  
or litigants and judges pre-hearing. For 
example, an AI system could analyze the  
arguments presented by each side and provide 
immediate suggestions for relevant law or other  
supporting or contradictory evidence. This would 
help streamline the process of keeping the case  
relevant and stopping litigants from going down 
a rabbit hole that has poor chance of success. 
Another way that AI could be used in this role 
is through predictive analytics. By analyzing  
large amounts of data from past cases, an AI 
system could identify patterns or trends that  
might influence future outcomes. This would 
allow the functionary officer to make more  
informed decisions about how to proceed with a 
case based on the past likelihood of success,  
given the case’s particular set 
of facts and body of evidence. 
Overall, there are many ways in which AI can be 
used to improve the functionary role in courts,  
leading to faster, more efficient, and accurate 
decision-making processes. At some point,  
it could even take over the role entirely, acting 
less as a tool and more as a decision-maker and  
assistant to the court and the litigants. 
Though again, never without some monitoring  
and oversight by us, this isn't a scifi 
movie and we’re presumably not so stupid  
as to leave no checks or oversight in place.
So, let’s focus now on how AI could be used  
to augment or replace the substantive role in 
a substantive court trial or hearing. First,  
AI could assist with gatekeeping functions by 
automatically identifying relevant evidence and  
flagging potential issues such as admissibility 
of evidence, hearsay, or privilege. A lot of time  
in hearings and trials is often spent dealing 
with these types of objections. While a judge  
usually easily addresses these, having the AI 
there to act as a prompt and guide could be  
beneficial to speed up the proceedings.
This would also free up time for judges  
to focus on more complex issues that 
require their expertise. Additionally,  
an AI can assist the court in considering the 
weight that the evidence should be given. There  
is often low quality evidence that needs to 
be weighed up against other evidence. The  
AI could quite easily address the nature of the 
evidence and its weight. This could prove useful  
to the judge or jury to consider the importance 
of a particular piece of evidence or testimony. 
Second, AI could be used to provide real-time 
translation and transcription services during  
hearings and trials, which would help to 
ensure that all parties are able to communicate  
effectively and understand each other’s arguments 
and have an instant objective record of the  
proceedings. I should add that these days AI is 
so good it can even understand me and my lingering  
speech impediment most of the time, though for 
me at least it is still faster to type scripts,  
and an actual recording could always be used 
in cases where that Dan Autocorrect has struck  
again and changed what the duck someone said.
Third, AI could also assist with legal research  
by providing judges and the parties with instant 
access to relevant case law and legislation,  
saving them time and ensuring that they have 
the most up-to-date information available. No  
chance of bringing in a piece of law that 
is a gamechanger to the case only to find  
out the legislature changed it 10 years ago.
Finally, we get to the auditor role. One way  
that AI could assist with this role would be 
through the use of AI to analyze transcripts  
and identify any discrepancies or inconsistencies 
in testimony or evidence presented during a trial.  
Additionally, AI could also help to detect any 
potential conflicts of interest among judges  
involved in a case by analyzing their previous 
decisions and rulings. So too, AI could assist  
with cost auditing by identifying areas where 
costs could be reduced without compromising  
the quality of justice being delivered.
This can even be in non-obvious ways,  
like letting an AI digitally mask a person’s face 
and voice to avoid perceived bias issues. Or,  
if we decide to go more remote for juries, allow 
jurors to watch testimony of the case at home and  
with the AI carefully and automatically removing 
bits the judge has ruled to be stricken from the  
record or potentially digitally alter every name, 
or even face, in the case, to prevent the need for  
them to be sequestered or fears of bias. This 
has its own pros and cons too, but the goal of  
technology is to give us more options, so we can 
decide which to use, and when and how to use them.  
Whether or not we learn to trust the judgment or 
wisdom of AIs, neither is a cause to abandon our  
personal pursuit of those faculties ourselves.
So, AI has the potential to augment and take over  
the various roles in courts much more effectively 
than current administrative workers or non-AI  
automated systems. Through NLP, machine 
learning algorithms, and real-time updates,  
AI can accurately classify documents, learn from 
past cases, and provide timely information to  
various people involved in the case.
An example case 
Let’s move away from the theoretical and look 
at how this might operate in practice. We’ll  
introduce two litigants. No murders, no intense 
trauma, just a simple mundane sort of case. Joan  
approached her neighbor, Charles, asking 
that he cut down a tree that was looking  
sick that was located half on Joan’s property 
and half on Charles’. Joan thought it might  
fall over. Charles, with the nonchalance 
of someone deciding on a Netflix show,  
said he'd mull over the arboreal dilemma. Fast 
forward a couple of months, and Mother Nature  
delivered her own verdict on the tree debate 
with the subtlety of a Thor’s meteorological  
hammer through Joan's roof. Joan wants 
to sue Charles for $20,000 in damages  
that she suffered in having to repair 
her roof and cart away the fallen tree. 
Joan, ever the digital citizen, logs onto the 
latest in bureaucratic web interfaces at her local  
court to file her grievance against gravity and 
Charles. As the matter deals with a lower amount  
of damage, she is entitled to sue using the new 
Robojustice system they’ve just introduced. She  
has an online consultation with the AI that asks 
her a series of questions about what happened.  
Joan says that Charles promised to pay her 
for the damage the morning after the storm,  
but he now denies ever saying he would do that. 
The AI asks a series of other important questions  
to begin the court case and draws up the court 
documents for Joan. Joan agrees to proceed after  
checking them. The AI also records the interaction 
that can be used during the case as evidence. 
The AI, the ultimate middleman, outsources the 
awkward job of delivering the bad news to Charles  
via a process server, who probably doesn't get 
enough credit for their 'shoot the messenger'  
risk factor. Charles, feeling betrayed 
by both his neighbor and his now ex-tree,  
decides to give the AI a piece of his 
mind—because if you can't rant at a machine,  
who can you rant at? He explains that there 
was nothing wrong with the tree, and Joan was  
just being a meddlesome and nosy neighbor. He 
also says that she’s delusional, because she  
is an alcoholic and often fall-down-drunk, 
often knocking on various neighbor’s doors  
to complain about minor or imaginary issues. He 
never promised to pay for Joan’s damage. Anyway,  
the amount Joan is claiming is ridiculous, because 
the tree only dislodged a couple of tiles from her  
roof. The AI creates the relevant court documents 
to enter Charles’ defense, which is automatically  
sent to Joan. Again, Charles’ interaction is 
recorded and entered as evidence in the case. 
The AI, doubling as a case management guru, 
schedules a digital get-together to lay down the  
law and give Joan and Charles their homework. In 
the conference, the AI explains that some of the  
allegations will not be able to be pursued, unless 
they are relevant to the case. In particular,  
Charles’ allegations about Joan being often 
drunk is not likely to be relevant to the  
case. The AI asks Charles to elaborate on how 
that is relevant to the case. Charles says Joan  
came up with the story that the tree was sick 
when she banged on his door one night, swaying,  
slurring her words and smelling of alcohol and he 
just thought she was being her usual crazy self. 
The AI explains that under the law, if the tree 
was objectively sick and in danger of falling down  
over, Joan's condition at the time of her warning 
him is likely irrelevant. However, if Charles can  
prove the tree was healthy and Joan's assessment 
was impaired by her intoxication, it may be  
relevant to whether Charles’ ignoring her was less 
negligent. The AI schedules a hearing date and  
instructs both parties to gather any evidence that 
will substantiate their claims and submit them. It  
gives examples of evidence that might be relevant, 
such as photographs, bills and eyewitnesses. 
This being the future there is a good chance 
one of them had house cameras or high-resolution  
photos taken somewhere near that tree and 
recently, and indeed another AI might be  
very good at scanning their image archives, 
footage, or facebook postings to find those. 
Central to the case is the health of the tree, so 
the AI shifts to expert witness mode and advises  
Joan and Charles to submit photographs of the 
tree before and after the event. It also asks  
pointed questions of both parties about the 
state of the tree to gather data about its  
health. Joan says that the tree was removed on 
her instructions, but Charles says he saw the  
workers cutting up and stacking up some of the 
wood in her yard. He’s worried that since she  
lied about having the wood, Joan might destroy the 
wood so it can’t be analyzed. Joan admits that she  
retained some of the tree as firewood, but says 
she just forgot. Most of the tree was removed. 
The AI, slipping into its robe of authority, 
decrees that Joan's woodpile is now off-limits,  
and must remain undisturbed, and issues a court 
order, preventing Joan from destroying any of the  
wood in her woodpile and requiring her to grant 
access to a court-ordered expert to inspect the  
wood and take samples. It also initiates 
a specific request to an arborist selected  
from the list of arborists that have signed 
up to the court’s program to inspect the wood  
and obtain samples. It also issues a court order 
requiring Joan to permit Charles to get evidence  
of the damage to Joan’s roof. It requests 
3 quotations from Charles and asks Joan to  
submit any other estimates that she obtained 
before deciding on the removal of the tree. 
Joan gets Terry, her brother, living across the 
street to approach the AI to give evidence. The  
AI asks open-ended questions to start and then 
more pointed questions of Terry. He basically  
says that he knows that Charles has had it in for 
Joan for years, ever since she reported Charles  
to the local authorities for illegally parking 
his trailer on the street. On the night of the  
tree’s collapse, he heard a loud crash somewhere 
in the neighborhood, but didn’t investigate it  
because it was storming outside. He’s certain 
Charles promised to pay Joan for the damage when  
they met the night the tree fell, but that Charles 
then refused out of spite. When pressed by the AI,  
he admits he didn’t overhear the conversation 
between Charles and Joan that night the tree  
collapsed, and the other stuff about the trailer 
was what Joan told him after she reported Charles. 
The AI issues a ruling excluding Terry’s evidence 
from the case as it is hearsay and the fact that  
there was a loud crash was not useful in the case, 
because he couldn’t tell where it came from and,  
in any case, both parties already admitted 
that the tree collapsed during that night. 
Charles uploads photographs of the 
tree from a couple of years before,  
showing it was healthy. Joan uploads photos of 
the tree on the ground after it collapsed. Her  
photographs are grainy, but there seems to be a 
dark mass in the middle of the tree trunk that  
she thinks shows it was rotten to the core.
Charles submits photographs of the damage to  
Joan’s roof. Joan also does that, and submits 
the invoices from the tree felling company  
and the roof repair company. Joan submits 
three quotes for the roof repair and three  
for the removal of the tree, as does Charles.
The arborist submits the required photographs  
and laboratory report on the wood samples 
she collected. The AI contacts the arborist  
and asks some questions about the wood. The 
arborist says she was not able to get samples  
of the tree near its base, because only the 
smaller branches were retained as firewood. 
Charles enlists Betty, the eagle-eyed sentinel of 
the subdivision, who's armed with an encyclopedic  
knowledge of Joan's happy hour habits, to share 
her cocktail chronicles with the AI, and whatever  
other gossip comes to mind.. The AI asks Betty 
open-ended questions about Joan. Betty paints  
a vivid picture of Joan as a drunk who regularly 
serenades her neighbors. The AI issues a subpoena  
for Betty to give evidence at the hearing.
On the hearing date, the AI begins by  
establishing the facts, using its database to 
pull up relevant property laws, precedent cases,  
and local ordinances about shared 
tree ownership and responsibility. 
The AI cross-examines Betty, asking if she knew 
what was in Joan’s glass tha night. After all,  
it might be water or a soft drink. Betty says 
she often waters the plants near her fence,  
which is immediately next to Joan’s porch and 
could even make out the brand of bourbon she  
regularly saw Joan refilling her glass with. 
She also said she’s seen Joan go through a  
whole fifth of bourbon in one sitting one night 
all on her own. Joan often knocked on Betty’s  
door late at night to complain about the smell 
of the fertilizer she used on her flowerbeds.  
When she did this, she was often swaying and 
slurring her speech and smelled of bourbon. 
When the AI cross-examines Joan, she says that 
none of that was true and that Betty was just  
being spiteful because Joan once threw her 
lawn clippings over the fence onto Betty’s  
flowerbed. She denies ever being intoxicated. 
The AI asks Joan about the dates of the quotes  
for the tree removal. Two of the quotes were 
dated after the tree was already removed. Joan  
admits that she simply used the tree felling 
company she had used in the past and didn’t get  
other quotes before getting the tree removed.
The AI puts on its detective hat—figuratively,  
of course—and grills Charles, gently reminding 
him that estimating isn't an art form,  
and lowballing isn't a sport. Charles admits 
that he asked them to minimize costs and only  
quote for items that were clearly needed. 
He concedes that as the repairs had already  
been completed when the contractors did the 
quotes, some items on Joan’s bill were omitted. 
Like a professor outlining the syllabus for a 
course that no one signed up for voluntarily,  
the AI lays out the legal framework, ensuring 
everyone is on the same begrudgingly educational  
journey. The AI sets out the principles 
of justice, such as fairness, precedent,  
and the balance of probabilities that apply.
The AI explains that its expert opinion concerning  
the tree is that it had markers for a tree disease 
that would ultimately cause its destruction,  
but the laboratory tests were inconclusive 
as to whether the disease was sufficiently  
advanced to have caused its collapse. The 
photographs of Charles were too old to be  
of value and those from Joan were too grainy 
to tell anything worthwhile about the tree. 
Based on the meteorological data from the night 
of the storm, the usual resilience of that species  
of tree in those conditions, the tree faced a 
moderate chance that it would collapse during that  
storm, even if it was healthy. All things being 
equal, as the tree straddled both properties,  
both parties had to share the loss under the law.
However, if the evidence had shown that Charles  
reasonably knew about the condition of the 
tree and did nothing, his contribution would  
be increased. The AI makes the finding 
that Joan is frequently intoxicated and  
prone to being a nuisance to her neighbors. It 
rejects Joan’s protestations to the contrary,  
as it detected she was lying from her biometrics 
as well as the evidence from Betty and Charles.  
Charles was therefore reasonable in ignoring 
her complaint the night she complained about  
the tree being dangerous. The AI also rejected 
the evidence relating to Charles’ promise to  
pay Joan for the removal as there was 
no corroborating evidence either way. 
The AI, tapping into its inner King Solomon, 
decides to split the tree baby down the middle,  
awarding Joan a judgment for half of 
the reasonable cost of the repairs  
and removal of the tree. In calculating 
the reasonable cost of the tree removal,  
the AI rejected applying the actual costs as 
Joan had not obtained quotes before engaging  
her preferred contractor. Instead, the lowest of 
Charles’ quotes was used. For the roof repair,  
Joan’s actual costs were reasonable 
and Charles’ quotes were deficient  
because they didn’t include everything 
required to make the repair. Charles  
was ordered to pay 50% of the AI’s calculated 
reasonable costs for the repair and removal. 
The AI, in its final act of bureaucratic 
kindness, reminds the parties that they  
can still seek solace in the arms of a human 
judge on appeal - assuming they still prefer  
flesh-and-blood over circuits and code. 
If appealed, the full record of the case  
and a detailed explanation of its decision-making 
process and the legal rationale behind its verdict  
will be sent to the appeals court, ensuring 
transparency and aiding in any appeal process. 
The AI diligently adds another notch to 
its digital belt, logging the case and  
contributing to a growing compendium of case 
law that can be used for training and refining  
AI judicial systems in the future. Again this is 
not a scifi story, so no one is assuming the AI  
can’t make mistakes or that improvement 
shouldn't be perpetual. Over time, this  
constantly evolving database will help improve 
the accuracy and fairness of automated justice. 
Analysis
So what can we draw from this example? 
First, the process can be less adversarial 
and more inquisitorial, meaning that the  
decision-maker, the AI, is actively involved 
in the case and drives the case. In contrast,  
in a conventional US courtroom, the process is 
adversarial, meaning the parties drive the case,  
decide what to present and effectively each run 
the case. An inquisitorial system can provide  
faster access to justice, is cheaper, and can 
get to the heart of the case more quickly. 
On the plus side, the AI promises 
access to justice cheaper, quicker,  
and permits a more nuanced access to justice 
than many current human-directed courts and  
tribunals do. The downside is that it 
only works when the judge is unbiased. 
While the promise of AI in the justice system is 
considerable, we must also be aware of potential  
limitations and ethical implications. The 
reason is obvious, the AI is, to borrow an  
old expression, acting as “judge, jury, and 
executioner”, or more accurately, every role  
currently handled by lawyers, court staff, judges, 
and juries. We miss out on the checks and balances  
that multiple different people acting in those 
roles bring. If something is awry in the system,  
one or more of the people involved can become a 
whistleblower to highlight the problem. When there  
is an AI in scifi, there is only the AI, unless 
other robust oversight systems are installed.  
We can keep other humans in the mix and indeed 
other AI, who are not total copies of each other. 
If AI gets a biased education, it's like that 
one annoying friend who can't stop quoting  
dubious historical facts they read on the back 
of a cereal box. The bias can be derived from  
biased training data or flawed algorithms that 
perpetuate or amplify existing prejudices in the  
legal system. Transparency and explainability of 
AI decision-making processes are also crucial to  
maintain trust and allow for meaningful appeal 
processes. Additionally, the human element of  
understanding, empathy, mercy, and the ability 
to interpret the spirit of the law are nuanced  
aspects that challenge the capabilities of 
current AI technology. However, we should  
not assume that will always remain the case.
Using an AI in the courtroom also raises questions  
about how it might be gamed. The obvious one is 
subverting the AI by hacking. Another more subtle  
one is finding unreasonable idiosyncrasies 
demonstrated by the AI and exploiting those.  
These are disproportionate reactions to stimuli 
demonstrated by the AI that a human judge would  
not be expected to demonstrate. That said, there 
are many judges famous for their unreasonable  
idiosyncrasies, such as overreactions to people 
picking their noses or letting a mobile phone ring  
in court. So the AI would be in good company here, 
but its idiosyncrasies may be far more bizarre,  
and either way, we would like to improve 
the system, not shoot for the status quo. 
The AI does have one failing that could be 
a major problem, and that is it is only as  
good as its training, though again that is 
an issue with humans too. If it is trained  
on data that leans in a particular way, 
its outputs will reflect that training.  
Concepts of justice and mercy are not universally 
agreed on and shift with time and place, we do  
not even have time to touch on the differences 
between Rehabilitative and Retributive Justice  
today for instance but you get very different 
results based on which you choose to work with. 
Depending on who you ask and the materials you 
feed the AI for it to learn from, you will get  
different results. You may not want some fringe 
element of your society doing that feeding,  
or alternatively, leave it entirely up to the 
academics, or majority rule. It’s really up  
to the developers of AI and society in general to 
ensure that they don’t let those AI get subverted  
for nefarious political, economic, or ideological 
gains, or even well-intentioned but flawed ones,  
after all, we know where the road paved with good 
intentions can lead. Again, we see the importance  
of not allowing such systems to be big black boxes 
we just imbue with our trust and blind faith,  
but that does not mean we can’t still use them.
The biggest danger when it comes to AI  
in our justice system is that most people’s 
attention span when it comes to the justice  
system, especially for non-dramatic cases, can 
be limited and fickle. If your oversight is  
limited to Tik Tok style short vids, expect your 
justice system to rapidly collapse. If we fail  
to pay attention to the detail of the AI being 
produced, we stand a very good chance that this  
technology will be controlled by a powerful 
fringe group in society to further their own  
agenda. We need robust safeguards and ethical 
guidelines and a will to monitor compliance. 
Human judges
Judges in our current legal system  
are human and I want to briefly touch on that. 
I think people worry about AI making decisions,  
and not without cause, but while we should be wary 
of that we should also embrace it when it's wise,  
and on a personal note, I’d like to see them 
in more decision roles in a more controlled  
environment. Making decisions, even mundane 
ones, is just about the most stressful and  
draining thing you can do in life, and it is way 
harder when we’re talking about deciding something  
life-changing for others. I’ve been lucky in life 
to have some very good mentors, around a dozen,  
and most were scientists or soldiers, but two 
of them were judges, one passed away years ago  
and the other will be retiring in a few years here 
and both were the spitting image and character of  
what people think of when they think of judges, 
very good men and very burdened by their jobs. 
Precedent and sentencing guidelines make that 
burden lighter and I think an AI would too,  
one that’s doing an emotionless analysis 
of the facts, and again I tend to think  
of that as a tool a judge would use rather than 
a replacement for one, but one that might save  
them a lot of gray hairs and ulcers. Decision 
Fatigue is as real for judges as it is for all  
of us but most of us are not making life and death 
decisions all day. Nor is this limited to judges,  
AI can advise on a lot of things, and give 
appropriate assistance, wherever possible,  
leaving humans to make decisions but letting 
AI take away some of that burden and fatigue. 
AGI
The hypothetical example I gave earlier  
is probably very close to being a reality, even 
using our current state of AI development, which  
is why we set it in the modern day rather than 
some fictional case on Mars or Alpha Centauri,  
like we often do for stories on this show.
Though, once we have AGI, Artificial General  
Intelligence, all bets are off, simply because it 
is, by definition, expected to be self-teaching,  
self-reflecting, self-improving, and constantly 
evolving itself at a level of intelligence that  
surpasses our own. While it might start out with 
our own morality due to its initial training, an  
AGI would probably rapidly diverge from that and 
develop its own identity and morality. And that is  
a scary thought. Do we end up with a destructive 
Dune Buterian Jihad thinking machine or a more  
benevolent Banksian Culture Mind? That’s up for 
debate, but AGI and AI are not the same thing  
and you can use the latter without the former.
Earlier, I made the point that judges on the US  
Supreme Court are appointed, not voted in and 
they keep those appointments for life. That’s  
intended to help them keep above politics, not 
answerable to the political whims of the moment.  
But many think that’s not how it has worked out. 
Many feel Bias has crept in and indeed it probably  
has always been in there. There is a parallel here 
with AGI. If we replace the Supreme Court with an  
AGI, it will go its own way and, as humans, we 
may not like the result. Will its biases be any  
worse than what we have now? I can’t honestly 
say, but I’m not all that keen to find out  
either. Better the devil you know, so to speak.
But to wrap things up, the integration of AI  
into the justice system represents a significant 
shift in how we approach legal disputes and the  
administration of justice. While it offers the 
potential to improve efficiency, reduce costs,  
and standardize outcomes, it is not without its 
challenges, even if those are probably not the  
kind we see with robo judges in classic scifi.
As we move forward, it is essential to proceed  
with caution, constantly evaluate the impact of 
these technologies, and ensure that the pursuit  
of justice remains a fundamentally human 
endeavor, informed and aided by technology,  
but not ruled by it. As with many things 
in life, the best way forward is one of  
balance and nuance. I should also say that 
those who abandon a pursuit of justice,  
simply out of laziness, probably should not 
expect it or much sympathy when they don’t get it. 
Resisting the urge to hand the gavel to an 
AGI comes from the same place as not letting  
your smartphone choose your dinner—it might be 
smart, but it doesn't have taste buds! While I  
believe that we should resist completely 
handing over power to an AGI, as it will  
inherently not be human and not bound by our own 
standards and morality, I think there is a much  
stronger case that AI can help us better deliver 
justice in the future. But you be the judge.
Before we get onto schedule and announcement, I 
wanted to thank the crew over here at SFIA for  
all the help on episodes over the years, 
and two of our regular editors who helped  
contribute to this script for instance, 
Mark and Konstantin, are both lawyers,  
and were pivotal to helping make this script come 
together. One of the things I love about this show  
is all the awesome and knowledgeable people I 
get to work with and we’re always looking for  
more folks to help if you’re interested.
Another of the things I love about this  
show is how one day we can be out in depths of 
interstellar space a million miles or a millions  
years from now, and next we can be right back in 
the present with technological problems facing us  
here and now, like we did today. Every topic 
we do on this show is serious but we try to  
have fun with them too, and that’s particularly 
true when we look at things like alien biology,  
as we did last year with our episodes on 
Ammonia-Based Life and Silicon-based Life, and  
we’re continuing that conversation this month in 
our Nebula Exclusive on aliens based on Crystals,  
in which we look at where and how crystals might 
serve as a building block for life and look at  
5 different hypothetical planets where it emerged 
using different evolutionary paths and mechanics. 
And again, Crystal Aliens is out now exclusively 
on Nebula, our streaming service, where you can  
also see every regular episode of SFIA a few 
days early and ad free, as well as our other  
bonus content, including extended editions of 
many episodes, and more Nebula Exclusives like  
last month’s episode Topopolis: The Eternal River, 
January’s Giant Space Monsters, December’s episode  
The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis, 
Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark Stars at the  
Beginning of Time, Life As An Asteroid Miner, 
Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters,  
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will, and more.
Nebula has tons of great content from an  
ever-growing community of creators. Using my 
link and discount it’s available now for just  
over $2.50 a month, less than the price 
of the drink or snack you might have been  
enjoying during the episode.
When you sign up at my link,  
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use my 
code, isaacarthur, you not only get access to  
all of the great stuff Nebula offers, like Crystal 
Aliens, you’ll also be directly supporting this  
show. Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, 
and with all the exclusive bonus content,  
go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
So this episode comes out on St.  
Patrick’s Day, which managed to work itself 
into the script as you probably noticed,  
and I hope everyone is having a fun and safe 
holiday, and thanks again to Mark for helping  
write up that case we discussed with the falling 
tree and making sure it was legally sound. This  
is also the halfway point for the month, and 
we still have plenty of episodes coming. This  
Thursday we’ll return to the Fermi paradox on 
March 21st to discuss that evolutionary jump  
from the simple to complex, and if that might 
be the solution to the big question of where  
all the alien life is. Then we’ll finish our 
discussion of last month on black holes by deep  
diving kugelblitz black holes and using them for 
power generation, before finishing out the month,  
with a bonus scifi sunday episode on 
the 31st, Multi-Planetary empires. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you’d like to donate or help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s 
episodes early and ad free on our streaming  
service, Nebula, along with hours of bonus content 
like Crystal Aliens, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
