This episode is sponsored by Audible.
In the last decade alone, thousands of new
planets have been discovered orbiting distant
alien suns, many of these far larger than
our planet, called Super-earths.
But would these Super Earths be super places
for humanity to colonize and settle?
To my perpetual irritation, a lot of popular
science articles tend to report every new
exoplanet of note with a great deal of hype
and one such example is referring to super
Earths as “Earth-like” in ways that imply
we could go move onto one tomorrow.
This tends to be justified by them being the
most Earth-like exoplanets we’ve found,
so I thought for today we would discuss why
that is, what Super-Earths are, if life could
naturally evolve there and get technological,
and if we have any interest in colonizing
them ourselves.
Now when I was a kid, planets numbered 9 and
fell into 2 categories, rocky inner planets
and big gas giants, plus the freak planet
Pluto, folks were always looking for planet
10 or planet X, which wasn’t always being
used as Roman numeral X or 10, and already
debating if Pluto should count.
Indeed we had previously had more than 9 planets
as we used to count the bigger asteroids like
Ceres and Vesta, and even before we found
our first exoplanets and the additional dwarf
planets in our own solar system, there was
a lot of talk about how to reclassify planets.
We knew that our catalog would expand enormously
and that we would doubtless find thousands
of planets closer to each of our planets than
they are to each other, and we theorized many
more.
So the classification systems themselves are
very broad and ill-defined, with many suggestions
and many overlapping.
That’s part of the problem with sensational
headlines is there’s not really some official
list of what is what, as it’s still early
days with little knowledge, and I would say
if anything, the astronomical community is
even more hesitant about defining planet categories
after the whole Pluto fiasco.
The other part with sensational headlines
– besides that publications are rewarded
for over-utilising clickbait – is that often
when we discover some new planet that is no
more like Earth than Mars or Venus is, or
even less so, it gets listed as the most earth-like
exoplanet yet discovered because this is actually
true.
The thing about exoplanet hunting is that
your odds of seeing and confirming a new exoplanet
mostly rely on how close it is to its new
sun and how big it is, as both affect how
much light it reflects, or blocks, or how
much gravitational impact it has.
What this means is that while our basic models
say there will be more smaller planets than
bigger planets, our observations mostly consist
of what we call “Hot Jupiter’s”, giant
planets near their Sun.
There are probably a dozen or more dwarf planets
like Pluto in our solar system, and that’s
likely a common thing in the galaxy, but such
tiny ice dwarfs, low in mass and far from
their parent stars, are going to be the last
things we discover and properly inventory
much as they are in our own solar system.
Sometimes we only know their radius not their
mass, though we can make decent approximations
of the latter from the former.
And an icy world Earth’s radius but Pluto’s
density is not going to be livable as it would
evaporate if we warmed it up with terraforming.
So too, a planet right near its Sun, of Earth’s
radius, is likely to be as dense and unlivable
as Mercury, but is the first Earth-radius
planet you would expect to find.
Very loosely we’d tend to guess stars hosting
planets between half Earth’s mass and double
Earth’s Mass and getting maybe 25% more
or less of our solar illumination would likely
be present in at least 1% of solar systems,
and maybe as high as 1 in 10 or more.
They shouldn’t be rare, but we’ve discovered
very few less-massive than Earth, and of those
more massive, those 1500 and counting exoplanets
of more than 1 but less than 10 times Earth’s
mass that we call Super Earths, virtually
none would be even as promising as Mars or
Venus for terraforming.
Again not because we think they are rare,
just that we see big, bright and hot exoplanets
easiest, so currently if we find one of Earth
radius, it’s usually Mercury distances or
closer, and if we find one at Earth’s distances,
it’s probably either a giant planet or around
a giant star making it too hot.
Now we are finally getting a decent list of
planets whose mass, radius, and lighting doesn’t
make the word Earth-like sound too absurd,
but while ’Earthlike’ mostly meant hot
super earths, we had a lot of speculation
about colonizing those and I thought we should
start or our own by discussing the composition.
Now that might seem like a strange point to
begin on given that the broadness of the category
– simply being more massive than Earth but
not more than 10 times as much – leaves
a huge range for composition but we do not
really live on Earth, we live in that tiny
band of it’s surface that’s got air and
water.
By default we would expect a bigger planet
to have these too.
Indeed given that our concern about terraforming
low gravity planets is their atmosphere escaping,
we would generally tend to expect more massive
worlds to have thicker oceans and atmospheres,
and here’s where it can get confusing to
folks.
See, if I tell someone we found a world twice
as big as Earth or twice as massive, folks
tend to think I said the same thing, and that
it would have twice the gravity Earth does.
Earth is actually the densest planet in our
solar system, though roughly tied with Mercury
and Venus only a bit behind that, but Mars
is 71% of Earth’s density and so a Mars-dense
but Earth sized world would have a surface
gravity of 71% of Earth Normal.
By the way for folks new to the show wincing
at me repeatedly garbling the pronunciation
of Earth this episode, my apologies, for some
reason even after years of speech therapy
I can’t seem to properly pronounce the name
of the planet I live on.
Anyway, so long as the radius stays the same,
the surface gravity is proportional to the
density.
A Plutonian world, with a density a third
of Earth’s would have a third the surface
gravity if Earth-sized, so would have a real
problem holding onto any atmosphere, and indeed
given that it’s a big ball of ices, many
of which would be gas, not liquid at room
temperature, such a planet could not plausibly
exist in a habitable zone of solar system,
it would melt and boil away.
However, for some context, a planet of such
a density could still have Earth-like gravity,
it would just need to be three times wider
than Earth, and at a third density, contain
27 times the volume but only 9 times the Mass,
right near the top of what would be a Super
Earth but more in line with what we mean by
the term mini-Neptune, or Ice Giant - such
as Neptune is now considered – or even a
gas dwarf, a rocky planet with a very thick
atmosphere.
If you’re curious, the lowest density planet
in our solar system is Saturn, just about
an eighth as dense as the Earth, and at 95
times our mass and 9 times our radius, it’s
nominal surface actually has about the same
gravity as Earth’s, just a bit higher.
This is one reason we sometimes contemplate
building a shell around such planets, moving
them closer to the sun, and terraforming that
shell, you’d get an Earth-like planet with
95 times our surface area.
So we want to be mindful that even inside
our own solar system we already see a wide
variety of masses and densities and sizes
that make it very clear a planet’s mass
or radius being ‘close to Earth’s’ doesn’t
mean much for habitability.
And we’re only talking size and density
and mass thus far, not if it is around a redder
sun or hotter overall or has a nice sized
moon.
A planet twice as wide as Earth and of Earth
density has twice the surface gravity, and
8 times the mass, a planet twice the mass
of Earth but the same density is only 26%
wider and 26% stronger surface gravity – the
cube root of 2 incidentally.
Was it thrice the mass and the same density
that radius and surface gravity would be the
cube root of three, 1.44, or 144% of Earth’s
rather than 126%.
But at 200% the mass and 126% the radius and
gravity, this isn’t really what we mean
by a Super Earth, it’s in the range, but
on the smaller side, but let’s consider
this world for a moment, which we will nickname
SFIA-26.
First, all things being equal, it could be
a bit further from our Sun and still be habitable.
The bigger the planet the warmer it’s generally
going to be, again all things being equal,
though don’t assume we’re talking Venus
hot at Earth distances or habitable out at
Mars.
Super Earth’s are likely to have a slightly
wider habitable zone around their star.
Wide surface too, 26% more radius means 58%
more surface area.
Here’s where we get a problem though.
Imagine we just teleported Earth’s atmosphere
right to this world, well it’s got 58% more
area to cover so that doesn’t work, not
enough air.
Ironically that’s not true but to explain
that, let’s imagine we just gave it 58%
more air, the same air above each square meter
of land as Earth has.
Now what?
Well the gravity is stronger, so that air
actually gets mashed down more.
You need less air on such planets to achieve
normal surface pressure because of that higher
gravity, and a place like Mars needs more
air for its lower gravity for that same reason.
Mars lost its atmosphere and oceans because
of its lower gravity and lack of magnetosphere.
Such a big planet has more gravity and probably
more molten core for a bigger magnetosphere,
helping prevent loss, but again, proportional
to its surface area, it would actually need
less air to match Earth’s air pressure.
However surface gravity isn’t the same as
escape velocity.
As I mentioned, Earth and Saturn have comparable
surface gravities but Saturn is nearly a hundred
times more massive and its escape velocity
is 4 times higher, which makes a huge difference
in rates of atmospheric loss.
Our hypothetical small super Earth with twice
the mass and 126% the radius and surface gravity
of Earth has 126% higher escape velocity too.
For our audio only listeners I’ve got the
equation up on the screen for anyone wanting
to calculate various hypothetical planets
themselves but I’m intentionally keeping
to the math-intuitive ones for today when
possible.
Now, how a planet gets its initial oceans
and air is a complex and still mostly mysterious
matter, we guess Earth had its own proto atmosphere
blown off when the Moon formed and recollected
from comet bombardments later on, but in a
basic and over-simplified approximation we
could assume a planet started with air and
water proportional to its total mass.
If we made Earth 26% wider and 58% bigger
in land surface, but it started with 200%
more air and water, then it’s got 26% deeper
seas and 26% more air per square meter…
both of which are under higher pressure from
that increased density and higher gravity.
On Earth you need to drop around 10 meters
deep, or deeper, in the water to add an atmosphere
of Earth pressure, on SFIA-26, that pressure
is up after just 8 meters.
Earth’s average ocean depth is 3700 meters
– over 2 miles – and has a pressure down
there of 370 atmospheres.
Here on SFIA-26, the average ocean depth – all
things being equal in continent layout - having
just twice as much water over 58% more surface
area, is 4700 meters, or 3 miles deep, and
the pressure down at that depth isn’t 470
atmospheres but rather about 590.
Of course it will probably be higher because
it probably has a lot more air sitting on
top of that ocean too.
But also, Earth is constantly losing air,
mostly hydrogen gas as it is lightest, to
atmospheric escape.
Such a planet should have less escape – this
is part of why the gas giants have so much
hydrogen – and how much hydrogen you have
controls how much water you have, as oxygen
is plentiful and slow to escape.
So you probably have more air and water than
we factored in already.
Now the next issue.
If Earth’s seas rose from 3700 meters to
4700, by a whole kilometer – not much ‘earth’
would be left poking above the water, and
again we would actually expect more water
depth on this world from that slow hydrogen
escape and maybe even its gravity tugging
more comets into it down the eons.
Now there is still a lot of land above a kilometer
in altitude here on Earth, and we’re not
just talking mountain peaks, eyeballing an
altitude map makes it look like about a quarter
of our land, big chunks of central Asia, southeast
Africa and the Western US are, and generally
it's those places like the Rockies and Himalayas,
the newer mountain ranges, that are resulting
in those large chunks of livable but high
altitude land near them.
Keep that in mind for in a moment.
Here on SFIA-26 that might mean it had a quarter
the proportional land to Earth but it’s
got 58% more surface so about 40% Earth’s
land area.
Again probably less from them having less
hydrogen escape and more water as a result
but let’s stick with that for a moment.
No problem imagining them getting a good sized
civilization from that, and spaceflight is
harder because of probably much thicker air
and higher gravity but not implausibly so.
We’ve talked about a parallel case before
for habitable high-gravity worlds and we need
to remember they also need stronger, thicker,
or denser bones for land life – which might
prevent or slow life coming from the seas
too.
It took us a long time to get animals out
of the sea onto land, for the overwhelming
majority of Earth’s history and life’s
history, there were no land animals.
That need for strong endoskeletons and shoulder
and hips and such might mean it took another
billion years to crawl out of the seas out
into tidal pools and then to live on land,
or that it never did.
Speaking of tides though, another thing to
keep in mind is that Earth used to spin a
lot faster, the Moon has been slowing our
day length a little each year for eons and
back in the day it was 12 hours long and had
much stronger storms.
Faster planet rotation means worse storms.
Erosion of land would have been much more
severe if such a planet began with a faster
rotation and had no huge moon to slow that
rotation, and a bigger moon than our own giant
one.
But thicker air itself makes for stronger
erosion.
And moreover, stronger gravity favors flattening
too.
Every volcanic eruption needs to fight that
much harder to get high land, every grain
of dirt tumbling downhill in a breeze or rainstorm
or river has that much more force acting against
drag of the land to keep it moving downhill
before friction stops it.
Stuff just wears down more.
And stuff does wear down, again most of our
higher altitude lands are near those newer
mountain ranges.
SFIA-26 is generally my basic example of a
high-gravity world, it’s getting into that
range of Earth-like planet where it’s definitely
colonizable and terraformable but where you
might need to be mega-nuking the ocean floor
to get yourself some new land or building
pontoon-continents.
Which is certainly an option, layers of small
hollow cylinders full of air stacked into
vast rafts kilometers long to build houses
on is no more effort for living space than
kilometers of overlapping domes or giant hollow
cylinders orbiting the planet that people
live inside, those O’Neill Cylinders we’re
so fond of discussing here as alternatives
to planets.
You could make some very large and durable
islands out of layers of pontoons and if the
galaxy turns out to be full of lots of oceanic
planets, this might be a common approach to
settling them.
Nonetheless SFIA-26 is getting close, and
maybe already passes by, where we would expect
a world to be Earth-like and where it’s
a bit dubious; not if life ‘could’ form,
but if it could evolve to be either land-dwelling
or even photosynthetic.
I’ll explain that more in bit but in the
absence of photosynthesis you would not expect
the sheer quantity of biomass and biodiversity
we tend to assume is needed for intelligent
life to arise.
This is why we don't’ tend to expect to
find anything particularly impressive in subsurface
oceans on frozen moons like Europa even if
we do find life there.
For the moment though, as I said SFIA-26 is
not really a good example of what we mean
by Super Earth, it’s on the low side, but
I think it fits what most folks are thinking
of in terms of gravity and such.
I want to consider several other cases, and
let’s start by just scaling up to 8 Earth
masses, near the top of Super Earth sizes
and another math-convenient one, and we’ll
dub this world SFIA-200, since so many of
its qualities will be 200% of Earth, its surface
gravity, escape velocity, and ocean depth
for starters.
At Earth density this is a world twice as
wide and with 4 times the surface area, which
in our basic approximation means its oceans
are 8 times larger in volume spread over 4
times the area and thus twice as deep.
There is very little of Earth that’s more
than 3 kilometers above our current sea level
and all that gravity and thick air isn’t
helping with high landmasses forming or not
eroding away.
By default we would expect this to be a blue
world with little to no land above water,
and maybe not even in the first couple hundred
meters of depth where sunlight reaches.
With the nutrients all deep down, and the
sunlight far above, life can certainly form
near thermal vents if that theory of origination
is true, but getting it near the surface to
survive on light is hard, with all the nutrients
sinking down.
We examined this case in more detail in both
our Oceans Planets episode and our episode
looking at if Technology can develop without
fire, and looked at some other options like
subsurface air pockets or floating icebergs
with captured dirt or ash as places life might
take hold.
Thus I don’t want to focus in on it too
much today.
Additionally, we are only at first approximation
here, we don’t know that there are not factors
shoving that water down under the crust into
the mantle where it gets stored – we think
– as hydroxide in minerals such as ringwoodite.
I’m sure most of you have heard how we believe
much if not most of Earth’s water is in
the Mantle, that’s both accurate and off,
as it isn’t in water form.
Folks hear that about the mantle and wonder
why it doesn’t come rising up since rock
is denser than water but ringwoodite is about
4-5 times denser than water for instance,
and it’s got the hydrogen and oxygen, not
an actual H2O in it.
For that matter water or water ice can be
pushed into forms nearly twice as dense as
normal water, like Ice VII, at 1.7 grams per
cubic centimeter, again see that water worlds
episode.
So there is a lot that could prevent a world
just being covered infinitely deep in water,
and that matters because any planet that is
bigger than Earth and not much closer to its
parent star ought to have a lot more hydrogen
than us, it is incredibly common after all,
it just blows away easily.
Water, its most common molecular form besides
diatomic hydrogen, is absurdly abundant throughout
the Universe as is oxygen, coming in right
after hydrogen and helium in elemental abundance,
albeit a distant third, and forming the important
part of the air we breathe, the majority of
the mass of the water we are mostly made of,
and the most abundant atom in the rocks we
stand on.
So what other weird factors should we consider?
Well before segueing off water it’s worth
noting that a planet mostly composed of water
but Earth sized would have the same gravity
as the Moon’s surface, and would have to
be five and half times wider than Earth with
30 times the surface area to have Earth-like
gravity.
Though on such a world the pressure would
be high enough to force collapses into some
of those denser ice-types even if it had no
significant amount of rock.
We shouldn’t discount encountering some
water giants in the gas giant ranges though,
closer to the sun than our gas giants are.
Low density might be decently common too,
a Super-Earth of 10 Earth masses but Mars
density would have 14 times the volume of
Earth, 240% of its radius, and about 560%
of its surface area.
We’ll call this one Ares-10, and its escape
velocity is still only double Earth’s, more
mass but less dense, and it might not have
much of a magnetic field given that the density
implies it’s low on iron at its core – we
are contemplating natural worlds for the moment,
see our Mega-Earths episode for truly enormous
Earth-like worlds we made ourselves, such
as the Saturn shell I mentioned earlier.
One might imagine such a world as Ares-10
forming nearer its sun and having a fairly
tepid magnetic field, thus being fairly Mars
like, arid and dead, instead of water rich,
but one could equally imagine finding such
a world that has a good mix of seas and shore
to produce a fairly Earth-like world except
for the high gravity.
One thing to note though is that at higher
pressure, chemistry often acts differently
and biochemistry maybe even more so with many
gases we consider benign, acting more like
acid.
So those are our biggest worlds, low density
and high mass.
The reason we would not expect to find worlds
much more dense than Earth already, is simply
because even a world made of pure iron is
only 42% denser than ours and we’d not expect
to ever see such a thing nor an entire planet
of those rare elements denser than iron.
You could get denser, but we probably need
to assume special conditions like a punishing
sun or a collision event even worse than the
one that we think made our moon that just
stripped off everything lighter than iron.
Weird results from collisions is certainly
not something we can rule out though, heck
you might even get hoop worlds as a result,
which are technically Super-Earths, but we’ll
revisit them another time too.
As mentioned we think proto-Earth got whacked
by something Mars sized to result in the modern
Earth-Moon pairing.
Uranus, 15 times Earth’s mass, is tipped
over on its side and we tend to assume a similar
event caused that and probably also caused
Venus to be all weird with its slow backward
spin and day longer than its year.
We might imagine a large planet near its sun
getting baked off lighter elements, a hot
Jupiter turned a Chthonian Planet, then hit
by a dwarf planet of more normal composition
that shoved it into a more livable orbit too
and covered its surface with a thin layer
of light elements, water, and air.
We could imagine a super-Earth with a Mars
or even Earth-mass moon around it as a near
double planet, potentially savagely tectonic
and with no shortage of land.
We could imagine a collision that resulted
in increased spin, rather than slow spin like
Venus got, so that the world actually bulged
noticeably at the equator.
We could even imagine some combination of
that which resulted in a world like Periremunda
from the Scifi novel Duty Calls, where the
planet’s equator is nearly open magma and
the rest desert, except for ultra-high plateaus
scattered around that having varying pressures
and climates based on the altitudes of the
various plateaus where stuff migrates around
on wings or even by being living blimps.
The more massive the planet, the more likely
we have an abundance of hydrogen and helium
for such things.
You could have stuff living on parts of Super
Earths that were lower pressure than Mount
Everest and others at air pressures Earth
never sees, even before getting to ocean life.
Such planets could have quite a collection
of Moons too, remember we’re talking about
worlds often closer to Neptune and Uranus
in mass than Earth, each with a dozen moons,
and Earth-sized planets probably would have
more moons in most cases where they didn’t
have big ones like ours.
Very large rings are possible too, potentially
like Saturn even.
One very likely scenario would be such worlds
existing decently further from their Sun than
earth, either on more elliptical orbits or
just being colder.
Less heat, less water over ice, less erosion,
potentially offering ice-covered worlds of
mountains and valleys with warm but darker
oases below and brighter UV-blasted cold thin-aired
spots above and many climates in between on
the slopes and in the caves of ice.
You could go further too, we have underground
lakes in Antarctica, and we think subsurface
oceans are decently common with larger and
colder moons, so a Super Earth out past Mars
might have a vast amount of tidally heated
underground lakes and caverns.
And those buried lakes in Antarctica do contain
life, so it’s not a huge stretch.
In this very same way, there’s nothing stopping
some large world, a Cthonian or nearly so,
becoming tidally locked near its sun, especially
in the case of a red dwarf, and potentially
instead of being bright desert on one side
and dark tundra on the other, we could see
molten slag on one side and icy mountains
on the other and a wide band of habitability
on the equator or even again by altitude,
deep down below the punishing sunlight in
the valleys between ancient dead but enormous
volcanoes, breathable at the bottom but near
airless at the tops.
Super earths run an almost unimaginable spectrum
of possible worlds, from paradise to graveyard,
molten cinder to icy rock, but amid all of
those it is possible life might arise no different
than here, eventually growing clever and reaching
out to space.
As to us colonizing them, I would say not
without much modification to the cyborg or
transhuman, or extreme genetic engineering,
at least for those whose gravity was half
again our own or more, but we will have to
see and that’s no bar either.
I suspect though we would still rather build
our own cylinder habitats with gravity and
air pressure and temperature of our choosing,
rather than trying to set up giant pontoon
island habitats on some oceanic super-Earth.
Of course if life originated on such a world,
smart dolphins with technology for instance,
and they got to space, they might prefer building
entirely marine habitats, giant cylinders
full of water, as might we to help preserve
our own marine life, and it's trickier than
it sounds.
We will examine oceanic space habitats next
week though.
For now, with Super Earths, our imagination
is our only real limit because we still know
so little about how planets form or what the
catalog of exoplanets really is out there
in the galaxy.
One thing’s for sure though, with us discovering
hundreds of new worlds a year now, we won’t
lack for a shortage of examples to investigate.
A few minutes ago I was mentioning Periremunda
from the Scifi novel Duty Calls, where they’ve
got a blasted landscape below and many huge
mountain plateaus everyone lives on, and the
comedic central character of those novels,
Commissar Caiphas Cain, spends an awful lot
of time traveling to strange new worlds and
trying not to get killed on them, and it was
long a favorite series of mine that didn’t
have any audiobooks and the publisher, Black
Library has been moving an awful lot of its
content into audiobook format finally, and
has put a lot of effort into making those
some very top notch performances, often with
full casts rather than a single narrator.
That series is a great example of science
fiction and satire, so I’m retroactively
awarding it our January Audible Audiobook
of the Month.
Those are all available over on our sponsor,
Audible, and usually for less than half the
price they retail at.
As I often say, a good narrator can make a
good book great, and a great narrator can
make a great book even better, and you get
a lot of impressive talent narrating audiobooks
these days.
I was rewatching Lord of the Rings with my
wife recently, who hadn’t seen any of the
films before, and afterward I picked up the
newest edition of the audiobooks and those
are narrated by Andy Serkis, who was the actor
who played Gollum in those and his talent
and versatility in voice-over really elevates
the performance.
If you’re looking for reading material during
the winter months, and before the new TV series
comes out, J.R.R.
Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings, Hobbit, and
more are rightly considered the best the fantasy
genre has to offer.
So I’m giving that the Audible Audiobook
of the Month for February.
Now Audible is the place to go for audiobooks
but it has a lot more to offer, including
many excellent podcasts, such as Science & Futurism
with Isaac Arthur.
That’s right, our show is available on Audible
now and that includes the Narration-Only version
for folks who prefer to skip on the music
we blend into the episodes, which seems popular
for folks who like to drift off to sleep listening
to me, though the Audible Plus Catalog also
has sleep & meditation tracks available, as
well as guided fitness programs for helping
keep those new year’s resolutions, and Audible
Original’s like Nail Gaiman’s Sandman
Act II.
In fact, they have so much content that if
you hit the play button it would run for a
few centuries before anything repeated, including
about 500 hours of this show now, and the
whole Audible Plus Catalog comes as a bonus
when you join Audible, in addition to your
usual 1 free audiobook each month and big
member discounts on additional ones, and as
always, new members can try Audible for free
for the first month, just go to Audible.com/isaac,
or text isaac to 500-500.
So today’s topic was super Earths and as
we mentioned today, there’s a chance those
might be entirely oceanic, and next week we
will examine some megastures and space habitats
built with marine habitation in mind, including
a new ultra large megastructure option we
have not examined before.
Now such megastructures take huge amounts
of mass to build and sometimes more than an
entire solar system might contain of a certain
element, so we’ll go into March looking
at Nuclear Transmutation options for civilizations
that don’t want to wait on supernovae to
get more materials, and of course such megastructures
often assume lifespans similar to the planet’s
they emulate, so on March 10th we will take
a look at how you could build a machine designed
to last a million years.
Then we’ll have our March Scifi Sunday episode
to look at the concept of Synthetic Life.
Now if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe
to the Channel and hit the notifications bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below.
You can also join in the conversation on any
of our social media forums, find our audio-only
versions of the show, or donate to support
future episodes, and all those options and
more are listed in the links in the episode
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
