This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
Our progress in the field of rocketry this
last decade has been amazing, but to reach
a future in which millions can travel to and
from orbit everyday, we will need freeways
and train tracks to space itself.
So today we are going to be looking at a space
launch system, the Tethered Ring, that is
a cousin to the Mass Driver, Orbital Ring,
and Lofstrom Loop, three of our favorite active
support launch systems.
Now each of those has its own episode in our
Upward Bound series that you can watch for
details and it seemed right that the Tethered
Ring should get its own episode too.
It’s a fantastic idea for hanging a non-rocket
based launch system in the upper atmosphere
that could make launch costs to orbit around
Earth as cheap as air travel around Earth,
and indeed could make travel around Earth
a lot faster and cheaper too.
If you haven’t seen any of those episodes,
they’re not prerequisites to understand
today’s topic, but a basic understanding
of them is helpful to understanding how the
tethered ring works, as is an understanding
of Active Support, so we will cover them briefly
today as a prelude to the Tethered Ring.
It might be helpful to think of the Active
Support in a tethered ring as a system for
simply keeping our ring rigid, something that
a potential super-material might allow too.
So while the coolest thing about the Tethered
Ring is that it can be built on the earth’s
surface entirely with present day technology
for a reasonable cost, for our sci-fi writers
out there, it actually represents something
you could have hanging on a planet without
maintenance or power needs - if you had a
rigid enough supermaterial.
This is a Ring that hangs over a planet by
being tethered to the ground, thus hangs over
the ground by hanging from the ground, a somewhat
counterintuitive notion that we’ll explain
in a bit.
When its inventor, Phil Swan, explained the
concept to me at the International Space Development
conference, I had a facepalm moment at the
beautiful simplicity of the idea and never
thinking of it before myself.
He and his team, which goes by the name “The
Atlantis Project”, have been developing
and discussing it for years now and I’m
very glad that SFIA is going to be a venue
to help popularize the notion, and I’ll
be linking to the website for it that has
all the deep dives and technical details,
and also a very nice app for placing the rings
where you want and with the various parameters
you like.
This is a very cool system that would work
well on Earth and on many other planets too.
Now, Active Support is seen by some as a technique
for emulating supermaterials by applying large
amounts of energy, and in a simplest conceptual
example, it’s like keeping a piece of paper
floating by placing it over a heat vent on
the floor.
Indeed, if you anchored that paper with a
cord or tether to the vent and left the vent
running it would hang up there forever and
ants could crawl up those tethers to the paper
and hang out and build cities there.
This is Active Support, and so would be a
Helicopter or drone Quadcopter that had an
electric engine that you anchored to ground
with a power cable from a power plant.
We could also do the same with a plane, but
it would need to fly in a circle to avoid
breaking that power cable.
Of course if it was flying high and had a
rail gun or an electromagnetic cannon on it,
a mass driver, it could launch things from
that altitude, high above most of the air,
and the US Military has funded studies on
the feasibility of launching payloads to space
from high-altitude planes, which have concluded
that this is plausible from a thermodynamics
point of view.
Indeed that power cord could power both the
floating plane and the launcher attached to
it and would be a viable space launch mechanism.
I don’t know of anyone having previously
studied or named that approach before, it’s
one I’ve played with on and off for some
years and it’s probably been thought of
before so I won’t claim it and name it today
especially as it’s not our focus nor would
it ever be very handy except maybe for a new
colony planet with limited launch needs and
a centralized first base, and mostly for cargo
that can handle a lot of g-force.
Think of it as a Planetary Slingshot.
The topic today will essentially replace that
circling plane with a much better static ring
which spacecraft can race along to launch
into space at accelerations that humans would
find comfortable.
Active Support comes in other forms too.
It’s the same concept for a water hose,
which is a fairy floppy device but when we
run water through it at high pressure, it
suddenly becomes quite stiff and rigid, but
not as rigid as, say, a large ring made of
diamond.
Generally our discussion of active support
on this show are for building giant space
towers, orbital rings, or even artificial
planets, and thus utilize methods for replicating
materials stronger than nature seems to allow.
The Orbital Ring for instance uses a giant
hollow ring around the planet, stationary
with respect
to the ground and with magnets inside, while
inside this sheath a metal ring spins at slightly
faster than orbital speed, and we can speed
up or slow down that ring with linear motors
on the outer, stationary sheath, and we use
levitation electromagnets to keep the inner
ring from touching the stationary sheath while
it is moving around at 10 kilometers a second
or even faster.
The combined momentum of both objects is kept
at what is needed for orbiting Earth at that
altitude, a velocity of 7.8 kilometers per
second times whatever its total mass is.
Total mass for itself, both inner ring and
outer sheath, as well as the cargo on it,
the ships, the tethers helping hold it in
place on Earth so it doesn’t wobble or suffer
from precession, and possibly solar panels
to power it.
You use tethers off at an angle to keep it
in place and provide transport via cable car
up to the Ring, for people, cargo, and power,
and it’s an excellent launch location.
With very good superconductors and magnetic
shielding this can be very low power.
It is easiest to do above the equator but
so long as your tethers are strong enough
you can position your hoop at any angle around
the Earth, but it’s still larger than the
full circumference of the planet, which implies
that you need to build it in orbit, which
means that you need to launch material into
low earth orbit to build it, or mine the material
on the moon and then bring it to low earth
orbit.
On the other hand, a tethered ring has a smaller
diameter and can thus be built on earth, for
example in the ocean around Antarctica, or
in the Pacific Ocean.
These, as we’ll see in a bit, are some of
the options The Atlantis Project team proposes.
You can tap power off that inner spinning
metal ring, or simply run other electricity
up there, to magnetically propel a space vessel
along the ring until it reaches orbital speed
itself and can launch off.
The same is true of the Loftsrom Loop which
is easier to think of as a cannon on the ground
firing metal pellets in a big parabola up
into space that land far away and get turned
around and fired back, and much like the inner
spinning ring of Orbital Ring, we can build
a sheath around this and give ourselves a
big launch ramp suspended in the air.
We can then either leach power magnetically
off the metal pellets or chain or ribbon inside
the external stationary sheath, or just run
a power cord up to it.
Same concept for a Space Tower, except here
we magnetically accelerate metal pellets or
bolts straight up then use magnets at the
top to redirect them back down again, which
counters the pull of gravity.
The systems at the base accelerate the pellets
back up again, and on this track we keep a
large tower built which can be impossibly
tall compared to what even the strongest of
tough compressive strength materials permit.
Active Support is very good for making things
rigid or having great compressive strength,
so long as you either have lots of cheap power
to run it, or you have a way to minimize the
power requirements.
One way to approach this is to use superconductors
and good magnetic shielding, but the tethered
ring white paper design proposes a different
approach, which is more akin to the technology
used in active magnetic bearings, specifically
a type of active magnetic bearing called a
“permanent magnet biased homopolar linear
active magnetic bearing”.
Don’t worry, you don’t need to memorize
that term.
Active Support can also, with a little more
work, be used to replace high Tensile Strength
materials, this is the strength a material
has when you pull on it rather than push on
it, or when you hang a weight from it.
See our Ringworlds episode for discussion
of how, but for today’s topic, Tethered
Rings, it’s worth noting that we have materials
that work for our tethers already, like Kevlar,
or Zylon, indeed carbon fiber will do the
trick, though obviously supermaterials like
Graphene could do it even better if they could
be made cheaply enough.
The difference is that when we look at space
elevators, we are looking at materials that
need to hold vast weights up over tens of
thousands of miles or kilometers, while alternatively
our tethers on a Orbital Ring, Lofstroom Loop
or Tethered Ring, just need to hold things
for tens of miles or kilometers.
Still not easy, mind you, but inside the realm
of materials we already have the ability to
cheaply mass produce.
For a given value of the word ‘cheaply’.
The basic models of the Orbital Ring, Lofstrom
Loop, Space Tower, Mass Driver, and Tethered
Ring all cost in the tens of billions of dollars.
Active structures also require maintenance,
and I usually assume such things parallel
highways and bridges at needing about their
original cost to build to be spent again over
the cost of a decade or two to keep them up,
and they also need a lot of energy to stay
up and to launch spaceships.
What’s cool about them all is it takes so
much less energy per kilogram launched, so
long as you are doing a lot of launching.
You knock your launch cost down to maybe a
hundredth what they are now, but only if you’re
interested in doing about a hundred times
as many launches a year as we do now, preferably
more.
Folks sometimes wonder why we don’t build
these things already if they’re physically
possible and that’s the key reason, it’s
like a railroad or the Panama canal, way cheaper
fuel costs once built but only if you are
moving enough freight to justify the initial
cost and maintenance.
So, building space infrastructure makes sense
when your space goals are ambitious, such
as setting up and supplying human outposts
on other worlds.
But it perhaps makes more economic sense to
use rockets if you only want to launch satellites
and build a space station or two in low-earth
orbit.
Another reason these don’t get built yet
is because even though the basic physics works
fine, like anything else they need prototyping
and often anticipate some technological improvements
that would make them way more effective.
The Tethered Ring is pretty simplistic and
can be built smaller as a test model, so there’s
less worries of needing multiple generations
of expensive prototypes.
And it also doesn’t require the cooperation
of a bunch of different countries to build
these prototypes.
One problem with the Orbital Ring is that
since it does have to encircle the entire
planet, even if not at the equator in favor
of being tipped at an angle, it still has
to pass over a lot of countries and just hangs
in the upper atmosphere above them, so we
assume permission has to be gotten from them
to build it.
They have good reason to say yes, as it presumably
grants them ultra-cheap and fast access to
both space and everyone else on that ring,
but the geopolitics could still be a pain.
Alternatively a full scale Tethered Ring can
be built and tested many meters below the
surface in the ocean, in international waters.
One possible location, discussed in the patent,
is around the Antarctic continent.
Another, discussed in the White Paper, is
around the Pacific Rim.
In fact, after a tethered ring is constructed
and raised, it can be moved to a better location,
if the geopolitical issues can be worked out,
so that it can provide carbon-neutral point-to-point
international high-speed transit for the countries
that it passes over.
A Tethered Ring is lifted up and held up by
its tethers, which can seem a bit counterintuitive.
We actually hang it from tethers attached
to the ground which keep it from falling down
to the ground.
And we do hang it too.
We have some visuals to explain this we’ll
be putting on the screen but for our audio-only
listeners, over on Soundcloud, Spotify, Itunes,
Audible, Amazon Music and others, this might
be a bit tricky to visualize.
Picture a basketball and a metal hoop just
a bit wider than it.
This hoop is our normal orbital ring and it
can be put at any angle.
Now shrink that hoop down to be a smaller
radius than the basketball.
It can be placed on the basketball and it
won’t fall down and hit the ground because
gravity keeps pulling it straight down while
the hoop isn’t wide enough to finish dropping
past the basketball once it widens out wider
than the hoop.
Of course this doesn’t result in the hoop
hanging in the air, it just rests on the basketball’s
surface.
However, Earth’s gravity doesn’t point
down at the ground, it points in toward the
basketball’s center, when Earth is the basketball.
So a big hoop around Earth would just land
on the ground wherever as everywhere is down.
Indeed it would flop to the ground as even
a ring made of pure diamond would be as flexible
as a rubber band at this scale, much like
our Topopolis Megastructure, a giant spinning
hollow steel cord miles wide that we can literally
tie into knots or loops because its flexible
at big enough lengths.
Making our Ring rigid is the principal role
of Active Support here and the only part it
is required for.
Just as with the Orbital Ring we will have
a hollow tube lined with magnets, stationary
with respect to the ground, and inside there
will be a big metal hoop spinning at high
speed, and much like water in a hose, this
will make the object rigid even though its
thousands of miles long.
So why isn’t the ring falling down?
The tethers attach to it, and the ground,
not space, so it’s hard to picture how this
is actually hanging in the sky from those
tethers.
If I ran guy-wires up to a hot air balloon
after all, those hold it to the ground, but
only because it wants to move up, shut off
the hot air or replace a blimp’s helium
with lead and it will fall down and those
tether’s won’t stop it.
Here’s the key part: Earth is curved, and
down is not in the same direction everywhere
along this ring or its tethers.
If you picture a very long tether running
from the ground off at an angle, then as the
Earth curves away beneath it the distance
from it to the ground is going to rise sharply.
Indeed even a straight line running along
Earth’s surface is going to curve away to
great height, this is how the horizon works
for the light moving in a straight line to
your eyes from some distant object.
So what our tethers are doing here, as they
radiate out from the Ring opposite of how
spokes of a wheel go, though slightly angled
down, is to reach to a distant spot to anchor
the ring in a roughly straight line.
Since the planet is curved, if the ring falls
down, it pulls on the tethers more, thus it
can’t fall down.
Our ring is held in the sky by being tethered
to the ground.
It’s a really neat trick and if you’re
having problems still picturing this, then
flip it around and imagine holding a ring
or disc from guy wires off the side attached
to tall towers.
The ring is held up by hanging down from those.
This is still the case, it’s just that our
tethers here are very long and our towers
are further away, and the point where they
attach is high, relative to the ring, because
the earth is actually a little bit inside
the ring as opposed to being entirely below
the ring.
Thus they don’t actually need to be up in
the air at all.
They can be on the ground because of the planet’s
curvature, and because the ring’s size allows
it to partially encircle the planet.
Of course for a big ring thousands of kilometers
in circumference, it would droop and stretch
all over the place between those tethers,
pulled outward where a tether connected and
drooping down between two tether connections,
so the tethers are forked so that they distribute
their tensile forces more evenly.
Also that inner spinning ring keeps the outer
stationary ring stiff and circular.
Much as with the Lofstrom Loop or Orbital
Ring we could use the kinetic energy of the
spinning ring as a source of power for our
launcher too, sapping speed off the ring magnetically
to propel a ship up to speed.
Our Ring is still in the atmosphere, mind
you, so it makes sense to house the mass driver
within an evacuated tube, and to have a fast
opening airlock at the end to let the spacecraft
out without letting too much air leak in.
We looked at this in Mass Drivers and a plasma
window might be an option too.
The reference design for the ring, is at an
altitude of 32 kilometers.
That it is far above storms and thick air,
so maintaining a near-vacuum tunnel around
the launch track is no problem.
And those tethers also make a great way to
move people, cargo, and power up to the Ring.
So how big is this ring?
Well that depends on circumference, of course,
and bigger is better in this case, as it means
your ships can accelerate to higher speeds
with a larger turning radius.
At ISDC this year Phil and his colleague,
Ceana, presented us the option of one running
essentially around the perimeter of the Pacific
Ocean as a circle, with about half its mass
in the ring and half in the tethers, but the
majority of the cost is in the tethers themselves,
which used just over 2 megatons of carbon-fiber
and roughly cost, in current money, about
45 billion dollars.
There’s also the transit tube, and of course
the outer sheath and inner metal hoop.
That metal hoop would probably be made from
iron although any ferromagnetic material works.
The inner ring just needs to be decently sturdy
and able to be shoved on by magnets.
That outer sheath can be aluminum, as it’s
lightweight and decently cheap, and we can
also put solar panels on it to power the whole
thing, a meter wide over its entire circumference
is sufficient.
In terms of actual energy stored in the Ring,
that varies by size – and much like the
Orbital Ring you can make these much thicker
if you want – but the baseline model would
have 2x10^17 Joules running inside that hoop
at any given moment, roughly the amount of
energy that hits Earth every second from the
Sun.
How often we need to replenish that energy
overall is hard to say at this time, but at
least many days, so the solar panels or perhaps
a handful of modern powerplants could do the
job, if not less, and you could be doing much
of recharging up power cords on those tethers
from the various major cities they connected
to outside their peak hours when they had
a surplus.
Or again by hanging solar panels from the
ring.
Even if we needed total energy replacement
once a month, which would require almost 80
gigawatts of power production to hit that
2x10^17 Joules over a month, that’s still
not much at a global scale.
However that is a lot of juice, the equivalent
of roughly 50 megaton nuclear devices, but
it’s all spread out over thousands of kilometers,
same as car wrecks on a freeway system or
a hurricane, and a hurricane contains a hundred
times the kinetic energy.
But, it is worth considering what would happen
if the ring got wrecked and whether it would
damage things.
If it did break, it’s not a huge worry,
much like an orbital ring, all the fast moving
bits are either flying off into orbit or burning
up in the atmosphere like meteorites, if it
breaks.
The bigger stationary segments could just
deploy parachutes and fall gently down.
I wouldn’t say a thicker carbon fiber tether
falling down is going to be totally safe for
those nearby but it would be nothing compared
to a trainwreck, and this is what we’re
seeking to replace here.
Of course a lighter material like graphene
works even better and would allow even more
safety provisions, but Phil Swan and his collaborators
were focused on modern and available materials,
and those available in 2015 specifically,
when the idea was first developed.
Phil told me that way back in the 1980s he
had been doing simulations of space elevators,
and concluded that the tethers were impossible
– this was pre-graphene and he went on hiatus
with such thoughts ‘till 2015 at a conference
on space elevators, and that’s where this
idea was first publicly presented.
It hasn’t been a secret either, I’m a
little sad it was around for nearly a decade
and this show’s entire lifetime before I
encountered it, and next week marks our show’s
8th anniversary incidentally.
Now again all numbers are necessarily approximate
and in modern values and technologies, but
I wanted to step through some specifics before
we close out as well as looking at more high-tech
versions and off-world use.
The Tethered Ring reference design’s height
is 32 Kilometers or 20 Miles up, that keeps
it above air traffic and weather.
Transport could be directly up a vertical
elevator cable that’s 32 kilometers long,
or at an angle, and the angle does not have
to be uniform on this.
You also can run cables inward or outward,
not just directly down from the tether, which
means that you can locate the elevator’s
terminuses near train stations or city centers,
if you wish, even if the ring doesn’t pass
directly over these locations.
The default tether is 110 kilometers long,
or 70 miles.
At the anchor point a tether is on the order
of arm’s width in diameter, and it will
widen slightly as it gets closer to the ring,
much as a tapered tether for a space elevator
does.
Spacing of the tethers’ anchor points could
be about 45 kilometers or 28 miles between
each tether, but because the tethers fork
on the way up to the ring, the spacing of
the ring attachment points is just a few meters,
feathering out to evenly grasp it.
We’re assuming a transit tube with a diameter
of about 12 meters or 40 feet which supports
four lanes of traffic.
The cars that travel within it are 4 meters
in diameter and 20 meters long, similar to
the fuselage of a business jet, and these
cars can switch between collector and express
lanes.
The mass driver’s tube could support space
vehicles with diameters of 12 meters or possibly
more, which can obviously hold a lot of spaceship,
or cargo and people.
More strength helps but the current model
already assumes you could have lots of observation
pods and structures suspended from the ring
for commerce and tourism.
The view would be amazing, 400 miles or 600
kilometers in any direction.
And again, a simple parachute built into one
would allow it to safely drift down in event
of accident or sabotage.
Indeed people in pressure suits could probably
skydive down from them, adding tourist revenue.
Current cost assumes about $10 a kilogram
for launch to orbit, cheaper to just go up
to the ring for a visit or around it and back
down to travel to another city.
In terms of building up there, since you’re
adding new weight and presumably new solar
panels to add and maintain power, even though
solar is a lot better at this altitude, it
is still pretty pricey, $110 a kilogram of
static load, so building a ten-ton lightweight
restaurant pod up there would run you 1.1
million dollars, in early 2022 money, a 20-ton
RV equivalent, 2.2 million bucks, etc.
Obviously that’s still pretty small for
living three times higher than the tallest
mountain peak, or running a hotel or restaurant
there, and this baseline ring would be expected
to be serving tens of thousands of people
at a time.
You can also overlap rings much as with the
Orbital Ring, to allow transfers between them.
And as with them, your travel time once on
the Ring to anywhere on Earth is on an order
of a few hours, but getting up and down the
tethers or elevators and to and from the stations
they’re anchored at is likely to match modern
travel to airports and taxi, takeoff, and
climb speeds, plus customs and security.
So way faster intercontinental travel, and
bigger versions of these might have bullet
trains that left a ground terminal and stopped
at another without pause at waypoints and
averaged hypersonic speeds for the trip.
It is a space launch system, of course, and
that’s its big interest to us, but that’s
the simple part, you electromagnetically accelerate
the launch vehicle down a track once you’re
up there, skipping on rocket fuel issues,
and it just lets go and flies into space.
You can launch at higher speeds and from higher
altitudes if you want to send people and payloads
directly to other planets without refueling.
Alternatively, if you want to keep the capital
cost of the tethered ring low you could construct
one that is closer to the ground, use it to
accelerate vehicles just part way up to orbital
speeds, and make up the rest of the delta
V needed for the mission with a second stage
rocket or a skyhook.
See our Skyhooks episode for more details
on those and the Mass Drivers episode for
more discussion of the specific mechanics
and economics of electromagnetic catapult
launches themselves.
But not only does it let us get to space,
it makes on-planet, point-to-point travel
much cheaper and faster, which is also the
big selling point of the orbital ring.
As with those and space towers and mass drivers
they can all be mixed and matched together
to form a vast orbital skybridge network allowing
millions of people and millions of tons of
cargo to move anywhere on a planet or into
orbit or down form orbit every day and at
cost equal to or less than modern transport
costs, at a fraction of the time, and being
purely electric, via renewable solar or nuclear
energy sources.
Sounds like something worth building, to me,
or at least prepping for a prototype of, and
again the full 100 page white paper and technical
specs are all available at the website listed
in the episode description if you want the
nuts and bolts.
Project-Atlantis.com, that’s project-hyphen-atlantis.
Now as I mentioned near the beginning, the
active support here, in a way, is just keeping
that ring rigid, and with a sufficiently advanced
material technology you could just have a
giant solid ring tethered to a planet, hanging
there for all time unpowered.
Also, for folks who ask about high-gravity
being a possible Fermi Paradox Solution, keeping
people from space because rockets couldn’t
do it - this is one of those counterarguments.
The Ring fabrication process lets you place
it partially sunk under the ocean during fabrication,
as it comes out of its factory, to avoid interfering
with seagoing traffic while under construction,
then you turn it on and lift it under its
own power out of the ocean and into the stratosphere.
You can use it to bootstrap your Orbital Rings
and other higher infrastructure into space
too, again it’s a great complimentary technology
of many we have elsewhere discussed, not just
a replacement or alternative.
It works well alone or in tandem with other
systems.
So it gets us into space but to close out,
where else in space would we use it?
Well it works fine on a place like Mars or
the Moon, though on the Moon it would be a
bit redundant.
We already have materials strong enough for
a classic space elevator on the Moon and we
don’t need an elevated track to get us over
its atmosphere, as it has none, so a simple
raised track above the ground to allow a nice
even circle can achieve the same job.
It potentially works on Venus quite well,
in tandem with cloud cities, or even augmenting
them, but your tether material needs to be
able to handle high-temperatures, since you
are tethering it into the ground, and Venus
is ultrahot, but the melting point of carbon
fiber is a lot higher than even Venus’s
inferno-like temperatures so it’s just making
sure your anchor system, which is likely to
involve a winch for loosening or tightening
the tether, can handle the pressure and temperature
there.
You can’t really use a tethered ring on
the “surface” of a gas giant, and an orbital
ring is preferable there anyway.
Again they don’t really serve a function
on any moons too small to have atmospheres,
though they would be handy on Saturn’s moon
Titan.
Also they are great options for any world
with significant gravity and atmosphere, especially
ones where either is higher than on Earth.
So lot’s of options for use off Earth, and
for getting us off Earth, and for getting
us around Earth.
Not bad for a simple Tethered Ring, and pretty
impressive for an object that so counter-intuitively
hangs itself over the ground by hanging itself
off the ground.
One of the trickier parts about today’s
concept was trying to explain how the Tethered
Ring avoids falling to the ground, and this
same sort of problem comes up when folks try
to figure out why a kite stays up, tethered
and pushed and pulled on by wind and gravity,
where wind and lift is our active support
in that case.
Same problems occurs for wondering why clouds
stay up or astronauts do, and many folks might
shrug and just accept that they do even if
it seems counterintuitive, but if those sorts
of things bug you and you want the tools to
understand it better, then I would recommend
Brilliant.
Brilliant’s focus on interactive learning,
like their scientific thinking course on Balance
and Center of Mass, help illustrate concepts
like opposing and balancing forces while letting
you adjust the system and see the results.
Many topics in science can seem hard because
there is no interactive and intuitive way
to work with the idea, compared to more traditionally
hands-on topics that you can play with and
thus learn easier, so Brilliant focuses on
making interactive and handson content which
makes it easier for anyone to learn, be it
the basics or advanced materials like astrophysics.
A better knowledge of math, science, and computer
science can not only be enlightening personally,
but a road to greater personal success.
Be a lifelong-learner, and let Brilliant be
your partner on that journey.
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own
pace, learn on the go, and learn something
new.
To get started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or click on the link in the description, and
the first 200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
So this was the first launch system we’ve
done a dedicated episode on in a while and
we may take a look at some others going forward
as I’m glad to say there’s been a lot
of good development on many of these with
the renewed push to space we’ve had building
up in this last decade.
Part of what made this episode possible though
was a great deal of technical and graphic
aid from the Atlantis Project and I wanted
to thank Phil Swan and Ceana Prado Nickel
for the help in particular, and they both
have long and distinguished careers in the
aerospace industry which lends the project
more firm details than we sometimes get to
have in our discussion of megastructures,
and again that website is linked in the episode
description and has a number of additional
explanations and technical details for those
wanting an even deeper dive.
It is always neat to get to work with experts
and one of my welcome perks from doing the
show, and while I’m at it, I wanted to give
a shout out to our long time cover artist,
Jakub Grygier, who has been making those great
covers and thumbnails for the show since around
episode 20, today being episode 359, not including
bonus episodes.
You may have noticed we’ve been experimenting
with the covers a bit of late and a lot of
that was me feeling that plastering the episode
titles over Jakub’s amazing art when the
title is already right next to episodes anyway
was obscuring those needlessly.
Now hopefully you can see his art better,
and don’t forget to checkout his link in
the episode description to see those in higher
detail along with tons more of his art.
And while I’m thanking folks, let me give
a shout to Sergey Chermisinov, whose song,
Sirius, is the one we always open and close
the Upward Bound series episodes with, and
we haven’t done one in a bit so it was nice
to have a return.He’s got an a amazing collection
of compositions I highly recommend.
Speaking of returns, we have our monthly scifi
Sunday episode coming up this weekend, on
Alien Impostors and Doppelgangers, and we
will be picking our SFIA Book of the Month,
so make sure to join us then.
And after that we will be celebrating the
8th Anniversary of our original episode, Megastructures
in Space, by examining the barriers to becoming
a Kardashev Civilization.
Then we’ll continue September with a look
at Post-Science Civilizations, who have discovered
everything there is to know or abandoned future
research, and then onto the Grabby Aliens
perspective of the Fermi Paradox, and what
Grabby Aliens are and if we will become an
example of them.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like help support future episodes, please
visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways
to donate, or become a show patron over at
Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
