This episode is brought to you by World Anvil!
 
As we head out to the Moon and beyond, to 
settle our solar system, we will need to  
decide why we’re doing it and what strategies we 
will pursue as we claim these new worlds.
 
A few weeks back we did an episode on Convergent 
Evolution where we discussed evolutionary survival  
strategies, overarching concepts like mass egg 
laying or seed production versus single births  
and parents, and I thought today we would apply 
this to one of our favorite topics on the show,  
colonizing our solar system.
Indeed the parallels are pretty strong,  
one approach in nature to spreading an organism 
is to create seed pods the wind will carry far  
away to many places, and one of our approaches to 
interstellar space colonization are seed ships and  
von Neumann probes, tiny spacecraft that grow 
more of themselves or even build a civilization  
when they arrive, then send more seeds off.
Today’s topic is colonizing our solar system,  
though not interstellar space, and in many 
ways we’re more curious about the motivations  
driving the actors because of so many possible 
strategies, whether you’re rushing to stake  
claims on gold-rich asteroids or aiming to 
mass-upload humanity to giant solar powered  
computers to run their brains in virtual utopias 
really alters your strategy for colonization.
 
We often discuss the particular processes for 
terraforming a world or various megastructures  
we might build in space to serve as 
habitats, industries, or weapon systems,  
but we don’t really talk about the basic drive, 
motivation, and strategy of doing these things.  
As an example, a choice to focus on asteroid 
mining and colonization is quite different than  
a focus on Terraforming Planets, as too would be 
a choice to harvest minor planets for resources to  
build orbital infrastructure around Earth or even 
to build multiple onion-like layers of habitation  
on Earth, what we call a Matrioshka Shellworld.
This is critical to how the future unfolds because  
in many ways right now our motive for getting into 
space is to be able to say we did so, much like  
the drive of many explorers in history. Officially 
it was often for finding new wealth in resources  
and opportunities, but often they did it to be 
able to say they did, and their funding came from  
folks who were motivated by that, holding social 
events to celebrate the accomplishment. A lot of  
explorers died, and while the successful often did 
get rich, it is at best a high-risk high-reward  
strategy and one often pursued by those who 
already were quite wealthy and in many cases could  
have pursued much lower-risk reward strategies. 
However, they are at least partially being  
compelled, as is their society in terms 
of offering up funding and acclaim,  
by the evolutionary strategy of trying 
to widen your species survival niche  
by hurling your seeds or offspring off 
to distant places to take root there,  
and by the other survival strategy of wandering to 
new places to seek fresh and unclaimed territory  
or find a mate who is not a close relative. 
That’s not exactly the motivation of the critters  
or folks doing it, they just have a compulsion or 
wanderjahr, but that’s three separate evolutionary  
survival strategies that encourage exploring 
and settling: Get your offspring to new places,  
get yourself fresh territory, get yourself a 
mate and offspring who are not closely related  
to avoid inbreeding problems. And indeed 
a fourth of getting new useful DNA traits  
for your offspring from distant mutant cousins.
Not all traits encourage that disperse, explore,  
and settle approach either, close social bonds 
of parent and child, siblings, mate attachment,  
or tribal friendships discourage packing up and 
leaving or encouraging others to, and that’s  
another direction we’ll contemplate in terms of 
solar colonization today. Indeed that might make  
dividing a pack or tribe so hard that it explains 
why things like Dunbar’s Number, the maximum  
number of close relationships a human can have 
with other people, at about 150, has not evolved  
to something higher. It would make separating 
the tribe into two new ones too painful.
 
Critical notion though is that at the moment 
it's mostly our innate desire to follow these  
paths that drives space colonization, 
and we rationalize that by looking at  
potential future technologies that would let 
us more easily reach, create, and nurture new  
homes as why its logical not just an urge.
I wanted to emphasize that before we dig into  
some of these specific strategies. After years 
of discussing space colonization I’ve noted folks  
tend to fall into two camps on it. The ones who 
fundamentally view it as a worthy goal on its own,  
and offer the practical scenarios as icing on 
the cake, space travel is good for its own sake  
and with effort will eventually become practical. 
Camp two are those who don’t view it as currently  
practical and thus view the whole thing as a 
waste of time. If it ever becomes practical,  
they figure, we can pursue it then.
I’m in that first camp and most folks  
watching this probably are too, and I think it 
can sometimes blind us to ramifications of certain  
approaches because for space enthusiasts, 
whether we leave motivated to explore,  
to terraform worlds, or to mine gold, the main 
motivation is to get out there for its own sake.  
Alternatively a bunch of colonies made with 
the specific intent of making money back home  
is a very different motivation producing a very 
different culture than a bunch of colonies made  
by breakaway bits of humanity who sell all 
they own to go found their personal utopia  
on some wretched airless rock because it's better 
– in their eyes – than hanging out with the  
rest of us who either oppress them or stubbornly 
refuse to admit they are right about everything.
 
Now it is my general belief that every motivation 
is going to find its way into space in the same  
way as it has in just about every political, 
economic, cultural, and religious scenario.  
There are trillions of planets in this galaxy, and 
the resources to construct millions of times that  
in living space with artificial habitats. That 
amounts to a lot of room to grow and try out  
new ideas. There are millions of asteroids in our 
solar system alone that would each easily contain  
entire civilizations, and those both near many 
neighbors and very isolated all at the same time.
 
However they are all likely to follow certain 
strategies either as a matter of practicality  
or convention. If I’m a political group or new 
religious sect, I can often follow a couple tried  
and true strategies for growth. Energetic 
evangelizing and converting is one option,  
with various sub-strategies available from 
physical coercion to peaceful discussion.  
You’ve also got expansion by reproduction – 
be fruitful and multiply – and non-expansion,  
a hidden sect or an elite group expanding 
influence and resources but not numbers,  
each wanting their own share of the power, each of 
those approaches is looking at space differently.  
But if you’re feeling stuck in a 
sea of those opposed to your belief,  
a new virgin land is a very attractive approach 
and one pursued a lot in the Age of Sail. 
 
This is not what we would expect the 
first colonies in space to look like.  
A small group isolated from the majority is 
not those most easily able to put together an  
expensive expedition and the first expeditions 
are most expensive since they need the most  
new innovation, the most prototypes, the most 
redundancy and the most support in resources,  
enthusiasm, and expertise. At first that 
might seem to make this strategy less likely,  
that all the first moon bases, first mars 
bases, first base on any new world or star  
would belong to a major player, the folks able to 
find several billion dollars in capital to risk. 
 
However, putting a base on the Moon of a few 
dozen folks no more claims that whole place  
as yours than driving your car to the middle 
of a desert and planting a flag on it does.  
In colonization eras there were local populations 
explorers could strike up relationships  
with, be it a trade treaty or permission to form a 
settlement nearby or conquest, which can advantage  
the first folks to arrive, but a place like 
the Moon is huge, and it’s really hard to claim  
putting a few domes the size of houses on it even 
represents a legitimate claim to all that area you  
can see around you, and the Moon is smaller than 
Earth with a much sharper and closer horizon,  
so that’s not a lot, 2.4 kilometers on flat 
terrain versus about double that on Earth.
 
In such a case the Moon would actually represent 
about 2 million circular plots of land of 1900  
hectares or 4600 Acres. And that’s a plot of 
land quite capable of supporting many thousands  
of people – at least if domed and farmed 
or solar paneled and grown in underground  
caves – and something fairly similar applies to 
Mars. This sort of approach would represent a  
Diversification strategy too, allowing or even 
encouraging millions of different new seeds of  
civilizations or subcultures to emerge across 
the moons and asteroid of the solar system,  
either as independent and sovereign 
states or subdivisions of existing ones,  
each with its own plot as far as 
the eye can see on their world,  
which often won’t be far given how sharply 
curving smaller moons and asteroids are.
 
Of course, the Moon is not flat, it's covered in 
craters, many with rim walls as high as mountains.  
And indeed, all the mountains we refer to on 
the Moon are bits of larger crater walls. Those  
craters themselves range from too small to stand 
in, to almost 5 million square kilometers in the  
case of the Aitken basin on the South Pole. That’s 
nearly one percent of the entire surface area of  
Earth, and fully an eighth of the Moon, but it’s 
also exceptional and full of many other smaller  
craters itself. Someone might be able to make a 
claim on the whole thing, one of the big players,  
though probably at the cost of agreeing to no 
other territorial initial holdings there. 
 
You can see our episode “Battle for the Moon” for 
more discussion of how this sort of thing could  
play out, but the key point is that much of the 
best and most natural settlement sites on the Moon  
are large craters several kilometers across or 
large underground lavatubes hundreds of meters  
wide and many kilometers long. This lends 
itself to letting the first few colonies  
be big efforts that get the claim on 
the nicest spots and have a headstart,  
but not an overwhelming one and one that offers 
millions of further settlement sites to those  
looking to do it on a budget after the folks 
who did it first worked out the hard parts. 
 
Their reward for the effort is 
that first dibs and head start,  
but not for totality. Nobody is going to be able 
to claim every plausible large crater site on  
the Moon without qualifying as a hyperpower, not 
just a superpower, and in a case like that, unless  
they both seek and succeed in pulling off extreme 
homogeneity within their empire, they’d just have  
tons of diverse factions under their umbrella but 
requesting their own colonization site. Like if  
the UN transitioned to more of a Federal body or 
gained oversight on what got settled and by whom.  
Which is decently likely, current space technology 
doesn’t lend itself to allowing colonization  
during open and high intensity military conflicts. 
The guns are too big and the targets too fragile.
 
So that would be a strategy that is not available 
for space colonization under the current known  
factors. As an ex-soldier who's been working for 
or with the military in some capacity or another  
since I was a teenager, I tend to roll my eyes at 
the notion of a peaceful let alone pacifist future  
as unrealistic. As a person literally writing 
this script an hour before giving a guest lecture  
to a military funded R&D facility, I tend 
to try to keep my brain active on the sorts  
of defense and security issues near-term space 
colonization could cause and I just haven’t heard  
a plausible scenario for successfully deploying 
a militant colonization and settlement strategy  
in space without major paradigm shifting 
technologies of the kinds we discussed in  
our Black Swans episode or Clarketech series. 
The militant option is essentially a denial of  
resources approach. It does not lend itself to 
delicate colonies, it does lend itself to wrecking  
them though. So you can have a big old world war 
three followed by colonization by the victors,  
or you can have a solar war break out after 
colonization, but colonization itself, while  
there are major players involved who might oppose 
someone colonizing something, can only occur  
with the consent of all those players. 
It might be a very strong-armed consent,  
but we’re talking the realm of diplomacy here, 
not active war. So its “Hey this place is ours  
but you can have that place” even if its “We’ll 
claim this fertile river valley and you can have  
that icy mountain and you that nice desert.” And 
space is pretty universally hostile and dead,  
so the major players each claiming one of the 
planets while everybody else got various minor  
planets, moons, and asteroids isn’t necessarily 
that lop-sided and also unlikely in my view.  
Not a case of the US gets Mars, Russia gets Venus, 
China Mercury and the EU the Jovian Moons or such  
but more likely each place getting divided up, and 
further divided by those folks to whichever group  
can convince them to give or lease them some as a 
subordinate entity or totally sovereign state. 
 
I’d also guess the latter would be rare, 
there’s just too many advantages for a  
small colony to remain as a sub-state 
of an existing nation back here on Earth  
for anyone to be contemplating that unless they 
happen to be very xenophobic or isolationist.  
That is one colonization strategy a nation might 
pursue too, even a smaller one, you basically  
agree to act as their government in the ways 
they want for a fee. So some smaller but stable  
nation back here, like Switzerland or Iceland 
or Luxembourg or the UAE or Singapore agrees to  
provide high courts for felonies and appeals, 
arbitration with other nations or companies,  
defense, a stable currency or platform for selling 
bonds or treasury notes, an official place to  
import goods to earth from without tariffs, or so 
on, to any colony asking for a charter from them  
in exchange for following certain rules and paying 
certain fees or considerations, like serving as  
a free dock for their naval vessels etc.  
I mention this one because it’s a plausible  
scenario and strategy for a smaller nation without 
much of a space program to become a big player by  
essentially being a tax haven or similar 
to smaller groups, companies or political,  
religious, or ideological groups wanting to 
found colonies mostly under their own banner. 
 
This strategy could be seen as “Be Valuable to 
your Colonies”, a bit like the traditional parent  
or tribal shaman role, and is a reminder that the 
strategy isn’t mostly going to be about how to  
best colonize, for most folks involved in the game 
the strategy is the same as down here on Earth,  
but with these emerging colonies as increasingly 
significant players. That’s a pretty important  
factor, because it is likely to be several 
centuries before there’s more people living  
off Earth than on Earth and probably just as 
long before any place other than Earth even  
gets into the range of being as populated as Earth 
to be able to get a seat at the table as a peer.
 
As a result, with Earth at the center for 
millennia to come, the biggest motivation  
driving space colonies will be how they benefit 
folks back on Earth. Mind you, that can include  
them feeling good about contributing to humanity’s 
expansion to the stars or groups on Earth sending  
out seeds to grow their splinter of civilization 
on new worlds, but Earth will be the big player.
 
Scifi delights in showing us Mars or 
some other world as a rival to Earth,  
even just a few centuries from now, but that plain 
ain’t happening. The usual justification is that  
all the great pioneers and minds travel to the 
new world, and that some disaster happens back  
on Earth. The popular one these days is ecological 
ruin and the problem is the technologies that let  
you terraform planets or build space habitats with 
ecosystems inside is the same kind that let you  
fix ecological problems on Earth or survive them 
even when they’re so bad they burn off the ocean  
and atmosphere, which would require weapons and 
energies we don’t even vaguely have right now.
 
So Earth is going to be dictating things 
for a while and the reason it might not  
be dictation is that there’s not likely to be a 
particularly unified Earth with unified policies.  
Even if some country did manage to achieve not 
only global supremacy but single-party rule,  
it wouldn’t have much holding that together 
outside of itself, so presumably would  
factionalize again unless the power in question 
were something like a Superintelligent AI  
going totalitarian or genocidal.
Which is another valid strategy, two  
of them actually, eliminating the competition or 
fleeing it. And there are very few occasions when  
this strategy functions well. It relies on all 
other players being aligned to Group A or Group B,  
or being very apathetic to what A or B 
do to each other, or simply not existing.  
Analysis and guesswork on the future tends to 
often run into the problem of folks forgetting to  
take into account the other players acting on the 
board game. Except in rare hypothetical scenarios  
an agency acting against another can’t ignore 
the reactions of other agencies around them.  
Only certain things can get 
around this, like a Malevolent  
and Rapid Technological Singularity – think 
Skynet from the Terminator only vastly smarter  
and more competent – or an ancient alien 
empire who controlled the whole galaxy  
and wiped out or conquered all other life in it, 
and has just now met us, their newest victim. 
 
The thing is, Earth to its early colonies 
absolutely qualifies as such a power,  
however there is no capability to act in a 
unified and vicious fashion against them.  
You can almost be guaranteed some power bloc is 
going to come to their aid, even if just to loudly  
criticize the bully because they either morally 
feel they should or are just opportunists enjoying  
the quick backstab and chance to twist the 
knife. It’s really only in those occasions where  
the internal opposition to an activity is tiny 
that someone can act in that sort of fashion.
 
Note that we’re not assuming Earth-based powers 
are acting with kindness or benevolence to  
colonies, just that they are acting inside 
the confines of diplomatic interactions.  
It’s a common notion that drives for colonizing 
space would be principally about money – and I  
think for many that is true – but in such cases 
that’s probably the motivation for the folks  
funding the effort back home, not the folks doing 
it, nor is money usually the sole motivation.  
Even on a corporate board focused 
on getting the bottom line up,  
someone in that room is motivated by a feeling 
of duty to the shareholders or employees,  
someone is thinking about how some new initiative 
is going to result in a prestigious award  
or their new philanthropic effort will get 
them a statue, or how they don’t like being  
seen as the greedy bad guy and so on. 
Out at the colony, it might be that it was  
proposed to the backers as a gold mine, 
literally, and that they were sourcing  
the colonists and workers from their ideological 
group who were essentially wanting to setup a big  
colony of their own inside the chosen asteroid 
that would be their utopia far from others,  
and the mineral extraction is just their means 
of getting funding for startup and maintenance.  
But same as with the corporate board we mentioned 
before, odds are good they have plenty of members  
with secondary motives too, who believe in 
their cause and colony but want to be rich too.
 
So our two principal driving motives are resources 
and growth but not only can those be pursued by  
multiple strategies but they also depend on 
what other motivations are mixed in there.  
For instance, if my strategy is to maximize human 
population but I have that it requires that the  
idyllic norm is life in house with a family on 
a small farm or forest, with reasonable comfort  
mostly achieved by working the land, then the 
colonization strategy likely to be pursued is  
to disassemble the whole solar system to make 
O’Neill Cylinders or bigger versions of them.
 
Eudaimonia as a prime goal for 
civilization is a fairly likely goal,  
very loosely this is a civilization seeking 
happiness but not quite in any respect,  
it’s not supposed to be rampant simple hedonism 
of maximizing pleasure, and how one defines this  
sort of ethical and idyllic societal happiness 
really controls your colonization strategies too.  
For instance a civilization wishing to 
maximize human pleasure might go for putting  
everyone’s brains into life support tanks and 
constantly stimulating their pleasures centers,  
which we would expect to result in a Dyson Swarm 
of solar panels with brain-tanks strapped on them  
raising the human population to somewhere along 
10^25 people, or about 10 trillion-trillion,  
as opposed to O’Neill Cylinder with the 
rural land focused one I just mentioned  
which tops out at more like 10^20 
people, or 100 billion-billion,  
only about one person for every 100,000 in the 
brain in a jar version, and you could go to the  
extreme the other way, one small community 
or even a lone person per space habitat,  
or the more intensive way, folks living in virtual 
worlds with even more space to themselves, either  
as brains in jars or as uploaded minds, or Matrix 
style, body floating in the amniotic fluid tank.
 
Note that in each of these though 
the strategy still comes down to  
“Disassemble every rock in the solar system 
and make more power collectors and habitats,  
you must construct additional pylons, do 
so as quickly as you can and wish to”,  
and this is one of the reasons we often tend 
to discuss Dyson Swarms as near-inevitable.  
Even in scenarios where everyone keeps living 
on Earth as we slowly import materials directly  
and add layer after layer of new spherical 
shells above to live on, that still implies  
a lot of support structures englobing the Sun to 
get power, get rid of heat, and do any process  
we don’t feel obliged to do on Earth that would 
be cheaper elsewhere, like maybe growing food.
 
This flies in the face of terraforming planets and 
folks might be wondering when I was going to say  
what our strategy and order for terraforming 
should be. That’s part of the problem,  
I half-expect a lot of the political conflict 
at the solar level for the next couple  
millenia to be folks who invested heavily into 
terraforming planets – financially, emotionally,  
or ideologically – fighting a rearguard against 
a rising populace that sees them as wasteful  
of material. It might be a strong rearguard too, 
you might have civilizations on a place like Mars  
whose whole culture even to a religious level 
is focused on the Greening of the Red Planet. 
 
Terraforming or Paraterraforming of the 
major planets and bigger moons is the best  
known strategy for colonizing the solar system and 
partially because it's one of the easiest to start  
under known science. It’s a slow growth approach 
from a small seed, and one with a pioneer appeal,  
thus is likely to be one initiated in a few places 
at least. So too are orbital colonies around Earth  
itself, taking advantage of the proximity by being 
in close orbit to Earth. The other two big ones  
will be colonies embedded into the asteroid 
belt and those focused on creating their own  
mini-solar systems around the Moons of Jupiter and 
Saturn. These strategies are fairly complementary  
and could run in tandem, and also involve direct 
control of a lot of those material assets,  
so I could imagine them being rather 
resistant to any later efforts at Dysoning  
or Starlifting using them.
Of course they have their own  
reason to be in conflict with each other 
and with Earth, but I could imagine that  
the bigger struggle in the millenia to come 
would be between them and that effort to go  
for a K2 Civilization in a Dyson Swarm.
That effort might go on long enough to  
be strongly influenced by Kuiper Belt and Oort 
Cloud outposts, and even interstellar colonies.  
Those might be seen as a source of raw 
materials to circumvent deconstruction  
of the planets in our solar system or as rivals 
binding us together against an external threat.  
But that’s a discussion for another time, 
those Interstellar Colonization Strategies.
 
We were talking about motivations for colonization 
of new worlds today and one thing I pointed out  
is that us space enthusiasts sometimes have a 
disconnect in trying to forecast why most folks,  
groups, businesses, or governments would want 
to invest in forging new worlds. For many of  
us space enthusiasts the reason to colonize space 
is… to colonize space. All the other motivations  
are a bit secondary because that drive to explore 
and create and worldbuild is such a strong one.
 
Now if you are already into role-playing 
games or writing stories you know what  
a fun thing worldbuilding is, to 
dial your daydreaming up to 11,  
and if you have not, especially if the content 
on this show tends to grab your interest,  
then it's a hobby I suspect you 
would find worth trying out. 
 
One problem with really elaborate worldbuilding 
though, especially if you want to share it with  
others, is that you need to move it from your head 
to paper or computer, and a lot of the development  
time and mental energy gets burned up just trying 
to organize your notes and build the framework,  
and often in trying to learn multiple pieces of 
software as you try to make maps or craft tables  
or indices. Over the years I’ve tried out a lot 
of those platforms and always been disappointed  
in either their learning curve or limitations 
and so I was very surprised when I first used  
World Anvil, because they nailed virtually 
everything I was looking for in worldbuilding  
toolset and have a bunch of other awesome 
creative or time-saving features I never  
even realized I wanted till I saw them.
World Anvil, the award-winning worldbuilding  
toolset, has tons of tools, is intuitive to learn, 
and has a giant stockpile of free tutorial videos  
that not only show how to use those tools but 
suggest ways to improve your worldbuilding in  
general, to make it easy, appealing, and 
informative to your players or audience.  
Whether you’re managing a campaign or writing a 
novel, whether you’re making city or dungeon maps,  
or connecting them to each other and a wider 
world map, or crafting family genealogies,  
World Anvil lets you forge your setting better and 
easier than anything I’ve ever worked with before,  
and it has a free version so you can 
share it with others, and selectively,  
so they’re not seeing secret content. And you can 
also incorporate ways to monetize your content,  
such as Patreon or Kofi or your own storefront.
World Anvil offers wikipedia-like articles  
for your world setting, interactive maps, 
timelines, an RPG Campaign Manager and a full  
Novel-Writing Software, all the tools you’ll need 
to run your RPG Campaign or write your novel,  
and never lose your notes again! If you’d 
like to give World Anvil a try and let it  
help you forge new worlds, just click 
the link in this episode’s description!
 
So on the topic of creating awesome 
science fiction and fantasy settings,  
there’s no official SFIA book of the month this 
month but let me give a shout out to Alastair  
Reynolds’ new Revelation Space novel “Inhibitor 
Space” which apparently came out last month but  
I literally just found out about so haven’t got to 
read yet, I don’t doubt it will be awesome though,  
he is my favorite scifi author and has a knack 
for writing mind-blowing novels and settings while  
keeping inside known physics. Let me also give a 
shout out to Erasmo Acosta’s novel “K3+” which I  
recently started and am pleasantly surprised to 
see incorporate tons of megastructures and other  
things we discuss on this show for humanity’s 
future but which a lot of scifi authors skip over.  
Many of you probably recognize Erasmo from our 
show’s facebook forum where he’s been an active  
participant to kicking futurism ideas around 
in for years. If you haven’t checked out our  
social media forums, they are a great place to 
discuss all sorts of ideas, even beyond what we  
look at in our episodes, and I’m glad to see 
those episodes inspiring some writing too.
 
Speaking of those episodes, we have 
our mid-month Scifi Sunday episode  
coming up this weekend to take a look at one 
potential method of faster than light travel,  
by folding space to travel instantly to new 
stars. Then return to our Alien Civilization  
series to contemplate aliens with tempers and 
aggressive tendencies in Belligerent Aliens. And  
in two weeks we’ll talk about another colonization 
strategy for space - saving Earth - before closing  
out the month with our Livestream Q&A, though 
unlike last month’s Halloween Livestream Q&A,  
Sarah and I will not be wearing costumes.
Now if you want to make sure you get notified  
when those episodes come out, make 
sure subscribe to the channel,  
and if you enjoyed the episode, don’t forget to 
hit the like button and share it with others.  
If you’d like to help support future episodes, 
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website,  
IsaacArthur.net, and patreon and our website 
are linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media 
forums where you can get updates and chat  
with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
