Black holes are objects of mystery and 
dread from which nothing can escape… but  
could they also be the foundations of future 
civilizations of unimaginable might and size. 
Black holes are interesting objects that have 
fascinated us both in science and science fiction,  
but their portrayal in science fiction and 
even often in science has tended to be flawed  
and included a lot of misconceptions. 
We’ll be clearing those up today as we  
discuss technological applications we might 
have with black holes and seeing how they  
might be the centers of future civilizations – 
metaphorically and even physically – not their  
destroyers. Though we will also be examining 
weapons based around black holes, including the  
Quasar Cannon, Obhof Gun and black hole bomb.
We need to start with the key misconception  
though, and that’s the idea that black holes are 
these invisible monsters that sneak up on you and  
from which you can’t escape. In reality it's very 
difficult to get sucked into one especially before  
you notice it's there. Your typical black hole 
is the leftover remnant of a star so big that it  
stretched millions of miles across and would 
be lethal to be anywhere within hundreds of  
million miles of it. The kind of stars that put 
out tens or even hundreds of thousands of times  
more light than our own sun does. And yet a black 
hole of, say, three solar masses, is 11 miles or  
18 kilometers wide, very tiny compared to planets 
or even moons, let alone the star that made them,  
with a volume quadrillions of times higher.
That monster may be tiny but it still has mass  
and its gravity acts normally, so that the force 
of gravity would be huge and stronger than Earth’s  
surface once you got about 4 million miles or 
6 million kilometers away. Indeed this is one  
of our coolest features of a black hole, we could 
build a shellworld around it of that radius and  
terraform that and have an Earth-like planet with 
that black hole at its core that had one million  
times the surface area as Earth. A Mega-Earth, 
as we discussed in our episode of that name. 
And black holes of other sizes can exist with 
these structures around them, and these might  
range from black holes even bigger than the one in 
our galactic center – what we call a Birch Planet,  
down to one’s small enough to make a modest 
asteroid have regular surface gravity,  
a micro-planet. We’ll discuss those 
more later but two quick notes. First,  
as long as you want the same gravity, the surface 
area of any sphere is going to be proportional to  
its mass. Ten times the mass, ten times 
the living area, a thousandth the mass,  
a thousandth the living area. Your density 
varies linearly if you do this though,  
and is why point-like or near point-like objects 
such as black holes are thought to be so handy in  
this regard, forming the literal center of 
your civilization. In the absence of them,  
your shell worlds can only have Earth Like gravity 
at roughly Earth Radius out to the mass of a  
brown dwarf, which admittedly is still a very big 
range offering some very big artificial planets. 
Second, while this would be the literal center 
of a very big civilization if built around a  
natural black hole, we also mean this more 
metaphorically, because they are essentially  
the epitome of power generation. You get a high 
fraction of mass energy conversion from them, and  
you can use any fuel at all. Indeed you get better 
results than by fusion, but it’s also something  
you can do with leftover fusion byproducts like 
helium that don’t have a lot of chemical uses. 
In theory you could even use dark matter to 
bulk up a black hole, and get power from it,  
but this is a good place to discuss the difference 
in how you get power from a black hole, as they  
control how you can use one, how big of one you 
want to use, and what you can use it for. This  
episode isn’t meant to be focused on generating 
power off of black holes but it’s fairly critical  
to other applications and technologies 
so we’ll go over them in modest detail. 
Now there’s 5 techniques but essentially 
they all work around two basic approaches:  
gather energy from things ramming into each other 
or heating up while falling in, and gather energy  
from black holes directly. That last can cause 
some head-scratching since a black hole is best  
known for nothing being able to leave it, though 
this is a misunderstanding. For instance, photons,  
being particles of light, can’t escape from any 
region of the black hole where its escape velocity  
is equal to the speed of light or higher – the 
event horizon is that boundary. On the other hand,  
gravitons, the particle of gravity, also move 
along at light speed and don’t have this issue,  
since if they did there wouldn’t be any 
gravity escaping it. Now that’s a bit  
of over-simplification of how gravity and 
general relativity work but that same sort  
of over-simplification is how black holes get 
ascribed their better-known misconceptions. 
Right until the moment you hit that event horizon, 
you are not trapped, and indeed you would simply  
enter a normal orbit around one from which 
you could easily break away. The thing is,  
lots of other items will do this over time. 
And the gravity the nearer you get to it is  
increasingly harsh and tidal, so that an object 
of any size might feel a stronger pull on the  
part closer to the black hole and get shredded 
by that. Your feet experience slightly more  
gravity when you’re standing than your 
head does, but it’s trivial. However,  
if gravity was ten times higher at your feet than 
your head you would definitely get injured badly  
by that tidal force difference, and black holes 
are even worse about this, indeed they can be so  
sharp in force change near their boundaries 
they can rip molecules or even atoms apart,  
and this is sharper with smaller black holes.
But even without that, this accumulating cloud  
of objects will tend to collide occasionally and 
generate a collision cascade like we consider with  
orbital debris around Earth in Kessler Syndrome, 
only far worse. This ends up being the accretion  
disk around the black hole and it emits radiation, 
which being above the event horizon can leave and  
can be absorbed by us for power. By dumping matter 
down toward a black hole, especially by having it  
slightly offset so it wants to orbit, not fall 
straight in, you’re feeding this process and  
emitting radiation every time there’s a collision, 
often at energies that would cause fusion too. 
And this gives us one type of black hole power 
generation, Accretion Disk Utilization, and a  
very easy one to tap, indeed easier than most 
modern power generation, and as we’ll see today,  
while reaching a black hole or creating one 
artificially might be technological difficult,  
generating power off them mostly is not. In 
this case, the accretion disk of a black hole,  
consisting of material spiraling into it, heats 
up due to friction and gravitational forces,  
emitting radiation. Keep in mind that hot gas 
around 6000 kelvin is what gives us sunlight,  
so it’s not hard to tap, though most accretion 
disk radiation is going to be vastly hotter,  
tending to X-rays or Gamma-Rays.
This radiation could potentially  
be used as an energy source, though as it would 
be in dangerous spectrums, you would either want  
to surround it with more gas to absorb and emit 
cooler wavelengths, much as the gas around our  
sun’s fusing core does, or wrap it in something 
like a big lead or Tungsten shell. Something  
that can absorb gamma and get hot, and then you 
can run a heat engine or a thermocouple off of  
it. A ship in a higher orbit around a black hole 
would probably want to extend a large thin sail  
perpendicular to the pull of the black hole to 
gain power this way. And there’s no need for total  
enclosure of the black hole, any more than hanging 
a solar panel over the Sun, you just might keep  
scaling up till you got to that point.
There’s nothing low-powered about this method but  
it’s not your highest efficiency path either. It’s 
simple and controllable. And often you would use  
this method in tandem with others – and for that 
matter the power harnessing aspect is often going  
to be similar, which is to say, absorb high-energy 
radiation and convert it into electricity. 
We use this same approach with Magnetic Field 
Exploitation. Black Holes spin incredibly fast,  
and generate insanely powerful magnetic fields 
assuming they have charge. So Black holes  
with strong magnetic fields, particularly 
those around some supermassive black holes,  
could theoretically be used to generate power. 
Similarly, ionized Gas and dust spiraling into  
the black hole from that magnetic field at high 
speeds can heat up and emit intense radiation,  
which could potentially be harnessed. Again we’re 
fundamentally talking about either a dynamo or  
perhaps a stream of ionized particles flowing 
down into that monster and power production  
isn’t too difficult to explain as a concept.
The Penrose Process is conceptually less simple  
though a bit parallel, and since we’re 
not going to touch on general relativity  
or frame-dragging today beyond the basics, it 
can be summarized as stealing spin energy from  
a black hole. Proposed by Roger Penrose in 
the 1960s, this method involves extracting  
energy from the rotational energy of a rotating 
black hole. Black holes usually have a large  
percentage of their total energy as rotational 
energy, often around 20%, and this rotation,  
to put it in simple terms, gives you a region 
around the black hole just outside the event  
horizon that’s wider at the spinning equator than 
the polar region. We call this the ergosphere. 
The idea is to drop an object into the black 
hole's ergosphere, the region outside the event  
horizon where objects cannot remain in place. The 
object would split into two, with one part falling  
into the black hole and the other escaping 
at a higher energy level than the original,  
thus extracting energy from the black hole. Ergo 
means ‘work’, and the erg is the lesser-known unit  
of energy beside the joule, and this name was 
chosen because you can dip things into it to  
extract work from it, in a process that slows 
the black hole's rotation just a little bit. 
Generally, that’s a good thing, as for other 
applications a non-spinning or slow-spinning  
black hole is easier to work with, but if you 
wanted to you could always do controlled drops  
of matter to add more angular momentum. Akin to 
this would be wrapping a black hole in mirrors  
at a distance and sending beams down through the 
ergosphere, where they can get amplified during  
passage by stealing some of that rotational 
energy. This is basically how a black hole  
bomb works which will touch on more later.
Our next one is Blandford-Znajek Process,  
or BZ Process, which is another method of 
getting at that buried rotational energy in  
a black hole using similar physics to our 
last two and tapping that ergosphere. The  
black hole’s magnetic field lines passing 
through the ergosphere become twisted due  
to the black hole's rotation. This twisting is due 
to frame-dragging, where the rotation of the black  
hole drags space-time around with it, but again 
we’re not going to dip into that in depth today.  
Extraction of Rotational Energy is achieved 
as the magnetic field lines twist, they can  
tap into the rotational energy of the black hole.
This energy is then transferred along the magnetic  
field lines away from the black hole. Which 
essentially means it spits out high-energy  
particles and radiation, and you capture those. 
The same will be true of our fifth process,  
Hawking radiation, which we’ll get to in a moment, 
but again the theme is that you send matter down  
into the black hole and extract a percentage of 
its energy in the process, usually a fraction of  
what you dropped in there in terms of mass energy 
but getting 20% of your mass energy back is pretty  
good, given that stars usually convert much 
less than 1%, and take very long times to do it. 
Now the BZ Process is how we think quasars get 
their energy and these are objects so bright  
they outshine entire galaxies and by a heavy 
margin. It’s a leading suspect for the process  
behind gamma-ray bursts and importantly it is not 
omni-directional, it blows out the poles in a bit  
of beam. We don’t know for sure if this is the 
mechanism for any of them, but it is considered  
to be the most plausible explanation for the 
immense energy output observed in quasars and  
other active galactic nuclei. These are some 
of the most luminous and energetic objects in  
the universe, and it's believed that they are 
powered by accreting supermassive black holes. 
We know what’s happening but aren’t sure of 
the mechanism, alternatively for our fifth  
and final one, Hawking Radiation, we understand 
the process very well but have essentially no  
way to confirm it. This method is named after 
Stephen Hawking and is, incidentally, what he’s  
originally famous in physics circles for before 
he got famous with everyone else, along with  
him and Penrose’s work on black holes in general.
Our inability to get experimental proof of Hawking  
radiation is why he never got the Nobel Prize, 
but the math and reasoning fits so perfectly  
that it tends to be taken for granted that it's 
correct, same as we don’t have experimental proof  
of what's in the Sun’s core or Earth’s for that 
matter. It’s also appropriate for our last type to  
discuss as it is not expected to naturally occur 
in any significant quantities for quintillions  
of years after the last star burns out.
As a quick caveat, I say ‘last’ but that’s  
not including some stranger or more obscure 
singularity methods allowed under various  
theories and cosmologies. If you start throwing 
in string theory, naked singularities, wormholes,  
or extra dimensions, other options can arise.
We’ve done entire episodes on explaining Hawking  
Radiation and from different angles of attack, 
and we’ll be examining the method more in a month,  
so we’ll summarize here. All of space and 
time is constantly frothing with new virtual  
particles popping in and out of existence – see 
our episode on Vacuum Energy & Zero Point Energy  
for discussion of those mechanisms. Normally 
this is as two opposite particles that almost  
inevitably run into each other and annihilate. 
Indeed, it’s been suggested that it's really the  
same particle moving forward than backward for 
a tiny instant of time, since a particle moving  
backward in time looks and acts identical to its 
antimatter twin in this interaction. The black  
hole itself is not generating this energy, rather 
it’s the extreme tidal force. Two particles pop  
up near an event horizon, as they do everywhere 
else all of the time, but here one of them is just  
a bit closer to it and experiences a bit more 
gravity, and gets pulled in while its partner  
does not. It flies off, un-annihilated, and we 
absorb it for power just like any other radiation. 
Now the problem is that even a black hole doesn’t 
have that much tidal difference nears its surface,  
it might be so immense that as you fall into it 
feet first your feet are experiencing millions of  
g’s more force than your head and you get shredded 
down to you atoms, spaghettified as it’s called,  
but the math tells us this should still 
be very rare. So rare that even a single  
electron-positron pair having this break happen on 
a 3 Solar Mass black hole’s event horizon should  
occur only a few times in a billion years.
Alternatively, the tidal forces on a black  
hole a thousandth that mass are so high that 
even though that event horizon is a thousandth  
the diameter and millionth the surface area, 
it will kick particles out a trillion times  
faster per unit of area and at a total rate 
million times more than its big brother. 
It is not that the smaller one is 
somehow making more virtual particles,  
we expect this rate to be the same everywhere 
in the universe, including inside you or I,  
it’s that it’s much better at tearing them apart 
to make one become real and permanent and the  
other to fall into the black hole and reduce 
its mass… the two have net zero energy so the  
escaping one has to have positive energy while the 
other must then be negative. These are ‘virtual’  
particles so it is fair to think of them unreal if 
you like, though ‘real’ is a pretty ambiguous and  
head-ache causing concept in theoretical physics.
In any event, this means the smaller a black hole  
is, the faster it loses mass. Natural black 
holes are utterly useless for generating  
power off of by Hawking Radiation and will be for 
next trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion  
years, when the smallest natural black holes 
created by supernovae or dead star mergers will  
finally have trimmed down enough to be emitting 
enough power to run a light bulb. The bigger  
ones will take even longer. Now somewhere around 
the trillion-trillion-trillion year mark, they  
would be generating enough power we could actually 
measure it with modern lab equipment and for that  
reason you might be able to run post-biological 
civilizations on them at that point as we examined  
way back in our civilizations at the end of time 
series in its first episode, black hole farming. 
But Hawking Radiation Black Holes don’t get 
interesting to us till they at least hit the  
one watt range. Which they do at 1.89 x 
10^16 kilograms, or just under 2000 gigatons,  
the mass of a modest asteroid and about double the 
mass of the larger Martian Moon, Phobos. And it  
would keep emitting that one watt, slowly rising 
with time, for around 10 Trillion-Trillion years,  
a lot longer than the time in which stars will 
exist. A 10 watt black hole, which is parallel  
to the power requirements of a human brain, would 
live 313 billion-trillion years and mass just 6  
gigatons. Every time you raise the power output by 
a factor of a hundred, lower the mass by a factor  
of 10 and lifetime by a factor of a thousand.
If you can make a black hole that’s less massive  
than these, you’ve got yourself a serious power 
plant, and the very nice spots are options like  
a gigawatt, which masses just 5.97 x 10^11 
kilograms, 597 megatons or less than a single  
kilometer wide asteroid, or its mass equivalent 
in hydrogen, and would keep pumping this power  
out for 313 billion years, as long as all but the 
most long-lived of stars. This only keeps rising,  
and those in the 100 kiloton to one megaton range 
start looking like awesome spaceship drives,  
or power plants for entire civilizations. As a 
reminder though, while a 1 megaton black hole  
would live 1500 years, and easily power our whole 
modern civilization, a 100 kiloton black hole  
would live just a year and half, and growing 
steadily brighter, so is probably something  
you would only use on a spaceship as a booster 
to get up to speed for an interstellar journey. 
My friend Bob Fowler worked out a nice chart 
of all the interesting sizes that I’ve got up  
on the screen that I recently started using a 
personal cheat sheet, and Viktor Toth’s Hawking  
Radiation Calculator is available online for 
anyone wanting to look up values on their own. 
They are kind of safe as they can’t be made to 
explode unexpectedly – unlike antimatter – but  
they all presumably do explode in the 
end as they get so low in mass. They’d  
make interesting weapons since they would 
carry huge amounts of energy in the space  
of something smaller than an atomic nucleus, but 
we looked at that more in weaponizing black holes. 
I also have to admit that I am more than a bit 
skeptical of any black hole functioning like  
this under the subatomic size scale. We have no 
proper theory of quantum gravity, which really  
matters at this scale, and we have some heavy 
disagreement in theory versus experimental data  
about how much energy is sitting around in a 
given chunk of space in the quantum foam or  
if it could reach or exceed a Planck Temperature 
– 10^32 Kelvin, and all of these objects radiate  
like a black body of a given temperature, 
which indeed is essentially the alternative  
conceptual approach over virtual particles.
We do have a possibility that black holes  
were formed in the Big Bang and which would 
not need to be of stellar mass, they’d have  
a minimum lifetime of 13.8 billion years then 
since they would have otherwise expired by now,  
thus would have to be at least 200 megatons, 
though since even these would still be bright  
enough to radiate 8 gigawatts of power it would 
seem likely they were either pretty rare or  
more massive than that, otherwise we should be 
able to detect them. They also would be able to  
absorb more mass and energy from the area around 
them which changes lifetime profiles a bit too. 
But there could be some natural sources for black 
holes in a useful mass for Hawking Radiation,  
and ‘useful’ varies. If your goal is power a 
personal space habitat with around a square  
mile or kilometer of internal living area, then 
anything in the gigawatt range works perfectly,  
and you could do with a lot less, or simply 
several of them supplying power instead of one. 
To wrap up on Hawking Radiation black holes 
though, they’re essentially not useful unless  
you can make them and even options like 
kugelblitz creation – which is focusing  
huge amounts of photons into one place and 
moment – get rather iffy. Bigger is easier,  
and avoids feeding problems too. No black hole 
useful for Hawking Radiation is bigger than an  
atomic nuclei which makes stuffing matter into 
them rather tricky. Again black holes aren’t magic  
vacuum cleaners and one of these would fly right 
through our planet without absorbing anything,  
being slowed by anything, or damaging anything 
except by radiation. That’s quite a smorgasbord  
to bypass, so trying to carefully feed a 
matter stream in as fuel is even harder. 
Can we make a black hole? Yes, absolutely, unless 
we’re just flat out wrong about their physics.  
Can we make one smaller than stellar mass?
Probably, and probably a lot smaller. But my  
own hunch is that a hawking radiation scale one, 
especially the sub-megaton power leviathans, is a  
much harder lift and maybe impossible. There’s 
a lot of ways you might do this. Shooting two  
massive iron balls or skinny rods at each other 
out of huge relativistic accelerators to slam into  
each other is probably the simplest and basically 
equivalent to how we did the old basic gun-style  
nuclear devices, though scaled up. And by that 
same reasoning, the trick of using explosives to  
implode a device that we use for other nukes 
would be a good approach. You surround a big  
sphere of iron with nukes all set to detonate in 
the same instant and this implosion is basically  
replicating the effect inside a supernova.
The kugelblitz approach of pouring energy  
beams into one spot all at the same time works 
too, its just that you probably need to be at  
a bigger scale. Black holes, in terms of that 
critical event horizon, grow much less dense as  
they get more massive or bigger. Ten times 
the mass, one hundred times less density,  
and that density – or the density of stuff right 
next to it as you try to cram it into form – is  
the bottleneck for making one. You need to beat a 
supernova. I expect this can be done and at many  
orders of magnitude less for the total mass, 
but how much less is probably impossible to  
say right now. Or a very good topic for a paper or 
thesis, so long as it is by someone other than me,  
Einstein Field equations make my head hurt.
In any event, I think it does open the door  
to larger but sub-stellar artificial black holes 
being a thing in the future. Which opens a lot of  
doors for us too. If you can make one that you 
can then feed up bigger on hydrogen and helium,  
then you can stop feeding it when it gets to 
your preferred mass. Or slow the feeding to  
keep it there if there was any significant 
Hawking Radiation leakage. Or you might keep  
feeding it to generate power, and as quick note, 
if you just want to add mass, you aim your beam  
right on target, you try to miss by a hair for 
power generation. In terms of why you might want  
to do this, if you manufacture black holes, by 
dumping mass in, then generating power slows how  
fast you can make them since you need to otherwise 
dissipate that energy as fast as you make it which  
again is a small but decent fraction of that 
thing’s total mass energy. And again we’ll be  
looking more at Kugelblitz Black Holes next month.
Beyond the power implications it's your  
gold-standard for decent gravity when terraforming 
as an alternative to spin-gravity. You can pop  
a micro-black hole into the center 
of some asteroid and call it home,  
indeed an artificial gravity generator on an 
asteroid was the situation in the short story,  
Collision Orbit by Jack Williamson, that coined 
the term terraforming. As we’ve already discussed  
black holes are not monstrous planet eaters – 
with the exception of the Obhof Gun which we’ll  
get to later - and you could keep one inside 
a sturdy metal shell, contained by magnets to  
keep it from drifting – you can move a black 
hole with magnets too, obviously touching one  
with anything made of matter is not a great plan. 
That shell has to be able to handle the pressure  
of whatever mass is sitting on top of fit and 
now experiencing higher gravity but normal earth  
gravity dragging a hundred meters of asteroid 
regolith down is not hard to engineer around. 
For bigger cases, like trying to give Mars or 
the Moon Earth-like gravity – you would need  
to use active support, orbital rings or atlas 
pillars – see the Megastructure Compendium for  
details on how those work but they do take power 
and conveniently you have a handy power supply  
right there. Incidentally, no, that would not 
make the Moon or Mars the same Mass as Earth,  
it scales with surface area, so Mars would need 
about 38% of Earth’s mass for Earth-like gravity,  
and the Moon 7.4%, and in both cases 
minus they’re existing mass. The cool  
thing is that it can be any available matter, 
so hydrogen or helium from Jupiter would work. 
We discussed this in more detail in the 
episode Moon: Mega City, but one parallel  
tech we discussed there was using lots of smaller 
black holes in something like 2D hexagonal layout,  
again anchored magnetically, to create a flat 
surface with gravity. I can’t ever imagine using  
this on a spaceship, but for space stations, or 
even for an inhabited spaceport on a smaller body,  
where you just wanted higher gravity in that 
area, it is an option. In theory you can  
expand this flat plane trick in scale to create 
something like a stasis field or slow time region,  
as black holes do slow time but only the truly 
enormous ones do so to any useful degree in a  
way that wouldn’t utterly shred anything bigger 
than a particle left inside it. Two even and  
flat planes could allow a uniform region inside.
I don’t view black holes as particularly useful  
for their time-distortion effects though, any more 
than their potential usage as a heat dump to get  
around some cooling issues mega-civilization 
have. Breaking thermodynamics with a black  
hole is dubious, we don’t understand the 
physics of that well enough to say no for  
sure but that’s basically the situation, 
we don’t think so but can’t utterly rule  
it out. Same for hiding your civilization by 
dumping your waste heat into a black hole,  
even if you could get 99% of your waste heat down 
into the thing, that’s not making you invisible,  
just dimmer, visible to the same instruments 
at a tenth the previous distance. As usual for  
Fermi Paradox scenarios, since you presumably 
only hide from bigger and older civilizations  
who could plausibly threaten you, you are trying 
to hide from someone who already knows you exist  
and knows the trick you’re trying to use.
Plus, fundamentally, these objects are  
not stealthy even when truly dark because they 
generate tons of gravity, and more importantly,  
they represent some of the most valuable 
real estate in all the cosmos so it’s not  
exactly a good hiding place as everyone 
should want to visit it all of the time,  
and use it to power their civilizations. It’s 
like hiding your empire in a fertile river delta. 
You can absolutely use a natural black hole 
as a power supply by those other 4 methods  
we discussed earlier. You can use them as 
gravitational slingshots, especially in pairs,  
to speed ships up to a decent fraction of 
light speed or slow them down too. This  
means they can be hubs for interstellar 
travel at a galactic scale. But there’s  
only around 100 million of them in this galaxy, 
possibly much less from mergers and ejections,  
which means each would be servicing a region 
of space on an order of 10,000 star systems,  
even assuming they were evenly distributed 
galaxy wide which they are not likely to be. 
Black holes are probably ejected at high 
speed from the galaxy a lot and incidentally  
even stellar sized ones make good intergalactic 
spaceships, and we explored some of those starship  
drives, the kind used for moving actual stars, 
in our episode Fleet of Stars. In this way you  
can dump matter into them as fuel and propellant 
and push them toward a new galaxy to colonize  
and use them to sustain you till you arrive, 
and tow other stars with you too if you want. 
But they also would make for some awesome galactic 
sector hubs. And as we’ve discussed before,  
if you’re using them to help add or subtract a ton 
of speed beyond what your other spaceship drives  
allow, they’re likely to be where the first colony 
ship for a given piece of the galaxy arrives. So  
they are in a position to become a de facto first 
settlement and sector capital. And thousands of  
star systems is quite the interstellar 
empire and a plausible one to maintain.  
That’s likely to be no more than a century or 
two of light lag for communication and that at  
least puts a unified civilization on the table 
as believable. Especially since that black hole  
represents a massive asset, no pun intended, 
and that system would be in a good position  
to keep its neighbors in its proverbial orbit.
Given that it could build a spherical shell with  
more living area than a Dyson Swarm, and possibly 
with multiple levels, it definitely has the  
population density aspect suitable for a galactic 
metropolis or capital. For a true galactic  
capital, or a place to collapse a galaxy into so 
as to avoid light lag, we have Birch planets, the  
bigger version of these that might being millions 
to even hundreds of billions of solar masses,  
and which one of these days I need to give its 
own episode, but let’s stick to assuming natural  
black holes in the ‘small’ stellar mass 
range or at most intermediate hundreds to  
thousands of stellar masses range for today.
Black holes at this scale can be used as  
power supplies, the centers of shell worlds or 
huge habitation rings, and industrial titans,  
including possibly the ability to take matter 
streams and send them in like a supercollider  
to make heavier elements out of hydrogen 
or helium. I think a lot of these might be  
possible on paper and harder or even impossible 
in real engineering but they will represent huge  
strategic and logistical advantages, and if 
they were the first place settled in a region,  
likely a historical and traditional ones too.
But they also represent huge weapon platforms.  
You’ve probably heard of the black hole bomb, and 
you can get more details on that in the video by  
Kurzegesagt that introduced it but the key aspect 
is superradiant scattering. You put mirrors up  
around the black hole and start bouncing light 
beams through that ergosphere, and they pick  
up energy every time they go through. Since we do 
not have any materials able to reflect gamma rays,  
that’s as far as this amplification can go, 
but I can see this being used as both a power  
supply and a beam enhancement method.
Obviously blowing up your black hole,  
or rather the area around it, is not something 
you want to do and would not be something  
done by simple sabotage, so this specific 
approach, if you had gamma reflective mirrors,  
would probably be limited to a deadman switch. If 
you invade us and win too well we’ll set this off…  
which I can see being used as a strategy in truly 
ancient post-stellar civilizations to discourage  
attempts to steal their resources in an era 
where there is none left to find anywhere else. 
We shouldn’t rule out gamma reflective mirrors 
being possible, and their existence would make  
any number of technologies, including artificial 
black hole creation and usage, way easier. 
The same applies for anything that lets us reflect 
or contain dark matter, and that’s your ideal  
feedstock for black holes if you manipulate it 
since it has no other interactions but gravity  
and no obvious purpose but producing it. However, 
it won’t fall into black holes as easily as it  
doesn’t interact with other matter and won’t 
slam into other things in an accretion disk. 
But getting back to dominating an interstellar 
empire, your big weapon you can do and which  
makes a natural black hole a military powerhouse 
is the quasar cannon. This thing makes the death  
star or a Nicoll-Dyson Beam look weak and 
I don’t think you’d ever use a full powered  
version on a black hole that was your civilization 
center. You are setting off an artificial quasar,  
at some scale or another, and these emerge along 
poles so you can aim it like a cannon and also  
probably focus that beam further with magnets. You 
might use this as a very powerful pushing beam to  
accelerate immense ships to ultra-relativistic 
speeds. Used in a strictly weaponized form,  
this is an apocalyptic device that you 
could use for taking out whole galaxies. 
The Obhof Gun is a particular variation of 
this and actually the inspiration for the  
Quasar Cannon and the short video I did on 
it last year. A friend of mine, Larry Obhof,  
had inquired about planets getting eaten by black 
holes and it got my brain chugging along on the  
concept and initially I was thinking of this 
one graphic I often use where it show a planet  
falling into some huge black hole – in practice 
black holes are much smaller than planets, except  
the really big ones at galactic cores, and the 
Obhof Gun in my head is the scenario where you’re  
feeding planets into one of these monsters like 
shotgun shells. Each blast coming out is somewhere  
on an order of 10^41 joules to thousands of times 
that for big gas giants, and that’s a directed  
supernova coming out of your metaphorical shotgun. 
Even the low yield version is pumping out a  
billion times the energy needed to vaporize Earth.
I’m not sure what you would aim that weapon at,  
Cthulhu’s big brother maybe, and it’s the power 
range of gamma ray bursts and quasar bursts so it  
is something that naturally occurs… and of course 
there might be civilizations out there needing to  
build these things too. The extreme version 
of this would be chucking in not planets but  
white dwarfs or neutron stars, which are far more 
massive and compact and might make better bullets. 
As terrifying a weapon as that sounds, it is 
fundamentally a big energy blast, so you might be  
using it power something or move something – like 
a galaxy – and I don’t know what sort of thing  
might be needed for drilling into other dimensions 
or alternate universes if they exist, or firing  
up new big bangs to make pocket universes, but 
this might be the kind of scale of device needed,  
something able to machinegun out hypernova blasts.
And that’s a good one to end on for today, because  
for all the talk about power and destruction, we 
have seen a lot of constructive and creative uses  
of black holes in our discussion. And yet, one 
of their most popular applications in theoretical  
discussion is the possibility of creating new 
Universes, with some theories suggesting a new  
big bang is set off in some unreachable place 
every time a black hole forms. It might be  
that black holes aren't made in order to create 
great civilizations here, but to create whole  
new universes somewhere else. But as I said 
at the beginning, for all that they're seen  
as the embodiment of ruin and destruction, 
and can indeed be unleashed to that end,  
the true value of black holes is to empower 
civilizations and function as engines of creation.
We discussed some very big megastructures 
today that we might be able to build with  
certain advanced technologies, but there’s 
one megastructure that’s among the very  
largest that could be built with simple modern 
materials and technology, called the Topopolis,  
a rotating habitat that’s no wider than 
an O’Neill Cylinder but can be any length  
you desire. In this month’s Nebula Exclusive 
Topopolis: The Eternal River, we explored these  
megastructures whose interior landscape might 
stretch out like some enormous river valley  
the entire distance of thousands or even millions 
of miles. Join us in journey down a river so long  
it traces out a thousand worlds as we explore 
a megastructure buildable with known science  
and materials but of unbelievable proportions.
And again, that’s out now exclusively on Nebula,  
our streaming service, where you can also see 
every regular episode of SFIA a few days early  
and ad free, as well as our other bonus content, 
including extended editions of many episodes,  
and more Nebula Exclusives like last month’s 
look at Giant Space Monsters, December’s  
episode The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter 
Hypothesis, Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships,  
Dark Stars at the Beginning of Time, Life As 
An Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon,  
Space Freighters, Retrocausality, Orch Or & 
Free Will, Colonizing Binary Stars, and more. 
Nebula has tons of great content 
from an ever-growing community of  
creators. Using my link and discount it’s 
available now for just over $2.50 a month,  
less than the price of the drink or 
snack you might have been enjoying  
during the episode.
When you sign up at my  
link, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use my 
code, isaacarthur, you not only get access to all  
of the great stuff Nebula offers, like Topopolis: 
The Eternal River, you’ll also be directly  
supporting this show. Again, to see SFIA early, 
ad free, and with all the exclusive bonus content,  
go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
As we explored today, with artificial gravity  
provided by a black hole we could potentially 
settle planets which were much smaller than Earth,  
and that would include our own Moon, but you 
might not need that technology to terraform  
our moon. Next week, on February 22nd we’ll ask 
if it is possible to terraform the moon to have  
green lands, blues seas, and white clouds, just 
like Earth, and then visit the topic of Vacuum  
Trains and other hyperfast transit systems on 
Sunday February 25th, before finishing the month  
on February 29th, as we leap into the topic of 
life on colony ark ship carrying people to new  
worlds that will carry us ahead into this leap 
year and into March, where we’ll head back to  
the dawn of time for a look at Primordial Planets.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can  
also help support the show on Patreon, and if 
you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Topopolis: 
The Eternal River, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
