This episode is brought to you by Raycon.
In the future, a technologically advanced
humanity might find it has sucked its world
dry and turned its eyes to other tempting
worlds, but can there be any world more tempting
than a past incarnation of our own planet?
And if so, might we invade and conquer our
own past?
Probably one of the most common themes in
science fiction is time travel, and even outside
of that genre it is pretty common in fiction.
Folks asking “What if”, like “What if
I had done things differently?”
or What if this hadn't happened or this had,
isn’t just a popular storyline but a habit
we all engage in both after a situation when
we ruminate on alternative outcomes and when
trying to make decisions in the first place,
where we seek to predict plausible outcomes.
Now, for my part, I’m very dubious about
concepts like time travel and alternate timelines,
they’ve been popularized because they're
great for fiction rather than on any strong
evidence they can or do occur.
However, our knowledge of time is still almost
entirely theoretical, so, today we will be
discussing both why the possibility of time
travel or alternate timelines is dubious but
also how we might use time travel or alternate
timelines if we could make it work.
There’s also the question of how wars conducted
through time might go.
In the future, the order to “attack at dawn”
might be answered by “which one sir?”,
and fleets might be trying to achieve strategic
positioning in terms of outflanking their
enemy temporally.
In one Roger Zelazny’s lesser known gems,
Creatures of Light and Darkness, we have martial
combatants who essentially hop through time
just an instant and end up making many copies
of themselves simultaneously fighting their
opponent, and that opponent’s copies, all
while trying to one up each other on foresight
and prediction.
One of the nominal protagonists is fathered
by his own son too, and Zelazny explores the
concept in his typically excellent mind-bending
and poetic style.
Time travel and its implications are a favorite
of sci-fi, and trying to figure out its practical
uses and limits and side effects is the center
of many excellent and also awful stories,
and sometimes excellently awful stories.
Many Doctor Who episodes come to mind, as
the show ranges in quality so much over its
decades of episodes and writers discussing
time hopping.
As it happens, when we contemplate likely
uses, it is probably not just for jumping
around history in a big blue police box for
the nominal purpose of visiting strange new
worlds or past events.
Of course, what you would do depends a lot
on what you can do, which depends a lot on
how time works.
And in Doctor Who they have often contemplated
invasions across time, including the Toclafane
from the Tenth Doctor’s tenure, who were
humans from the year 100 Trillion gone mad
and seeking to invade modern Earth.
We see something very similar in the 1987
film Gandahar, or Light Years, where an idyllic
fantasy realm finds itself being invaded by
machine-men, and it turns out they were from
a future incarnation of that world trying
to harvest their peaceful ancestors for genetic
material to preserve a giant mega-brain that
was alive back then, and fairly benevolent,
but turned crazed over time from degeneration.
I saw that one a couple years after it came
out when I was about ten, about the same time
Terminator 2 came out, and they massively
influenced my thoughts on time travel, mostly
in the sense of making me love the stories
but hate the seeming paradoxes of it all.
Also about the same time, the 1989 movie “Millenium”
came out, where they raid the past for healthier
humans.
We also see timequakes as a side effect of
messing around with time, and that pops up
in Babylon 5 too, physical damage of a timequake
from screwing with the past, not just time
paradoxes.
You could get stuff like that too, if for
instance your time-syncing wasn’t perfect
and you get the Earth of a tenth of a second
ago trying to merge with right now, or your
hand interacting with a piece of your wrist
where time was moving a bit slower or faster.
Accelerated or slow time fields have some
difficult practical consequences we tend to
see get skipped in sci-fi, though we often
see the consequence of rapid aging of a person
or limb or object without it seeming to experience
that time in any other way.
Having ways to minimize consequences of time
travel or show them in more classic ways is
common in stories.
Multiverses tend to help with that; on first
glance anyway, and in the many worlds theory
context, as it is just a timeline for anyone
involved that starts in one version of reality
and picks up in another.
The TV show Sliders starring John-Rhys Davies,
also from the 1990s, explored jumping alternate
timelines as its central plot, sliding between
multiverses for the changed timeline of the
week.
Again, I’m not a big proponent of the concept
of the many worlds theory, which is essentially
the notion of alternate timelines, not to
be confused with multiverses in general.
It's not universally accepted and it's actually
in contradiction to the Copenhagen Interpretation
of Quantum Mechanics that you know of from
the Schrodinger’s Cat experiment.
Either one is right or the other is or neither
is, not both.
Alternate timelines are the subset of multiverse
concepts where you come across two possible
forks in a road and can go either way, so
you do, and get two realities, and such branching
events continue on each road and further branch.
Multiverses as a whole contain a lot of other
options like one in which gravitational or
electromagnetic attraction between two particle
is 10% lower or higher, or 10 billion times
lower and higher, or where you have a fourth
physical dimension or even more abstract stuff
like circles with 359 degrees or entirely
different fundamental particles or units.
We covered those other types of multiverses
in our Parallel Universes & Alternate Realities
episode a couple years back, and the implications
of Multiverses to the Fermi Paradox in our
episode Fermi Paradox: Multiverse.
Today we are focused on the idea that you
might invade your own past history, or alternate
timelines.
Now, there’s a lot of different theories
on how alternate timelines would be, so I
should emphasize that whenever you hear folks
beating up on sci-fi films involving time
travel or alternate timelines for bad science,
that does need to be taken with a grain of
salt.
There’s no agreed upon consensus as to how
time and timelines work and paradoxes seem
to occur with any version of them – even
the versions where time is entirely a single
linear path with no loops, branches, or redos.
That said, Hollywood is not a good place to
go for how they work either.
A story with time travel in it is usually
a metaphor for free will, destiny, and if
one person can make a difference.
Alternate timelines are usually about if the
same person were exposed to different events
or had just one key difference to themselves;
those “What if?”
scenarios.
Usually a change that amounts to one single
sentence, for a high concept story.
What if someone other than Steve Rogers became
Captain America and punched Adolf Hitler?
Indeed, time travel stories involving World
War 2 alone probably represent their own special
category of time travel stories.
Also you’ve got those where the protagonist
influenced that figure into an action that
caused our current past, like convincing Caesar
to cross the Rubicon or they insert a more
modern and humanist thought into some more
savage warlord of history.
This is one style of invading time, not with
an army or even necessarily force, just one
lone person armed with knowledge, and possibly
superweapons too.
And we also see examples of aliens or time
travelers pretending to be historical figures,
or not even pretending, they just were.
Probably the most famous time traveler of
the Marvel Comics Universe, especially after
the Loki TV show, is Nathaniel Richards, aka
Kang the Conqueror, who was also the fictional
Pharaoh Rama-Tut of ancient times but was
born a thousand years from now.
Today’s episode is really more about the
notion that you would flat out invade your
own past with armies and colonists, which
is usually considered a no-no because there’s
no way you could avoid utterly changing the
past, but that’s only a problem if the notion
of temporal inertia holds true, which we’ll
get to in a moment.
Philosophically, free-will either does or
does not exist.
If things are foreordained, then obviously
you don’t have multiple timelines – though
you can still have other types of multiverses.
And that’s probably a big reason I dislike
the branching timelines notion, at a personal
level, because to me if there’s two forks
at every decision, free will is what helps
me pick a road, and if I’m actually going
down both, there was no decision or free will.
There’s also no meaningful concept of identity
either, as the most familiar concept we have
nowadays for personal identity is John Locke’s
notion of psychological continuity.
You are not identical to when you were born,
indeed you have virtually none of your original
atoms, and yet we consider that the same person,
and do so on the basis of continuity of thought
and purpose.
A tree too changes as it grows from sapling
to tree to pile of lumber at a carpenter’s
workshop, and we would say at that point,
as it becomes a table and a desk and some
wooden ladles, the tree no longer exists.
Who exactly is you in some alternate timeline
where Hitler won World War 2?
Well a lot of people presumably, as there
are so many different ways that War could
have turned out differently, like one where
JFK drowned when his boat was hit by a Japanese
destroyer.
Or just far more mundane stuff.
What if your parents never met?
What if they did and even got married but
you were born one day later?
It is quite likely you would have the same
name and general upbringing.
Are you still you?
Well you’ve got the same DNA – you actually
don’t since it’s a random mix of your
parents, dependent on which of billions of
sperm win the race – but let’s say it
was?
You are absolutely not your DNA, heck; the
overwhelming majority of cells in your body
don’t even have your DNA in them.
They’re red blood cells with no DNA or non-human
bacteria, but why would we suddenly decide
that’s not you?
Particularly given that samples of your DNA
taken randomly across your body and lifetime
will not perfectly match.
A cell near your stomach and another from
your foot may be different, same as they might
be if you took one from your five year old
and fifty-year old incarnations.
Or your alternate timeline where you decided
to go for a trip to the beach and suntan or
visit an area with a slightly higher background
radiation level, mutations happen.
Isn’t a human really more of an ecosystem
with a composition and personality that slowly
alters over time?
Slight digression but ever since we discovered
DNA half a century ago we have had a bad habit
of equating that with your identity or implying
bits of you that lacked it aren’t you.
This should not be treated as the fundamental
definition of what a person is, or the boundary
of humanity.
Those personal experiences mean far more.
And, in a lot of theories, you would almost
be easier defining timelines by the person
than the entire universe anyway.
After all, no event that occurred here on
Earth in the year 2020 could yet have impacted
anybody at our closest neighbor Alpha Centauri,
4 light years away, let alone those millions
of light years from here which is the overwhelming
majority of the Universe.
No act of any human could have impacted a
galaxy beyond our own yet, unless time travel
or faster than light travel exist, and the
two are functionally identical in almost every
respect anyway.
To have one is to have the other.
And when we say the speed of light is as fast
as we can go, that’s really a name that
exists because we measured light before we
measured the speed of gravity – they’re
the same – or the maximum speed cause and
effect could happen at.
The speed of light is really the speed of
causality, and if there is a Universe for
every single decision, indeed for every single
event, then you would have near-infinite realities
that were identical in every way except that
billions of light year away, some minor thing
happened, a uranium particle decayed today
rather than a million years from now or one
second ago.
This will have no impact on our area of the
Universe for billions of years, and honestly,
little where it happened either.
Indeed for most of the Observable Universe
it will NEVER have any impact because most
of the Universe we can currently see is already
over the cosmological event horizon.
Event Horizons are not black holes, though
black holes have them, they are simply the
point at which the effects of any given event
can never reach another place to influence
them, they are over the horizon, unseen and
uninvolved.
So, is virtually every alternate reality identical
to tons of others in every detectable way,
or do these just not get created if or until
events reach them?
Can I invade a galaxy 2 billion light years
away but one billion years ago without causing
paradoxes?
Well, it should seem so.
Now, because the Universe is expanding, light,
gravity, and causality will take more than
2 billion years to get here from that place
but ignoring that for conceptual simplicity,
are the alternate realities breaking here
when the event of those invasions reaches
us 2 billion years later?
If that’s the case, do different alternate
realities spring up when the event reaches
Mars maybe 20 minutes later?
What if there were two such invasions on opposite
sides of the galactic Supercluster, alpha
and beta.
So that Earth found out about Alpha at noon
and Beta at 12:10, but Mars finds out about
Alpha at 12:20 and Beta at 11:50.
Did we get modified timelines for each of
these scenarios?
Did event Beta cause a new timeline on Mars
at 11:50 and a separate one on Earth at 12:10.
Did we get a new one for each other planet
in the solar system?
Each space habitat orbiting one of them?
What about each person observing the message?
How about each individual atom?
Do we also get a new timeline for each atom
contained in the invading fleet as well?
Would time travel – or faster than light
travel – be possible so long as you always
went further away than where your signal could
reach you before you left?
You can jump 25 light years away 24 years
back in time because your ship or signal can’t
cover that distance home in time to cause
a paradox.
Could you then jump to another spot, 25 light
years away again and 24 years back in time,
48 years ago, but sideways or actually closer
to Earth so your signal doesn’t need 48
years to arrive?
If so, can I cause time paradoxes with any
two jumps?
Also, what’s actually preventing you from
doing these paradoxical trips anyway?
Time cops?
Great for stories but not really viable, since
someone could still break the rules or messup
enforcement of them.
There’s another thing too, I was talking
about jumping between stars, like through
a gateway to hyperspace, rather than just
traveling the distance like by warp drive
or even just classic engines.
We tend to almost always treat time travel
like that.
Your exceptions are generally when the film
or show wants to give you a Montage of events
that occurred during your jump, like Buck
Rogers when he gets frozen, or Fry from Futurama,
parodying that.
In those cases, the person was just frozen
in a capsule or drifting, someone could have
gone and smashed their capsule up while they
were on ice.
What if moving through time forward or backward
was just a speeding up or reversing, not jumping
out of the Universe and back in at the desired
moment?
In a fast time bubble too, where is your air
to breathe coming from, or light to see by,
why aren’t you being blinded by a century’s
worth of outside light hitting your eyeballs
in seconds of personal time.
And outside that bubble, for a fast time bubble,
why isn’t the heat of a person or machine
inside that bubble, experiencing centuries
for every second outside, not blowing that
whole area to pieces?
It is functionally identical to how a chemical
bomb works after all, a sudden massive generation
of heat.
Same concept for matter from the future suddenly
arriving here and now, like a time traveler,
and locally violating conservation of energy,
plus asking what happened to the displaced
air or other matter where they arrived at.
It is worth mentioning that while we don’t
have a great grasp of what time is, we do
know it can run at different speeds in the
same Universe.
Time moves slower when you move faster, or
when you’re accelerating or decelerating,
or just in heavier gravitational areas.
Time runs slower in your basement than your
attic, indeed your head and feet, and presumably
slower in all those electrons whipping around
protons at a high-fraction of light speed,
though that’s not really an accurate model
of how atoms work and time gets even weirder
at the quantum scale.
Time runs slower or faster at poles versus
equator or valley versus hill, on Mars than
Earth or Venus.
Time runs much faster on a comet in deep space
than at the Sun’s core, and runs slower
at the galactic core than in deep intergalactic
space.
That’s not just theory, we have outright
measured time flow differences ever since
Einstein proposed all this and found they
matched our predictions exactly, over and
over again.
That is time travel as we know it, the idea
that time proceeds forward at a set rate for
all to experience, with instant cause and
effect, has been out the window for over a
century.
Time runs a little faster or slower here and
there, and cause and effect take time to propagate.
So, we can artificially slow time, very drastically
near dense and massive things like neutron
stars and black holes, and we can hypothesize
that with negative matter or energy we might
be able to speed time up instead of down,
or reverse it.
But you would still be sitting there experiencing
it, not instantly popping from A to B, and
someone could presumably see you making this
journey too.
You invade backward in time till today, from
a month from now, and the journey take you
a few minutes of personal time, maybe while
standing still, maybe while walking, or marching
an army, and folks see you arrive and then
presumably see you break in two as one of
you proceeds at normal speed again and another
of you begins walking backwards at a snail’s
pace till returning to that time and point
you left from.
What would happen if you shot at that very
vulnerable slow-reverse-marching army instead
of its future-self attacking you normally?
A question folks often ask is where all the
energy is coming from to make these alternate
timelines.
One common answer is to either shrug and point
out that the same question applies to where
our Universe came from back at moment zero,
the Big Bang, as it is presumably no harder
or easier to source it for a new timeline.
Another is to say that we shouldn’t assume
it was actually made at that point; that there’s
a near infinite number of ways a Universe
may be arranged in terms of the locations
of any given particle, and that every possible
combination simply exists.
There is no classic time, just an near-infinite
number of static universes for each unique
layout and size, and that what we think of
as time is simply your journey between those
universes, and that by default that journey
rolls downhill from denser, more compact universes,
to more expanded ones.
Or even that your own thoughts are just one
current along the vast number of combinations
of atoms forming your brain.
In that your unique identity is just the path
followed between all of those, same as if
we took out a 2D map of the planet and drew
a long path around it, presumably without
intersections being allowed.
In this scenario there is no paradox with
time travel, indeed, there is no time, someone
presumably just has a path where their brain
happens to be observing what would appear
to be time-travel events.
Indeed, in an infinite universe, where everything
that can happen eventually does, and where
quantum mechanics allows even a complete brain
with memories to form at random by extreme
freak coincidence, there’s going to be a
reality where someone springs up out of nothing
with fake random memories that happen to show
them having gotten into a time travel box
and set the coordinates for here and now.
See our infinite improbability issues episode
for more discussion of that and Quantum Cheeseburgers.
Key notion though, in such a setup, people
invade the past a lot, because there are a
near infinite number of scenarios where atoms
can be arranged such that they would involve
a brain that thought it remembered past-future
events, no paradox is implied.
Another option for looking at time, which
is a little more useful for time travel, is
time loops.
This is where a person’s timeline, as a
time traveler, might have them living a century,
but they did it by being born in the year
3000, living there till there year 3025, traveling
back in time to 2975, and living another 50
years during which they see their original
being born again and jumping back in time,
possibly because you taught them how to do
it, then you go on to live to the year 3050,
100 years of total life spanning a 75 year
window.
25 of those years overlapped, 3000 to 3025.
One wonders if the Universe has any issue
with you suddenly removing around 100 kilograms
of mass and energy from the year 3025 and
adding it to the year 2975.
That definitely changes events, incidentally.
You could teleport yourself to a tiny little
life support cubicle hidden inside a mountain
and stay there not interfering, no butterfly
flapping its wings, and yet your extra mass
adds to earth’s gravity and slows time here
just a little bit more.
Even if the means of travel was actually just
copying your data from some collections of
atoms now to another elsewhen in the past,
then that changed pattern of atoms – which
presumably is taking actions, now that we’ve
turned it from harmless rock or air, into
you, is still also interacting with all the
gravity, light, neutrinos, and so on passing
through them and very occasionally nudging
one in a different way than it otherwise would
have with its original pattern before we transmuted
it into you.
So, yes, you’re going to change time, that’s
a reality.
Unless, again, you’re outside its window
or cone of causality, you teleported 25 years
back in time but 26 light years away.
But you still changed time there, you just
didn’t paradox your own timeline because
you can’t get back to Earth in time to tell
yourself not to build a time machine.
You could get back to a distant time and place
and build a huge space fleet able to arrive
in a few months to provide help to your own
future though.
The paradox of traveling back in time and
killing your grandfather or sleeping with
your grandmother or some other depraved activity
time traveler’s are prone to isn’t the
same as simply altering the past.
It’s altering it in a way that would seem
to prevent the trip itself.
You go back to kill Hitler and succeed and
thus time changes and nobody has a reason
to kill Hitler, thus the trip is never made.
Alternatively, going back in time to build
an armada that cannot have its light even
reach you or the invaders till after you left
causes no paradox.
If you go back in time to a gold mine before
someone bought it and buy it yourself and
leave the title and deed in a safe deposit
box for your later discovery, it is hard to
arrange that in some way that’s going to
result in you getting it without disrupting
the chain of events that led to you pursuing
that course of action.
You could leave today at noon to the past
and buy a gold mine and have the deed arrive
by courier to your future self that afternoon,
but how did you know that gold mine existed
to be exploited?
Maybe you put the deed in some fictitious
name and transferred it to your modern self
privately in the past, and that message arrives
the afternoon after your time trip?
That might let you get around a paradox.
Alternatively, there’s no paradox simply
from moving through time at varying rates,
and that could include backwards, much as
I can lay a string across a map of Earth in
a straight line as a shortest journey, or
a great circle, but can also bend it for many
destinations in a zig zag or even curve back
on itself, as you drive around an area then
come home at the end of the day to the same
place.
We shouldn’t assume a default single Universe
with a singular timeline has any problem with
that activity, or that, if each of those map
points was a single reality, that voyaging
through them causes a problem.
However, if we’re sticking to one changeable
but singular timeline, then any loops need
to be closed, that point of intersection does
need to be identical, which, in this context
means that we’re talking about events that
were their own cause and effect.
Fiction loves to play with this and it makes
some amazing stories, often where the event
the time traveler went back in time to prevent
was caused by them.
This is generally the view of time travel
Einstein subscribed to as well, that every
change you made would already have been done
by you, because your future-self would already
have caused the sequence of events to unfold
that way.
Meaning, if Bruce Wayne goes back in time
to save his parents, he’s going to end up
causing the event that killed them, or more
accurately, he will cause the sequence of
events that causes his jump back in time.
Basically the entire self-fulfilling prophecy
concept.
A slight variation of that is that you can
invent FTL, but not time travel, because no
one ever uses it for that even though they
can.
Which would seem absurd except for if every
use of time travel effectively erases the
cause for it.
Nobody uses time travel because it's dangerous
on paper and all theories and reason says
it’s a terrible idea, and when someone gets
suicidally reckless to give it a try, they
no longer have a reason to be the first to
try it anymore and thus don’t try it, that
day anyway, maybe another, but the same things
just keeps happening to them or anyone else.
This isn’t assuming any intelligent governing
agency like time cops for instance, or He
Who Remains.
It's more the notion of the Novikov Self-Consistency
Principle, which we might phrase as saying
that, water in the ocean returns to the ocean
eventually, it doesn’t do so through volition
or guidance, and it does not matter if it
left with a bucket or by evaporation, it doesn’t
matter if it rained on a frozen mountain and
sat there for ten millennia, or on a seashore,
if it came by one river or another, or if
it bounced around a billion points in between,
eventually it gets back where it started.
Every time loop must close back on a point
that gives the actor the exact same state
of mind as when they left the first time,
or the inevitable same cause of events.
It wouldn’t matter if time looped repeatedly
there either, with a thousand different scenarios
playing out before that realignment occurred,
anymore than it matters if a wire loops around
once or coils thousands of times.
The loop will keep happening with minor changes
until self-correction is achieved.
Unless of course we stretch that analogy to
include something like electrical resistance.
After a certain number of events, the loop
fizzles rather than realigns, or maybe the
reverse and it is able to make a real change
to the timeline after knocking the revolving
wheel enough off-axis.
Temporal inertia is a common one too, favored
by Isaac Asimov in his time travel novel The
End of Eternity, my own favorite novel by
him.
Things that were meant to happen tend to happen,
or there are attractor states in history.
That one also sees a sort of Cold War between
the Eternals who manipulate countless centuries
through the year one-million AD, with a future
group trying to dampen out or stop their tinkering
from affecting them.
In the story, time has an inertia that tends
to self-correct.
Like a rock thrown in a pond, waves on a pond
settling flat over a distance and time leaving
an effectively identical pond even if every
individual molecule of water is in a different
place than it otherwise would have been.
So that further-future group is able to basically
establish a time wall around their era, starting
thousands of centuries earlier, that prevents
the Eternals time traveling in, and thus the
inertia of time allows humanity to return
to where it was supposed to be, in time for
them to exist.
Some more spoilers but even further ahead
in time, both groups find humanity has died
off circa the year 15 million AD, and they
make the argument that time travel technology
itself, as opposed to space travel, is a sucide
pact technology for civilizations and we explored
those in our recent episode on Technological
Time Bombs and the Femri Paradox.
Another favorite author of mine, Alastair
Reynolds, implies in one of his books that
the use of any technology for time travel
or faster than light travel - which are inextricably
linked - has a tendency to self correct by
deleting the entire offending civilization,
backwards in time, to prevent them generating
paradoxes with their FTL methods.
There’s some legitimacy to this concept
of inertia too, events aren’t inevitable
but certain things tend to be easy to predict
the general form of.
The pond’s state is predictable even if
the individual water molecules are not.
I’m no psychic when I look out my window
and see the clouds and say ‘ah, rain soon’,
and if it blows a bit north of me like it
did a couple days back, well that doesn’t
mean I was misreading the signs or that the
thing was inevitable but somehow disrupted.
There are physical reasons why it rains, and
there are psychological reasons why people
fight with each other or get married or start
a business or family or whichever.
A man is not necessarily pre-destined to start
a restaurant but if he loves cooking and watches
cooking shows and talks about how it's his
dream, well, we need not be having prophetic
visions for us to guess he might be a restaurant
owner some day.
And that's the notion of such kinds of inertia,
not the magic of time self-correcting but
the statistical certainty that even though
you can't predict whether any coin will come
up heads or tails, if you flip a million coins,
you are practically guaranteed to have half
heads and half tails, to a tiny fraction of
a percent of difference.
We explored this notion more in our episode
on Psychohistory and it does have some big
problems.
I don’t think temporal inertia holds up
as a valid concept.
Others models are cyclic, and for instance,
under the current big bang model, no matter
what happens between the Big Bang and the
End of Eternity, the Universe we see would
have begun as a point-like object of insane
heat and density and would end as a statistical
wash-out.
There may be a near infinite number of configurations
a Universe at Heat Death could be in, but
they are all effectively identical.
Like a sea composed of nothing but water molecules,
it hardly matters which ones are which and
where and when.
In that sort of context, a person moving from
that Heat Death to the Big bang shouldn’t
have any paradox issues because they cannot
affect the outcome.
You start and stop at the bottom of the hill,
it doesn’t matter what path you followed
up and down it.
Of course, that’s a pretty big motivation
for time travel too, to escape that heat death,
as we suggested near the beginning of today’s
episode, when your world is near its own end,
heading back to its beginning is a nice option.
Now, if you have a reality that allows for
those kinds of travels, so you are not eliminating
your reason for existing but merely breaking
off a new timeline, then one possibility you
have is that you would expect more timelines
the older a Universe gets, and more realities.
As we said, back at the Big Bang, if everything
is pointlike, there is no meaningful arrangement
of particles through space to represent an
array of options.
As expansion begins and space gets bigger,
there’s a lot more individual arrangements
particles can have throughout space.
Just as an example, if space is a 10x10x10
cube with one particle in it, there are 1000
spots it could be in, 1000 realities as it
were.
If there’s 2 particles in that space, there’s
1 million realities, or 999,000 if they’re
not allowed to both be at the same point,
and less if we have two identical particles
and don’t care if A or B are at a given
spot.
Get three particles, and it jumps to a billion
layouts.
Increase that cube to 100x100x100 and now
it’s a million layouts for a single particle,
a trillion for two, and a quintillion for
three.
Inside the observable Universe, we estimate
there would be about 10^185 Planck volumes,
tiny little spots of space much smaller than
an atom that we think represent the effective
minimum pixel of reality.
Our cube, or sphere, would then be 10^185
cells in total, and any given atom could have
that many positions and a Universe of just
2 could have 10^370 different unique arrangements.
There are estimated to be around 10^80 atoms
in the Observable Universe.
I won’t bother rattling off the number of
possible realities that entails, just understand
that adding just one more atom brings another
10^185 more in, not just one more combination.
So too, every time the Universe adds one more
Planck length of volume by Hubble expansion,
those odds leap up even more.
So, every second the Universe ages, vastly
more combinations are possible than before.
This may be very slightly countered-out by
vast amounts of matter being removed from
each other’s Hubble Volumes with expansion,
since they can no longer affect each other
at those distances, but I’m not sure that
would pertain to whether or not they counted
as valid combinations.
If they do still count, then the very high
probability the Universe is infinite matters.
We only discuss the Observable Universe incidentally,
science has no opinion or data on things beyond
that besides that they should almost certainly
exist and be more than there is in the Observable
region, see our episode the edge of the Universe
for details.
What’s this got to do with time wars incidentally?
Well, let us assume that intelligence developing
becomes more likely the longer the Universe
exists, in its current age anyway, after stars
stop forming, this ceases to be true.
However, the older a Universe is, the more
likely it is to have had a species develop
– or even spawn randomly, Boltzmann Brain-style
– that is able to develop time travel technology
if it is possible or for that matter, evolve
the ability to engage in time travel organically.
The older the Universe gets, the exponentially
more versions of it include some agency able
to travel through time, if it can do so.
Thus, the more of them would exist, who, by
default, would be turning a predatory eye
toward past epochs of the Universe.
There are far, far fewer of those past epochs.
To emphasize scale here, if only one in a
trillion future humanities was able to get
the technology and desire for invading back
in time, it wouldn’t even need to wait one
second before it would have more realities
in which they existed with that will and ability,
than there were realities a second ago for
them to invade.
It's not that, a second from now, there are
a trillion new possible futures for us, and
one second more, there are another trillion,
it's that one second more and there’s a
trillion-trillion.
Each wanting to send an army back to this
singular reality.
And that’s way, way fewer than there actually
are too.
By the math, I’m just too lazy to run the
ridiculously huge numbers in order to obtain
a wild estimate of a value whose numerical
value is meaninglessly huge.
So, your invaders are jumping back in time
and running into primitive forces they can
easily beat, plus a trillion times as many
other invading armies looking to do the same
thing they’re doing.
Each of those would be spawning new alternate
timelines of course, but each one would have
a near infinite number of future states where
someone would have the means and ability to
invade backward in time too, more so, since
the ability to do this is part of their history.
So, now you have armies invading a pristine
planet who literally outnumber the stars themselves,
to the point that the planet is going to undergo
gravitational collapse into a black hole as
they feed people into the grinder.
Amusingly, this might get them what they want,
since we have many theories suggesting that
black holes form and generate a new universe
with a Big Bang on their other side.
However proof this shouldn’t work can be
obtained by simply noting that we are not
being invaded and squished into a black hole,
but should have a near infinite number of
futures who should want to do this to us,
even if it seems insane, so presumably cannot.
This doesn’t require armies either, the
same math applies just to historians coming
back to visit a spot, or time travelers stuck
in a loop where they just kept dropping new
bodies onto an ever deepening pile, something
played with in both Doctor’s Who’s episode:
Heaven Sent, and Peter Hamilton’s sci-fi
novel “The Abyss Beyond Dreams”, both
of which are nightmare fuel.
If you’ve got a timeloop that keeps causing
a new person to fall through to some place,
followed by another version of them, again
and again, it is beyond horrifying, but the
good news is, that nightmare eventually should
result in a singularity forming, though that
might just mean an ultra-fast merciful death,
or that the rising mass means time freezes
locally eventually, but should just keep rising
and rising.
We don’t really have a good enough understanding
of space-time to know if that ends at some
point with a big bang though it's certainly
been discussed before.
Armies and fleets or just one lone historian
coming through to a place of curiosity, eventually
should result in this occurring.
If time travel is possible, and practical
in this way, with splitting off new timelines,
you could end up with each one turning into
a giant black hole.
Which would once more result in a time travel
method that even if possible, was worse than
useless.
Indeed this might be a Fermi Paradox solution
itself, planets which spawn time travel turn
into black holes and eat their civilizations
before they make contact with each other.
Either destroying them or putting them in
a new Universe of their own.
Of course, as we mentioned, a Big Bang is
one of those convenient spots in a timeline
where there is no space or time, so no timelines
yet, so maybe the natural results of any effort
to invade a prior period of your own Universe,
just spawns a new iteration of the Universe.
Not a bad way to die I suppose, spawning a
new reality, makes for a great epitaph, even
if no one knows you did it.
Also makes you wonder if that’s who or what
made our Universe pop into existence.
I mentioned an awful lot of books during today’s
episode that I’d definitely recommend if
you want more discussion and stories of time
travel, and as channel regulars know, I tend
to prefer audiobooks over traditional reading
as I can get other projects done while I am
it.
Of course some of those projects can be loud
or in loud places, and is why you want a nice
pair of noise reducing or isolating earbuds,
and I’ve been using my Raycon earbuds now
for over 2 years to listen audiobooks while
mowing my lawn or taking a nap.
Or for doing a conference call while out biking,
they’re a great alternative to using the
speakerphone and you can reject calls or navigate
audio tracks just with their earbuds, leaving
you hands-free.
Another thing I love about them is that don’t
fall out of my ear, whether I go over a bump
or sleep on my side.
Raycon’s Everyday Earbuds have optimized
gel tips for the perfect in-ear fit, so they
are comfortable and they will not budge or
fall out, and they give you high quality audio
at half the price of other premium audio brands.
That’s probably while Raycon Everyday Earbuds
have tens of thousands of 5-star reviews,
including mine.
The individual earbuds have a 8 hour playtime
battery life and they recharge in their compact
carrying case, for 32 hours of listening time
without needing to plug into a wall, and they
have a wireless charging feature for the case
too you can try out.
Raycon Everyday Earbuds are also Siri and
Alexa compatible, and their noise isolation
feature can be turned on for total immersion
or you can go into awareness mode if you need
to be able to hear the world around you while
listening.
They’ve also got three sound profiles, pure
sound, for those of us who like to listen
to podcasts and audiobooks, a bass-boosted
mode for music with a lot of beat, and balanced
mode.
And they are water resilient and tough, mine
have even survived being left in my pocket
through the washing machine.
They won’t fall out of year but if you drop
one in a puddle accidentally, it’s usually
going to survive.
They’re just all around great earbuds in
terms of quality, versatility, comfort, and
cost.
So if you’re looking for a great and affordable
listening experience and want to help support
our show while you’re at it, just click
the link in the description box or go to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur
to get 15% off your Raycon purchase!
Incidentally if you’re looking for more
discussion and Q&A on the matter of time travel,
a couple weeks back I was on Fade to Black
with my friend Jimmy Church and the main topic
for two-and-a-half hours of live radio was
time travel, paradoxes, and various theories
on methods and common questions about time
travel.
I’ll link to that interview in the episode
description.
So next week we’ll jump a few decades into
the future to ask what humanity’s first
space settlement will be like, and where it
will be: in orbit, on the Moon or Mars or
somewhere else.
Then we’ll close the month out with our
Livestream Q&A on Sunday August 28th at 4pm
Eastern time, where we take your questions
from the chat and answer them live.
Then it will be into August to discuss living
in space, some of the many challenges of doing
that, and how to stay sane while you’re
at it.
Since we don’t have time travel yet, if
you want to see those episodes you’ll have
to wait till they come out.
But if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, don’t forget to subscribe
to the channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like help support future episodes, please
visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways
to donate, or become a show patron over at
Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!I
