Current theory says the dinosaurs came to an end  
when a giant asteroid from space crashed 
into Earth, wouldn’t it be ironic then if  
we sent asteroids out from Earth into 
deep space to colonize other worlds? 
A few weeks back we were discussing Interstellar 
Colonization Strategies and next week we’ll be  
discussing Planetary Terraforming Strategies for 
when a colony spaceship arrives at a new world,  
but one of the strategies we didn’t cover 
last week was the possibility of using  
asteroids as spaceships to travel to new systems.
Now, normally I don’t think of this as a good  
option, for many reasons we’ll discuss today, but 
the big one has usually been that they are simply  
a fuel hog compared to a far less massive ship 
made from hollowing out the asteroid and refining  
its ores to make a ship. While I was writing 
Interstellar Colonization Strategies though,  
I talked about how bigger was better when it 
came to colony ships, as they have more cargo,  
redundancy, and endurance. Those are fuel hogs 
too, but we wouldn’t really care because the fuel  
in question, hydrogen or perhaps deuterium 
or helium-3, is so incredibly abundant. 
So the idea of launching some asteroid massing 
a trillion tons into space using trillions of  
tons of fusion fuel seems absurd at first - but 
the economics say otherwise. As it turns out,  
the fuel part is the easy part. Even by modern 
standards, the cost to pump liquid hydrogen into  
some tank is going to be way less than the cost 
to build that tank. Hydrogen is relatively rare  
on Earth and helium more so, but they are the 
two most abundant elements in the Universe, each  
outnumbering every other type of element combined. 
So, in an economy with advanced automation and  
humanity scattered all around the solar system, 
tanking huge amounts of hydrogen from one of the  
gas giants or from a comet to fill some big rock 
up is going to be easier than refining all that  
rock down into metals to make spaceships anyway.
Alternatively, some big asteroid or comet offers  
a lot of advantages as a spaceship, 
interplanetary or interstellar. There  
are some definite downsides, but once you remove 
the fuel burden from the equation, I think the  
positives might outweigh those in many cases.
Additionally, fuel is not always an issue. For  
instance, we have a device known as a Planetary 
Cycler or Aldrin Cycler. This is essentially  
a large spaceship or space station on its own 
planetary orbit, typically a very long elliptical  
one, timed to bring it close to two separate 
planets or bodies. So an Earth- Mars Cycler  
will be on a long elliptical orbit around the Sun 
taking a couple years and spending most of it out  
beyond Mars, but would make for relatively short 
journeys of 5 months from Earth to Mars and Mars  
to Earth for any ship that docks with them as they 
pass by either planet. This also works for moons,  
and the Backflip cycler option for Earth 
and our Moon, which would be on more of a  
monthly timeline, is probably a good option.
What’s neat about these cyclers is that once  
you put them into their orbit, aside from some 
optional contingency fuel for emergency maneuvers,  
they require no more fuel to continue their 
orbit than any other heavenly body orbiting  
the Sun does: basically none. Objects in motion 
remain in motion unless acted on by another  
force and barring minor perturbations, the only 
force acting on a planet orbiting our Sun is the  
Sun’s gravity acting like a sling to whip the 
planet around in circles, or elliptical orbits. 
Thus they’re perfect for some big asteroid we 
nudged into that orbit and may just require us  
to apply a little station-keeping to 
occasionally. Ships dock with it and  
take advantage of its huge mass to provide 
radiation shielding and resupply, allowing  
faster passenger or cargo ships to use far less 
fuel, and armor, and rendezvous with what’s  
essentially a mixture of ferry and truckstop, 
slow but cheap and reliable bulk transport. 
The Same reasoning applies to interstellar ark 
ships as they will run up to speed and then cruise  
through space for decades before slowing down 
at their destination. What’s neat about them is  
that you can also be working to refine parts 
of that asteroid into raw materials for your  
onboard industry, and your colonization gear once 
you arrive. So, in theory, a very basic and small  
colony organization could grab an asteroid, 
ranging from less than a kilometer wide to  
several, fill it with fusion fuel, and head out 
to the stars on a multi-century journey while  
transforming that asteroid into a bigger community 
and possibly even a fleet of escort vessels. 
Now, we keep saying that we’ll hollow out the 
asteroid but that’s probably not the right way  
to think of it. More likely you would just have 
big thin balloons of fuel you attached behind the  
Asteroid since most of the fuel would be burnt in 
a few months as you accelerated to cruising speed,  
so any complex and long-lasting storage system 
would seem a waste. By default, folks assume  
you need the same fuel to speed up and slow down, 
but that’s not true. Since you have to accelerate  
your slow down fuel too, it generally takes about 
3 times as much starting fuel as stopping fuel.  
So for every 4 tanks of fuel you need, 3 will 
need only simple storage for while you bring  
them to the ships and the launch it, the fourth 
will need to be stored for decades at least. 
Of course there’s probably a fifth for us on the 
ship for running power production during the trip  
and as a reserve and backup. These we can strap 
behind too, and then we could cut some rock out  
of the asteroid for some living area and stack 
that around our tanks to make them sturdier,  
like bricks, or an ice wall, and further minimize 
leakage. A lot of the asteroids we might use for  
this are likely to be those deeper out in the 
Asteroid Belt or even its larger twin, the Kuiper  
Belt, and those would have a lot of ice on them 
too. Many asteroids aren’t solid rock either, but  
more like giant piles of frozen gravel, so using 
ice and gravel as an exterior shield for bits you  
are building behind the ship makes a lot of sense.
We tend to think of using metallic asteroids  
so we would have plenty of metal, 
as opposed to carbonaceous ones,  
but carbon is the material that ultra-hard diamond 
and ultra-strong graphene are made of, so much  
of our structure might be provided by carbon-rich 
asteroids rather than the rarer metallic variety. 
Graphene has a lot of great properties but 
three interest us in particular. First, it can  
make a great liner for fuel tanks, as hydrogen 
is prone to leaking out and also corroding  
things – part of our problem using it for rockets 
and for a hydrogen fuel economy. Graphene is much  
better at storing it compared to other methods. 
Second, since we can make graphene into strong  
ultra-thin sheets just an atom wide, we can 
make huge sails out of it for catching sunlight,  
laser or energy beams, or even interstellar dust. 
More on that later but a single square sheet  
of graphene a kilometer on each side would only 
weigh 2.27 grams, and few layers would be needed. 
Indeed, a sheet big enough to cover every bit of 
our own planet would only weigh about 1200 tons,  
versus trillions of tons for even a fairly 
small asteroid, and you could coat an asteroid  
or comet in layers of graphene to keep it from 
leaking away from melting or micro-collisions,  
or from disintegrating. Your typical asteroid 
isn’t really held together by much, gravity inside  
them is tiny even compared to our Moon, so bits 
of asteroid would go flying off into deep space  
just from tapping it. We would need spin gravity 
to give people gravity to live with, but we can’t  
spin the asteroid or it would fly to pieces.
Which takes us to the third handy bit, graphene  
has enormous tensile strength, which is great for 
space elevators and other tethers, such as if we  
want to tow things far behind the ship for safety, 
like an antimatter reservoir or radioactive  
fission fuel. It also makes it a nice net for 
holding our asteroid together if we did spin it,  
but we probably wouldn’t want to anyway. It makes 
more sense to dig out a cylinder-shaped crater and  
put a small rotating habitat drum in there as 
opposed to trying to spin the whole thing. In  
practice you would probably find a nice crater of 
about the desired diameter, then dig it out a bit  
and use the parts extracted to build up and around 
so you had a hollow cylinder partially protruding  
from the asteroid and partially embedded into it.
Or you might dig your hab drum in completely, for  
maximum shielding, and use the extracted bits for 
constructing fuel drums, manufacturing facilities,  
hydroponics, or other areas of lower priority for 
shielding. You can use this same technique on a  
comet, which tends to have a lot of rock and 
metal too but are principally ices of water,  
ammonia, and methane, and you can melt 
out tunnels, separate the components,  
and pipe the fluids to radiated areas to 
refreeze it and use for construction or storage. 
As time goes on your big rock is going to start 
taking on more artificial characteristics and  
probably shifting toward being long and skinny, as 
that’s a better shape for high speed travel than  
a sphere. Not that many asteroids really 
are spherical. The big famous ones are,  
like Ceres, which is practically a dwarf 
planet, but most are no more spherical than  
any other rock you’d find on Earth. They’re 
a lump or glob, and any resemblance to a  
specific geometry is mostly coincidental.
Over time the rock might start to look  
more streamlined but that might be a project of 
years or even millenia. Even a modest asteroid,  
like the kind we have thousands of in our 
solar system, might have thousands of miles  
of tunnels and hundreds of cylinder 
habitats and giant chambers in it.  
I should also note that you can merge asteroids 
fairly easily in most cases, they’re just heaps  
of gravel or ice, so merging a comet with your 
asteroid to give it fuel and an icy coating  
might be a common exercise, as would adding a 
second asteroid to one you’ve already built on. 
A lot depends on how long the mission is planning 
to last, and that involves many factors. The first  
of course is your power supply and starship drive. 
We’re assuming no FTL or warp options though,  
if you had those, I’m sure you’d utilize them, and 
such a ship might still be great for intergalactic  
travel. By default, we tend to assume fusion 
power, and we discussed that a bit already,  
but there are other options. Antimatter of course, 
if you can make and store it. Blackhole drives are  
excellent, same problem though. But with black 
holes, you can feed them anything. Both would  
have little difficulty getting up to somewhere 
between a quarter and half-light of speed,  
versus the more like 5-15% that fusion might 
permit. Nuclear fission using uranium or thorium,  
via an Orion Drive or Medusa Drive or some other 
variant, is probably getting you somewhere around  
1-5%. And those are top speeds, in any case 
you may be a whole order of magnitude slower. 
Those are vague numbers, I know it drives folks 
nuts that we can’t give more specific values for  
how fast this or that ship drive might go, but 
it’s sort of like asking the Wright Brothers how  
fast a plane can go and expecting a specific 
speed. They don’t know how to engineer a jet  
yet and even if they did, a fighter jet and a 
big cargo plane are very different animals with  
very different speed profiles, which are 
also dependent on cost of fuel or pilots. 
You also aren’t always willing to go for maximum 
speed, it’s just so easy to think of that vast  
supply of hydrogen and assume you’re going 
to max things out when it saves years on a  
journey. However, engines probably cost a 
lot of money and time to build and repair,  
and probably wear down proportional to usage, so 
there’s no real guarantee folks will go for 12%  
of light speed, if that was the maximum fusion 
allowed, if 10% basically cost half the price. 
We also have options like laser sails, where 
it’s all about huge energy collectors pouring  
incredible amounts of energy into the back of 
the ship to either push it along with reflected  
light or power huge ion drives that are more 
like particle accelerators than rockets.  
Here, a ship’s speed is basically about how 
much energy you dump in from home and this  
method of propulsion is less reliant on the rocket 
equation, especially for the laser reflection,  
and so the amount of power needed to get it to 
higher speeds is lower but also it takes real  
energy you already made back home, so people 
might be a bit more miserly with it than with  
tons of hydrogen on some gas giant, especially 
when we’re talking about moving a mountain. 
But let’s consider a few specific scenarios 
as options, and start with 1036 Ganymed,  
which in spite of its name is a Near Earth 
Asteroid, not Jupiter and its moon Ganymede,  
and is also a Mars Crosser, so might be ideal for 
turning into a planetary cycler one day. With one  
big, big problem. It’s 40 kilometers across and 
should have mass somewhere near 100 trillion tons,  
making it billions of times heavier than 
any spaceship we’ve ever made before and  
each ton of that would need many millions of 
joules of kinetic energy to nudge it onto the  
desired course - think millions of megatons of 
explosives. So on the one hand common sense says  
pick another smaller asteroid or even break 
a chunk of this one off and use that instead. 
On the other hand, a 1000x1000 kilometer orbital 
mirror sending its power to that rock 24/7 could  
get the job done in a few years, and as we 
noted earlier, a single sheet graphene panel  
that size would only mass a couple thousand 
tons, and even if made many layers thick,  
it's still pretty minimal. I’d imagine you would 
do dozens of circular ones of a more modest  
diameter orbiting closer to the Sun where they get 
more power, and use those to move it up to speed. 
Scale matters though, because I can casually talk 
about a giant ultra-thin mirror only massing a  
few thousand tons but the power output 
of that object is a billion megawatts,  
around 50 times what the power consumption of 
humanity is these days. We do actually have  
some lasers that are that powerful incidentally, 
they just usually fire for a nanosecond or less,  
meanwhile this would be going on for years. 
You can run a lot of industry and economy on  
something like that, and it is usually why I don’t 
think civilizations would use asteroid ships. 
But we do have to remember that scale and what 
it is to them. Interstellar space colonization  
is likely to occur at a time when all of 
humanity is still numbered in billions  
or maybe low trillions but has easy access to 
space, and a Sun that puts out 400 billion times  
the power this beam needs and a couple billion 
times what lands on Earth as sunlight. They’re  
not having a shortage of available sunlight, 
nor carbon or aluminum for mirrors or lenses,  
so to them the cost is simply producing the 
mirror and the focusing equipment and controls.  
That wouldn’t even have to be graphene either, 
robots rolling aluminum foil on the Moon – or  
from the asteroid – would need to make a lot 
more in mass, a few hundred megatons probably,  
but even so, that’s comparable to modern 
production of aluminum. But in this scenario,  
the cost of aluminum is probably way cheaper 
since the bottleneck on aluminum production is  
electricity… which means once you get it going 
it gets even cheaper still to actually do. 
Now, such immense beams are far more than that 
asteroid is going to need to run life support  
and hydroponics once it is positioned on its long 
orbit around the Sun that makes it pass Earth and  
Mars over and over. More likely it would have 
its own sets of parabolic mirrors towed around  
with it that beam power into collectors for it, 
or maybe it would have a lot of nuclear reactors.  
This thing is a giant star fortress too, it’s not 
for ferrying a few dozen people and some cargo  
around. It’s not like smaller cyclers that might 
be thought of as a cruise ship or container ship.  
It’s basically a hollow mountain, and it’s going 
to become a major space city or nation all on its  
own. On the surface of its 35-kilometer-wide 
bulk are a vast number of craters and canyons,  
natural, artificial, and those in-between.
Each one of those is a potential spacedock  
and sometimes that’s for big cargo haulers that 
are hundreds of meters long themselves and other  
times it’s for small space yachts. All around 1036 
Ganymed would be various antennae and dishes and  
tethered solar panels or facilities, and inside 
it, dozens of cylinder habitation drums stretching  
a kilometer each or more. It’s huge and home to 
millions, most on temporary five month journeys  
between Earth and Mars or Vice Versa. It could 
house billions, and one day will, and is probably  
vastly bigger than you really need for a Cycler. 
We’re basically turning something considerably  
bigger than the island of Guam into a giant 
shipping vessel, and it’s three dimensional too,  
not just a small island surface, but the whole 
mountain connecting it down to the ocean floor. 
You could stuff every building humanity has 
made into that volume, with room to spare,  
and it has enough raw materials to build that 
many times over, as our buildings are generally  
hollow. 1036 Ganymed is the biggest of the Near 
Earth Asteroids but there are hundreds of bigger  
ones in the Asteroid Belt and millions that would 
honestly be better suited as a cycler, we were  
using an intentional large case. An Asteroid that 
was maybe half a kilometer or less across probably  
is a better pick in the nearer-term. That could 
be hollowed out to form a large metropolis with  
plenty of warehouse and tank space, and needing 
barely a millionth the energy and thrust to get  
them aligned on a good trajectory to serve 
as a cycler to various planets and moons. 
You might transform one into a giant 
hydroponics farm too, mostly hollow and huge,  
that had a growth phase when it was closer to 
the sun, then dropped its food off afterwards,  
and maybe concentrated the weaker light it got 
further from the sun into a smaller region for  
getting younger plants growing. In this 
way, a long stream of cyclers might bring  
food to Jupiter for instance and bring 
deuterium or Helium-3 back to Earth. 
But let’s take our big asteroid 
and see what might happen to them.  
Say that after serving as a big cycler for 
a couple centuries and reaching a population  
of a couple million, it decides it’s tired of 
being a constant pawn between various Earth and  
Martian power groups. It’s even been invaded 
a few times, though the thick crust of stone  
and rabbit warren of tunnels inside made that a 
very unsuccessful effort the last try. They’re  
not interested in another, and they’ve done great 
financially over the years, so they’re cutting a  
deal with the Governor of Neptune’s largest 
Chandelier City to refit them for new model  
fusion reactors and pump them up on fusion fuel.
They’re going to sell all their local holdings  
to pay for that and for some serious beaming 
power from the various solar conglomerates.  
They’re not stopping at Neptune, everything 
is going to be carefully timed to rendezvous  
with them as they corkscrew out of the 
system, and they’re going to drop a big  
dish behind them to focus that beaming power 
on them as they head out into the Oort Cloud. 
By the year 2626 they’re moving out of the solar 
system at 10% of light speed and have finished  
installing their reactors and rigging their ship 
for interstellar space. You might be picturing a  
big rock tumbling through the void but in reality 
that’s just the centerpiece. Strung out behind it  
are millions of buckyball shaped fuel reservoirs 
and some other ancillary facilities, even a few  
small habitation rings for the folks who tend 
the trailing fuel pods. Way behind them is a big  
satellite dish and detection array for monitoring 
space to the side and behind, and for talking back  
to Neptune, with whom they have a multi-century 
contract to send them news and tech updates. 
If you’re looking sideways from the asteroid 
or from the trailing fuel tanks, you don’t  
actually see stars. Rather there's a lot of thin 
sheets of graphene spun out around it as rings,  
just a few atoms thick, and lots of them of 
slightly different diameters and spin rates. Their  
only real job is to get smashed up by any space 
rock that comes in at an angle and at high speed,  
shredding the panel in question but shredding 
the rock too, so it’s more like scattered dust  
when it hits the ship. Forward of the asteroid 
ship is something similar, the ship looks like  
it has a giant umbrella poking forward out of 
it. That thin forward shield exists only to get  
hammered by any space junk the asteroid would 
otherwise run into at relativistic speeds. Skinny  
Diamond shafts hold the umbrellas out in front.
Such collisions are of such high energy that they  
match a nuclear bomb of the same mass and utterly 
vaporize everything involved, so a thin sheet is  
ideal for this. You just replace the damaged 
section with another patch. They are working  
on a second layer even further out, and are 
trying to decide what the best approach will  
be for mixing in forward physical shields with 
detectors and point defense lasers. This isn’t a  
sail in the classic sense, but they treat it 
a bit like their prow’s figurehead or flag,  
and have an elaborate quilt of colored 
patches on the forward shield. The newest  
one was painted by a class of third-graders in 
the ship’s schools. There’s several thousand  
students in each grade level these days.
Now, originally they had been planning to  
use the remaining fuel to run up to a slightly 
higher speed and save the rest for deceleration  
and operations en route, but they’ve decided 
they’re going to go faster and instead opt  
to build more ships out of the asteroid's mass. 
Again, the asteroid contains more raw materials  
than humanity has ever used in every single 
building and vehicle humanity ever made before  
the Space Age really kicked off. One of those 
ships will outpace the fleet by a few light  
months and deploy the sequential solar slowing 
method we’ve discussed elsewhere, firing off big  
shells from its forward rail gun, containing 
packed-up solar sails and beaming equipment. 
Those will fly toward their destination Sun, 
slowed by its light as they unfurl, and the  
first one will soak up that light and fire it as 
a beam back at the second one, slowing it more,  
and it will repeat the process to the third, and 
the fourth, with each sail crashing into the star  
until one finally slows enough to orbit that 
star instead. At the success of that operation,  
1036 Ganymed, known these days as The Rock, 
will briefly open holes in its umbrella and  
begin a volley of rail gun fire containing 
thousands of those shells, each containing  
billions of square meters of graphene sail cloth.
Once those are fired, it will begin unfurling an  
even larger sail to receive that energy as it 
gets beamed in, becoming briefly larger than  
a planet in cross section. That sail will 
get torn to pieces as it gets pummeled by  
space dust and beamed energy, but will protect 
The Rock and its escorts as that huge energy  
supply from their destination slows them down.
That’s all in the future though, for when they  
arrive at their destination around the year 3000.
Right now it's the 28th century and they’ve been  
cruising along and growing their numbers. Day to 
day life inside the asteroid is culturally a lot  
like the late 20th century to early 21st because 
a lot of the early space cultures idolized the  
early space race period in the same way folks 
often do for Elizabethan England or the Roman  
Republic or Classical Athens, so lots of 
denim jeans and Coca-Cola, plus some extra  
culture mix of neo-Appalachian coal miner that got 
popular in the Asteroid Belt in the 23rd century. 
They’re not short of technology of course, they’re 
essentially the opposite of a post-scarcity  
civilization in the traditional sense since 
they have a set amount of fuel and resources,  
but their losses to production and consumption 
and recycling inefficiencies are small enough  
that their engineers claim they could coast all 
the way the Draco Dwarf Galaxy a quarter of a  
million light years from home, a spheroidal galaxy 
that is one of our main galaxy’s many, many,  
many cannibalized victims, and is perhaps best 
known as the object with the highest concentration  
of dark matter that we have currently observed. 
That’s not their destination, but they’d get  
there in just over a million years at their 
current cruising speed of 20% light speed. 
There’s some debate on if they really have 
enough fuel to run their reactors that long,  
especially as leakage happens, but they are 
confident their current telescopic arrays  
could spot any decent-sized frozen ball of ice 
in interstellar space, and they could send a  
robotic tender behind to power-decelerate and 
land on it and deploy an automated refinery  
and rail gun system to launch fuel pods to them 
to capture. Several cousin vessels are planning  
on similar attempts and will report success or 
failure as it happens, plus light lag for the  
signal of course. They’re planning to field test 
that at some point but they don’t really plan on  
needing it as they already have a destination.
With a population now over a few million and  
with a couple centuries of breeding 
and advanced medicine, they expect to  
have a pretty big colony when the time comes but 
still won’t have used up most of their rock yet.  
Now, it’s sort of the tradition on The Rock 
to have worked as a miner at some point,  
up to and including swinging a real vintage 
pickaxe, which is quite a trick in micro-gravity,  
but most real mining is done by robots with 
minimal human supervision, and honestly that’s  
true of everything on the ship in terms 
of primary production of goods and food. 
Tunnels don’t really need much shoring up 
in microgravity and they use something like  
spray-on diamond foam for them, so the whole 
place is shot through of thousands of kilometers  
of tunnels these days ranging from just wide 
enough for a person to float down head first to  
big wide ones with a rotating cylinder inside. 
Many of these will feature lighting and small  
gardens but generally people only live inside 
habitation drums a hundred meters wide or larger,  
which are plentiful enough. The Rock itself has 
all sorts of cylinders and towers and tethers  
hanging out the back of it and what people call 
the Curtain Wall, where giant blocks of stone  
a couple meters wide were placed back from the 
equator of the rock to form a vast cylinder wall  
over 200 kilometers in circumference, and growing 
in height toward the back of the ship every year. 
Neat thing about microgravity is that you can 
actually move a 10-ton block on your own as a  
person, though in air it will resist being shoved 
on more and slow down as the air drags it to a  
halt. It’s more of a psychological barrier but 
it’s another tradition, every adult has put a  
block in at some point and carved their name 
on it, usually many times, a lot of people  
nowadays make it birthday tradition, and some 
similar ones apply to carving out new tunnels,  
slowly turning The Rock into something that looks 
a bit like a floating island with skyscrapers and  
towers on top of it falling through the void with 
millions of fuel pods dragged behind it, or above. 
They estimate they could easily house billions 
but would need to send out resource gatherers  
at that point, and would need many more centuries 
than their journey requires to reach that number,  
though some talk about just leaving 
colonies behind and never stopping the Rock,  
and maybe going all the way out to Draco, and 
they already are less of a single community and  
more like a metropolis with many suburbs and 
satellite communities, all the way from the  
deep caverns in the rock to communication 
arrays tenders nearly a hundred kilometers  
behind, dragged by long strong tethers.
Such could be our experience with Asteroid  
Ships. In the end, if you can pay the power bill 
or the shipping costs for the fusion fuel, it’s  
incredibly easy to just land on one and dig in 
and convert it over time and need into a spaceship  
and other facilities. A comet, especially one 
with a rocky center, would work even better  
for this purpose, and partially because they’re 
already nearly interstellar, saving you the fuel  
needed to break them away from the solar system.
We’ll continue this discussion next week though,  
as we contemplate Planetary 
terraforming Strategies.
As someone who tries to cover the future and 
science, it's important for me to stay up to  
date. And one of the things that drives me 
nuts is having to check in every morning  
to see what is going on in the world and 
getting slammed by endless clickbait news  
articles pitching sensationalism and typically 
just copying each other and whatever point of  
view that particular journalist got from the 
echo chamber they write for. It’s a problem  
everyone recognizes regardless of where they’re 
at on the political spectrum or the planet,  
but it seems like anyone proposing a fix is really 
just offering another echo chamber to visit. 
And that’s what impressed me about 
Ground News. It’s not a news site,  
rather it's the world’s first news comparison 
platform that shows you how breaking news is  
being covered across the political spectrum, 
and gives you a visual breakdown of the new  
sources covering a story and where they align 
politically. It also shows you blindspots,  
like which new stories are being underreported 
by one side or the other. And you can watch  
how international stories are being covered 
across the globe using the interactive map. 
Cofounded by Harleen Kaur, who got her start 
working for NASA on the New Horizons Spacecraft,  
Ground News is a Platform that makes 
it easy to swipe between headlines  
to discover which details are emphasized, 
exaggerated, or left out entirely, and you  
can even see your own news bias preferences, 
if you’d rather not live in an echo chamber. 
Ground News is not better news, it’s 
a better way to read the news, and you  
can go to Ground.News/IsaacArthur to try Ground 
News for free, or subscribe to get access to all  
the features you see here and support our show 
and a small team of independent media outsiders  
working to make the news more transparent, 
again, that’s Ground.News/IsaacArthur.
So that’s it for today but we still have our 
Monthly Livestream coming up this weekend, Sunday  
January 29th at 4 pm Eastern time, where I, and my 
lovely wife and cohost, Sarah, take live questions  
on the show and our topics from the audience chat.
Then it's on to February to talk about turning  
barren planets into homes for humanity, with 
Thursday February 2nd’s episode, Planetary  
Terraforming Strategies. Then on February 9th 
we’ll discuss a surprising candidate for possibly  
hosting alien life, large oceanic worlds with 
massive hydrogen atmospheres, or Hycean Planets.  
And don’t forget to join us after that for the 
mid-month Scifi Sunday episode, on February 12th,  
where we’ll look at the concept of Super Soldiers.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can  
also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting our website, 
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s  
episodes early and ad free on our streaming 
service, Nebula, at nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
