This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
In the future, we may be able produce hamburger
synthetically, sparing the cows and pigs and
chickens…
but we might also be able to have mammoth burgers and dino-steaks.
So today is Independence Day in the US,
the day when I and much of the audience that  lives
in the US gorge ourselves on barbeque before
setting off roughly 30 kilotons of explosive
fireworks.
Needless to say, the default main dish of
any barbeque tends to be grilled meat, and
lots of it, so the future of meat seemed a
proper topic for the day.
Also, needless to say, meat is often a controversial
topic.
Many folks object to eating meat for moral
or environmental reasons, but today we’ll
mostly bypass those considerations.
I suspect most of us, regardless of whether
it’s morally valid, don’t lose a lot of
sleep about eating animals but would prefer
to not do so if we could get something cheaper
that also matched or exceeded the quality.
That pretty much describes the main purpose
of technology too, to find more cheap and
efficient means of satisfying human needs
and desires without sacrificing quality or
even improving it.
This is what we will focus on then, targeting
on approaches that let us have our steak and
eat it too, but let me put a word of warning
out about any argument that focuses on telling
people not to do something because it’s
inefficient.
First, it’s a bit of loser on the policy
front, because it tends to attract vocal advocates
that come off as self-righteous, and we all
loathe those people even if we’re almost
all guilty of it too, on something; and second,
one always want to be careful what doors you
open.
Personally I love a good salad I grew myself
in my own garden and picked minutes before
it went in the dish, but if we’re aiming
for efficiency, not only is meat inefficient,
but so is home gardening, and worse, so are
plants.
Animals, being what they are, like to walk
around, fly, fight, migrate and whatnot, which
is the stuff that makes life exciting, but
it's all very energy-intensive and thermodynamics
means eating plants for that, let alone eating
animals that ate those plants, is not very
efficient.
But if you think the calorie per acre drop
off from plants to meat is bad, you don’t
even want to know what it is from sunlight
to corn or wheat.
Getting 10 million food calories, or 42 gigajoules,
out of an acre per year is pretty good farming
for even a staple crop, and to keep things
round and metric we’ll say 100 gigajoules
a hectare.
That same hectare gets about 100 gigajoules
of sunlight in a few hours of day time.
Depending on where you’re farming and what
you’re farming and how, you’re getting
at best a .1% conversion of sunlight to food
energy.
That’s one of the reasons we like to discuss
concepts like hydroponics or vertical farming
or space farming here on the channel, we can
do way better when we control all the factors
and can ensure every photon of light is optimized
in its use.
This, again, is exactly what we mean when
we say technology is about getting us more
of what we want for less, or things we could
not have even had before.
Being hyper-efficient at producing what we
want, not at sculpting those wants to what
is efficient.
Personal restraint is a good thing, but I
tend to feel it should be personal, not imposed
or pressured, wherever possible, and we do
research and technology to expand our options,
not limit them.
Our topic today being synthetic meat, it’s
also important to remember that is merely
the most urgent thing to synthesize, if we
can start synthesizing other foods more economically
and ecologically than we grow them, then that
will come next.
Done right, it means fresh food on demand
and ridiculously cheap and high in quality
that is equal or better to traditional foods
in every important way, done wrong, it’s
where we get rather selective and high-handed
in defining what the ‘important’ part
is.
In this regard we don’t even want to limit
ourselves to nutritional value, taste, texture,
smell, and look, but also remember why we
like big barbeques and feasts so much.
Which is to say, they appeal to our very primal
enjoyment of sharing food and company while
that food is prepared, food and everything
around it is one of the core drives and thus
one of those fulcrums for things like stress,
anxiety, confidence, comradely, and so on.
There’s a lot of debate about early humans
tended to eat, partially because you’re
talking about many thousands of years of many
thousands of diverse tribes with changing
options, and partially because it’s hard
for us to find out what types and ratios of
food they actually ate.
When you think about it, even when we do find
an ancient corpse intact enough to analyze
their stomach contents, that’s a pretty
dubious sample since it was their last meal,
the thing they ate before they died, which
typically was not from what we’d call natural
causes.
Even those few who did die of old age probably
did it mostly toothless and thus not eating
their preferred lifetime diet.
So it skews the sample a bit.
Of course we do know what our ancestors mostly
ate, and that was mostly nothing, hunger was
pretty common thing for them and most of us
nowadays don’t really know that feeling
of grinding despair that prolonged and regular
deprivation causes or the joy that came when
the hunters or gathers came in carrying a
deer or sack of tubers and they could turn
to their kids and tell them they were eating
today and well.
Our barbeques and feasts commemorate that
very old and very primal relief and joy and
companionship that occurs in the acquisition,
preparation, and consumption of such bounty
with our friends and family.
Which not to say you should rush off to one
today or start planning a dinner party, nor
casually glut yourself, but personally – just
speaking for myself – I tend to find hobbies
like gardening or cooking or hosting or attending
very positive things for oneself and others
and daresay a lot of folks would be happier
if they spent more time doing that and less
time online or watching TV… except for this
show of course, which you should watch and
subscribe and like and share with others.
Needless to say an excess of these things
isn’t a great idea either, I just got done
with a year and a half of diet and exercise
to get back to into the shape I was when I
left the Army and knock off the hundred pounds
my joy of cooking gifted me.
But yeah, feasts are good things, go enjoy
life, but with moderation.
I get asked a lot on Memorial Day if, as a
veteran, I approve of folks having cookouts
on days of remembrance, and I always say yes,
just don’t forget what the day is about,
which I tend to assume they have since they
asked my opinion without using a Ouija Board,
wrong holiday.
Whether in celebration or mourning or both
at once, sharing a meal with loved ones is
often a good thing.
Key thing, before we finally get into the
meat of today’s topic, is that food is about
more than simple physical sustenance, so anything
we do which is synthetic needs to address
more than that.
It also offers us some rare new opportunities,
if I can vat grow or print a rhino steak or
elephant burger, that’s something I can
eat guilt free, indeed it can even be beneficial
if some of the profits and R&D efforts are
being directed to maintaining nature preserves
for rhinos or elephants.
Always look for those extras, if I can bring
back an extinct species like the Dodo or the
Mammoth, from related technologies to growing
exotic meats, or vice-versa, that’s a very
good thing.
So too if I can synthesize bread flour or
rice in huge vats or printers instead of in
a field that could be used for other things
and at a fraction of the price and with a
far more varied nutritional and flavor spectrum.
I mean, if you like bacon bits on your salad,
wouldn’t a bacon salad be even cooler?
And while one might question the ethics of
funding de-extinction technology just to have
a mammoth burger or dino-steak, if that ultimately
ends in being able visit the zoo and see a
sabre-tooth tiger while eating some Kentucky-Fried
Raptor that never involved a slaughterhouse,
and which resulted in no expanding waistline
or hardening arteries because we’d better
mastered biotechnology and medicine, that’s
hard to argue as anything but awesome.
Our main focus for today is going to be on
the current efforts, mostly on the printing
of various modern meats, but we don’t want
to ignore what really impressive biotechnology
might offer, and that might be some surprising
things, like a hybrid apple tree whose apples
were rich not just in proteins but those essential
amino acids human bodies don’t make and
often are deficient in plants.
Or an apple tree whose apples were actually
meat, which sounds pretty creepy when you
think about what the sap might need to be,
but especially as we move out from Earth to
new worlds we’ve claimed or built, creating
some decidedly new and evolutionarily implausible
ecologies does seem like the sort of thing
we’d do, and we’ll look at that more throughout
the summer.
I should also mention another alternative
on that is to grow the whole critter without
a brain.
There are lots of mutations in animals that
cause a condition known as "microcephaly",
literally "tiny head".
As you might guess these mutations result
in animals with small heads and small brains.
In fact, in some cases mutant animals will
be born with nothing but a brain-stem, in
other words, no actual cognitive function,
so we're talking about cows, pigs and chickens
that are really just living meat in the shape
of an animal.
Sounds rather ghastly too, like something
from the Matrix, though arguably less so that
eating something with a brain, but it does
make the apple-meat tree sound nicer.
Until relatively recently most meat alternatives
were usually either focused on actual meat
alternatives, like eating bugs or some other
animal we deemed healthier or more efficient,
or taking a plant like soybeans or mushrooms
and making it into products that look or tasted
more like meat.
I got raised mostly vegetarian so I tried
a lot of those growing up and I actually like
some of them but never thought they much tasted
like meat.
If you’re curious, my mom is a vegetarian,
not for ethical reasons she just doesn’t
like meat, but you typically have to enjoy
a food to cook it well so I was usually quite
happy as a kid to eat veggie too, at home
anyway, but while my love of vegetables hasn’t
waned, I’m not personally fond of most meat
substitutes nor do I regard them as even vaguely
tasting like the meat they allegedly substituted,
even where they were tasty in their own right,
which some are.
I choose to view them as a new type of food
though rather than a replacement.
Synthetic meats aim to be the real deal, so
we might as well ask how we make the basic
meat cells.
As you probably know meat is mostly made out
of proteins, which are one of the basic types
of building blocks of life, although it certainly
has fat too and a negligible amount of carbohydrates,
two other types of life's basic building blocks.
It turns out that plants also have all three
of these building blocks, but in different
variations and in different quantities.
So if you want to turn plants into meat, you
really need to take a very close look at the
specific types of proteins and fats found
in the meat you want to copy, then go and
find some plants that make those specific
proteins and fats, if not in the same quantities,
and break them apart biochemically, or even
synthesize them in a lab.
This has actually already been done for beef,
and the exact process was a lot more weird
then you're probably imagining.
Basically, scientists digested a bit of beef
to get it into a form that could be processed,
then fed this slurry into something called
a chromatography column, which is basically
just a packed substrate that separate molecules
based on physical properties.
They let this drip through the column and
at the bottom they collected all the individual
building blocks, each and every type of protein
and fat, and gave these samples to human tasters.
The tasters wrote descriptions of each component,
which is really the only way you can figure
out how the different parts contribute to
the overall beefiness, and a synthetic beef
was assembled by putting the parts back together
again, based upon how their flavor was described
by the tasters.
Obviously, it's a little more complicated
than that, since the order you add the parts
and any sort of additional treatment is important,
especially for the finished texture.
For this Beef v1.0 they stuck with a ground-up
product, the type you would use in a hamburger,
which is a bit of a cheat since it doesn't
have to have many significant textures, but
you've got to start somewhere.
You can imagine that steaks are going to be
a bit trickier, but certainly not impossible,
and will likely involve some 3D-printing process,
where the individual proteins and fats are
added layer by layer as the steak is built
up.
But once you master steaks you can really
go after any fully-textured product, like
chicken breasts, pork chops or fish fillets,
the sky's the limit.
This is very expensive, and also not ideal
either.
One of the big costs is the growing medium,
and that frequently involves animal blood,
which would rather defeat the point of the
process if you’re aiming to not kill animals,
though I suppose sucking a liter of blood
out of livestock every few weeks is nicer
than the alternative.
One of the processes looking to make this
all way cheaper is a new serum which creates
it’s ideal cocktail of sugars, salts, and
amino acids in giant bioreactors and recycles
and filters them during the growth process
to be less wasteful.
 
The first lab grown burger cost $325,000 in
2013, two years later it was down to $36 a
pound, or $80 a kilogram.
Needless to say, that’s still way too pricey,
and the cost has dropped a bit more since,
you can actually buy this stuff too, but not
a lot and we’re still talking ground beef,
not a porterhouse steak.
Still we’ve got some plausible indicators
it might be price competitive or even cheaper
in the next few years, and I’d feel fairly
confident they’ll be for sale in most restaurants
for a decent price and quality inside a decade.
The burgers mind you, let’s talk steak.
Cells in a petri dish only have to be fed
enough to split into more cells and form the
shape and size that we want.
They won't grow into inedible bone, organs
or hair, and certainly won't waste precious
energy galloping across the pasture, unless
something goes horribly wrong in the laboratory.
So in theory this is cheaper and should just
be a matter of time, but we actually want
that bone for some meats and more over, those
cells aren’t growing in anything like the
right ways in a petri dish to make a cut of
meat.
So that can presumably be improved over time,
but tends to lean us more toward the printer
approach, grow the stock and print it out,
at the lowest resolution we can get away with
since as we noted in the Santa Claus Machine,
the more zoomed in you try to print, the slower
everything goes, since each layer is thinner.
Indeed we got our first lab grown steak some
months back, but it was only 5 millimeters
thick, a fifth of an inch, and had an estimated
cost of $50.
So we’re getting there, as both the growth
techniques and general 3D printing technology
improve, but you’ll probably be replacing
your grill before you can be throwing these
on there for equal or cheaper than current
steaks.
Passed the taste though, and we can rely on
improvements to technology and economy of
scale to help there.
Of course I should note that cost of food
isn’t always the dominant factor in sales,
and a niche premium market for the stuff ought
to help fund improvements and we do seem to
see that already developing.
Hard to guess but I’d expect that to come
in from three angles, premium sales to those
with ethical objections but a fondness for
meat, bulk production of ground meats that
circumvent the printer, and probably an exotic
meats market.
That one is hard to guess as I think many
folks would be aghast at eating elephant even
if it was never an elephant, but if the company
were kicking part of the profit to elephant
nature preserves, it might suddenly become
all the rage.
Also a motivation for research in growing
or printing bone too, for meat cuts like the
T-bone or for artificial ivory.
Exotics meats, even those from outright extinct
creatures, could get to be a big thing, as
it’s a totally different flavor.
But for most folks who enjoy meat, the absolute
best thing they can imagine eating is a perfectly
grilled steak, seasoned to perfection and
served with all the rights sides and in good
company.
But just like it's hard for us to imagine
the beauty of a sunset on Saturn, with its
rings and exotic gases, and how it might actually
be more spectacular than one on Earth, it
can be really hard to imagine how meat could
get any better than that perfect steak.
But why couldn't it?
Earlier we talked about building synthetic
meat from basic protein and fat building blocks
in proportions determined by human tasters,
to try to replicate beef as closely as possible.
There is no reason to stop at beef-as-we-know-it,
though, once we've captured the essence of
what people like about it.
Such things offer a motivation to develop
the technology even if it did bottleneck at
a price above traditional meat production,
because it’s something you can’t get traditionally.
But that also applies to places where normal
meat would just not be viable.
As we move out to space, to go look at the
Sunset on Saturn or the Earthrise on the Moon,
it’s often not going to be convenient to
take a thousand acres of pastureland with
you, or even just a stable where the animals
could be fed hydroponically grown food themselves.
In which case, bioreactors and meat printers
allow relatively small and automated production
of any type of meat and in the types and amounts
a handful of people want, so nothing is getting
discarded on some ship or small space station
or asteroid mining site, nor have to be flown
in at likely outrageous prices and frozen
or freeze dried to save mass.
Such technology opens the door to just having
such a printer right in your home, but I should
say realistically such printers will likely
never be so fast they could compete with a
grocery store, especially one with rapid drone
deliveries, which I’m betting will be a
thing, artificial meat or not, within a decade
or two tops.
If the print times for a typical steak can
be reduced to a few hours, rather than a few
weeks like it is currently, we might start
seeing meat-printers in homes like we see
breadmakers though.
I suspect households with pets might see the
critters parking themselves impatiently next
to the Meat-a-tron 3000 though.
Exciting options, for the near future and
the not-to-distant future too, though hard
to predict the specifics and timelines, given
how much tastes vary.
Like a lot of technology, it offers some great
options and fixes a lot of problems, but,
there is no way we can imagine how good it
will be until we taste it.
One big aspect of today’s topic is that
when we improve our knowledge of science for
one thing, it often helps us solve problems
in related areas and find new challenges.
The ability to mass manufacture artificial
steaks is likely to have a big impact on all
sorts of other areas of biology and medicine,
like being able to grow or clone replacement
organs or synthesize macromolecules for many
other medical uses.
While we tend to focus more on this channel
on physics, biology is every bit as critical
to humanity’s future, and in some ways more
so.
If you’d like to learn more about it, try
out the Computational Biology course on Brilliant.
Their online courses and daily challenges
let you enhance your knowledge of math and
science with easy to learn interactive methods
from the comfort of your own home and at your
own pace.
To make it that even easier, Brilliant now
lets you download any of their dozens of interactive
courses through the mobile app, and you'll
be able to solve fascinating problems in math,
science, and computer science no matter where
you are, or how spotty your internet connection.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
We’ll be looking more at advanced applications
of biotechnology this summer, starting with
a look at bioships, void ecology, and space
whales in a couple weeks.
Before that though, we noted today that these
technologies would be critical to letting
us get into space so we could see the rings
of Saturn up close or watch the Earth rise
on the Moon, and next week we’ll take a
look at Space Tourism.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
