Among the billions and billions of planets and 
moons in this galaxy, we may encounter many  
examples of double planets, but what would 
they be like and could life arise on them? 
When we think of planets out there in 
the cosmos, we usually envision solitary  
spheres orbiting a star or perhaps one with 
a large moon or two like we do. Sometimes we  
envision not planets but large habitable 
moons, around some even larger gas giant. 
But out there in the vastness of space, some 
planets have formed an extraordinary partnership,  
locked in a cosmic dance with another planet, 
that eventually leads to them looking at each  
other’s face all day every day for billions of 
years to come. These are the double planets – a  
fascinating phenomenon that raises even 
more questions about their formation,  
evolution, and the unique conditions 
that might be present in them. 
Could we find worlds where neither was a 
moon, but both were large and habitable,  
like Earth, and would life have evolved from 
one of those double sand spread to the other?  
Could life continue to move back and forth 
between them? And would such life tend to  
adapt to natural space travel, able to move 
to other planets or asteroids in that system? 
We will discuss these and other ideas, such as 
the Rocheworld, where two planet’s form a physical  
land bridge between each other, and if those sound 
like fun topics, make sure to hit those like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons.
It isn’t too hard to imagine standing on  
the surface of one planet and gazing up at the 
skies at a giant body, as we do with our moon,  
but what if that body was covered in oceans and 
green continents and white clouds? As much as the  
Moon fascinates us, surely that living world being 
in the sky would grab our attention even more. 
But is it as big as the Moon in 
the sky? Or larger or smaller? 
Of course this would depend on not just its size 
but its distance and thus seems hard to say. We  
can answer the question here and say a double 
planet could never be smaller in the sky than  
our current Moon appears. Earth is 4 times wider 
than the Moon and a copy of Earth where the Moon  
was would be 4 times wider to our eyes and 16 
times bigger in width and height, and also 16  
times brighter during a full moon. But it could be 
further away, rather than closer, except it would  
need to be 4 times further away and that would 
take it to the very edge of Earth’s Hill Sphere,  
the region where Earth Gravity dominates over 
other bodies. Beyond here, the double planet would  
orbit the Sun instead, and just be a neighbor and 
they would orbit with one a couple million miles  
or more closer or further from the Sun. That 
Hill Sphere, and where you can stably orbit  
a place as a moon or partner, is also controlled 
by how close you are to a given star, and so is  
smaller in the habitable zones of red or orange 
dwarfs, and where you have large neighboring  
planets like Jupiter perturbing your orbit.
But what it means is that you wouldn’t ever  
expect a double planet to be significantly 
smaller in the sky than our own Moon. In the  
other direction, there’s a limit, the Roche 
Limit, at which the gravity and tidal forces  
from your neighboring planet would begin ripping 
your own surface off, which we’ll cover later. 
We will also cover the special case where the two 
planets are tidally locked and both still have 24  
hour day-night cycle, specifically a double Earth 
case, which we might imagine happened if someone  
accidentally opened up an inter-universe wormhole 
so that a copy of Earth from one Multiverse fell  
into a neighboring one so both Earth’s orbit each 
other. And we’ll consider air bridges between such  
worlds, sea or land bridges between, or 
artificial ones like the Acheron River we  
discussed in Colonizing Pluto between that planet 
and its own relatively large moon, arguably a case  
of double dwarf planets. We’ll even discuss 
multi-body scenarios like several planets  
sharing an orbit, such as a Klemperer Rosette.
But let’s begin by asking how such double planets  
could arise, and what forces could bring them 
together and forever intertwine their destinies? 
There’s a few possible origins for Double Planets 
and the simplest is that the formed from the same  
protoplanetary disc, just as planets usually 
do, only as the clumps emerged, rather than all  
falling into one spot, we had two pair of clumps 
forming close enough to be in each other’s Hill  
Sphere’s but not quite close enough to merge. 
It would help if we knew for sure how all our  
own planets formed and got moons, but the default 
assumption is that there were way more planets in  
the early days of this solar system, and that many 
were tiny ones that fell into some other planet or  
the Sun, or became moons, or were ejected from the 
Solar System, or even just vaporized by the solar  
wind and radiation like happens to comets.
Two forming close this might not be too  
improbable, but in the highly unstable early 
solar system, it would be much easier to  
perturb them so that they merged or broke apart.
Alternatively, a capture, one planet capturing the  
other, or they each other, is also a possibility. 
It wouldn’t be the most likely outcome of two  
neighboring planets being perturbed near each 
other, but in a galaxy of a trillion worlds,  
even were it only 1 in a million that would 
leave a million double planets. Our current  
ability to model developing planetary 
systems isn’t good enough to let us speak  
to the probability of this with any accuracy 
but I wouldn’t think it was so rare as that. 
So too, we believe our Moon formed from 
the wreckage after a dwarf planet slammed  
proto-Earth and ejected matter into space. Some 
from each object, some lost to the void forever,  
some falling back to the New Earth, 
and some forming our Large Moon. 
It would be entirely plausible that a high 
energy impact of two other bodies, possibly one  
a Super Earth, could have jettisoned out enough 
material to form an entire second planet. Indeed,  
that debris disc might have been big enough to 
allow some further out to form another moon too,  
orbiting both new planets. As a side note, either 
planet could have a smaller moon close to it. 
That gives us three different pathways to a 
double planet and none seeming very odd. There  
is a distinct unlikeliness you would have two of 
nearly the same size and both habitable, but that  
might merely mean that 1 in 100 systems has double 
planets and 1 in 100 of those has a combination  
where both are half to double earth’s mass.
There are no implications they would be  
exactly the same size or even close, and 
so one could argue we never get a double  
planet as we just have one being a moon of the 
other. But this offers no concrete definition  
free from arbitrary cutoffs and categories. 
Many have sought to define double planets,  
and I would say the only necessary cut off is that 
Earth and our Moon should not be counted as such,  
given that it is the defining example of a moon.
There’s three real factors in play here worth  
considering. First, is either body worthy of the 
name planet in terms of its own raw mass? Second,  
is either just so much larger than the other so 
as to merit nothing more than being a Moon, as  
Earth would be around Jupiter or as even some ice 
Giant like Neptune might be around a brown dwarf? 
And third, what’s the distance between them and 
orbital mechanics. Isaac Asimov once suggested  
the definition for a double planet instead 
of moon is when the barycenter of orbit was  
outside of the larger body. Moons don’t really 
orbit planets, they all orbit a shared spot with  
their partner called a barycenter but for most 
planet-moon systems we know of, that barycenter  
is inside the bigger planet and often in its core 
rather than upper regions. But even these still  
wobble and it’s one way we detect exoplanets 
around other stars or possible exomoons around  
exoplanets. We know where they should be, but they 
are just a hair off, and in a way that repeats,  
as that satellite orbits it and gravitationally 
yanks it back and forth a bit, and from that  
we can determine the mass and distance of the 
orbiting body. And I think if we had two large  
bodies, even of very different masses, that 
did orbit each other but at great distance,  
they may still be sibling planets but no longer 
seem a pair of twins, maybe fraternal twins. 
In any event, no clear line seems drawable 
beyond what we have with Earth and the Moon,  
so we will not bother defining it further, and 
while the distance between them might seem the  
lesser factor of those three, the others being 
their total size and relative size to each other,  
the distance between them is the biggest 
factor in other aspects of their relationship. 
Bodies which orbit each other slowly exchange 
angular momentum, until they reach a state of  
tidal locking in which first one then both bodies 
keep the same face pointing toward each other. 
The overwhelmingly dominant force in that tidal 
friction is the distance between the bodies,  
rising with the fifth power, so that an object 
twice as close will tidally lock two to the  
fifth or 32 times faster, while one ten times 
further away will take ten to the fifth or  
100,000 time slower, all things being equal.
If you’ve ever wondered how that happens,  
understand that two bodies are constantly 
exchanging vast amounts of gravitational  
energy with each other. It is huge, and the 
sorts of energy moving between Earth and the  
Moon over one month of orbit dwarf the energy 
the Sun shines upon us during that same period.  
And they are not point-like bodies moving in 
perfect circles. The Moon pulls on the side  
of the planet it is nearest harder than the far 
side, and more or less depending on if it’s at its  
closest or furthest point of orbit from Earth. 
This distorts the planet, and a lot too, we’re  
talking miles of change. Those bits stretched 
toward the Moon experience even more gravity. 
As the Moon and Earth orbit and rotate to move 
this spot it’s no longer directly facing the moon,  
and some new places bulge out to take its 
place, that other area still takes time to sag  
back. While it’s up, it’s experiencing a stronger 
pull of gravity by being closer, and this doesn’t  
balance with the other side just getting ready to 
be in the middle, so there is a slightly higher  
force on the side of the planet rotating away and 
that force is back toward the middle. So this is a  
breaking action, slowing the wheel until it stops 
rotating at a different speed than the other body  
orbits. And this is tidal locking, where the one 
body rotates at the same rate it orbits. This  
is why the Moon always shows us more or less the 
same face, and why virtually every moon is tidally  
locked to its parent planet. Mass is a powerful 
secondary factor in this, so bigger planets cause  
faster locks to them, while also resisting a lock 
longer, hence why the Moon is locked but Earth,  
being far bigger, is not. Not yet anyway.
Composition matters too, as oceans sag back  
down into place way faster than rock, and are less 
dense thus have less mass to generate gravity,  
and both cause less tidal friction, same for 
atmospheres. We estimate our own Moon – which  
was closer at the time it formed – only took 
about a hundred million years to tidally lock  
after forming. We estimate the Earth had 
a day only 12 hours long back then too,  
and it’s been slowly getting longer, though the 
tidal force on Earth is diminishing as the Moon  
creeps further away. Again the tidal locking 
rate goes with the fifth power of distance. 
If we are assuming two habitable planets though, 
that time should be longer, and we would expect  
Earth to lock to the moon in about 50 billion more 
years. About ten times as long the Sun has left  
before it burns Earth out, and while there are 
ways to prevent or delay that for even trillions  
of years, they all involve a scale and capability 
that permits you to unlock tidally locked planets  
too, so Earth will never likely get locked to 
our moon. But a planet half the distance and  
80 times the mass of the Moon, like Earth is, 
is going to lock roughly 200,000 times faster,  
as it goes with the fifth power of distance but 
also the square of mass. And 50 billion divided  
by that is around a quarter of a million years. 
Though that’s a very loose figure and the equation  
for calculating tidal locking can generate some 
iffy numbers. For instance Earth, by the basic  
equation, would have locked to the Sun already, 
and indeed I’ve seen this in arguments that  
Earth must be younger than we think, but the Moon 
orbiting us messes with that and so does having an  
atmosphere and oceans. Distance being a stronger 
factor than mass, I think if we had a double  
planet and no moon around either – which is also 
possible – we likely would have a tidally locked  
pair of planets long before life could arise and 
evolve the eyeballs to see their twin planet with. 
It would also appear huge in that sky, 8 times 
wider and 64 times more area reflecting sunlight  
at night, or 64 times brighter than our own 
full moon. Though as reminder, our eyes are  
logarithmic in their light sensitivity, so we 
tend not to realize the Sun at noon is hundreds  
of thousands of times brighter than a full Moon 
is, so even this huge twin planet in the sky is  
not allowing plant growth by moonlight or 
leaving any doubt that it is nighttime. 
And the Sun both planets shared would 
still illuminate all sides of both planets,  
only planets tidally locked to a star have one 
side eternally lit and the other in eternal  
darkness. Also, regarding moons, much like planets 
around binary stars, it is possible for a binary  
planet to have a moon of its own, or for the pair 
to share a more distant moon orbiting both. Weird  
orbits like figure-eights around both are 
unlikely to occur naturally or be stable,  
though I’d bet civilizations on double 
planets would make a lot of spaceships  
and stations on stranger orbits like that.
A loose rule of thumb is that a body can’t  
have a stable satellite further away from it than 
a ninth the distance to whatever it orbits itself,  
and I would also say it would need to never get 
anywhere near as far away as the L1 Lagrange point  
of that body to its own parent. I’d also guess 
that unless we had the big collision disc case  
from earlier from which one planet formed and the 
outer part of the disc formed a moon around both,  
that we would only expect moons captured since 
the pair became doubles. I think any moon  
predating that coupling would probably have 
gotten ejected or collided with one of them. 
Now again, it is very unlikely we would have 
two double planets, even habitable ones,  
that both had roughly Earth Mass and day 
length, but we would expect them to have the  
same day length as each other, not too mention 
year length, and then their total day length  
is based on their distance from each other.
Orbital periods have to do with the mass of  
both objects, when they’re in the same order 
of magnitude at least, so if you’re guessing  
that a double planet’s distance from Earth – in a 
Double Earth case – would be geostationary height,  
you’re in the right zone but no. It would be 
a center-to-center distance of about 54,000  
kilometers or 33,500 miles, or about 26,000 
miles from facing surface to facing surface,  
while geostationary over Earth is 22,000 
miles up. I will call these Earth-1 and  
Earth-2 and assume Earth-1 is the more 
massive of the pair, though for this  
example I’m treating them as near identical.
Days get longer a lot faster as we draw these  
bodies apart, at twice the distance it’s already 
3 and a half days. At the moon’s distance,  
it would be 19 and a half days, so shorter 
than a month but much too long for a day,  
and again the partner planet isn’t giving a lot 
of moonlight, or planet-light, at this distance.  
Though at the 24-hour day distance it would be 
more than hundred times brighter than our full  
moon and interestingly that means it’s visible and 
impressive day and night, but only from the half  
of the planet that can see it. The other side 
never sees it, and same for the other side of  
the twin planet, and neither gets any moonlight so 
has fairly dark nights. This is likely to hugely  
impact the biology of both planets, but the tidal 
forces are likely to be an even bigger impact. 
At this distance, about seven times closer than 
the Earth-Moon system, and with eighty times the  
mass, your gravitational force between these 
worlds is 4000 times stronger. That means when  
the planet whips around to the other side, the 
force yanking those tides back the other way are  
doing it 4000 times more enthusiastically than 
our Moon does. And while we don’t really know  
what role the Moon plays in our tectonics, 
we are comfortably certain it is big one,  
so we should assume that double planet 
has a good deal more tectonic activity. 
Indeed, gravity on Earth-1 is going to 
be 1.4% lower on the side facing Earth-2,  
and vice-versa, while the sides facing 
away from each other have 1.4% higher  
gravity. This makes me revise an opinion I 
gave on this topic when I covered it way,  
way back in season 1 in a video about half our 
normal episode length, where I said we wouldn’t  
expect any air-bridge between these planets.
An Air Bridge that actual animals can fly  
through between Earth-1 and Earth-2 still seems 
dubious, as our atmosphere is unbreathable just  
30 miles up, not 30,000. However, we have a lot 
of factors that needed to be considered here and  
which can’t be accurately modeled yet. First, that 
whole double planet system has quite the combined  
magnetic field that’s probably helping keep solar 
wind from stripping air off both planets. Second,  
all those tides, at a pretty extreme level, 
probably are surging air up even more than  
water. Third, there’s a good chance this place 
has got some serious and steady volcanic activity  
going on that’s spewing mass up into space. 
Enough that I would not be too surprised if  
there was a haze between the planets and even a 
thin fog up at their shared L1 Lagrange Point. 
That makes it seem a lot more plausible that 
we would some transference of microbes between  
planets, so that one seeded the other 
and that they occasionally seeded back  
and forth – which might have weird effects 
like every couple millions years you had  
an invasive species or extinction event 
as some wildly different but compatible  
microbes or spores fell down from the heavens.
And two last points, we know that extremophiles  
can adapt to some insane conditions if they 
can do it gradually, and we know that the  
reason Earth has so little hydrogen and helium is 
because of the long stripping process of our Sun,  
and these worlds might have retained more and 
so organisms that successfully used molecular  
hydrogen or helium as a lifting gas could have 
evolved and gotten big. Some gas bag or space  
whale evolving to be able to move along that 
ultra-low density atmospheric column between  
those two planets is not unreasonable, and of 
course from there we can imagine other organisms  
learning to hitch rides on them. Maybe it uses 
oxygen as its equivalent of a ballast tank in  
some pocket or orifice a decent-sized critter 
could hop into. And given time that truly  
does open the door to such creatures evolving 
further to wander their interplanetary void. 
Now we can eventually build a space elevator 
between these, as a physical bridge,  
and we discussed that more with our Acheron 
River design between Pluto and its moon Charon,  
as here there is a steady straight line between 
surface to surface and while they may be a bit  
eccentric as opposed to circular in orbit of 
each other, any elevator is likely to be able  
to handle some stretch and can always have winch 
elements adjusting the tether length and tension.  
They will need impressively strong material 
to build that elevator out of, same as us,  
but I think they would be a lot more willing 
to try projects like that and something like  
the Apollo Program as soon as they thought they 
could work. Given a bit more technology, or active  
support systems, they could build a space tower 
right between those planets and run thousands of  
major transport lines down it. Indeed you could 
use that to slowly stabilize their mutual orbits  
so as to never drift further or closer apart.
Could a physical bridge form naturally between  
them? Well surprisingly the answer is yes and this 
brings us to the Roche world. If our planetary  
pair were slowly growing closer, a few things 
would happen. First the day length would shorten,  
and when they were about 13,000 miles from 
surface to surface, that day period has  
dropped to 12 hours. That force between worlds 
shifting gravity rises from 1.4% to over 5%,  
and all that tectonic activity and tides and 
volcanic eruptions goes up to. That doesn’t  
mean the planet is uninhabitable and indeed 
this is how fast we think Earth was spinning  
back when life started. Whatever air bridge you 
have between worlds is now orders of magnitude  
thicker than it was, though it might still 
be much too thin to breathe, hard to say. 
As this distance contracts, that atmospheric 
column between worlds will get thicker. And  
at some point, you would expect to reach the 
Roche Limit. The Roche limit is as close as  
an object holding itself together by gravity can 
get to another large body before being shredded,  
as the larger body pulls on the surface of the 
smaller one harder than the smaller one pulls on  
that surface itself. Material starts coming off 
and ripping the smaller world slowly to pieces.  
This gets worse from both the deformation from 
gravity and the centrifugal spin near the surface. 
However, while Earth might rip apart a small moon 
that came too close, this situation is different.  
Equal sized, or near equal sized, bodies have much 
lower Roche Limits, so close they practically have  
to be touching. But even our moon, if brought 
close to Earth, would have to be within 6000  
miles, core to core, before the surface gravity 
on the Moon reached zero on the spot closest to  
Earth, where Earth’s gravity now pulled as hard as 
the Moon did. They would only be a little over a  
thousand miles apart from closest point to point… 
and very easy to build a space elevator between  
them now and an air bridge would seem guaranteed, 
maybe even a comfortably breathable one. 
Can this actually get to the 
point where they are touching? 
Yes, and not necessarily apocalyptically, at 
least not in the short term. On geological  
timelines as the two planets merge this 
is going to be devastating to the point of  
sterilization but not necessarily when they touch.
As they approach they stop being spherical planets  
and get more egg-shaped, and then when they 
touch you get a land bridge but also a sea bridge  
over it and presumably can now sail between 
these planets. Your day is now only 4 hours  
long and on the back sides of these planets 
there is going to be some centrifugal force,  
and if you smashed the merging pair at this 
point you could end up with a donut shaped  
planet emerging instead. Over time this bridge 
is going to thicken and shorten and should always  
have seas and breathable air over it with down 
pointing to the ground beneath you though it’s  
going to be on the weaker side. Your land and sea 
is always sliding to where gravity is strongest so  
there won’t be places without or where the 
gravity isn’t perpendicular to the ground. 
With sufficient engineering you could make 
something like this artificially and stably,  
and while I suspect there will be plenty of 
examples out in the cosmos of this process  
occurring naturally, I’d imagine intentional 
mergers or actions to slow it down to keep  
it a tourist hotspot would be common. Or maybe 
folks would try to detonate one to turn it into  
a hoop planet. But I think the artificial 
rocheworld, one connected at the 24 hour mark  
and by some very large bridge megastructure, 
would be the more common approach to this. 
One last topic for contemplation is the idea 
of triple worlds or quadruple worlds or more,  
and this is where we get to the Klemperer 
Rosette. There are quasi-stable orbital  
spots in any planet’s orbit around its star, 
or moons around a planet, at the L3, L4,  
and L5 Lagrange points which are respectively 180 
degrees ahead, and 60 degrees ahead and behind the  
orbiting body. But if we put two at the counter 
locations, each other’s L3s, we could then add 4  
more objects at their two L4 and two L5 spots. If 
they’re all the same mass, or alternating mass,  
three of two different masses alternating 
every-other spot, this is decently stable and  
maintenance of that is well-within the ability of 
any civilization who put them there to begin with. 
This is now a stable 6-body system, and you can 
see our Megastructure series for discussion on  
how to build and move planets. You might 
make shells around large gas giant planet  
of compressed gas as a way of storing fuel for 
your sun for down the road while having a planet  
a hundred times larger than Earth to live 
on. You could do 6, or 8, or even hundreds,  
complete with an interlocking ring suspended 
above the north or south poles for superfast  
transport between them and stabilization purposes.
You can also do this with no central object,  
so you could have 6 large moons orbiting 
a bigger planet that’s orbiting that sun,  
or leave the planet out, though it would make it 
more prone to perturbation. One might imagine a  
civilization engaging in Starlifitng to mine it’s 
own sun, as we discussed in Atmospheric Mining,  
and extending its lifetime in the process, 
having five dozen Saturn Mass planets in a  
Klemperer Rosette around that Sun, each storing 
tens of millions of years of fusion fuel,  
each with a hundred giant continents on them, 
and each orbited by a dozen Earth-sized moons  
in another Klemperer Rosette, for a total 
of 60 Mega-Earths and 720 normal Earths,  
or 6720 Earths worth of living area and with 
over a billion years of fuel waiting inside them. 
If two planets are better than one, surely more 
is even better. After all, the sky is the limit,  
unless you’re on a Roche world of course, in 
which case the sky is the rest of the planet. 
As we saw today, a double planet, or just one with 
a moon bigger or smaller than ours, would hugely  
impact how life emerged and evolved there. The 
process by which life arose and moved from that  
first basic cell to us nowadays is fascinating, as 
is contemplating that future out among the galaxy. 
If it fascinates you too, check Cell to 
Singularity, a free-to-play science-based  
game that walks you up the evolutionary and 
tech trees from that first moment all the way  
through a technological singularity and settling 
neighboring worlds. Some of Cell to Singularity’s  
developers are part of our audience, and so 
Cell to Singularity explores many concepts we’ve  
discussed on this show before and they share our 
belief that a story or game can be entertaining  
while being based on real science and research, 
so that you can enjoy a wonderful scifi setting  
while playing a scientifically-accurate 
game on a journey through space and time. 
Explore from Early Earth out to among the stars, 
in a game that fits easily into your busy day  
and again is free to play. Try it out on Steam or 
on your phone, available on iOS and Google Play,  
and start building your civilization 
up from Cell to Singularity today.
This weekend’s livestream is canceled and instead 
we will air the bonus episode, Space Hygiene,  
on November 26th, for a look at the dirtier 
aspects of space travel. Then on the 30th,  
we’ll look at the dirtier aspects of 
space settlement, with Agriworlds,  
and have a discussion about how you could farm an 
entire planet. Then we’ll start December with a  
discussion of how to select spaceship crews, 
before returning to our Alien Civilization  
series with Nihilistic Aliens. Then we’ll talk 
about ways to warp and manipulate reality,  
on December 14th, before discussing 
Silicon based lifeforms on the 21st. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
