This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
It’s our great hope and goal to get out
into the galaxy and meet its other occupants
if they exist, but what if it turns out the
galaxy is empty because they packed up and
went somewhere better?
So today we’re back in the Alien Civilizations
series to take a look at the notion of advanced
civilizations transitioning beyond a physical
existence or even to another reality.
This is a bit of a continuation of last week’s
Fermi Paradox Extinction episode and a popular
solution for the Fermi Paradox.
The Fermi Paradox being the big question of
why our Universe, as such a vast and ancient
place, seems devoid of any vast and ancient
civilizations.
Solutions inevitably revolve around the idea
that something just makes these civilizations
almost never come into existence, stay small
or hidden, or go extinct.
These all have some element of pessimism to
them, and makes the Universe, or the process
of evolution, seem a much colder place or
harsher process than we’d prefer to view
them.
A more cheerful notion is that advanced civilizations
are much more common, but that they prosper
and grow to a point where they just don’t
need to obey the laws of the Universe as we
know them or play Darwin’s harsh game anymore,
they’ve found something better and more
enlightened.
Which implies we could too if we play our
cards right.
So it’s a popular theme of a lot of science
fiction and truth be told, long predates the
genre.
Many a mythology, theology, or ideology both
past and present has offered up some better
place beyond, the Sacred World, as opposed
to material world around us, referred to as
the Profane World, though the term profane
has mutated a bit in modern usage.
Needless to say, if such places exist, many
folks would understandably want to leave behind
the Profane World to travel or ascend to that
Sacred World.
One recurring theme we have in the Alien Civilizations
series, that makes it distinct from our Fermi
Paradox episodes, is that we often approach
concepts more from a motivation standpoint
rather than just means and opportunity for
figuring out how an alien civilization might
act.
An alien civilization with interstellar ships
obviously has the means and opportunity to
visit or invade Earth, so we ask what their
motivations would be to do so and what actions,
in light of such motivations and capabilities,
would make sense, then we ask if we can see
those as supporting evidence they might exist.
You’ve a very simple and easy motivation
to seek to ascend from the Profane World to
the Sacred World for instance, if it exists
and can be ascended to, many civilizations
will seek to do just that.
Of course that doesn’t mean they all will
or that every member of it will want to, even
assuming they can, as it’s often implied
to be a place or state that has more to do
with the mind and ethics of the individual.
Plus, it’s very poorly defined, or maybe
it would be better to say it has too many
definitions.
Nobody’s ideas of enlightenment and utopia
tend to match up too well, let alone different
species with completely different evolutionary
origins, motivations, and biology.
On top of this, you’d have the issue of
those who were ultra-evolved and enlightened
versus those who merely think they are, which
is also of course rather subjective, and many
examples in science fiction come off this
way, seeming far more smug and aloof than
seems merited.
This is only the beginning of the problems
with the general notion we need to look at,
a couple of which aren’t problems with the
concept so much as using it as a Fermi Paradox
solution.
Though as we’ve noted before, just because
some behavior or concept doesn’t make for
a good Fermi Paradox solution doesn’t mean
nobody does it, and in the series we try to
look at those hypothetical civilizations regardless
of if they make good Fermi Paradox Solutions,
even if sometimes it is just to conclude why
such civilizations probably aren’t very
common.
The point of Fermi Paradox solutions is to
explain an absence of observable alien civilizations.
The Ascension approach only works in that
regard if it’s a one-way trip that prevents
you from poking around this universe anymore
by rule or inclination.
In science fiction these entities usually
aren’t allowed or inclined to involve themselves
with us and our petty mortal concerns, and
for good reason, it really wrecks stories
when you’ve got super-powerful entities
hanging around who intervene all the time,
saving the heroes rather than allowing them
to save themselves through wit, luck, and
perseverance.
Of course, life is not a story – probably
– and stories that feature such entities
usually need to cobble together some rationale,
often poorly written, for their actions.
After all, the presence of some enlightened,
super powerful being or beings that transcends
reality begs the question as to why they’re
not constantly helping or crushing our normal,
mortal, and relatable heroes, depending on
if they’re benevolent or malevolent.
If those stories get sequels or become a series
the original rationale for why that behavior
made sense gets thinner and thinner as the
audience contemplates them.
Q from the Star Trek series is a great example,
depending on the writer he can be comic relief,
sinister villain, or even hidden friend and
mentor, it’s only John de Lancie’s superb
acting that saves the character.
Tricksters make for good ultra-powerful characters
in storytelling, you expect their actions
to be confusing, often cruel, and not having
much point other than for their own amusement,
and it makes a bit of sense that they can’t
go too far because they have peers who only
tolerate so much mischief.
That they tolerate any gets handwaved away
to being aloof, they don’t really care that
much about lesser beings and our petty problems,
but we’ve got a problem there too.
We have a megastructure we discuss a lot on
the show called a Matrioshka Brain, essentially
a massive supercomputer or mind that uses
an entire star to power its thinking, and
since that’s a lot of thinking, it’s probably
rapidly maxed out the efficiency of computer
chips, so it not only is running on a trillion,
trillion times more power than whatever device
you’re watching or listening to this episode
on, or that your brain uses, it’s probably
doing so with orders of magnitude more efficiency
too.
This isn’t necessarily a conscious mind,
and isn’t necessarily limited to one mind.
This is one option for ascension under known
science we’ll discuss in a bit, but if it
were a conscious mind, that thing would have
so much processing power available that it
could literally simulate every human that’s
ever existed simultaneously without even putting
a tiny dent in its total processing power,
and could even more easily carry on simultaneous
conversations with everyone living on Earth,
or indeed on every planet in the known Universe,
even if every single star had a planet with
a human-level species on it.
It’s just that terrifyingly high-powered,
and a little more terrifying because that
construct requires no higher technology than
we have now.
Like any Dyson Swarm or Stellar Engine, while
more technology helps, it’s simply a matter
of brute force construction, all you need
to build one is a single robot capable of
mining resources in space and making copies
of itself and following some basic construction.
Something we’ll probably have this century
or even this next generation.
Such a thing might genuinely not care about
what the rest of us are doing, but if it does
care, even just a little bit, it really could
micromanage every single one of our lives
constantly with no more proportional effort
than throwing some spare change into a donation
bucket.
So it doesn’t matter if it cares about us
just a little or an awful lot, the effort
involved is just so microscopically tiny.
Not a new concept of course, a regular commentary
on God, the Demiurge version that is a creator
of an entire vast Universe, is that the creator
doesn’t care much about all the little details.
But not from a lack of capacity, which is
presumably way higher than even a Matrioshka
Brain, which again would barely even notice
the processing power used up if every single
human called it up for advice on every little
problem bugging them.
Again it might not care, or may prefer a pretty
hands off approach for ethical reasons.
Relative Intelligence isn’t a good reason
for not caring of course, you can make a strong
argument that being smarter makes you more
curious and interested in all the little details,
as you can track them all and see their importance
easier and understand them better.
As we’ve noted elsewhere, humans are much
smarter than insects but we still have an
interest in them and many folks make a career
of it.
Similarly, while we are often quite fond of
cute cuddly critters, we’ll often take a
hands off approach to them in the wild, even
when we’d like to help.
That’s a fairly common theme for explaining
non-intervention by such ascended entities
too, they don’t want to interfere with the
natural progression of those below them.
I should note though, that we will often interfere
to stop extinction, and they too might tend
to have a red line where they felt compelled
to act.
Quite a pain from a storytelling perspective,
since you can only show such entities when
they are breaking the rules and feeding the
wildlife, like how we often see with the Ancients
in the Stargate Franchise, but not a problem
in the real world, since they can exist whether
we notice them or not.
It removes them from the galactic chessboard,
which is handy for storytelling but not very
realistic, as if they’re off the board at
all, it’s probably merely because they’re
the chessmasters moving all the pieces.
However, if they care and have the capacity
to get involved, you need a reason why they
aren’t.
“We have rules against it” is one, but
requires an explanation of what those rules
are, why they matter, why the line between
acting and not acting is what it is and isn’t
arbitrary, and how it’s enforced and arbitrated.
An alternative but parallel notion is that
ascension doesn’t necessitate benevolence,
and that there is some equal but opposite
malevolence.
Ahriman from Persian mythology or Zoroastrianism
would be an example of the equal and opposite
evil God we see in dualistic cosmologies.
From Stargate, we eventually get introduced
to the Ori, the evil opposites of the Ancients,
both from a long dead civilization where everybody
either ascended or died off, and presumably
created to deal with the apparent plothole
of ultra-powerful benevolent entities who
rarely helped the heroes out, or possibly
because the show was in its ninth season and
desperately in need of new villains.
The original bad guys, the Goa’uld, had
undergone what is often called ‘villain
decay’, a common problem of recurring bad
guys who, while being way more powerful than
the heroes, are repeatedly beaten until they
aren’t scary or menacing to the audience
anymore.
Q from Star Trek often came off that way too,
as did the Borg, and countless other villains
in other series over the years.
Indeed one of the ways of rescuing such bad
guys from audience indifference is to flip
them over to the good guys side as antiheroes
or teaming up with them against some greater
enemy.
They did that with both the Goa’uld and
the Borg, and it gets done with a lot of comic
book characters, folks like Magneto or Doctor
Doom, or even Thanos or Galactus, eater of
worlds.
You flush them out as characters and make
them either more sympathetic or understandable,
not just mustache-twirlers.
Mustache-twirlers make for bad villains in
stories, largely because they don’t seem
realistic, a villain has a motive for what
they do, don’t usually regard themselves
as villains, and except for the mischievous
trickster don’t do bad stuff for their own
amusement, but rather because they viewed
it as a necessary evil.
This leads folks to ask why they didn’t
do something else instead, using Thanos as
an example, instead of wishing away half the
population of the Universe with the Infinity
Gauntlet, why not just wish for twice as many
worlds, or even an alteration to everyone’s
biology or psychology to achieve his goal.
Big bad guys with murky but evil goals raise
the question of why they want to do that,
and if you turn them into semi-sympathetic
big bad guys doing what they consider necessary
evils, it begs the question of why the big
bad guy can’t see the obvious flaws or alternative
paths.
Of course the exact opposite tends to happen
with mysterious but benevolent entities in
such stories too, they sit on the sidelines
not helping and start coming off as aloof,
powerless, or just jerks.
There’s entire pages over on TV Tropes arguing
the cases for and against this or that ancient
and powerful species being either benevolent,
neglectful, or abusive prescursor civilizations.
And I’m focusing on all these fictional
examples because it’s only in this long-running
series format that we start noticing the holes
in a lot of the behavior and motivations of
such ascended critters, Benevolent or Malevolent.
We looked at examples like Cthulu style ancient
and terrifying entities in our Sleeping Giants
episode and you tend to get the same problems,
which are fine in fiction, until the audience
starts noticing the flaws by their constant
recurrence, but don’t really make sense
in real-world contemplation.
Just as an example, that hypothetical Matrioshka
Brain we were mentioning earlier, could quite
easily take copies of everybody’s brain
and upload them on their death to some virtual
paradise.
At first that sounds like an entirely fine
approach to non-intervention, as it lets you
live your own life and grow spiritually and
so on, and no matter how bad things go, it
rescues you afterwards to paradise.
That’s fairly parallel to Irenaean Theodicy
from back in the 2nd century AD, though not
a perfect match since classic philosophy or
theology on the Problem of Evil generally
only apply if you’re dealing with an entity
that is specifically infinite.
A Matrioshka Brain is not, and its hypothetical
simulated paradise, its Sacred World, is actually
beneath and contained within the material
Profane World it draws on for resources.
It’s arguable if its ascended anywhere at
all, and indeed you get a reverse case in
simulations, since it might create entire
new races of folks living in virtual paradise
who, if they ascended from there to the higher
reality – our universe where the computers
run, they are instead ascending from the Sacred
World to the Profane and might be rather disappointed
in it and want to go back.
Which could happen in our cases too, maybe
we can access other hypothetical Universes
above our own, higher realities, or just parallel
realities in a Multiverse.
You might head off to these and decide they
aren’t all they were cracked up to be and
want to come back.
That raises another issue, which is one way
trips, which are problematic for many reasons.
It could be that a species might find a way
to go to some newer younger universe, devoid
of life, full of resources, and low on entropy.
You open a gateway there, or even create this
new Universe, and have all your people jump
on through, escaping both the inevitable Entropic
Death of the Universe and having to compete
with any other folks.
This idea’s got some big problems.
First, if it is one way, how the heck did
you ever get a report back from there confirming
it’s a ripe plum waiting to be picked?
And if you haven’t got that proof, how are
you convincing folks to jump on through?
Every single one of them needs to make a rather
literal leap of faith.
It would be completely reasonable and inevitable
that some wouldn’t.
On the flipside, if it is a two way street,
there’s nothing stopping you from coming
back for visits or just importing resources
from there.
You ought to be able to construct an entropy-violating
engine using that too, giving you an infinite
power source.
Indeed in Iain M. Banks Culture Series, our
Books of the Month, they draw on just such
an approach for powering their starships,
reaching into what they call the Grid for
their energy, and this Grid also blocks them
from Inter-Universal Travel, kind of like
the Earth’s Mantle in a way, great power
source but hard to pass through, and its implied
that more advanced civilizations eventually
figure out how and jump into new universes
on the other side of the Grid to explore them
or just avoid entropy.
Ascension is a great way in a story to clear
the setting of pesky elder races who’ve
been around for millions or even billions
of years and ought to have colonized everything
themselves already, or at least play king
of the hill and tell everyone else what the
rules are and how things will go.
It does always require asking two questions
though.
First, why don’t they help others do the
same, just leaving instructions behind on
how to build the Ascend-o-Matic or gateway
to their own personal universe?
And if it’s greed to keep all the resources
to themselves, why aren’t they keeping this
Universe in their pocket too or leaving behind
automated armadas to purge the Universe of
any potential future competitors that might
follow them?
Second, what happened to everyone who didn’t
go?
A lot of authors just skip this point entirely,
which is one heck of a handwave, points to
Peter F. Hamilton in his Commonwealth Saga
for noting that problem.
Not everyone is going to be into ascension,
especially if it requires a leap of faith,
and those folks left over shouldn’t just
disappear.
Though even there his example, the Anomine,
who mostly ascended after a period of playing
Guardians of the Galaxy, left behind a remnant
who was just focused on living a primitive
life.
Some other authors have done that too but
in this case the remnant wasn’t ignorant
of what their transcended ancestors had done,
nor did those other folks clean up all their
high tech artifacts, they just didn’t want
to do it themselves.
The flaw is that they were strangely binary
in their approach, transcend or sit on their
homeworld farming.
One could argue that almost everyone of an
explorer mindset jumped in the Ascend-o-Matic,
but even if we assumed nobody left behind
felt like further exploring, colonizing, or
policing the galaxy at that time, why in the
heck didn’t a single member of a following
generation?
It is a great book series by the way, another
of our books of the month, but like many a
story it’s got some weakness on examination.
As I’ve mentioned, that’s pretty much
unavoidable if you want to tell a story in
a galaxy full of ancient civilizations of
powerful entities and still have your main
characters be human and relatable yet somehow
relevant and capable of dealing with galactic
crises.
This is a recurring issue with a lot of Fermi
Paradox solutions, they emerge out of science
fiction or get popularized there and the author
does a great job making it sound plausible.
In reality, some advanced civilization that
leaves a remnant behind is either going to
watch over that remnant, leave something behind
for any to follow who want to, or just abandon
them entirely.
If that last, then a few generations later
you’ll have a whole new crew of folks wanting
to go out and explore and build, probably
aided by all the junk and libraries their
ancestors left behind, not to mention likely
being very evolved or genetically enhanced
or similar, giving them a headstart to repeat
the process.
Even if that just resulted in recurring waves
of settlement then ascension, that is very
much not an absence from the galactic scene.
If they do leave behind the Ascend-o-matic
or portals to new ripe Universes, why aren’t
they also leaving those for other civilizations
too?
I suppose they might be really racist, but
we usually assume they’re pretty enlightened.
Of course they don’t have to be, and I did
mention the Ancients and the Ori from Stargate
earlier and how everybody either ascended
or died off and the Ori were jerks.
It’s entirely plausible some scenarios for
this might involve ideological wars where
the pro-ascension faction, or factions, wiped
out the remnants on accident or on purpose.
But if they’re interstellar that almost
has to be on purpose, since even if the Ascend-o-matic
had the unintended consequences of vaporizing
worlds or entire solar systems, you presumably
don’t flip them on in every single colony
at the same time.
You’d also expect any grand war between
such factions to have unaligned refugees fleeing
to new space and there’s no reason to assume
they are going to opt for techno-primitivism,
and do that forever, or have the exact same
argument about ascension on their worlds just
a few generations later.
Now a big caveat to that is assuming they’re
actually interstellar when all this happens.
Our nominal ascension-on-the-cheap method
of dumping everyone into a simulation in a
Matrioshka Brain for instance doesn’t actually
require interstellar flight.
It doesn’t even require a fully assembled
Matrioshka, with its many trillions of trillions
of times more processing power than a human
brain, which is probably going to be overkill
for solving almost any scientific problems
we still have yet to crack.
As I mentioned, that isn’t an object that
requires you already be an ancient galaxy
spanning civilization to make, and while the
power levels available to such a construct
are far more than sufficient to let you engage
in interstellar travel, even ignoring all
the new technology such levels of computation
and mind simulation probably are discovering,
you might easily have such a thing assembled
in its entirety before your ships have reached
all but the closest worlds.
Indeed, even its tiny early version when you
first begin construction is likely enough.
It’s entirely possible we’d have computers
on Earth quite capable of emulating human
minds, maybe all of them, before we ever had
the first person born on another world, even
just Mars or the Moon.
Or computers powerful enough to solve some
formula for popping open gateways to new universes,
so nobody has an interest in spending centuries
on some tin can creeping toward another star.
I still can’t see us abandoning our presence
in this Universe, not even if these new places
offered an infinite buffet of resources and
excitement, some folks would remain, even
if just to guard the gateway maybe, and if
not, if we needed leave no gate, then we need
fear no alien invasion behind us, and might
as well use some of the now redundant resources
of this solar system to let any such critters
know how to do as we did.
Same basic reasoning there as why you don’t
invade a primitive planet messing up its own
ecosystem, you just send them the plans for
devices that let them avoid doing that, or
send them a volley of relativistic kill missiles,
which obviously won’t help the environmental
problems much, but if you’re that much of
a smug and aloof species which won’t help
even when you easily can, genocidal tendencies
wouldn’t be too surprising either.
That is the problem with Aloof Aliens in general,
be they ascended to higher planes of existence
or just ultra-powerful, we can handwave at
non-intervention approaches initially but
the more one thinks on it, the less it really
makes sense as an ethical policy or one you
could actually enforce.
See the Smug Aliens episode for more on that,
but the abandonment for better places, regardless
of if you leave a remnant behind who doesn’t
want to come or to show others how to go,
it has the question of what’s actually making
these places better?
I mean sure a lower entropy universe is just
handy, but only for power and resources, so
you only migrate if it’s a one way trip,
otherwise you just go there to colonize, same
as colonizing new worlds here, and setup trade.
Now it could be stuff like dimensions where
the speed of light was way higher, allowing
faster travel, or weirder stuff like places
with 4 physical dimensions or types of matter
and energy we don’t have here, or entirely
new things comparable to those that don’t
exist here, but that doesn’t seem to offer
a case for total abandonment of our Universe,
and we’ll explore higher-dimensional aliens
another time.
Of course we don’t even know if such places
exist, let alone how to travel to them, and
nobody is sending us invitations or directions
for a visit.
So for now, we’re stuck in our Universe,
but it’s a pretty awesome place still full
of wonders and mysteries to explore, so there’s
no big rush.
Speaking of all those awesome wonders and
mysteries in our Universe, and exploring them,
while we can’t send ships out yet to take
a firsthand look, we have been learning more
and more every year and if you’re interested
in exploring the universe and how it works
from the comfort of your own home and at your
own pace, try out Brilliant.
Their online interactive math, science, and
computer science courses and daily challenges
let you enhance your knowledge of math and
science with easy to learn interactive methods.
To make it even easier, Brilliant now lets
you download any of their dozens of interactive
courses through the mobile app, and you'll
be able to solve fascinating problems in math,
science, and computer science no matter where
you are, or how spotty your internet connection.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
So we were talking about exploring strange
new wonders and worlds in our Universe, and
beyond, and many of those are potentially
hostile places, indeed almost everything off
this planet is.
Space is often described as a vast empty place
but it’s not empty, it’s full of lots
of radiation and dangerous hypervelocity micrometeors.
Next week we’ll be exploring the spacesuits
of the future, from the near term to the really
high-tech, including ones that might let you
dive down into gas giants or walk around on
the surface of molten hot worlds like Venus.
The week after that, we’ll look at how to
cool Venus down and terraform it, in Winter
on Venus.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And if you want to join in on the discussion
of this topic or any of our others, leave
a comment below or join our Facebook, Discord,
or Reddit groups, Science and Futurism with
Isaac Arthur, or head over to the website,
IsaacArthur.net, and check out our forums,
and all of those are linked in episode description
below.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
