This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
Probably one of the most paradigm-shifting
concepts leading into the modern era of science
is that we are not special or terribly unique
here on Earth, but merely one fairly hum-drum species
on a mediocre world among the countless trillions in the void…
but what if that’s
the wrong perspective?
So today we’ll be looking at Boltzmann Brains,
the Anthropic Principle, the Simulation Hypothesis,
and Consciousness.
This is part 2 of a collaboration with Jade
from Up and Atom, so if you’re coming over
from her channel, welcome, and for channel
regulars, you should watch part 1 on her channel
first, where the Boltzmann Brain gets explained,
then watch this one, and you can find part
1 linked in the video description or the in-video
card.
Quick summary version though, improbable but
possible events will tend to happen given
enough time or space.
Flip a coin enough times and you’ll get
heads ten times in a row, shuffle a deck of
cards enough times and in spite of randomizing
it each shuffle, you’ll return it to some
more ordered state eventually, like all the
cards in numerical order.
Look at enough collections of matter and you’ll
find something that’s randomly assembled
into a seemingly artificial grouping, like
the basic building blocks of proto-life, or
a computer chip or a brain or even an entire
galaxy.
Needless to say, things which are less improbable
will be more likely to occur and should be
more frequent, and in Ludwig Boltzmann’s
time, the late 19th century, we assumed the
Universe was probably an infinite and eternal
place in which anything which could happen
should happen, though again the more likely
it was to happen the more often we’d see
it.
Thus a randomly assembled brain would be more
common than a randomly assembled galaxy.
Or a randomly assembled Universe, which is
a notion still often kicked around as a possible
cause for our own Universe appearing in a
Big Bang, a low entropy state slowly rising
in entropy as the Universe expand and decays.
The thought that perhaps our Universe simply
emerged from some random fluctuation, not
very different than shuffling a deck of cards
back into order, though vastly more improbable.[a][b]
We examine this notion more in part 1, and
our main interest now is in considering some
of the possibilities it implies.
To look at those we first have to consider
the Anthropic Principle, which is itself a
fairly difficult concept to cover for a variety
of reasons.
First it is a somewhat tricky concept.
Second, the popular examples people use tend
to really predispose people to dislike the
solutions, and thus the method of reasoning.
And third, there’s no rigorous definition
of what it is.
In a way, it’s not a tricky concept at all,
it’s basically the exact opposite of the
Copernican or Mediocrity Principle, and is
an example of a starting point you use for
looking at situations when you have virtually
no evidence to work with and no obvious way
of getting more anytime soon.
Its examples tend to include cases where it’s
basically impossible to get more data at this
time too, which results in examples that set
many people’s teeth on edge in my experience.
What is the Mediocrity Principle?
Well you know that one, it’s a cornerstone
of science.
If we have only one or only a few examples
of something, we choose to assume they’re
pretty normal examples until we have evidence
otherwise.
Often they aren’t normal, but it helps to
start from this case.
Hence we tend to assume Earth or Humans are
fairly common examples of habitable planets
or technological civilizations.
Hence the Copernican Principle, Earth is not
the center of the Universe and is probably
fairly mundane, or mediocre, and thus the
generalized version, the Mediocrity Principle.
Of course often the first example of something
we see is not particularly normal, and not
just as an outlier of chance, that first alien
you ever met was fairly tall or short for
their species for instance.
Someone watching Earth having come across
it might catch our broadcasts of basketball
games and assume humans were quite taller
than our average.
Frequently the first example of something
you’re going to encounter is an outlier,
not by chance, but for the reason you’re
encountering them first.
This is how we ended up dubbing our Sun a
Yellow Dwarf originally, even though it’s
much brighter and more massive than average,
because it is far easier to see the more massive
and bright stars so we thought they were normal
first.
What’s more, you can have cases where simply
by being able to observe something you represent
a skew on the normal.
We’re not talking about normal observer
bias here, but the kind where your odds of
being there to see something are altered by
you existing.
Now this often sounds a bit arcane and many
examples of it don’t help, but you think
about problems this way all the time, same
as the Mediocrity Principle.
You routinely encounter stuff and figure it’s
probably a mediocre and common example of
that stuff till you get more examples.
But you also assume you observing it is probably
impacted by you, for instance it’s not going
to surprise anyone watching this video if
they go into the comments and see a lot of
generally geeky comments on science, math,
or science fiction and you are probably watching
this, observing this, because you have such
interests too.
You might be here randomly but even then this
probably got recommended to you because your
prior watch and search habits indicated an
interest along those lines.
Not a random observer, and it affected what
you could see.
Same, if you woke up with amnesia in a room
full of people wearing the same clothes, you
could assume via the Mediocrity Principle
that most people wore that garb, like business
suits or t-shirt and jeans for instance, or
you might assume you saw that first as an
outlier appropriate to your observation, like
doctors and nurses in scrubs as you had a
head injury.
Or you might glance down and notice you wore
the same thing, like a jersey or military
uniform, you banged your head doing drills
and you are observing them in this garb because
you, as an observer, are just much more likely
to be in their particular company.
These are all valid approaches to looking
at situations when you have virtually no evidence
on hand.
Now I mentioned that another problem with
the Anthropic Principle is that it doesn’t
have an exact definition, one of the more
famous thinkers on this topic, Nick Bostrom,
noted around 30 fairly distinct versions when
looking into the matter and added his own
too, the Simulation Hypothesis, one familiar
already to channel regulars.
Another, and the one where the term was first
used, was Brandon Carter’s Doomsday Argument,
and this version often is called the Weak
Anthropic Principle, though he’s since remarked
that he wished he’d called it the Observer
or Egocentric Principle instead, and as you’ve
probably noted those are maybe better than
the Anthropic Principle since they more generally
speak to what it is, an assumption when looking
at a situation that you’re not some random
observer of an event that’s probably normal
or mediocre as such events go, but are focused
more on why you are seeing that event.
We looked at the Doomsday Argument some years
back and you can catch that episode for the
details.
The third well known version is the Fine-Tuned
Universe theory, popularized by Cosmologists
John Barrow and Frank Tipler in their book
the Anthropic Cosmological Principle, and
along with the Simulation Hypothesis are our
two of interest in regard to Boltzmann Brains
today.
I mentioned that these examples often stir
a bit of dislike and argument in folks when
trying to learn the concept, and the reasons
are pretty obvious, while the Doomsday argument,
Simulation Hypothesis, and Fine-Tuned Universe
theory are great examples for generating discussion
of the topic since, they may be summed up
in order as basically arguing Humanity is
mathematically doomed, if Reality is actually
real, and if there is a God.
Shockingly these topics sometimes touch a
nerve.
For Simulation Hypothesis the reasoning is
pretty simple, and often misstated in discussion
of it, Simulation Hypothesis is not the idea
that you might live in a false reality, but
rather that you might live in a specific type,
an Ancestor Simulation.
Which is where the simulators are specifically
running their own history or a version of
it, like if we ran a simulation where a war
ended differently or a piece of technology
got invented sooner or later or more personally,
if your parents had moved to a different town
when you were young or so on.
Those are ancestor simulations and one of
the reasons that distinction is important
is because it implies the rules of your reality
actually match up to the layer above simulating
it.
It’s not very likely they’d have changed
the basic rules of how the Universe operated,
or maybe at most tweaked one a little bit,
and so studying the Universe around you is
actually helpful even though it’s fake.
Maybe the Moon Landings happened a decade
later and by a different country, but the
Moon still orbits the Earth and for the same
reasons.
That’s not a requirement of a simulation,
and if you’ve played games where you can
walk off one side of the screen and pop out
the other, that’s an example of playing
with the basic physics, that Universe circles
around on itself and isn’t a flat plane.
More on that in a moment, and if you want
more on the Simulation Hypothesis we’ve
got episodes looking at it, but one key bit
of it is the Principle of Indifference.
Yeah, lots of Principles today.
The Principle of Indifference, or Principle
of Insufficient Reason, is another of those
approaches to making guesses and decisions
when you know basically nothing.
You assume if you have a handful of options,
all reasonably plausible, but without anything
to let you argue decisively that one is more
likely than another, you just assume for now
that they are equally likely.
For Simulation Hypothesis we assume 3 reasonable
scenarios.
First, that nobody does these ancestor simulations
because they are impossible or you wipe yourself
out before you can do them.
Second, that nobody does them because they
are impractical or undesirable or illegal,
but that you can do them if you want, and
third, that they can be done and get done
a lot, so much so that the vast majority of
21st century Earth’s are actually Ancestor
Simulations run from sometime ahead in the
future.
You’ll often be told odds about us being
in a simulation or not, but by this reasoning,
it’s 33%, or just under a third, because
one third is option 1, the other third is
option 2, and in option 3, even if there are
many more simulations than real universes,
there’s still a finite chance you’re in
the real deal, so just under a third.
Obviously those three options aren’t going
to be equal in probability, but we have no
way at this time of knowing what those odds
actually are.
Again see those episodes for further discussion.
This of course is not the only type of simulated
Universe you can do, you can change the fundamental
physical rules, and presumably you could for
instance set the speed of light in a simulated
Universe to any value higher or lower than
what ours is.
There being an awful lot of numbers you basically
have a vast number of unique potential universes
you could generate this way, and there are
other physical constants and parameters you
could tweak too, either individually or in
combination.
Needless to say, there could also be a large
number of other real universes with different
physical properties too, one of the examples
of the Multiverse notion.
As best as we can tell – currently - there
is no particular reason why the physical constants
of our Universe are the values they are, so
we assume they could have been different.
And as best as we can tell most of these values
do not allow intelligent life to arise via
evolution.
Higher gravity, stars form and burn out too
quickly for planets to have time for evolution,
that sort of thing.
If this is the case, that these constants
can be over a huge range, the overwhelmingly
majority of which can’t have life in them,
well, you’ve got a bit of problem.
The Universe would seem to be fine-tuned for
life.
You can assume we just got lucky or you can
assume no such thing, that the Universe is
artificial, fine-tuned, divinely created or
simulated, take your pick.
The alternative is obvious by now, that this
Universe is indeed improbable, but that there
are a bunch of other ones, not just ours,
and most are indeed dead but since nobody
is there to observe them, their probability
of existing is not puzzling anyone.
There is no evidence supporting any of the
options incidentally, and they’re all pretty
logically coherent, so feel free to pick the
one that suits your tastes.
It’s very handy for discussing the concept
of drawing conclusions and making decisions
with very little data for that reason.
Now, this basic analysis of Dead Universes
is off the notion of life evolving from something
pretty simple into something much more complex,
and as we’ve noted, a Boltzmann Brain is
statistically far less probable – in a Universe
with our characteristics – than an evolving
one should be.
Other rules, other probabilities, and it’s
very easy to come up with a Universe where
as improbable as a Boltzmann Brian is, it’s
still more likely than Darwin’s Approach
because the latter just won’t work there,
whereas Boltzmann Brains can pretty much work
anywhere.
You could have a place where an entire Universe
blew into a supercomputer and the machinery
and fuel to run it randomly as soon as the
place cooled enough to operate.
You could have one where gravity was just
super weak and everything meandered around
in a stew until falling into patterns, and
only those really big and complex ones could
really sustain themselves long enough to do
anything.
Even in some Universe where gravity is so
strong virtually everything turns into black
holes almost right away, black holes could
be used as a switch and so you can create
a computer that way and so over a long enough
time line – and black holes live a long
time – you might expect a Boltzmann Brain
to emerge made of the things.
Critical notion, these dead universes may
out number universes like ours by so much
that the number of Universes in which one
has popped up exceeds the ones where it evolved.[c][d]
So such minds might be far more numerous than
seemingly natural ones like ours.
As we noted though, the Simulation Hypothesis
only focuses on Ancestor Simulations because
you can still meaningfully talk about the
higher simulating layer if you’re assuming
it works on the same principles.
Needless to say some mind that just popped
out of nowhere, a new conscious surrounded
by the empty waste of eternity, or living
in utter sensory deprivation because it didn’t
come with any eyes or ears, is not going to
be simulating us as an ancestor simulation.
Even if it knows about the Universe it lives
in and the rules it has, which is hardly guaranteed,
simulating 21st century Earth as part of its
past clearly doesn’t work logically.
Which would seem to end the idea except here
we have some mind, essentially dreaming away
in the void.
Possibly it’s a more or less human mind,
possibly it’s some giant megacomputer like
a Matrioshka Brain.
Either way, its sanity would seem rather dubious.
We can’t really assume that just because
it was born blind and deaf and alone it’s
naturally okay with those circumstances.
We have a conscious mind shaped by evolution
– presumably – so all our abstract thinking
had to make some sort of survival sense and
requires a certain basic level of sanity in
one’s natural environment, for a given value
of sanity.
It does not, it didn’t evolve, it doesn’t
have any predators, but it has, by random
luck, achieved consciousness.
Ponder that for a moment or two and you can
guess that this lone mind in the void is probably
as mad as a hatter, if the randomly assembled
brain was anything even vaguely like ours,
which of course at least some would have to
be by random luck.
It would be very easy for something like that
to dream up a reality – either a world of
people or just you, and indeed the ‘just
you’ option is a lot more likely since as
we noted at the beginning, a smaller Boltzmann
Brain, one just smart enough to be of human
intellect, is way more probable than one that
could do a whole simulated civilization or
Universe.
Though it’s worth noting such a mind need
not be static and incapable of growth, just
because it wasn’t evolved.
The random luck that created it probably need
to randomly give it fuel and repair options
or it will be a pretty short-lived intellect,
which might permit growth and mutation too.[e][f]
Regardless, I doubt most of us really have
to stretch our imagination too much to contemplate
the notion that we might live in some world
we dreamed up as a delusion.
Incidentally it doesn’t actually matter
that rules of this Universe would imply life
was likely – since they’d presumably be
self-rationalized anyway – or that the entire
premise of this is based off assuming other
universes exist that have different rules
by having seen inconsistencies in our own,
Fine-Tuning.
Because the premise doesn’t come from that,
ignoring that it’s an old idea, that we’re
dreaming reality, it requires no empirical
evidence to assume your universe has rules
and that there may be other places with different
rules.
It merely requires you believe that there
are rules to your reality, even if they are
wrong or made up.
Again it’s not an ancestor simulation, so
we couldn’t assume the real rules were anything
like what we saw, but that hardly prevents
us considering that there may be other places
with different rules.
In the broadest sense, if any place can exist,
then you’d have places like our apparent
reality where life evolved just like we think
it did, ones where human-level minds, while
improbable, popped out of nowhere first because
evolution couldn’t really work there, and
ones where giant megaminds popped into being
and dreamed us all up.
Obviously hard to figure out which of these
scenarios is more probable but none should
be impossible so at a minimum we can’t rule
out that there’s a finite probability you
or I are actually in any of these versions.
Boltzmann Brains dreaming up everyone and
dreaming up rules too, without knowing either
or forcing yourself to forget things, which
would require you be really nuts, like some
sort of person left on their own in a dark
prison cell for years.
If you haven’t already seen Part 1 you can
check that out for a discussion of why a Boltzmann
Brain, in spite of being very improbable in
our Universe compared to evolved intelligence,
might be fairly probable or even more probable
in a grand multiverse sense of things.
Alternatively, we can’t assume it is more
improbable anyway since if we lived in one,
or were one, our observations about this natural
Universe mean nothing anyway, again, not an
Ancestor Simulation.
This, by the way, is why I often say the big
question probably isn’t whether or not reality
is real but if it actually matters if it is
or we’re just being a bit arbitrary about
what ‘real’ means.
Anyway the most probable Boltzmann Brain would
be a single simple intelligence, just one
smart enough to think about such things as
abstract concepts like this, and if you were
one of those than you’d have to assume we’re
made up voices in your head.
… and you’d have to be crazy to dream
this stuff up, right?
A theme we’ve had in today episodes is that
our common approach to modern science is to
assume that all we witness is fairly random
and ordinary, that our ability to observe
it is coincidental.
We talked today about how that’s not always
the best approach, but it has generally been
a very good way to go about learning how our
world and the Universe in general function,
and that’s been a very useful and profitable
set of knowledge for humanity to acquire,
as a group and individually.
Understanding math and science is just plain
handy, but it’s also a lot of fun to know
and having fun while you learn it is also
the best approach.
If you want to learn more math and science,
and have fun while you’re doing it, try
out Brilliant.
Their online interactive math, science, and
computer science courses and daily challenges
let you enhance your knowledge of math and
science with easy to learn interactive methods
from the comfort of your own home and at your
own pace.
To make it even easier, Brilliant now lets
you download any of their dozens of interactive
courses through the mobile app, and you'll
be able to solve fascinating problems in math,
science, and computer science no matter where
you are, or how spotty your internet connection.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
We have our regular Thursday episode coming
up, and for that we’ll be back in the Alien
Civilization series to take a look at the
general methods and motivations for an alien
invasion, be it overt or covert, and try to
reason why a hypothetical alien civ might
or might not do such thing, in Invasive Aliens.
Then we’ll have our usual end of the month
livestream after to close out July before
heading into August to look at some examples
of other threats to Interplanetary or Interstellar
Civilizations, from natural to artificial,
internal or external or existential.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And don’t forget to check out part 1 over
on Jade’s channel, Up and Atom, or any of
her other awesome episodes.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
