There is no more hostile place to life than
the empty expanse of space.
Regrettably it makes up virtually the entire
Universe.
So how do we go about living there?
So today’s topic is focused on living in
space, and at first that might sound like
familiar territory to us, as we’ve discussed
colonizing space a lot on this channel.
But in point of fact, we generally don’t
talk much about living in space, but rather
how to colonize planets or moons in it, which
is no more colonizing space than living on
islands is colonizing the ocean.
Even when we discuss building artificial habitats
there, our topic for next week, that’s still
mostly about making as Earth-like a place
as possible.
There’s a big difference between terraforming
a place to be Earth-like and actually adapting
in part to that environment.
Consider three scenarios, folks decide to
make their home on the coast of Antarctica.
In one scenario they drag down some fission
reactors and a lot of glass, dome the place
over and provide supplemental lighting and
heating so they could walk around inside in
t-shirts and shorts.
That’s essentially terraforming, and one
can argue that regardless of address those
folks don’t really live in Antarctica.
In the second scenario they visit some high-tech
genetics or cybernetic lab that changes them
and their children so they can walk around
in the natural Antarctic environment as comfortably
as a penguin, and that’s what we call bioforming
instead of terraforming.
That’s been discussed for planets but not
so much for actual space itself.
I’ve mentioned the notion of Void Ecology
in passing before, the notion of creating
lifeforms designed for living in space itself
and how you’d probably need to start from
the ground up and blur the line on what we
normally call life to achieve it, and we’ll
talk about it more down the road a bit.
Our third scenario is that middle ground,
and something humanity has done a lot of,
where we change ourselves a bit, and we change
our environment a bit, but mostly we adopt
a new way of life to fit that environment,
and that’s more of our focus for today.
We’ve talked a lot about the technology
that makes it possible to colonize planets
or make the spaceships to get there but not
too much about the change in lifestyle.
We’ve got some good examples of that in
fiction to look at for inspiration, and one
of those comes from our SFIA Book of the Month,
sponsored by Audible - Leviathan Wakes.
This is the first book in The Expanse series,
which obviously inspired today’s episode
title.
The books have gone on to be adapted into
a very good TV series just starting its third
season.
The novel focuses a lot on the culture that
you see emerging both in the Asteroid Belt,
where no realistic terraforming is really
viable, and on the people who spend their
lives on spaceships, and how these environments
fundamentally alter their lifestyle, culture,
and outlook on the Universe.
It’s a great novel, and you can pick up
a free copy of Leviathan Wakes today and also
get a 30-day trial of Audible, just use my
link, Audible.com/Isaac or text isaac to 500-500.
We’re going to be spending a lot of time
this year looking at some scenarios for humanity’s
future, and this seemed like a good place
to start.
What defines a culture in many ways is not
what it has in abundance, which does surely
shape them, but also what they have very little
of.
When we move into discussing Post-Scarcity
civilizations in a month or so, civilizations
defined by lacking virtually nothing, we’ll
see that isn’t entirely true and they can
lack things like a sense of purpose or privacy.
Conversely, early explorers and settlers in
space definitely don’t lack a purpose.
If you’re going off to colonize Mars or
Ceres or haul comets to water-starved locations
you clearly have a major driving purpose.
And this is space we’re talking about, and
this is why life in space is a good place
to begin our discussion of future human civilizations
- you lack virtually everything you need to
live there.
Space is huge and empty.
Even on a desert planet, like Arrakis in Frank
Herbert’s Dune Novels, where water is so
scarce they recycle their dead, they still
have air to breathe freely.
Dune’s another great example of this is
in science fiction too, as Frank Herbert explores
the huge impact that water scarcity has on
every facet of the inhabitants’ lives.
He shows us a great dichotomy of scarcity
and abundance in that novel too.
On Arrakis, they have no water, something
vastly abundant almost everywhere else.
Yet they have easy access to the Spice Melange,
a substance so precious elsewhere in their
empire, that a pocket full of the stuff would
let you live a life of luxury on the planet
of your choosing.
This is good example because one of the biggest
driving forces for colonizing the solar system,
especially the asteroids, is that you could
potentially bring home tons of precious metals.
One tiny mining party of a dozen people might
go to an asteroid and mine it and come home
with a cargo hold packed full of thousands
of tons of Gold or Platinum or Lanthanum,
each valued at about $60,000 dollars a kilogram
right now, and thus land on Earth with enough
assets to make each crewmember a billionaire
a few times over again even if the mission
cost billions to launch.
Now to state the obvious, that’s an unstable
profit margin and it wouldn’t be long before
market prices for those commodities dropped
to just over the cost to conduct such a mission,
though a 1% profit margin to the crew on a
multi-billion dollar expedition is nothing
to sneeze at.
Of course there’s no guarantee they’d
be paid that either.
Historically, regardless of what you mined,
you got paid about the same and usually not
terribly well at that.
One man swinging a pickaxe being much like
another, the salary only has to be attractive
enough to outweigh the hardships and risks
involved compared to some other job, assuming
you even paid them.
Mining has a fairly bad reputation even by
the fairly low standards of labor historically.
And of course we see that in science fiction
a lot too.
But regardless of the value of the precious
metals in your cargo hold, when that vessel
is a spaceship you’d trade all of it for
some fuel, water, or air if you’re running
low on them and you need to give over valuable
cargo space to those if you want to finish
your journey.
Again nothing new there, ocean going vessels
carrying ultra-valuable spices still needed
to carry food and water, and nobody ever missed
the irony of sailors of old needing barrels
of water while sitting on a literal ocean
of it.
There’s an entire culture, indeed several,
revolving around sailors so there seems no
reason we wouldn’t expect the same of those
serving on spaceships.
This same would be true of mining operations
though our focus today is more about life
on ships.
One thing they’ll have in common is that
everyone is going to be very mindful of whose
managing the water and air or any damage to
the structure and machinery managing those
and keeping them contained in the little bubble
of life surrounded by the infinite void.
We see that in the novel Leviathan Wakes as
well, the residents of those asteroids consider
anyone tampering with life support to be essentially
committing a capital crime, a point made in
the show too but not emphasized quite as much.
They do make a couple of errors though, first
water as a raw material isn’t something
an asteroid colony on Ceres would ever lack,
nor any place much further out.
Once you get out to Jupiter and beyond the
frost line, we get reminded that the first
and third most common elements in the Universe
are hydrogen and oxygen.
H20 is essentially the most common molecule
in the Universe, after molecular hydrogen,
since helium doesn’t bond to anything, like
all the Noble Gases it’s very aristocratic
and snobby.
The other big one being that Ceres was spun
up for more gravity, one of the big engineering
accomplishments of Tycho Station, another
being the Nauvoo, a generation ship with a
rotating interior similar to the O’Neill
Cylinders we’ll be looking at next week.
That path works fine, but spinning an asteroid
to generate more gravity does not.
Ceres is the largest asteroid out there, and
while there are over a million asteroids in
the Belt, Ceres has fully a third of the Belt’s
mass in it, enough that it’s actually a
dwarf planet like Pluto.
In spite of that it would take 6000 clones
of Ceres to equal the Mass of Earth, and its
surface gravity is only 3% of Earth normal.
So you’d want more gravity there, and certainly
on any asteroid habitat, as even for most
decent-sized asteroids the gravity is so small
you could jump off one and never fall back
down again.
However you can’t fix that by spinning one
and indeed if you did opt to change the rotational
rate of an asteroid it would usually be to
slow it down, most rotate a good deal faster
than Earth, and Ceres does so every nine hours.
But they aren’t rotating very fast in terms
of speed, which is good because if they did
they’d fly apart.
The faster you spin something the more centrifugal
force it experiences and as we’ve discussed
many times on the channel, you can use that
as artificial gravity.
However, it is gravity that points outward
from the spin axis, meaning the poles experience
no change while the equator gets the most
spin-gravity.
The problem is, that artificial gravity is
in the opposite direction of actual gravity,
it’s flinging you away from the planet,
moon, or asteroid, not pulling you in.
That’s why we say we’d live on a planet
but we say we would live inside a rotating
habitat.
You’re not adding to Ceres gravity by spinning
it, you’re decreasing it.
Indeed that’s one of the tricks we’ve
discussed for making high-gravity planets
easier to live, or orbital rings around gas
giants or other super-massive astronomical
bodies.
People occasionally talk about hollowing an
asteroid out, then spinning it and living
in it, but that’s a bit backwards too.
Your typical asteroid is nothing but a loosely
held together ball of gravel, give it an Earth’s
gravity worth of spin and it will fly apart.
Other than that, the basic concept is fine.
You can hollow an asteroid out and not spin
it, and instead stick a rotating habitat inside
it, whose sides are of high-tensile strength
material not a wad of gravel, and it’s a
very good place to put one, again our topic
for next week.
The right way to do it for a place like Ceres
would be to drill holes down all over the
asteroid like a golfball’s dimples, only
deeper, and put in cylinder habitats in those
holes, pointing down.
Then, if you wanted to, you could dome that
over with glass and drop the asteroid’s
spin down to once every 24 hours.
However, while on this channel we tend to
casually discuss manufacturing things the
size of planets, it is worth noting that doing
so requires insane amounts of manpower, or
at least robots.
I tend to expect that we will have very good
robots before we are seriously colonizing
space, but that’s hardly guaranteed.
Even then, for any given construction project
there are limitations even if only because
you can think of other things you’d like
to do with those resources and manpower.
In theory, I could build a greenhouse over
my entire backyard, in practice I have one
that’s 12 foot by 20 and I tend to feel
I went a little excessive just doing that,
especially on those occasions I find myself
having to perform hasty maintenance on it
in foul weather.
Maintenance is even less pleasant in space,
where there is nothing, except for lethal
levels of radiation and the occasional hyper-velocity
micrometeor.
For any given habitat in space there is going
to be a line where people say ‘this is quite
enough’.
Where they draw it will of course depend on
what the minimum they need is, and the most
they can afford, and will settle somewhere
in between - but likely much closer to the
minimum in the early days in space.
That’s even more true of spaceships, since
how fast they can go is controlled by how
massive they are.
You might be able to build several acres of
forest on a ship but someone is bound to ask
if something smaller can do the job since
it means your trips are shorter or carry more
goods.
That’s likely to be particularly true of
more high-tech civilizations as someone is
likely to point out that some virtual reality
setup is likely to be way cheaper and provide
all the landscapes you want.
How far you can push something like that depends
on what the acceptable norms are and again
those get sculpted by the pressing needs and
stresses of your local civilization.
We often see discussion of whether or not
space colonies would be vegetarian, due to
efficiency needs, but even that might be not
looking far enough.
There’s a lot of old scifi where you’d
see people eat meal capsules, swallowing some
vitamin sized pill that was apparently a whole
meal, and that’s quite unrealistic of course.
As we noted last episode in portable power,
fats, carbs, and protein aren’t as energy
dense as, say, gasoline.
But not by so much that you could get all
your calories out a of pill-sized object even
if you could metabolize hydrocarbons for all
your nutrient needs.
On the other hand, plants themselves aren’t
that efficient at converting energy into calories
and not terribly fast either, and we could
easily see food production in space shift
to some genetically tailored algae or even
carbs, proteins, and fats that were made artificially.
You can make those in a beaker after all,
no plant or animal is required.
You might see everyone in space eating some
carefully synthesized gruel with artificial
taste added or even folks getting tongue implants
that just simulated the taste, even augmented
reality overlays that made you feel like you
were eating a seven course meal instead of
algae paste.
Throw in a bit of peer pressure and you could
have folks continue to eat that way long after
their settlement could easily provide more
classic cuisine just because that’s how
they do things and only weak, soft individuals
need more.
“That’s how we do things” still remains
an amazingly common and successful argument
even nowadays when our civilization is dependent
on ever changing and improving technology
and we actually have reliable historical accounts
going back long enough to tell us that we
haven’t always done things that way, so
I would imagine it will continue being a common
argument in the future too.
That could apply to a lot of stuff.
We don’t know yet how much gravity is enough
for a human to live healthily, our only data
is from Earth and zero gravity in orbit, and
odds are good we can handle a lot lower gravity
than Earth’s.
Further, we’d expect technology to lower
that safe amount even more as time goes on.
Artificial gravity is expensive, and the more
you want the more expensive it is.
We can only do this by spin, which requires
pretty big devices.
The more gravity you want, the bigger and
stronger that outer spinning shell needs to
be.
Or by constant acceleration, a very popular
application in fiction including in The Expanse
but also one that really only makes sense
with some sort of infinite fuel source.
Or for very specific set distances.
Outside of a fairly narrow range, you wouldn’t
burn fuel that way.
Most of the time you’d accelerate as fast
as your crew and ship can handle, then drift,
because it shortens the voyage time to do
it that way, and because it makes no sense
with a reaction drive to accelerate all the
way to the moment you flip over and decelerate,
because most of that fuel you used in the
middle is basically wasted.
It’s like flooring your engine on the way
to a red light.
If you accelerate at 1 G for one day then
flip over and decelerate, you will have covered
75 million kilometers, reaching a peak speed
of 847 kilometers per second.
If instead you accelerated at 4 G for a quarter
of a day, you will reach that same speed of
847 kilometers per second after 6 hours, having
covered just 9 million kilometers so far,
and you’ll cover the same in your last 6
hours decelerating at 4 G.
However the 1 G ship was moving for two days,
we only did half a day up and down with the
4 G ship, so it’s got 36 more hours drifting
at 847 kilometers per second.
During that time it will cover 110 million
kilometers, not the 75 the other ship did,
plus the 9 million each up and down, 128 million
kilometers versus 75.
That’s 70% more distance covered, in the
same time with the same fuel, it just burned
it faster.
So which way do you think folks would go?
To add to that, the best defense a ship has
against space debris or weapons is the ability
to suddenly apply thrust in a random direction
if being shot at, and the more the better.
When that happens the direction of apparent
gravity will suddenly and violently change
direction.
Just like low but non-zero gravity, we don’t
have great data on the long terms effects
of high gravity on people, but we have exposed
human subjects to 1.5 G for as much as seven
days without ill effect, and you can even
walk around in that; you just get tired.
It might not sound like a big difference over
1 G but it would make more than a big enough
difference that anyone not flying for recreation
would do it when they could, and just switch
over to spin gravity when they finished their
initial burn, even though that meant needing
to swap around where the floor was compared
to the wall.
So it isn’t that you’d expect people to
adapt to lower gravity so much as they adapt
to changing gravity and likely as much as
they can safely tolerate.
At least those working and living on ships,
and that would alter everything about day
to day life.
We tend to put weights and grips on the bottom
of cups on sea vessels because they rock around
and you don’t want them spilling or sliding,
suction cups see a fair amount of use too,
and probably would see more on a spaceship.
You tend to want to have padding on everything,
tethers connecting stuff, and things that
couldn’t spill.
What’s more, you might put airbags in the
walls or uniforms people wore, because if
a ship suddenly detects an object it needs
to slam on the gas to avoid, odds are that
will be a computer doing it for minimum reaction
time deciding it has no choice but to do it
or lose the ship.
No warning to grab stuff, just some siren
blasting out telling you not to prepare to
fall, but that you are already doing so.
And falling even a couple meters at several
times Earth gravity is going to hurt you bad,
potentially kill you, and any sharp or hard
object nearby could come whipping into you
like a sword or a sledgehammer.
Odds are good every chair, bench, and bed
on that ship is an acceleration couch and
has belts and buckles on it.
Most of us habitually fasten our seatbelt
when we get into a car these days, I’m old
enough to remember when people found the chest
belt irritating and would just do the lap
belt, and even then a lot of folks griped
about either.
Some folks still do but to most of us it’s
not just a habit, we actually feel uncomfortable
until we have it on.
I would say they’d probably get to be the
same way except I’d tend to expect those
to be smart chairs that could cocoon you in
an eye blink instead.
Barring that, remember it’s not just strapping
in on your chair in the bridge, it’s not
just doing so in ship’s mess for a cup or
bulb of coffee and some donut-flavored squeeze
paste.
It’s in the bed and it would be in the bathroom
except I wouldn’t be surprised if most ships
don’t actually have one.
And I don’t mean because you can’t have
a hot water shower in space, that water shortage
notion is a holdover of modern tech, no spaceship
pulling hours or days of high-G acceleration
could give a fig if its crew members felt
like taking blistering hot, hour long showers
every day, because that water limit has to
do with needing energy to recycle that water
and compared to the energy output of that
ship’s engines their water recycling energy
use is going to look like a rounding error.
Rather, it’s that you probably won’t spend
much time outside of your clothes and there’d
be a lot of push to make spacesuits able to
be comfortably worn 24/7 that could recycle
everything for you, including all your bodily
waste.
Akin to the Still Suits we see in the novel
Dune.
That would have a pretty big impact on your
lifestyle and sub-culture too, I could easily
see a basic ship-suit being the equivalent
of a second skin you rarely and maybe even
never took off.
Anyway energy is not scarce for anything but
the ship’s engine and speed, because that
is so huge compared to any other energy need.
We said earlier that both what is abundant
and what is scarce is what drives a culture
or sub-culture’s mindset.
On a ship, the abundance is energy, because
they burn fuel at insane rates and they can’t
realistically do anything on that ship that
is going to make it really matter if they
are soberly efficient or drunkenly wasteful
with their juice.
There’s not much they can use it on either.
An interplanetary cargo ship, one past an
era of chemical fuels, will not bother growing
plants on board because they can recycle their
air and water mechanically instead, and ditch
waste if they need to.
Recreation is unlikely to be a big energy-soak,
and a hydroponics system is not going to handle
sudden changes in gravity strength and direction
very well, and serves little point on some
fusion driven ship that is unlikely to ever
be out for more than a month at a time before
they can resupply.
So at most they might keep seed packets somewhere
and the feedstock for a 3D printer to manufacture
hydroponic equipment, if they needed too,
as seeds are ultra-light, and odds are every
ship would have a 3D printer.
That’s what is abundant.
What’s scarce?
Air and water somewhat, but the big one for
spaceships is mass.
Mass is the big limiter for ships, not habitats.
Every kilogram you have has to be pushed up
to speed.
So every extra bit of radiation shielding,
every extra bit of additional reserve air
and water, every extra object in your personal
luggage, and maybe even every kilogram of
fat or muscle on your body is slowing that
ship down.
So how does that affect mindset?
It’s not really space so much as mass, so
a ship doesn’t need to be tight quarters,
but they wouldn’t want you filling up a
spacious cabin with heavy gear either.
You might be encouraged to wear your suit
all the time just so they can cut down a little
on the exterior radiation shielding, if that
suit provides some.
They’re not going to appreciate you bringing
your antique book collection along instead
of digital copies.
They might be okay with your fish tank though,
since that water could be used as a reserve
source.
They won’t want you having anything that
isn’t easily secured when not in active
use, nothing that is going to fly off and
kill someone when the wall suddenly becomes
the floor.
Light, strong, durable, minimal…
Now how far that goes and in what directions
is hard to say, odds are every ship would
have its own flavor too when it came to what
they were very strict about or very relaxed
about, but that’s the sort of influences
affecting the mindset we’d expect to see.
Space is a murderous death pit empty of everything
but radiation and tiny bits of super-fast
debris spraying around like shrapnel to kill
your ship, millions of kilometers from any
rescue, which is more likely to involve vacuuming
up your remains than taking you back to a
hospital.
I suspect it would tend to encourage a pretty
disciplined and serious mindset; less so for
space habitats as we’ll discuss next week.
But our book of the month, Leviathan Wakes,
is a great example of authors looking at that
environment and crafting how it alters a society.
Not just physiologically but culturally, creating
its own priorities and customs.
If you’ve seen the show, you know how good
it is, and while I normally say the book is
always better than the show, that’s hard
in the case because it really is an excellent
book but the show is so good.
Let me instead say that while it is a very
solid adaptation, there are quite a lot of
differences and a lot more depth in certain
areas, and I preferred the chief protagonist,
Jim Holden, as depicted in the novel over
the show, he still seems to get stuffed into
every crisis going on in the solar system
but without that element of reckless lack
of forethought the TV version sometimes seems
to have.
You can pick up a FREE copy of “Leviathan
Wakes” today, just use my link in this episode’s
description, Audible.com/Isaac or text promo
code Isaac to 500-500 to get a free book and
30 day free trial, and that book is yours
to keep, whether you stay on with Audible
or not, and if you don’t enjoy it, you can
swap it out for a different book at any time.
As mentioned, next week we will be looking
more at space habitats with an episode on
O’Neill Cylinders, giant cylindrical habitats
that we’ll see are a lot more comfortable
than life on a spaceship is likely to be.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
