Spacecraft may one day be so common 
that everyone has flown on one,  
with thousands of new spaceships being 
built every year in manufacturies dwarfing  
the enormous facilities we build 
planes and sea-going vessels in. 
Building a spaceship is an enormous undertaking. 
They tend to cost as much as an aircraft carrier,  
even though the crew and cargo are in a space 
about the size of a small boat or modest yacht.  
They require precision-manufacturing unlike any 
other vehicle, and yet, one day their manufacture  
might be as routine as that of an automobile.
Emphasis on routine, not simple, as there’s  
nothing simple about the modern car, 
and I wouldn’t expect that to be true  
of personal spaceships either, but in many ways 
a spaceship can be simpler than a terrestrial  
vehicle. Space is mostly empty with few 
obstacles or shifts to road surface or air  
density to require constant course corrections.
Today we’ll be examining a lot of different paths  
for the future of building ships, and we’ll be 
looking at everything from simple asteroid-mining  
ships produced in a low-tech future, to cases 
where all the real work was done on the software  
and design end, and someone just spills some 
self-replicator robots on a spare asteroid, and  
they replicate and spawn ships out of it, or maybe 
even grow them quasi-biologically. And as we’ll  
see, even in these high-tech situations, there 
are limits to how fast you can produce a fleet. 
Fundamentally, scale is what we’re looking 
at today though; not building just one ship,  
or a prototype, but the mass manufacture 
of them: starship factories or dockyards. 
When I was a young teen there was a cartoon called 
Exosquad that is a bit of a hidden gem. It often  
had deep, realistic, and philosophical discussions 
buried among second-rate animation and comic  
action scenes, but I liked it and it features 
humanity at war, and the good guys forced back  
to Jupiter at the start of the second season, 
where they’re repairing and rebuilding their  
fleet. They lost the flagship in the close of the 
first season, and its successor was sabotaged and  
blown up while halfway built at their shipyard.
That made me wonder how the heck they ever found  
the resources to build a ship, when the 
bad guys had the 3 real planets, Earth,  
Venus, and Mars, under their thumb, and we’re 
never told that any of the others are seriously  
inhabited. Those ships were huge, and they showed 
people in spacesuits going EVA to weld them. 
Automation, of course, can be a huge game changer 
in how these things work, but if you think about  
the newest aircraft carrier we built, the Gerald 
Ford, that came in at around 13 billion dollars,  
and if to keep the math easy we assumed everyone 
in that building process and supply chain averaged  
26 dollars an hour in pay and compensation, 
that would imply half a billion man-hours went  
into construction – most of that occurring 
off-site, mining and making the materials  
and paying the people who did that or made their 
equipment – but half a billion is a huge number,  
and even the annual version of that, 
assuming 2000 work hours a year,  
is still a quarter of a million years of labor.
It’s important to understand that to build in  
space, almost all the material needs to be up 
there for it be economically plausible, and while  
a lot of the cost might be in hyper-expensive 
tiny microchips or research, development, and  
prototyping down on the ground, you are building 
that ship in space, and also mining, refining  
and smelting all the metal for it there too.
It is not hard to imagine needing a million  
people in space, in terms of workers and families, 
to build one big spaceship, especially those  
mile-long ones popular in sci fi. Even with a 
lot of automation, that still seems plausible. 
But I thought we’d begin in an era when there are 
still less than a million people living in space,  
and look at a pair of fictional shipyards, 
The George Mueller Orbital Shipyard,  
around Earth, affectionately known as Port 
George, and the Linus Collection Point,  
orbiting 22 Kalliope in the Asteroid Belt, 
affectionately known as the Scrapyard. 
Port George is named in honor of 
the father of the space shuttle,  
and handles a number of different designs but is 
best known for its tender vessels, medium-sized  
ships with a crew of 6-12 designed for multi-week 
operation anywhere in Cis-Lunar Space out to the  
Earth-Sun Lagrange L-1 Point. It’s designed to be 
able to rendezvous with existing space structures  
or satellites and either to bring them inside, 
for smaller ones, or go EVA for larger ones. 
Port George itself has relatively minimal 
EVA involved in construction, it is a huge,  
and mostly hollow facility, and even its areas 
exposed to the vacuum of space are typically  
still enclosed, just depressurized, to help 
protect the crew and vehicle under construction.  
Many of the ships they build are principally 
made of aluminum mined from Luna, and so there  
is little concern of oxidation damage to the 
outside. Even for those ships which are more  
sensitive to oxygen it is usually considered 
safer and easier to have a thin-walled pressure  
chamber for the dockyard workers to operate in.
Indeed, much of Port George is under low-speed  
rotation to permit about a fifth of Earth-normal 
Gravity, as it was determined that a standard  
earth atmosphere was needed, but that the 
workers mostly benefited from just enough  
gravity to feel like there was an up and 
a down. Personal living quarters generally  
are kept at 80-100% of standard gravity.
One of the more interesting things about  
Port George is that a large portion of its 
workers live down on Earth, and it would not  
be unusual for a work crew to consist of one or 
two humans and a dozen robots being controlled by  
telepresence operators down on Earth - after all, 
the time delay from Earth's surface to orbit is  
much less than a second, so, although the latency 
is something that takes some getting used to – and  
may require some anti-nausea medication - it's far 
from a dealbreaker. After some trial and error, it  
was determined that keeping those same operators 
with those same on-site teams tended to result in  
far better group cohesion and quality control, so 
many an on-site dockyard worker has workmates down  
on Earth they’re close enough with to occasionally 
visit whenever they’re on shore leave. 
For very big ships, such as an Aldrin Cycler, Port 
George used to do exterior unshielded assembly of  
main components, but is now using inflatable 
bubbles of a thin-walled, radiation absorbent  
material, to allow crews to use a relatively 
low-mass spacesuit with their helmet mag-locked  
to their thigh for if there’s a pressure drop. 
This is seen as an overall safer work environment  
due to the physical exhaustion and psychological 
issues of bulkier suits designed for extended  
open-space, or ‘void’ work as it is called. The 
more recent efforts to systemize space debris  
clearance have also made such large inflatable 
bubbles more long-lived. Though punctures remain  
common and are typically treated with a quick 
patch till the entire bubble degrades, or the  
project is complete, and it can be recycled.
Along with being able to rely on Earth for remote  
workers, Port George gets a lot of state funding 
and has critical but small components manufactured  
down on Earth. Nonetheless it still has to 
be frugal about all its resources, especially  
those brought up from Earth, which is why salvage 
and recycling are critical to their operations. 
Port George is also known for its construction 
of the DS-12 Toy Box, a space debris collection  
ship with minimum bells and whistles, designed 
to allow a 1 or 2 person crew to salvage damaged  
orbitals and control a number of drones that are 
able to collect pieces of scrap with low delta-v  
relative to the ship. The nickname of Toy Box 
officially is for all the neat drones the model  
comes equipped with, but everyone knows it's for 
all the weird and unique garbage they collect. 
While the DS-12 Toybox is viewed with a certain 
amount of amused contempt as a junker among other  
orbital spaceship crews, the handful of them 
that have been transported to the Asteroid  
Belt are practically considered luxury yachts.
The growing Space Industry is hungry for metal  
but specifically for the cheapest metal, and 
that’s where The Scrapyard comes in. 22 Kalliope,  
at over a hundred miles across in most 
directions, is the second largest Metallic  
Asteroid in the Belt, and something of a rubble 
pile including hydrated mineral and silicates,  
and is home to a handful of mining operations, but 
Kalliope is better known for having its own Moon,  
Linus, which itself is 20 miles across and thus 
is bigger than both of Mars’ moons combined. 
The Scrapyard formed not long after someone 
had the idea to run a skyhook-style tether  
directly between Kalliope and Linus, 
hanging just over Kalliope’s surface,  
which has a 4 hour rotation rate. Linus orbits it 
twice a week a thousand kilometers from Kalliope,  
and which with good timing can be used to allow 
ships or cargo pods to accelerate and release  
around the Belt or even back to Earth. This has 
made it a popular port of call of asteroid miners,  
which the Census say now number 30,000 throughout 
the system, roughly 10,000 of which are in single  
or two person crewed, owner operator mining 
and prospecting ships, several hundred of  
which visit this asteroid pair for the discounted 
rates of shipping cargo both to and from Earth. 
Many of these ships were built at the 
Scrapyard on Linus, and here we see  
the Art of Minimalist Shipbuilding not seen 
since the old days of early spaceship travel,  
and many of which would be illegal to 
operate near Earth for a variety of reasons,  
ranging from worker safety hazards to some 
using radioactive materials. Ultimately,  
every dollar spent on a ship or its crew 
has to be paid for with the metals it mines,  
so the Scrapyard allows lone individuals or small 
teams to be competitive with the larger and better  
equipped markets, at the price of taking some 
additional risks and enduring more discomforts. 
Fundamentally, a spaceship is just 
a pressurized box with an engine,  
and the Scrapyard understands this all too well. 
Their ships aren’t for landing on big planets  
or taking off through atmospheres. They don’t 
need the radiation shielding the DS-12 needs,  
because they’re about 3 times further from the Sun 
than Earth, and thus only get 12% of the radiation  
from the Sun, and there’s no Van Allen Radiation 
Belt out in the Asteroid Belt, and also, no  
government inspectors pushing for worker safety.
This far out from the sun, and orbiting it,  
and not Earth, the majority of space 
debris is traveling relatively slowly,  
so it is possible to armor ships against that, and 
uranium is reasonably plentiful out in the belt,  
as is thorium. Solar power isn’t a very realistic 
option here, it can be done by using large,  
thin reflective dishes to concentrate sunlight, 
but that’s less viable while moving around,  
and the preferred method for mining and 
prospecting is to park your ship in a deep  
crater, to protect it from micro-meteors and other 
debris, but where it won’t get a lot of sunlight. 
So the Scrapyard tends to make a lot of ships 
that are very like the cargo pods they shoot  
back to Earth; brutally simple. Those ships are 
often only two rooms, a main room for living,  
working, and sleeping, and a smaller airlocked 
room for exiting, which often does double-duty as  
a bathroom. They’ve got robots who make the big 
metal plates, and the rest they slap together,  
and a lone person can easily move a multi-ton 
plate in microgravity. It's a slow process  
of shoving inertial mass around, but 
there’s just the air holding it back.  
That’s one of the neat things about a zero-gravity 
shipyard, you don’t see many forklifts,  
and large items are often slowly moved into 
place with a protective coating of inflatable  
air pillows on the side to minimize collision 
damage during installation. Sometimes, one will  
get punctured and cause a fairly heavy object, 
like a nuclear power module, to start drifting  
and spinning around. There are surprisingly few 
injuries in the shipyards, but at least one was  
someone having a heart attack at the sight of 
a nuclear reactor careening around the dock. 
They can make a ship in just a few days, 
because they are not large or complex. Weld  
the hull together, get an airlock and engine 
port on it, a window, usually on the opposite  
side of the airlock, so you can escape 
if one side is blocked for some reason.  
If your ship burns something out on an asteroid 
crater it can cause a venting of gas that could  
knock it over, and then, zero-gravity or not, it 
could get stuck and wedged in, airlock-side down. 
The very simplest ships just have a RTG and a 
device that can run metalysis on ore and produce  
metal plus oxygen, and they use that oxygen as 
their propellant when they’re ready to leave,  
usually buying methane for fuel back 
at the depot, shipped in from Titan,  
which buys pressurized pods from Kalliope. 
These ships have nothing like the efficiency  
of the bigger and more expensive fission reactor 
versions, running on more elaborate Ion Drives,  
but they are cheap and you can make one on your 
own, often by scrounging parts from many of the  
wrecked and discarded bits awaiting salvage or 
disposal on Linus, whose escape velocity of about  
20 meters per second, or 45 miles per hour makes 
it just sufficient enough to comfortably hold down  
cargo or salvage, as well as the crew, who might 
get flung off something, or some loose debris may  
collide into and cause an air tank to leak.
One of those issues with EVA, for an asteroid  
miner or dockyard worker, is that if you forget to 
tether yourself or any gear, it’s generally going  
to get lost. Fetching drones are very popular 
but not cheap. Kalliope’s has a annual festival,  
which is held every 5 Earth years, as Kalliope’s 
orbit around the Sun is 5 Earth years, and it has  
many contests, one of which is who can untangle 
tool tethers fastest while in a full EVA suit,  
and the current champion, four times running, 
is the current elected mayor of the binary  
asteroid group. She ran on untangling the complex 
regulations for shipping back to Earth. Other  
contests include sealing a leaky compartment, 
finding a leak on a wall covered in consoles,  
and various feats of dexterity and acrobatics 
in microgravity while wearing a spacesuit. 
This episode isn’t about the lives of asteroids 
miners or shipyard workers, but the folks at  
the Scrapyard show us a future in which you could 
have a thriving shipbuilding and asteroid-mining  
economy a billion kilometers from Earth, and yet 
needing only modern technology and automation. 
Let’s consider the other extremes of that, like 
ultra-automation and self-growing ships, and begin  
by considering the nanotech self-replicator 
option. We tend to have this assumption that  
we can make tiny little machines that can make 
copies of themselves and perform some other task,  
general or specialized, and we assume if something 
the size of a biological cell can do this,  
we should be able to make something as good 
or better, and about the same size or smaller. 
Such being the case, one designed to live in 
a vacuum and take apart local regolith seems  
plausible enough, and they could have their own 
equivalent of DNA and an extra separate one for  
the processes or items they were supposed to 
make. Like turn on, make a copy of itself,  
build one of object A, make another 
copy of itself, build another object A,  
etc. That would be a specialized 
version, an Object A might be a  
specific object like a chunk of metal plate, or 
a paperclip, or maybe even a whole spaceship. 
Now, this is popular in sci fi. As are 
the nanobots running wild as Grey Goo or  
Hegemonizing Swarm. However, in practice we 
would borrow further from nature by having  
layers of ecosystems, and then further depart from 
nature by not feeling obliged to have an organism  
replicate itself specifically. So instead 
of having one species of self-replicator,  
you would probably instead have a few hundred, or 
million, each designed for some specific tasks and  
built along different lines and scales. This one 
seeks metal deposits, this one builds kilns for  
melting metal, this one makes the rivets 
for use in Airlocks, this one makes wire,  
this one makes killer drones that seek out 
any faulty or mutant bots and kills them. 
And none of them self-replicate, rather some big 
drone arrives and builds ten smaller drones meant  
for building each of ten other smaller drones 
who each have a specific model of yet-smaller  
drone that they make. And you probably have 
some control variable the machines can’t make  
or get that limits reproduction – this might be 
some specific rare element or some manufactured  
black box widget some of the bigger replicators 
need, or even something akin to Bitcoin. One of  
the replicating layers has to mine codes 
before reproducing, and this limits its  
reproduction once it begins getting in excess 
of the estimated number needed for the project. 
So, your replicator arrives at a spare 
asteroid and turns it into a ship, or ships,  
and this is simple enough conceptually but its 
sheer simplicity tends to make folks assume  
it’s the end of all normal manufacturing. 
In practice, this is not an insta-ship,  
even if your drones have a magical infinite 
power supply, they can only work so fast without  
overheating themselves and their surroundings 
till they get melted by their own frenetic work.  
Also, they break very easily, and the sturdier 
you make them, the more replication time they  
need and the more energy per task they need. We 
talked about this more in our Self-replicating  
space probes and Santa Claus Machine episodes, 
and there are a lot of limitations in how fast  
you can do 3D printing, nanotech, or Star Trek 
style replicators. Odds are there are more  
problems we don’t even know of yet too.
The Clanking Self-Replicator is often a  
better option, and this is more the assumption 
that you’re not going for tiny little robots,  
but a bunch of big drones and factories. 
Big animals and plants, not microbes.  
At its core, imagine a factory for making robots 
that could make any of the robots needed to  
perform most of the functions in that factory, to 
supply that factory, or build another copy of that  
factory. This is going to use a huge, insulated 
cauldron for making its metals because this is  
more efficient than a bunch of tiny bots. We don’t 
really use these on Earth though because it’s so  
much easier to employ a human for any of the parts 
that aren’t easily roboticized or repetitive,  
and we have a lot of humans who need work.
It's hard to predict how labor will go on Earth;  
where we have a plentiful supply of people, 
and there’s good reason to think those people  
actually require more effort and resources if 
you don’t keep them occupied usefully, so we will  
likely never have totally automated factories. 
But in space, we may have to, especially with  
interstellar efforts. More likely though, we 
would engage in Human-Machine Teaming, which  
at least in recent decades has tended to prove far 
more useful than machines alone or humans alone.  
So, our spaceship factories in space, 
where manpower is likely to be limited,  
will probably tend to be in this semi-autonomous 
clanking self-replicator situation where some  
large but not truly automated chunk of the 
supply chain is being partially run by humans.  
Maybe maintenance, maybe they are the ones 
doing final assembly and quality control,  
and the overall administration and 
management might be jobs for them too. 
This would seem to work better for very big 
projects like those mile-long battleships sci  
fi loves, or those even bigger Arkship 
colony vessels we love to discuss on  
this show for interstellar generation ships.
This strikes as your most likely setup in part  
because it resembles modern manufacturing, but 
is likely to have a lot of very simplified supply  
chains, in locations if not steps. You’re always 
able to move faster and better in manufacturing  
if you’re dedicating a specific spot to making 
a specific item, not the whole device. For us,  
it isn’t the lone bot or factory that 
self-replicates, or even the lone human  
or couple, but rather the civilization itself 
that self-replicates, and that’s very needed  
where an arkship is considered because you are 
not just building a big metal cylinder. You have  
to set up and decorate or equip each compartment, 
some of which need to be elaborate ecosystems for  
organisms you’re taking with you, others would 
need complex factories for gear you need to  
repair and replace, and yet more would be schools, 
parks, farms, gardens, and entire communities. 
So we can imagine tiny little robots or 
entire automated facilities doing this,  
maybe even building critters and people from 
DNA templates and education and care archives,  
but there are so many hurdles in the way of 
this process – what we call seed ships or data  
ships – that it would seem hard for it to go fast. 
Indeed, when you think about it, while we can  
repair things hyper-fast NASCAR style, or build 
houses or bridges overnight. Generally speaking,  
we tend to move bigger things, and more slowly 
than in prior times. Houses don’t get built  
overnight or in a few weeks, it’s a process of 
many months or even years for bigger buildings,  
and it produces superior work, at least for 
whatever quantities you’re optimizing around,  
be it time, labor, money, minimal 
paperwork, minimal local disruption, etc. 
I think this will be the case more in the future 
too, but in the context of this larger organism  
doing replication, we might consider mitosis as 
an option - that our starship factories of the  
future might be starships themselves. We have 
contemplated this in the case of our Gardener  
Ship; a large interstellar generation ship that 
needs to be able to manufacture any component  
the ship or colony will need in case it breaks, 
since in multi-decade or multi-century journeys,  
anything can break. Thus they can manufacture 
an entire new ship so long as they’re given the  
time and enough raw materials, and 
they have a lot of time. They have  
decades between nearest points in which to 
do little but build and breed more people. 
So, arriving at a colony destination, it 
would seem very likely that many people who  
spent their whole life on that giant ship wouldn’t 
necessarily want to become a planetary colonist,  
and the population would have risen during 
that voyage, so some stay on the old ship,  
some go to form the new colony, and some go 
on the new ship to a new destination after  
they help the colonists start up and refill 
their raw supplies. They just keep doing this,  
growing their numbers and restocking as they 
journey toward the galactic rim, see our Gardening  
the Galaxy episode for a look at that life.
But critically, it offers us the option of  
mitosis for ships, or colonial fleets, as they 
might be a small fleet rather than a lone ship,  
and might add ships as they go, building them 
from raw materials acquired at each stop,  
and occasionally divide that fleet like a cell 
would. Or a Spaceship might flat-out grow longer  
over time like a big, long worm, then, unlike 
actual worms, those types of ships could divide  
and form new ships by cutting themselves in half. 
Or they might even grow themselves in a DNA helix  
style and unzip the ship into two identical ones.
We’ll be exploring more of the ideas of truly  
complicated mass manufacturing, and dedicating 
entire large asteroids to industry – or entire  
moons or planets – this weekend in our Scifi 
Sunday episode: Forge Worlds & Industrial Planets,  
but as we’re seeing today, it is very 
likely that your true starship factories,  
those making big ships, along the lines of 
colony vessels, not merely little shuttles, are  
more likely to be entire cities or nation states 
in space, not some small dockyard of hundreds,  
and in the future, a project of that scope might 
even be accomplished largely by automation. 
We’re also seeing this automation is likely to 
involve many layers, from the classic welder,  
to entire biosystems of nanotech, to gardeners 
and biologists, and even more obscure things  
like hospital administrators, investors and 
recruiters, because those big ships aren’t  
just a gun and engine, they’re a small 
civilization – or even a large one. And  
you need experts in everything, and storage 
space for everything, up to and potentially  
including antimatter fuel or weapon storage, 
or space for the guys who handle installing  
the micro-black hole in the spaceship’s basement.
Indeed, you might need a whole world to really do  
it right, especially for big ones, and it might 
be that you do build them down on the ground,  
then winch them up to space by tether between 
a pair of orbital rings, but again we’ll  
examine that option this weekend in Forge Worlds.
One last option for acquiring your spaceships is  
not to manufacture them, but to instead steal 
them from others, and space piracy might be a  
fairly complex process, especially as it’s often 
likely to be data and designs you need to steal,  
not just raw materials or ultra-expensive computer 
chips. However, it is always possible we might be  
able to make ships that could travel to other 
universes if the Multiverse idea is true,  
in which case you might be able to make your 
starships by manufacturing one, then stealing  
copies from those adjoining multiverses where 
an almost identical spaceship just got produced. 
Of course, that implies you’re violating the first 
rule of warfare, never try picking on someone your  
own size, since they presumably have identical 
technology and infrastructure to yourself. 
It’s also a good reminder about scale, because 
while those massive mile-long ships might be  
popular in sci fi for their sheer appearance 
of immensity, we have good reason to believe  
that bigger will be better for a lot of aspects 
of ship efficiency, speed, or combat prowess,  
and that space faring civilizations can get away 
with both quantity and quality, fielding huge  
numbers of huge ships which are each incredibly 
sophisticated, multipurpose capable, and powerful. 
And so, while we might see small ship factories 
like The Scrapyard, turning out tiny boats,  
or others making small personal yachts, like 
we discussed in Your Own Personal Spaceship,  
there is definitely room for bigger starship 
factories, and they might need that room too,  
as some might be as big as entire 
continents, or encircle entire planets.
 
I always enjoy writing these episodes with 
the narrative formats to them as it seems like  
stories are just such a good approach to teaching 
science. If you’ve done much STEM teaching you  
probably know how hard it is to teach some 
concepts, like electricity and circuits,  
to even smart adults or teens. It takes a 
unique mixture of hands on experience and  
narrative to really make it stick. This is why I 
was fascinated by our newest sponsor, Upper Story. 
Their newest game Spintronics, has number of 
example puzzles for you to build woven inside  
a beautifully illustrated graphic novel. 
So instead of boring instructions you get  
a steampunk-themed story of a young clockmaster 
learning an alternative technology, electricity,  
and using gears to build mechanical circuits 
and teach about both them and electricity. 
Spintronics does an amazing job showing all the 
electronic components in a hands-on way that is  
fun and instructive. I loved it and found it quite 
stimulating but more importantly my kids loved it,  
everything from experimenting with different 
resistor combinations to building chain linkage,  
and I had to use ice cream to lure them away.
So as we go into the holiday season, if you’re  
looking for a fun and hands on educational gift 
for your family or friends, something that can be  
played in a group or solo, use the link in the 
episode description upperstory.com/spintronics  
to learn more, and don’t forget to use coupon code 
ISAACARTHUR at checkout to save 10% on your order.
So back in August we began circulating a petition 
to save the New Horizons Space probe out in the  
Kuiper Belt, to keep the research team for 
the billion dollar probe billions of miles  
from home running, and I’m very glad to say that 
was a success. We got thousands of signatures,  
and the bulk of them, especially the early 
ones so critical to getting it to snowball,  
come from this audience. As did the donations 
that helped promote the petition for others to  
see it. So if you signed that petition, shared 
it, donated to it, or wrote your congressmen,  
yes, you absolutely saved the New Horizons 
probe so it could continue the process of  
expanding our horizons. Thank you so much. We 
literally could not have done this without you. 
I did also want to thank the rest of the 
leadership at the National Space Society  
for their support for this, particularly 
Executive Vice President Hoyt Davidson,  
who did so much of the heavy lifting on the front 
end of this, and the Beyond Earth Institute and  
Space Frontier Foundation for co-signing our 
letter to NASA and congress, along with many  
other groups like Space.com and Universe Today who 
helped raise awareness or circulate the petition  
once we got it going, and it just helps show what 
amazing things we can do when working together for  
a shared greater future. So again on behalf of the 
National Space Society, thank you, and Ad Astra! 
Speaking of building the future, this 
weekend on Scifi Sunday we’ll be continuing  
our factory theme by contemplating 
entire planets devoted to industry,  
in Forgeworlds & Industrial Planets. Then 
next Thursday on October 19th we’ll discuss  
if Life Extension Is Ethical. Then we will look at 
another type of dedicated planet, Fortress Worlds,  
on October 26th, and in two weeks we’ll finish 
October, with our monthly Livestream Q&A,  
on the 29th. Then on November 2nd we’ll 
ask if the Rebel Space Colonies we often  
contemplate in scifi and futurism might occur 
and what they’ll be like, before we release  
our big-3 hour long updated and extended edition 
of the Fermi Paradox Compendium on November 9th. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can 
also help support the show on Patreon, and if you  
want to donate and help in other ways, you 
can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
