This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
We’ve occasionally said that Jupiter, with
its many moons,
is practically a second solar system inside
our own,
but what if we could actually make Jupiter
a second Sun?
In Arthur C. Clarke’s classic novel, 2010,
the sequel to the legendary 2001: A Space
Odyssey, Jupiter is turned into a second sun
by mysterious alien benefactors with the message
bearing a gift and a warning, “All these
worlds are yours except Europa. Attempt no
landing there. Use them together. Use them
in peace.”
Since then the notion that Jupiter might be
turned into a sun has become a rather popular
bit of science fiction speculation. Can it
be done? Would it turn the Jovian moons into
better sites for colonies? And what benefits
or problems would it bring to Earth?
We should start with the obvious, while Jupiter
is enormous, roughly matching the combined
mass of every planet, moon, and asteroid in
the solar system, including the Oort Cloud,
Jupiter is still only a thousandth the mass
of our Sun. You may have heard Jupiter would
need to be 80 times more massive to be a star,
but the lowest mass star we’ve thus far
found that burns hydrogen, 2MASS J0523−1403,
about 42 light years away from us, is actually
just 67 times more massive than Jupiter. Given
that stars that small are the hardest to see,
it’s very unlikely that one coincidentally
a mere 42 light years away holds the record
for least massive star, more likely that the
galaxy contains some that we can’t see that
are even lower.
Of course, that only includes classic hydrogen
burning stars, not deuterium burning stars
or ones of an artificial nature, and we’ll
explore those options today too.
There are many artificial routes by which
one might be able to ignite Jupiter, some
of which we spoke of in more detail in our
episode “Making Suns”, but one might want
to ask what the effect would be if we could
do that.
Generally the larger a star is, the brighter.
Doubling one’s mass will make it about 10
times brighter, and the reverse is true too,
half the mass, about a tenth the brightness.
This is only a rule of thumb rather than a
smooth curve but, for instance, that tiny
red dwarf 67 times more massive than Jupiter
we mentioned a moment ago, is quite dim, our
own Sun being 7200 times brighter, even though
our Sun is only 16 times more massive than
it is.
We would expect a Jupiter-star to be vastly
less bright just following that mass curve,
but if it were that bright, since Jupiter
is 5 times farther from the Sun than Earth
is, and usually 4 to 6 times farther from
Earth than the Sun, we would expect it to
be about 100,000 to 250,000 times less bright
in our sky than our own Sun, and indeed actually
a lot less to the naked eye as far more of
that light it would give off is in the infrared
range rather than visible wavelengths.
As small as that number sounds, don’t assume
that wouldn’t still be a very bright object,
the Sun is 400,000 times brighter than the
Full Moon so such a star would parallel that,
giving off more total light but a big chunk
of it invisible to our eyes. Our eyes are
logarithmic in nature so we don’t really
notice changes in brightness as much, for
instance, most of us would consider the lighting
of 10 Watt LED bulb in a room quite bright
but would generally be only about a thousandth
the light in that room that it would get if
we ripped the roof off to expose the room
to a cloudless noon sky. And indeed, the light
of the Sun out at Jupiter, 5 times farther
from the Sun than us and thus 5² or 25 times
dimmer, is still brighter than most cloudy
days here and quite enough for all but the
most sun-loving plants.
What would the light be like on Jupiter’s
Moons if it became a sun though? Jupiter has
many dozens of moons, but it’s really the
core-4, the Galilean Moons of Io, Europa,
Ganymede, and Callisto that generally interest
us as they each outmass the rest of the tiny
moons combined and approximate our own moon’s
mass and size.
If we did make Jupiter into a star as bright
as that dim and tiny red dwarf, then Io, the
closest to Jupiter and 350 times closer to
Jupiter than Earth is to the Sun, would be
getting 17 times more light from that Jupiter-star
than Earth gets, while Callisto, 4 times farther
away, would be getting about as much light
as Earth does. That’s a bit problematic
because Io, for instance, is already rather
warm from tidal heating by Jupiter.
Which raises the other problem, tidal locking.
All of Jupiter’s moons are tidally locked
to it, showing the same face to Jupiter as
they orbit it. When most of the light they
get comes from the Sun this isn’t a big
deal, as they aren’t locked to our Sun and
thus have day lengths the same as their orbital
period around Jupiter, ranging from 1.8 Earth
days on Io to 16.7 days on Callisto. The sides
facing Jupiter always face Jupiter though,
so if it was ignited into a star, only those
sides facing Jupiter would get any of its
light.
Now they’d still be getting the Sun’s
own light, which as mentioned is hardly trivial,
more than your typical cloudy day, but it
means your day night cycles would be quite
bizarre on those Moons. On Io for instance,
one side would still only get the Sun, with
a 43 hour day-night phase, while the other
side would have Jupiter burning over head
all the time and our own sun meandering a
bit more dimly across the sky for around a
day then gone for around a day. Out at Callisto,
the same would apply only our Sun would be
putting in appearances for a bit over a week
than disappearing for the same, as it has
a 16.7 day orbital period. Incidentally on
Europa that period is 3.5 days, and Jupiter
would be about half as bright as on Io, while
on Ganymede that period is 7 days and 15%
as bright as on Io.
Not exactly setting us up for success in making
nicely terraformable worlds, and most of Jupiter’s
Moons are even farther away, there are 4 tiny
ones that are closer than the Galilean Moons,
with Metis, the closest, orbiting every 7
hours and it would get about 10 times more
light than Io would and nearly a couple hundred
times more than Callisto. Jupiter’s other
71 moons – at last count - are a good deal
farther away and indeed most have orbital
periods of a year or more.
Key notion here, before we discuss some of
our options for making Jupiter a star, this
doesn’t exactly result in a new miniature
solar system full of terraformable worlds,
in any classic sense anyway, and that’s
before even remembering that these are not
big places with lots of gravity, again the
big 4 Galileans only roughly match our own
Moon.
Now why a star needs a certain mass to be
a star and why the bigger ones are exponentially
brighter than the smaller ones comes down
to what makes fusion happen. Or to be more
accurate, what makes fusion happen more often.
As I mentioned in our episode Fusion Power,
it’s actually rather rare even in our own
Sun, so much so that if you took a portable
generator’s volume of the Sun and kept it
magically under pressure you’d be lucky
to power a dim light bulb with that. That’s
the whole problem with making fusion reactors,
it's not enough to replicate the Sun’s interior
conditions, because the Sun for all its brightness
only generates about 1 watt of power for every
5 tons of its mass.
Now for our Sun most of that takes place in
a smaller fraction of the core, but for comparison
the biggest stars generate more than 20,000
times as much brightness per unit of mass,
which is still only 4 watts per kilogram,
akin to a flashlight in brightness and mass,
while that tiny little red dwarf we were referencing
is generating about 1 watt of light for a
couple millions kilograms of mass. If we could
match that with Jupiter, it would still be
67 times dimmer and thus barely able to warm
even Io, the closest of its big moons.
Why this is the case all comes down to temperature
and pressure, the more you squeeze a gas down,
the hotter and higher pressure it tends to
be, which essentially means random atoms inside
it are moving around faster, making them more
likely to bump neighbors, who are also more
densely packed in too, thus even more likely
to collide in any given moment, and because
they are higher temperature and thus moving
faster, those are much higher-energy collisions
and more likely to cause a fusion event. It’s
still really rare even in the biggest stars,
which still live a million years before having
burned up a decent fraction of their hydrogen,
and it's so rare in the smallest of stars
that it takes them trillions of years to do
that, meaning any given particle in the core
undergoing a true fusion event will generally
need a trillion years for that to be a likely
event.
Certain materials like deuterium are more
likely to fuse when they strike, thus why
you can have temporary deuterium burning in
brown dwarfs, which can be thought of as either
the very smallest of stars or the very biggest
of planets if you prefer, but this is still
minimal. Though it would be far higher if
we made a star entirely out of deuterium,
something we discussed in the episode I mentioned
earlier, Making Suns.
That pressure at the core of a star comes
from all those upper layers pushing down on
it and all that gravity from that mass. However,
that’s not the only way to make pressure.
You can just squeeze an object down. Not as
hard as it sounds like with a star either
as they generally have a low density, indeed
our Sun’s surface – which is a pretty
ambiguous concept – is a good deal less
dense than our own atmosphere.
We’ve often talked about making active-support
structures on this show, including giant spheres
the size of Jupiter, what we call Shellworlds
or Mega-Earths, and while that usually is
constructed with the intent of holding mass
above it, not inside it, the principle still
applies. We could make a giant shell around
Jupiter and start squeezing it down. If that
shell were constructed of a high-temperature
melting point material like Tungsten, we might
not even need to ignite fusion in Jupiter’s
core to get light out of it.
Before we had cheap LED light bulbs, the most
common sort was the incandescent bulb, which
worked by running electricity through a tungsten
filament inside a glass bulb. That really
has nothing to do with electricity, any given
bit of wire has a resistance to electricity
and heats up when you run a current through
it, we just used that current and resistance
to heat up a long strand of Tungsten till
it glowed with its own contained heat and
emitted light, same as a hot metal rod. Because
it has such a high melting point, we could
heat it up to temperatures that produced lots
of light in the visible spectrum.
Planets contain a stupid amount of potential
energy from when they formed, as all that
mass falling in to them gained as much energy
as it takes to lift something out of orbit,
and it rises sharply with mass. Jupiter, while
only 300 times more massive than Earth, has
about 10,000 times the binding energy, about
as much as the Sun produces in a couple centuries
of its sunlight. As a reminder the Sun’s
total illumination is a couple billion times
more light than actually hits Earth from the
Sun since space is so huge, so that binding
energy of Jupiter could illuminate Earth for
400 billion years if it was all concentrated
on Earth.
And remember, we’re not even discussing
fusion yet. If we compress Jupiter some more,
its binding energy will actually increase
as matter falls deeper down and injects more
potential energy as kinetic energy slamming
around as heat. If you crunch Jupiter down
inside a big Tungsten globe, or some other
high-temperature material, it will heat that
Tungsten up till it glows red hot, literally
a giant light bulb no different than the incandescent
bulb most of us grew up with for interior
lighting, and that would be a white light,
same as those bulbs were, just a cooler more
reddish orange tint than what we associate
to sun-light or hotter-spectrum LED bulbs.
You’d slowly lose energy as that radiated
heat and cooled, and so you’d need to keep
crunching Jupiter down, but if your aim was
to produce something about a ten thousandth
as bright as our Sun, you are looking at many
thousands of years of illumination.
Of course, while you’re doing this, that
core is getting compressed more, though in
fact that’s mostly metallic hydrogen and
other heavier elements but you’d probably
be getting a good deal more fusion events.
Note that I say more, because there already
is some. Hydrogen bumping around occasionally
undergoes fusion, it’s just way more often
the more energetic the particles are and the
more frequent the collisions happen from packing
them in tight together.
Assuming you can keep ramping your pressure
up in that core, you will get more fusion,
and you can keep tightening your big globe
down until that fusion is happening often
enough to keep your big globe at super-hot
temperatures but not actually melting, just
glowing bright. Conceptually this is very
similar to how stars normally work too, they
achieve a hydrostatic equilibrium as all the
heat they produce tries to force particles
further apart while gravity tries to hold
them together, and they equalize at a given
radius where those uppermost layers are trying
to fall down from gravity while heat is trying
to push them apart.
If the star collapses more, fusion rises,
heating it and pushing the star wider, which
lowers pressure in the core, decreasing fusion
rates. This reaches a balance point based
on stellar mass and composition which again
we call hydrostatic equilibrium. We’re just
cheating by using a big metal globe to shove
down. Now doing that takes a lot of power,
active support isn’t free neither is keeping
cool any parts you need not to be running
hot, but there is a bigger power source available,
obviously, and since all energy expended eventually
ends up as heat, which is our goal anyway,
it hardly needs to be an efficient process.
You can also potentially be doing this crunching
magnetically, all that heat makes for a lot
of ionized material after all, same as on
a star, so you could potentially be crushing
a star down by running a massive amount of
magnets around it.
You also don’t necessarily need to be making
Jupiter all that bright. As mentioned, most
of our Sun’s light meanders off into the
void rather than hitting planets, and we can
be using mirrors and lens orbiting a planet
or a star to focus a dimmer light onto a planet
or moon in the quantity we want. This is a
good way of solving both the issue of Jupiter’s
Moons being at differing distances from it
and the issue of them having a dark side due
to being tidally locked. You just put mirrors
in lenses around your Jupiter-star to focus
light on those moons and others out past that
Moon to reflect light onto their dark side.
You don’t even necessarily need to bother
with regular orbits either, such a mirror
is essentially a solar sail and that lets
us play with orbital periods a lot, what we
call statites and lagites, things with no
orbital period or slowed orbital periods by
using a mixture of light pressure and gravity
to define their orbital period rather than
just gravity. For that matter, since those
moons have little mass and gravity, space
elevators work fine on them and actually a
good deal better if they’re being used to
tether a giant mirror at their top that you're
shining a powerful light beam on to reflect
on the surface below. That light pressure
decreases the effective weight of the structure.
Indeed you could actually use that trick for
space elevators around Earth, just having
big mirrors fanning out around your tether
as it ascended from ground to orbit and bouncing
light beams off them to hold them up, and
either bouncing that light off or skipping
the extra momentum of bouncing the photons
in favor of absorbing them into big solar
power collectors, whose power could run down
that tether to be used as electricity groundside.
This is effectively a lagite space elevator,
I’m not sure it’s the best approach to
space elevators or power generation but it’s
a notion I’ve played around with occasionally
over the years and keep meaning to do an episode
or aside on.
Of course if we’re putting big mirrors and
lenses around Jupiter we might want to just
do that directly around those moons, and use
our existing Sun, but that would still work
better around Jupiter in many ways because
those mirrors are thin and Jupiter makes such
a good gravitational anchor to keep them from
flying off, as they are solar sails, unless
you add a lot of mass as ballast.
That incidentally doesn’t have to be a huge
amount, light pressure is pretty minimal which
is why solar sails need to be so thin, but
if we’re talking mirrors to move the Sun’s
own light around the Jovian sub-system of
moons, those don’t necessarily need to be
orbiting. Jupiter is huge and we can float
things in its atmosphere by regular old buoyancy,
it’s a mix of hydrogen and helium and so
pure hydrogen refined out from that inside
a big balloon is lighter than the atmosphere
and thus would float, and would float even
better if we heated the content a bit. Jupiter’s
surface area is 122 times larger than Earth,
so even though it only gets light from the
Sun at a fraction of Earth’s intensity,
it’s still about five times as much total.
Whereas the total surface area of all Jupiter’s
Moons combined is a bit less than Earth’s,
Ganymede having the most at 17%.
If you start building tons of floating mirror
platforms on Jupiter that bounce light at
those moons, then you only need to cover a
modest fraction of Jupiter’s surface with
them to keep those worlds nicely illuminated
and to the amount you want for each one. Which
might be a good deal less than Earth, since
these moons contain an awful lot of ice and
melting them might not be a great idea, at
least initially or quickly.
Speaking of floating things in Jupiter’s
atmosphere though, our main interest in Jupiter
is usually in the context of a fusion economy,
one running on some form of portable and compact
fusion rather than stars or hyper-compressed
gas giants. If that ever took off, we’d
probably have huge floating refineries on
Jupiter and other gas giants sucking out hydrogen,
or deuterium, hydrogen’s heavier and more
easily fused isotope. Such a refinery would
probably have a fusion plant on hand and be
separating out the hydrogen, deuterium, and
helium, and be venting hot helium from the
bottom to provide lift, keeping hot hydrogen
inside as a lifting gas, and filling tanks
of deuterium up as its export.
You don’t necessarily need very good artificial
fusion to want to use this approach either,
hydrogen, deuterium, and helium all have a
lot of value, and in a case like that you
might simply use beamed energy or lasers generated
closer to the Sun to power such floating refineries,
as we mentioned in Colonizing the Sun, it’s
actually fairly easy to make giant lasers
in the Sun’s upper layers by using a pair
of big mirrors and that atmosphere as your
lasing medium between them. There’s any
number of materials that could handle being
mirrors in the Sun’s upper atmosphere though
they’d wear down with time, but they are
cheap to make.
We call these Stellasers and they can be built
big or small and easily keep a beam on target
anywhere inside our solar system. Interesting
thing about lasers is that they are just a
pair of mirrors and a medium that gets excited
by light and gives off light, usually some
gas which is abundant in the atmosphere of
not just the sun but gas giants too. So not
only can you just pour lasers down on Jupiter,
to heat it up, but you could also turn it
into a giant fluorescent light bulb, as hydrogen
and the other gases in Jupiter’s atmosphere
do have excitation frequencies in the visible
spectrum.
More importantly though, if you are using
stellasers a lot, you can create large laser
highways throughout the solar system and between
stars, as we looked at in interstellar laser
highways, allowing very fast and cheap spaceship
travel. You generally need places to dump
momentum though, as that has to be conserved
and pushes your mirrors around, so it helps
to have large massive objects to dump momentum
into.
You can place mirrors in deep space being
hit by lasers but they will move, and while
you can bounce them off each other you do
need to cement any given relay of mirrors
with heavy end points and planets, especially
giant one’s like Jupiter, are great for
this, as even whole armadas of massive ships
could ply the space lanes for millennia while
barely nudging such giants. The connection
doesn’t have to be physical either as you
can dump into orbital mirrors gravitationally
bound to the world with a little extra effort,
and those are likely to scatter a lot of light,
another way you might make them into a second
sun.
Indeed of all the scenarios we’ve discussed,
this one seems the most probable, that you’d
be using Jupiter and the other gas giants
as large hubs of interplanetary and interstellar
laser highways with some of the light diverted
from surplus mirrors to reflect on those moons
and artificial habitats built in orbit or
to power other light sources, particularly
if we don’t achieve useful fusion in the
future. We often assume only with artificial
fusion can we ever truly conquer the solar
system and stars beyond but in truth while
it might slow down expansion waves who’d
have problems slowing down on approach to
uninhabited regions using pushing lasers,
once those are in place we can use existing
suns to more than easily power solar economies,
both the colonies themselves and the ships
venturing around inside them or between other
inhabited system.
Of course, if you have artificial fusion,
trying to make artificial stars is less necessary.
It also probably opens up some routes to turn
the planet into a star a lot easier, like
some version of the magnetic compression technique
we mentioned a while ago. In which case you
could easily run lighting on Jupiter from
the surplus of those gas refineries and extraction
spots sending fusion fuel off to the colonies.
But you might decide what you really want
from Jupiter is to get all that gas off. It
has plenty of value all on its own even without
fusion economies, and you might decide it's
easier stored and handled by being removed
to smaller storage depots, where it serves
a function as shielding or mass even when
not in use. But more importantly, hydrogen
and helium are incredibly common throughout
the Universe, being rare only in the warm
innner solar system where virtually all of
it is in the Sun and the remainder is mostly
tied up in Earth’s Oceans and crust. However,
deep down under Jupiter’s layers we get
to metallic hydrogen, which might be extractable
and make a nice fuel itself, and below that
is more rocky material, stuff like carbon
and iron and gold and platinum, probably more
than all the rest of the planets combined.
If you strip that gas off, you get access
to all of that.
We’re not quite sure how much metal is inside
Jupiter, it's hard to calculate and indeed
we think it may have been hit early in the
solar system’s formation by a planet ten
times Earth’s mass – there were a lot
more planets and proto-planets and dwarfs
in the early days we think which consolidated
into the current ones. However much it is,
it is a huge amount of material we’d want,
and if we have fusion we could boil it off
by using fusion candles, essentially giant
two way fusion rocket flames – see Colonizing
Jupiter for more discussion of those - and
mass export of gas to fuel fusion economies
elsewhere.
Without it though, if we want it fast, we
can just torch Jupiter by death-starring it
with mass Stellaser fire and remove that layer
by evaporation and magnetic extraction, akin
to the process we discussed for removing mass
from the Sun in the episode Starlifting. This
is not a fast process, as I said earlier,
the gravitational binding energy of Jupiter
is equal to 200 years of solar output, so
even if you were directing all that light
from the Sun at Jupiter, it would take that
long to burn it all off – and obliterate
all the Jovian moons as the place would be
literally turning into a second Sun and not
a tiny dim one. If on the other hand you were
trying to slowly remove it, applying something
more akin to what we contemplated when discussing
replacing Jupiter with the smallest known
red dwarf, it would take a good deal longer,
more like a couple million years during which
time Jupiter would glow quite brightly, and
that would only use up about 1% of 1% of the
Sun’s output. When you’re done, you’ve
got all that raw material, but it’s a slow
process.
This also works on the other gas giants and
indeed is a good deal easier and faster as
they have far less binding energy, but that’s
certainly one way to make Summer on Jupiter,
and when you’re done, you have a rather
large rocky planet left behind, though you’d
have to wait for that too cool of course,
but I suppose that would be Autumn on Jupiter.
So we were talking today about making stars
today by artificial means, and if you’re
curious about stellar formation and star lifescycles,
there’s a number of good discussions and
quizzes on the life cycles of stars in Brilliant’s
Astronomy Course, which covers everything
from the basics to fairly advanced concepts
and does so in a fun and interactive fashion.
In a time when more folks are embracing online
education, Brilliant’s focus on fun and
interactive methods makes them a great choice,
whether you’re a student, a parent trying
to enhance your kid’s education, a professional
brushing up on cutting-edge topics, or someone
who just wants to use this time to understand
the world better, you should check out Brilliant.
Try adding some learning structure to your
day by setting a goal to improve yourself,
and then work at that goal just a little bit
every day. Brilliant makes that possible with
interactive explorations and a mobile app
that you can take with you wherever you are.
If you are naturally curious, want to build
your problem-solving skills, or need to develop
confidence in your analytical abilities, then
get Brilliant Premium to learn something new.
Brilliant’s thought-provoking math, science,
and computer science content helps guide you
to mastery by taking complex concepts and
breaking them up into bite-sized understandable
chunks. You'll start by having fun with their
interactive explorations, over time you'll
be amazed at what you can accomplish.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, and want to do it at
your own pace and from the comfort of your
own home, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and try it out for free.
So we have a fun schedule coming up for the
rest of June, starting next week with a return
to the Fermi Paradox to contemplate what it
would like to be the first civilization to
arise in the galaxy, and if we might be such
a civilization ourselves, in the Fermi Paradox:
Firstborn.
Some folks have suggested the oldest civilization
in a galaxy full of aliens might tend to act
as a police force on the others, and in two
weeks we’ll examine that notion, as well
as how we might engage in bringing law & order
to distant off world towns in space, in Space
Police.
And in three weeks we’ll take a look at
Graphene, what it is and what we might use
it for, and how this super-strong material
might impact our civilization.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others. And if you’d
like to support future episodes, you can support
the show on Patreon or visit our website,
IsaacArthur.net, to donate to the channel,
see our list of episodes or book recommendations,
or buy some awesome SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
