This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
66 million years ago the world was changed
forever
when an Asteroid only the size of a mountain
struck Earth
and wiped out the dinosaurs.
It could happen again, any day,
so what could we do to stop it?
The primary current theory for what ended
the dinosaurs was a massive asteroid, and
it wasn’t the first or last time one struck
our world with earth-shattering consequences.
Indeed current theory also says a truly massive
asteroid or dwarf planet early in our planet’s
history struck us and threw much of our crust
and mantle into orbit, debris from which later
formed our atypically large moon.
When thinking of calamities it is worth remembering
that we ourselves probably would not exist
except for that moon-generating event-- and
we’d still be rodents if not for the one
that got the dinosaurs-- so they can be beneficial
for everyone but the folks on the receiving
end…
though that may not be the case for more advanced
civilizations who may consider an incoming
asteroid quite a boon.
Those two events, the dinosaur-killer and
moon-maker, are hardly the only major impacts
we’ve had.
The latter was so enormous there is no crater
for it, it erased any events before it occurred,
but we have hundreds of major craters we’ve
found thus far and more doubtless we will
find or that were erased by time.
We’ve a crater in South Africa, estimated
at 2 billion years of age, that is twice as
big as the one from 66 million years ago that
struck the Yucatan, and three more with craters
over a 100 kilometers wide, with dozens in
the tens of kilometers width.
The largest known event in human times was
about a million years ago in Ghana in Africa,
and left a crater 10 kilometers wide, and
another larger one in Kazakhstan also around
a million years back at 14 kilometers.
To give a scale, we usually say the energy
release to form a crater roughly goes with
the cube of the diameter, and that a one megaton
nuke would leave a crater about a kilometer
wide.
So one 10 kilometers wide would be the equivalent
of 10-cubed or 1000 megatons, essentially
our cold-war arsenal, whereas one 100 kilometers
wide would be a 100-cubed or a million Megaton
blast.
Those two about a million years back could
each have been strong enough to cause major
climatic events.
Since then we’ve had many more that would
dwarf a typical nuclear explosion, and while
hardly civilization toppling events at a planetary
scale, such an impact in modern times would
likely be ruinous for the nation it landed
in and potentially have disastrous economic
consequences planet-wide.
So, they are not rare, though the bigger you
go the less common they are, and they are
a thing to worry over.
Particularly as there are probably over a
million objects in our asteroid belt alone
big enough to cause those kinds of impacts
that would be civilization-toppling, and thousands
that could cause mass-extinction.
It is also all a statistics game, it is unlikely
that anything that would even wipe out a city,
let alone a planet, would strike Earth in
the next thousand years but not super unlikely
either.
We are not talking lottery-odds, especially
for city-destroyers.
We’ll be talking today about how to detect
and prevent or destroy such asteroids coming
toward Earth.
We also need to remember that this is the
same technology that can permit malicious
asteroid attack, someone nudging an asteroid
into a collision course with Earth or even
some accident in asteroid mining operations
causing scatter collisions and perturbations
that nudged many objects onto dangerous new
trajectories.
Now asteroids are not an ideal attack method
because they are slow and easy to detect compared
to something like a “Rod From God” or
it’s big brother, the relativistic kill
missile, nor would you tend to miss someone
setting of the sorts of explosive or propellant
needed to move one onto an attack vector,
but it is an option and moreover, any number
of asteroid mining projects could accidentally
put one on a dangerous trajectory.
Key notion though is that we can’t assume
luck will protect us because even ignoring
that asteroids hit us from time to time naturally,
a civilization moving into space opens up
many new avenues for increased space debris
and collision dangers we will need to defend
from.
The first key to defense of course is knowing
where the threat is.
Early detection is key to asteroid defense,
because their sheer speed makes it easy to
miss them until it is too late to redirect
them.
In general an asteroid impact crater will
be ten times as wide as the asteroid that
caused it because of the enormous kinetic
energy released by the collision.
Asteroids vary in speed of impact but usually
move in the tens of kilometers per second
range, and would cover the distance from the
Moon to the Earth in under a day.
Timelines for such an object being spotted
at interplanetary distances and reaching us
might be around a year but we need to see
it clearly enough to know its trajectory,
though we currently still haven’t spotted
most asteroids in the Belt that are considerably
larger than a kilometer across.
Anything over a kilometer across represents
a major threat to us, likely to leave millions
dead and trillions of dollars lost, and it
would be very hard for us to spot nowadays.
Such an object a kilometer wide would be three
million times dimmer than the moon at the
same distance from us as the moon is.
That would be about 16 dimmer in terms of
apparent magnitude than the moon, which is
a -13 at a full moon.
For astronomical magnitude every 5 is equal
to a factor of 100 in brightness, and that
would make it about a 3 so it would be noticeably
visible to the naked eye but hardly bright,
plenty of nighttime stars are 3’s.
An object’s apparent brightness drops off
with the square of distance, so one a ten
times further away will be ten-squared or
one hundred times dimmer, or 5 orders of astronomical
magnitude dimmer, so that same asteroid we
mentioned a moment ago that was decently naked-eye
visible out at the moon’s distance would
be an 8 at that point, ten times further away,
and visible with binoculars.
The asteroid belt is around thousand times
farther from us than the moon and so is a
million times dimmer or 15 orders of magnitude
dimmer, but it’s actually worse than that
because we see them by reflected light from
the Sun which also falls off with the square
of distance, and the Belt is much farther
from the Sun than Earth is.
Space is big and these things are dim and
one headed toward Earth is not going to stand
out much until it is too close and we have
little time to react.
Now we could build much bigger telescopes
in space and more of them, see our Megatelescopes
episode, but this relies on passive detection
and these asteroids have their light all scattered
around the solar spectrum like most objects
reflecting light.
It is much easier to pick up an object shining
dimly but in a specific narrow frequency than
one shining brightly in a white spectrum,
and this is the basic notion of ‘active’
detection.
You blast out a rapid pulse of some tight
frequency of light, usually radio or microwave
rather than visible, and that tends to reflect
off the sort of substance you are looking
for, and see what scatters back and with the
time of return and direction you’ve got
your ping – that is essentially RADAR.
You can also do very wide images shot from
multiple angles and have a computer come back
and crunch the numbers for matchups, which
is an approach you could use with ambient
light like solar illumination or the infrared
blackbody radiation given off by the object.
Indeed for the latter the peak wavelength
of infrared will also give a fairly good idea
how far away it is from the Sun, as that correlates
to temperature of the object.
Both of these approaches benefit hugely from
having lots of detection gear in space and
not just in orbit around Earth.
You could also put them at Earth’s Lagrange
points or any number of other orbits to give
yourself a much better resolution and detection
capacity.
You need to do this as you go out in space
too because our atmosphere protects us from
small junk, which is vastly more common than
big objects, and things in space do not get
that protection and can be trashed by a fist-sized
one-kilogram meteor that would have been torched
by our atmosphere.
Indeed about 25 million hit Earth every year,
nearly once a second, to the tune of about
15 million kilograms a year.
And keep in mind there’s nothing special
in this regard about Earth.
Our gravity well does make us get hit a bit
more often than some random bit of empty space
of the same volume, but not that much.
Space is full of dangerous stuff, and will
be more so as we start littering the place
with our own junk.
So you have a very good motivation to put
up that detection and monitoring system if
you want to build a robust presence in space,
and that presence makes it much easier to
build that detection system.
Monitoring is important too because keeping
track of all these objects helps avoid them--not
to mention that if you check in and see that
one isn’t where it is supposed to be that
means something struck it or perturbed it,
which would cause lots of other stuff to be
flying around on potential new collision courses,
and it’s easier to find those if you can
calculate from where they got nudged or blasted
loose.
A future humanity in space needs detection
and monitoring and can do it easier in many
respects than we can now, but what about now?
What would we do if we picked one up?
There is a persistent myth that nuking asteroids
would not be effective.
But the First Rule of Life In General is,
“If brute force isn’t working, you’re
not using enough.”
Yes, you could turn an asteroid into sand
and golf balls by hitting with enough nukes,
though a really big asteroid would require
several times more nukes than currently exist
on Earth.
And if blasting it apart were your only strategy,
you would have to blast it into pieces that
small to be sure the atmosphere could burn
them up, because if the Earth were going to
be struck by the Rock of Gibraltar, peppering
it instead with a billion hurtling Volkswagens
would actually be worse.
This approach to asteroid management would
also leave you having to track and avoid all
the shrapnel you created.
A far more efficient and tidier way to use
nukes against asteroids is to detect an asteroid's
collision course with Earth early, very early,
and nudge it onto a slightly different path.
The high energy radiation from a nuke will
vaporize or ionize a very thin layer of one
side of the asteroid, trillions of tiny explosions
pushing on the asteroid like rockets.
If we approximate the asteroid as a sphere,
the optimal detonation placement to yield
the greatest nudge per nuke is actually about
an asteroid radius away from the surface.
Distributing the pressure over so much of
the surface greatly increases the chances
that the asteroid will stay in big pieces,
which are easier to track and avoid later,
after they miss Earth.
And the nudge you need isn’t very much,
relatively speaking, if your network detects
at a distance and defends quickly.
Traveling 1 m/s for 70 days, you’ll cover
a distance equal to the Earth’s radius,
which means that if you can change the velocity
of an incoming object by just 1m/s 70 days
before it hits Earth, you’ll have saved
the Earth--even if in a somewhat uncinematic
way.
The real issue with using nukes, at least
at the moment is that warheads are not terribly
fast, sturdy, or lightweight items except
in terms of how much punch they pack.
You cannot just load a hundred megaton nuclear
warheads onto a shuttle or rocket and fly
them into space.
They are also somewhat delicate items, in
that the detonation trigger is a high-precision
device, the design of which challenged the
world-class engineers and scientists on the
Manhattan Project.
It’s even more difficult to design and build
one that will survive the shaking of a high-g
launch into space and still function reliably
when it reaches its target.
Contrary to what movies show, blowing up a
nuke will not set it off, it will only break
it and make it non-functional.
So you can’t send a barrage of simultaneous
nukes at a target unless you are incredibly
precise about the timing, otherwise the radiation
blast or tons of high-velocity debris from
the first nuke will disable the others.
But just getting your nuke up even to high
orbit is no small trick either.
Warheads aren’t light but ICBMS are down
right heavy, what with all that rocket fuel,
and are not designed to be launched from orbit.
Trying to rapidly retool and refuel ICBMS
to be carried into orbit on a rocket then
launched from there so they could reach something
out in high orbit or the moon is not a quick
or easy thing to do.
There is a reason we use phrases like ‘this
isn’t rocket science’ and ‘this isn’t
brain surgery’, and rapidly retooling an
ICBM and an orbital launch rocket to a job
neither was meant for, or ‘rocket surgery’
is considerably harder.
So if we want to nuke an asteroid we need
to build those nukes from the get-go with
that in mind and we should be putting them
up in space, so we aren’t needing to deal
with orbital launch energy costs or weather
windows scrubbing that launch.
This kind of precaution carries the small
problem that some folks are squeamish about
having atomic bombs whizzing around in orbit
overhead - and that both warheads and rockets
need lots of constant maintenance to work
which is hard in space.
The other problem is you have to fly the rocket
there and they do have rather long flight
times.
Again early detection is the key since it
gives you more time to get your bomb ready
for the flight and actually fly it there.
Some asteroids are just a big ball of gravel
loosely held together by gravity while others
are more of slab you can shatter, and we call
the Impact Disruption Energy the kinetic energy
needed to shatter an asteroid and remove at
least half its mass if we just whack it with
another object… like if we shoved another
smaller asteroid or space station or spaceship
in its way that it plowed into.
Part of this energy is the shattering energy,
and is generally proportional to the mass
of the asteroid, but you also have the gravitational
energy in there, because it does have gravity
and if you shatter it the bits can just fall
back down and reform, so you need to shatter
and blow it apart.
In general for smaller rocks that shattering
energy is much higher than the gravitational
energy, larger ones though are gravity-dominated.
What we’re seeing here is that while yes,
nukes can absolutely get the job done, again
with sufficient brute force you can get almost
any job done, they are not ideal.
Especially now.
Down the road and with far better detection,
an Earth-bound asteroid wouldn’t be such
a world-shaking calamity.
After all it is a bunch of free metal already
headed your way you can mine and harvest on
the cheap.
High-tech civilizations might just regard
an incoming asteroid as free stuff.
But that is a good way off, so how about more
short term?
If not nukes, what is the alternative?
One innovative suggestion was to fly a ship
out to spray paint the asteroid to be highly
reflective, so that reflecting sunlight will
push it like a solar sail off course, but
this probably isn’t practical with anything
but smaller ones and very early detection.
However, it’s not a bad approach if you
can add more light pressure with a laser,
and we have often discussed using lasers to
push spaceships up to high speeds, as we looked
in Interstellar Laser Highways.
You could also maneuver that asteroid around
to some place you wanted it, like into a lagrange
point to serve as a nice base for a space
station.
Of course, if you have lasers that powerful
and if time were limited, you could skip the
reflective paint job and just hit the asteroid
with the laser directly.
This will produce significantly less thrust,
but it will at least produce the same surface-vaporization
rocket effect as the radiation from a nuke,
but in a slower, more controlled version that’s
less likely to messily shatter the asteroid.
The big benefit is that light is near-instant,
even over the vast tracts of interplanetary
space it gets to its target in minutes not
days or weeks.
You can also keep at it, it’s not a single
expenditure of energy like a bomb.
Nukes might seem like they have a lot of energy
in them – and they do as atomic energy is
far denser than chemical energy, but a megaton
H-bomb still only has the energy equivalent
to what the United States power consumption
is over a couple of hours, so if you plugged
that into a laser and kept it on the asteroid
it would be delivering a dozen megatons of
zap to that asteroid every day and delivering
it precisely in mere minutes from when you
flipped it on.
Remember, you’re not trying to simply zap
the thing and blow it apart, rather you’re
cooking or ablating off its surface with a
more diffuse beam to act as propellant to
shove it aside.
You basically are shining a powerful flashlight
on it to push it aside using its own heated
matter as the propellant.
We’ve discussed parallel tricks to this
for snatching comets in from deep space to
help provide water for terraforming and artificial
space habitats.
Your laser provides the energy and the struck
object provides the propellant that energy
superheats.
Now I like this method for a couple of reasons.
First, you can’t exactly plug the planet’s
power grid into a big laser, our atmosphere
is kind of in the way, but space is a great
place for renewable energy, namely solar panels
that never have to worry about clouds or nighttime,
and we talked before in our power satellites
episode about how handy it is to get power
this way and beam it down as microwaves to
Earth, as diffuse Masers, the microwave variety
of laser.
Indeed, it is on my shortlist of things likely
to kickoff major space industry as our energy
sector is a multi-trillion dollar one so moving
it to space gives us huge resources for other
space projects to piggyback on.
But you could easily divert part of this power
supply to such lasers to occasionally vaporize
more mundane space debris or push ships away
from Earth to our various colonies.
Lasers are also easier to secure against theft
and misuse than nukes lingering in orbit or
on the moon.
So that would be my preferred approach to
asteroid defense, but we have many and what
they all rely on ultimately is early detection
and a robust presence in space, which also
gets all your eggs out of one basket in case
another Moon-maker or dino-killer heads our
way.
Ultimately, your best defense against asteroids
is not an individual system like nukes or
lasers but simply that robust push for space
development.
The best way to protect ourselves from threats
from space is to expand ever outward into
space.
We’ll be talking more about the uses of
asteroids in the coming months as we continue
our new series, Becoming an Interplanetary
Species, and we just had our second episode
of that come out this week, looking at colonizing
Cislunar Space.
For those of you who are subscribed to Nebula,
our new streaming service, you already had
a chance to catch today’s episode as an
early release, and while I’ve enjoyed putting
our mid-month bonus episodes up there a couple
months early, I have decided for now to switch
away from doing that in favor of just releasing
ALL our future episodes on Nebula a couple
days early, and ad free.
If you’d like to catch all of SFIAs episodes
early and without ads, or see any of the great
content from our sister channels on Nebula,
you can signup for Nebula today, or you can
get it for free by instead signing up for
Curiosity Stream, whose partnering with us
to bring you the best education videos out
there.
Curiosity Stream has excellent educational
content of their own and they are running
26% discount if you use the link in the description.
That’s a great deal since it means you get
a year of both Curiositystream and Nebula
for less than $15, and it helps support this
show and a lot of other educational content
which is what Curiositystream and Nebula are
all about, and again you can get a year of
both for less than $15 by using the link in
the episode’s description.
So as mentioned we are continuing our look
at Becoming an Interplanetary Species, and
we’ll start October off with episode 3,
as we look at returning to the Moon and staying
there.
But there’s more to come before then, and
this Thursday we’ll be taking a look at
the Future of Fission, as we celebrate the
sixth anniversary of the show.
Then the week after that we’ll be back to
the Fermi Paradox series to look at the Phosphorus
Scarcity problem with life evolving, then
close the month out with our Livestream Q&A
on Sunday, September 27th, 4 pm Eastern Time.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
