There is a school of thought that says everything
we do is ultimately futile because one day
the Earth will end and take with it all of
our accomplishments.
That at best we might transplant ourselves
elsewhere, yet the world will still end…
but what if it didn’t have to?
So today we return to the Civilizations at
the End of Time series with a bit of a different
episode than I’d originally been planning.
I’d initially meant to discuss how you’d
survive around white dwarfs or neutron stars,
dying stars, and we will get to that another
time, but I thought for today we’d just
see how long we could keep life on Earth going.
A little over a year ago we took a look at
the Fermi Paradox from the perspective of
civilizations that just stayed at home rather
than colonizing other solar systems.
This is a topic we discuss a lot, and a couple
months back we discussed how to evacuate Earth
in the event of a catastrophe, and both got
me thinking that even if folks leave Earth,
there’s always going to be folks that stick
around.
We tend to neglect those folks in science
fiction a lot and in futurism too; I believe
our destiny is out in the stars, or at least
the interesting and hopeful parts are.
When we see Earth in distant future stories,
it’s usually in the sub-genre of fiction
known as “Dying Earth”, for the 1950 novel
of the same name by Jack Vance.
That book spawned a series written by him
and inspired quite a few other works by other
authors, probably the best known of those
being Gene Wolfe’s Book of the New Sun.
Dying Earth novels tend to be dark fantasy
in tone, usually set after some apocalypse
and being fantasy in that they tend to feature
low technology and ‘magic’ that is usually
leftover technology.
That itself is fairly common in fantasy, a
low-tech Earth after a cataclysm, Terry Brooks’
Shannara series being an example.
Dying Earth differs in that usually civilization
isn’t a surviving remnant that’s trying
to rebuild, but one of constant further decay.
The planet and humanity are exhausted, Earth
is dying, body and soul, because folks have
essentially turned to an existence of cannibalism
and grave robbing, sometimes metaphorical,
sometimes literal.
If you’re a regular to the channel you can
probably guess that such a future particularly
nags at me.
So I thought we’d challenge the notion of
this being some bleak existence, as we had
in the other episodes.
We looked at the time after all the stars
had burnt out and showed that instead of civilization
being gone or nearly so, it might be the beginning
of a far greater and longer period of civilization.
If you’re not a channel regular - which
is probable since this series tends to be
the one most new viewers arrive at for some
reason - then let me suggest you get a drink
and snack, as we don’t go for brevity here,
and switch on the closed captions as the way
I speak can take some getting used to.
That’s a handy reminder too, since while
I try to make most episodes stand alone, this
series relies heavily on concepts we’ve
detailed elsewhere and my speech impediment
is more pronounced in older episodes.
We’ll put clickable links in the description
below and some in-video as we go along in
case you want to learn more or need a refresher
on some of the concepts covered in older episodes.
One of the big aspects for this discussion,
and the one that got me thinking, was the
mindset of those who would stick around Earth
if we were off colonizing other planets and
building various megastructures, and this
ties into those megastructures too.
We often talk about how - with sufficient
automation - it makes far more sense to build
places to live like artificial habitats, as
opposed to terraforming planets.
It not only allows you to produce far more
total living area, it also lets you tailor
the environment much closer to Earth’s and
quite probably is actually easier than terraforming
a planet too.
This inevitably leads to the notion that advanced
civilizations do not regard planets as new
places to live, but more like the local lumber
yard.
You don’t live there, you visit it to pick
up materials to build where you want to live.
When gazing up at distant and barren alien
planets, you just as inevitably tilt your
eyes down to look at ours and ask if we might
disassemble it for raw materials too.
There’s a lot of argument over whether we
would or wouldn’t preserve our homeworld,
but usually it is in the context of building
Dyson Swarms and Earth being a very large
chunk of available building material.
If you added up every other rocky planet,
Mercury, Venus, and Mars, they would mass
about as much as Earth combined.
But if you added up every other rocky mass,
every moon and asteroid, you would not have
nearly as much mass as Earth.
At the same time, you can build thousands
of times the living area out of a planet as
its natural surface permits, so if you are
low on raw material and want to use Earth,
you could easily offer every person living
there hundreds of times more land than they
already had as compensation and barely make
a dent into everything you built out of the
planet.
That tends to be the usual argument, folks
pointing out Earth is a huge chunk of the
available material from which we could make
far more worlds in the future, and others
saying we should preserve Earth regardless.
We typically circumvent that argument here
at SFIA by pointing out that while Earth is
nearly half the available mass budget of rocky
planets, moons, and asteroids, it is far smaller
than our various gas giants, which have many
planets worth of metals under all that hydrogen
and helium, which we can access.
Moreover, 99.8% of the mass of this solar
system is in the Sun, and it contains tens
of thousands of Earth’s worth of metals
that you can access via starlifting technology.
As a reminder, in astronomy a metal is anything
heavier than helium, so it would include elements
like carbon, not just iron or titanium, with
super-strong allotropes such as graphene,
which will likely be what we use to build
with, more than steel anyway.
We discussed how to retrieve all those materials
from the gas giants and the sun, and it really
doesn’t require any truly impressive technology.
More tech helps of course but we’ve got
the basic tools already.
Earth used to have a big layer of hydrogen
and helium over it too, but it was blown away
by the solar wind.
You can use the same technique - scaled up
- to remove it from gas giants for instance,
leaving a metallic core.
The harvesting technique for stars actually
involves ramping up that solar wind in a focused
and directional manner.
These are staggering feats of engineering
that dwarf anything we’ve ever done before.
These tasks require a virtually unlimited
supply of manpower working for thousands of
years, but if you are building artificial
worlds, you are already in that realm.
If you need trillions of people to do the
work, well you won’t be doing it till you’ve
already used up those asteroids and moons
anyway, and will have those trillions of people
to do it.
And since you’re building new living area,
your timeline is only constrained by how fast
your population grows.
So we get a picture where Earth is not half
of materials available to build, but less
than a percent of a percent.
There are other ways and sources available
too if that’s not enough.
I can easily see folks fighting constant battles,
be it with words, wealth or weapons, to get
access to Earth when it’s half of your material,
but not nearly as easily as when it’s less
than a percent of a percent.
You might try to buy it, but outright coercion
would seem less likely, with a supply of resources
that big it would be like someone disassembling
the pyramids for road building material.
Of course a lot of monuments have been taken
apart to build roads and houses over the centuries
so one couldn’t rule it out either, and
we are talking about timelines of billions
of years, not centuries.
I’ve also been asked to focus more episodes
down on Earth, perhaps a Downward Bound or
Inward Bound series to compliment the Upward
Bound and Outward Bound series, where we talk
about colonizing or mining other planets or
stars, and it’s tempting but mostly it gets
me thinking about who sticks around on Earth.
Another thing we talk about a lot here is
the notion of life extension and the kind
of impact that would have on a culture when
dying of old age is a choice rather than part
of a natural life cycle, you could start seeing
folks living thousands of years, or even longer,
and you’d expect them to have a disproportionate
share of power, wealth, and influence.
That could result in some terribly stable
civilizations and they might be a bit terrible
in their own way too, perhaps not a lot of
upward mobility in a civilization where your
boss just received an award for 500 years
of service.
So you’d expect a lot of younger folks or
those looking to have a lot of influence and
impact to migrate away from Earth.
Once you max out a planet to its comfortable
population, people wanting kids need to move,
people wanting to climb ladders need to move,
people bored with Earth need to move, people
who want a bigger home and more land need
to move, and so on, while people bored with
life presumably let themselves die and probably
get replaced either by someone who really
wants to live on Earth, complete with the
culture on it, or got raised by folks who
think a thousand years is a perfectly plausible
timeline for an apprenticeship.
Things don’t necessarily have to go that
way, but it’s very easy for me to imagine
Earth as a bit of an island of relics in a
sprawling empire of a billion artificial habitats
inside our solar system, itself inside an
even more sprawling galactic civilization.
Old, rich, and quite possibly obsessive about
preserving things.
We try to keep our monuments and historic
properties around these days, even though
we didn’t live there and experience that.
It’s possible they might not value antiques
as much because there’s no mystique to them.
Odds are the construction crew for Stonehenge
might complain less about moving or replacing
some of the monoliths than we would, but I
think it more likely every house on Earth
would start resembling a museum or archeological
site.
A friend once asked me how long it would take
before we’d fill up every inch of land on
Earth with graveyards, on similar lines to
when we’d run out of space for landfills.
The answer to both is never, we lose about
50 million people a year and we’ve got room
for about 50 trillion graves without stacking
(which we often already do), a million year
supply and bodies don’t last that long and
neither do landfills.
Even planet wide cities, Ecumenopolises, won’t
run out of room for graves unless they are
preserving bodies in carbonite or something,
and of course they can and must build vertically
anyway.
But keeping to modern death rates and grave
sizes, notably being 6 foot deep, you would
layer the planet with tombs in a million years
and we still have 5 billion or so left.
If those were perfectly preserved you’d
layer the land with tombs 10 kilometers or
6 miles deep.
We certainly tend to build on top of ruins,
it’s pretty well accepted that whether you
build a city on a coast or a hill or river,
after a while what you’re mostly building
that city on is itself, and all the leftover
buildings and garbage of prior generations.
And with ultra-strong materials and better
technology, I could see a civilizations just
locking up someone’s apartment when they
died with them in it to never be used again,
just visited and maybe not even that.
That’s a little bit more plausible than
it sounds like too.
Ultra-strong materials along with ultra-durable
ones and self-repairing ones are likely to
be technologies we pursue vigorously and are
probably on the table, and have to be taken
in the context of Ecumenopolises and Arcologies.
As we said in Ecumenopolises, a planet wide
city is hardly a paved over dystopia absent
any trees, indeed you could have vast nature
preserves the size of Yosemite or Madagascar
in there among all the layers.
You are building up, and your real limitation
is heat.
You can be pumping energy from solar collectors
or fusion plants to light vast vertical farms
but you still have to get rid of that heat
and that limitation bottlenecks you long before
you run out of space from building up even
with modern materials.
Any level you want to light and operate adds
to that heat, whereas sealed off dark tombs
do not, quite to the contrary dark and cold
help preserve them.
I would also guess that a lot of people would
feel a bit weird living in a house or apartment
someone else had occupied for centuries.
As I recall back in the various episodes on
life extension and immortality we’d noted
that if suicide was the main way folks died
in the future, as accidents, disease, and
old age diminish, we’d said keeping to mostly
modern rates you’d expect median lifetime
of about 5000 years, and our upper end on
Ecumenpolises tended to be about 5 trillion
inhabitants, both of those numbers are very
flexible but it would mean a billion folks
died a year, 20 times the current rate, even
with ridiculously long lives.
And if you were sealing people up like pharaohs
with a lot of their stuff you could layer
yourself up pretty deep that way.
Potentially thousands of kilometers deep,
because the active support technologies we’ve
discussed allow that sort of thing and you
can also stagger layers so that gravity doesn’t
increase.
Layers above you don’t add to gravity on
you and layers below just need to have a density
and spacing high enough to let the previous
layer’s extra mass be diminished by your
extra height from it, gravity falling off
with distance and all.
Weird notion I’ll admit but I could see
it.
It reminds me of a scene from one of those
novels I mentioned earlier, Book of the New
Sun.
The protagonist, Severian, refers to some
folks as miners and if you’re paying attention
you notice they are actually grave robbers,
and that’s what mining means in that place
set in the ruins of countless millennia of
civilizations.
And I say protagonist rather than hero because
Severian’s job as a roving torturer and
executioner in the violent, decaying, hopeless
civilization of that book series is a respected
profession with its own guild.
Yet the author makes no effort to make him
seem even vaguely heroic or nice.
Like I said earlier, that’s a common tone
in Dying Earth novels.
One that seems rather justified, too.
The world is winding down and the sun is dying,
you can’t live on Earth forever because
eventually the Sun will burn out.
However, we’ve talked about moving planets
before.
While the sun gets brighter every year, even
as big as space is, that’s so long that
you’d only need to move the planet about
a couple centimeters or an inch a day to avoid
that brightening.
Even at maximum red giant size, we could safely
orbit out by Pluto.
Nor is such a civilization really likely to
be all that dependent on natural sunlight
anyway.
Solar shields could be erected to bounce light
away, protecting us where we are right now
all the way until the Sun hits its maximum
size, which may or may not be big enough to
encompass our planet, we’re not sure yet.
But that’s also fairly redundant to look
at because it is very unlikely our Sun will
ever have a red giant phase if the solar system
remains inhabited.
That same starlifting technology lets you
yank out the helium that is slowly poisoning
the Sun, and decrease its mass so its shines
more dimly and lives far longer.
You don’t have to move the Earth closer
to stay warm.
You could add mirrors as we’ve discussed
for warming up places like Mars or Callisto.
But in point of fact, an Ecumenopolis planet
benefits from reduced sunlight and even if
the top layer of such a many layered planet
was left as natural forest it would receive
more than enough light for photosynthesis,
and be warmed by all the heat generated on
lower levels, and you could still supplement
that light if you needed or wanted.
We will discuss dying stars in more detail
in another episode.
But in short, if you are really focused on
keeping your sun around, keep to star sizes
that are convective enough to swirl all the
mass around so the heavier elements don’t
collect in the core where you can’t lift
them off.
Then you can just keep replenishing your sun
with hydrogen and removing the heavier elements
produced, which are fairly valuable themselves,
even helium.
Stars a third the mass or less than our own
sun are fully convective, they bubble around
like a stew, and live a lot longer as they
burn all their fuel – most larger stars
don’t – and do it very slowly.
Wolf 359, an M6 Red dwarf 8 light years away
from us, best known for where the Borg curb-stomped
the Federation fleet, has a bolometric luminosity
of just 0.14% of the Sun, though that means
it still gives off a million times more sunlight
than Earth currently receives, some 540 billion,
trillion watts.
To do this it has to convert almost a million
tons of hydrogen into helium every second
or about 25 trillion tons a year.
Sounds like a lot but it would take it 75
Trillion years to burn through an amount of
hydrogen equal to the mass of our own Sun.
You could lift out everything besides hydrogen
from the Sun, constantly filtering it, and
keep most of that hydrogen away too, in orbiting
reservoirs to slowly filter back in.
Indeed you could build artificial but classic
spherical planets, shellworlds, around those
and have a whole ring of Earth like planets
around your Sun, something known as a Klemperer
Rosette.
And you could go smaller and live longer or
import hydrogen from elsewhere.
There are hundreds of billions of stars in
this galaxy, and most of the hydrogen in the
galaxy is still floating around not in any
star, and on these kinds of timelines our
neighboring galaxies will have merged into
us to add their quantity too, so you’ve
got plenty of sources.
However, just our sun’s own mass, spread
out over 75 trillion years, pretty much takes
you to the end of the Stellar phase of the
Universe.
We haven’t got too precise a timeline for
when the last naturally forming stars will
cease to exist, but we usually put it at about
100 trillion years.
In the meantime, stars will have become smaller
and a lot less common.
Fewer large stars form and only smaller ones
live very long anyway.
M-type stars have a red hue and we call them
red dwarves on a scale from M0 at the brightest
to M9 at the dimmest.
Wolf 359 is not a particularly small or long
lived red dwarf, by the way, as it’s an
M6.
Most stars are red dwarfs.
M9 is the smallest normal star, and those
naturally live trillions of years, unlike
our own sun’s 10 billion.
If they had the fuel mass of our Sun, they’d
stretch their lives out to about a quadrillion
years.
That is long after even late-forming, low-mass
stars gone to white dwarf will have cooled
off to stellar husks.
You could scale that up a trillion fold if
you cannibalized all the spare hydrogen in
the Local Group of galaxies for it, I don’t
think you’d do that, even if someone living
outside our solar system didn’t object.
It would make more sense to do something else
with it all, like build the Maximum sized
Birch Planet we discussed in Mega-Earths.
But if you did, that would buy you up to 10^27
years, or a billion, billion, billion years,
well into the Black Hole Farming era, as opposed
to the roughly 1 billion left before rising
solar output strips Earth’s atmosphere away,
if we did nothing about it.
Of course we almost certainly would.
I really doubt humanity will resemble much
of what it is now at that point.
Your descendants a billion years from now
are not likely to resemble you any more than
we resemble our ultra-great granddad who first
thought having multiple cells was a fun idea
a billion odd years ago.
However, if there is a civilization around
then, it seems very unlikely they’d not
take steps to prevent such events or that
the galaxy would be particularly natural anymore.
We can say stellar formation in the galaxy
ought to drop off to very little in a trillion
years and cease entirely in 100 trillion at
most.
You can have a lot of civilizations arise
in a trillion years, but realistically, unless
all civilizations terminate at about our current
technological levels - rather than getting
out to the stars – – I wouldn’t expect
natural star formation to occur more than
maybe a few million years after they left
their planet.
That’s more than enough time to form a galaxy-spanning
Kardashev 3 civilization, also known as a
K3 civilization where stars are only forming
because you permit it.
And you might not, preferring to use that
fuel in artificial fusion plants rather than
naturally occurring or artificial stars, but
if you let stars form, they are probably doing
so where and when you want and at the mass
you want and with the metallicity you want.
We wouldn’t see a tribe sitting around a
campfire and leap to the conclusion that their
civilization will end in a few hours when
the logs burn up.
They are more than capable of finding more
wood for the fire and storing it up.
Likewise, discussing the natural lifetime
of a K3 civilization in terms of the natural
lifespan of the stars in their galaxy is equally
absurd.
So we could have Earth orbiting around the
Sun along with all sorts of other artificial
planets and megastructures for trillions or
quadrillions of years to come, and frankly
I think that’s a lot more realistic than
imagining folks living on Earth waiting for
the atmosphere to evaporate away or the Sun
to expand and kill us.
I think that layered tomb-world becomes a
bit more realistic in that respect too.
If you’ve still got people who are more
or less human after all that time that means
they are probably pretty obsessed with retaining
their past, to the point of giving gene therapy
to even the smallest mutation to prevent evolution,
and they’ve probably gotten very good at
preventing any sort of genetic or cultural
drift.
Off Earth, in the rest of the solar system
they might have gone this way too.
If not, one can assume a lot of the galaxy
is totally alien.
Heck, on these timelines, whole civilizations
could have evolved from some marginally Earth-like
planet no human ever lived on.
Someone just stopped by one day to plant a
flag that happened to have some bacteria on
it and things evolve from there to complex
life.
We’ll imagine for now that everyone who
favored a more post-human approach has long
since left the area and leaves Earth be, a
bunch of backward, obsessed lunatics preserving
history and all.
Much of our solar system is similar in mindset,
and we’ve been extending the Sun’s life
and shrunk it down.
During that time, Earth’s been building
up layer after layer of museums and tombs
by extracting building material from under
the crust and filling those empty spots with
hydrogen or deuterium to use for fusion fuel,
layer after layer.
After every last fuel reservoir orbiting the
sun has been used up, it will start to die
but won’t go red giant, rather it will go
straight to white dwarf.
Those are actually sufficiently bright when
compared to red dwarfs, so we could go on
as it cooled, too.
Indeed, we could switch it over to running
on helium now, plenty of that lying around
at this point.
But one day it will burn out and you’d just
have Earth and its internal fuel supply left,
with maybe some more they’d reserved in
orbital reservoirs.
They could easily have a planet’s worth
of hydrogen lying around and it takes about
300 kilograms to light up Earth every second.
An Earth of that mass would last 2 billion
trillion seconds, or for 60 trillion more
years.
Actually not that long compared to the time
Earth would already have been around for by
then, but still 15,000 times longer than it’s
been around for us now, and 60,000 times as
long as it would have left if humanity didn’t
intervene to save it from the brightening
sun.
You could keep going, cannibalizing the planet
to be smaller and need less fuel, potentially
no longer using fusion in favor of something
like micro-black holes, which are around a
hundred times more fuel efficient and let
you live a hundred times longer.
That’s when things do start hitting the
Dying Earth scenario.
It just depends on how much fuel you had,
and if they’d gone and hoarded a few sun’s
worth of fuel for themselves, which is plausible
enough, they might have 60 quintillion years
via fusion and 6000 quintillion years via
micro black hole.
That is a very, very long time, a billion,
billion times longer than a human lifespan
via fusion and a billion, billion times longer
than our whole recorded history by black hole
or raw matter to energy conversion.
And that’s pretty much it for organic life,
odds are pretty good that’s long gone by
then anyway, in favor of digital minds.
Still, I could imagine Earth being a place
where organic life and even somewhat classic,
if probably fairly cyborg’d up, humans had
remained the whole time.
Is that the end of civilization?
Quite probably not, and as we discuss in the
Civilizations at the End of Time episode Black
Hole Farming, a Cooling and Dark Universe
is just the beginning for civilization if
it’s running on computers, as civilization
will be able to exist around black holes for
epochs of time that regard even this extended
timeline we’ve discussed today as but an
eyeblink of time.
And in Iron Stars we’ll go far beyond that,
all the way to the real end of time when the
only possible life is that which literally
forms out of random chaos.
For my part, I really can’t imagine humanity
in its current incarnation will be around
in even a million years, except for a few
stubborn hold outs, but civilization I suspect
will continue till long after all the stars
are gone, and I think there’s a good chance
Earth will survive not only our own Sun, but
all the rest of them too.
Many of our ancestors thought the Earth was
eternal, some thought it maybe only had a
few centuries left at most, and while we now
know Earth will die one day, we can see a
way of pushing that far off toward as close
to eternity as is imaginable.
We always try to stay within the bounds of
known science here at SFIA, even if many of
the things we discuss seem beyond fantastic.
I always like to stress that real science
can offer us paths to things that seem even
more fantastic than the wildest dreaming of
most sci-fi writers.
We spent a lot of time discussing the Sun’s
lifetime, and if you want to understand the
science behind that, then I recommend that
you check out Brilliant.org.
Their astronomy course provides you with the
physics tools that astrophysicists use to
understand the cosmos, the life cycles of
stars, and the fate of the universe.
Through active problem solving, you build
up your frameworks to understand these concepts,
instead of just memorizing formulas from a
textbook.
You can dive right in at whatever your skill
level is and explore at your own pace.
I can never overemphasize how handy that math
and science skill-set is to have in your mental
toolbox, and Brilliant is a great place to
get started.
To support the channel and learn more about
Brilliant, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription.
That’s the subscription I’ve been using
to explore their multitude of thought-provoking
puzzles.
Next week we will pushing the boundaries of
science a bit to look at Teleportation, and
seeing what options might allow it, or something
like it, inside known science.
We’ll also consider some novel applications
of that technology that tend to get skipped
in science fiction.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching and have
a great week!
