This episode is brought to you by World Anvil 
During World War 2 the Allies initiated the 
Manhattan Project, a program of immense scale  
that culminated in the creation of atomic bombs, 
the most powerful weapon mankind had yet created.  
What great projects will we have in the future, 
and what new wonders, or horrors, will we create?
 
So today we will be looking at Future Manhattan 
Projects, and while that was for a weapon,  
and many parallel if smaller projects were for 
military applications, we will consider other  
projects too. In truth the line between military 
and peacetime projects is often rather blurry  
anyway, with swords often being beaten into 
plowshares, when the fighting is over anyway.  
The Space Race is an example of a peaceful 
project that had peaceful aims but was  
also a theater of the Cold War – and Space Race 
efforts like the Apollo landings are often seen  
as the other big project of the 20th century.
At the strategic level, anything that boosts  
your prestige, economy and production also 
boosts your military strength. And just as  
any sword can be beaten into a plowshare, 
any plowshare can be beaten into a sword.  
That's the first rule of warfare after 
all, everything is a potential weapon. 
So today we’ll talk about some of the major 
projects we might see in the next century or two.  
A few are topics we have devoted entire 
episodes to or might in the near future,  
so for the folks watching on youtube you will see 
some popup thumbnails and cards you can click on  
if you want to see those episodes. And don’t 
forget to hit the like and subscribe button  
while you’re at it, if you enjoy the content.
Before we discuss future projects though,  
some quick history. The Manhattan Project 
is nothing like our first huge project,  
we’ve got the giant pyramids and cathedrals 
when it comes to big old buildings,  
not to mention various defensive fortifications, 
whether it’s the Great Wall of China or a bunch  
of fortification projects we’ve seen throughout 
history, like the vast number of Norman castles  
built after the Battle of Hastings in 1066. 
We’ve also seen immense road building projects,  
the Roman Empire being most famous for that, and 
aqueducts, and when it comes to moving water,  
and long before even Rome we had huge canal 
building projects for irrigating the soil  
in our fertile river valley civilizations.
As huge as the Manhattan Projects was,  
running an estimated 2 billion dollars at 
the time, equivalent to 25 billion dollars in  
2021 – the Second World War ran over a hundred 
times that cost for the US alone, and we spent  
3 times as much money just on producing 
tanks as on the entire Manhattan Project.  
We spent about six times that money, adjusted 
for inflation, on the Apollo Project too. 
So what’s special about the Manhattan Project? 
Well it was hardly the first big military or  
economic project, but it is usually considered the 
first big group scientific development project,  
eventually employing 130,000 people, though 
most of these were not scientists. 90% of  
the costs were building factories and 
producing fissile material for the bomb,  
but the actual R&D on the bomb was still huge. 
Hundreds of scientists worked at Los Alamos  
developing the science and technology of the bomb 
under Robert Oppenheimer, including future Nobel  
Prize winner Richard Feynman, who is in a tie 
with Benjamin Franklin as my biggest role models  
for how to learn, teach, convey, popularize, and 
live science. His various autobiographical works  
on the Manhattan Project and other matters 
are great reads and I highly recommend them. 
I already noted that we have had a lot of 
other big science projects since then too.  
On top of the Space Race, we had the International 
Space Station, a more cooperative venture, and the  
Hubble Space Telescope, along with other major 
telescope projects like the Very Large Array.  
We’ve had quite a few nuclear follow 
ups on the Manhattan Project too,  
many these days aimed at either particle physics, 
like our various supercolliders, or fusion  
research, like the National Ignition Facility, 
or ITER, or the Human Genome Project for biology. 
Past big projects can give us insight into 
future ones. For instance the roads, aqueducts,  
and canals see modern reflections in our highways, 
plumbing, electrical grids, and the push to put  
telephone wires everywhere then to get the 
internet everywhere, then broadband, and cell  
coverage. Present needs can also give insights, 
we need faster and more reliable internet and cell  
coverage, we need better, cheaper, more abundant 
and renewable energy production and storage,  
and there are often discussions of trying to do 
solar power or hydrogen fuel cells in the context  
of a new Manhattan or Apollo Project, and also for 
fusion power or new fission power plant designs. 
Of course building weapons or getting into 
space are both areas that could be viewed as  
successor to the Manhattan Project. 
What would be the next superweapon? 
That’s a popular idea in science fiction, some new 
mega-bomb that dwarfs even thermonuclear bombs,  
but in reality it probably is not a 
good candidate for a future project.  
We don’t use nuclear weapons, we do not build 
them as big as we can, and they are desirable  
mostly as a deterrent. Nobody will risk invading 
your nation while you have nuclear weapons,  
and some way to deliver them. There may be 
a need for something bigger than an H-Bomb  
centuries from now, but unless someone creates 
a super-powerful defense they aren’t needing an  
upgrade except potentially in delivery mechanisms 
to avoid Anti-Ballistic Missile or ABM systems. 
We have discussed options like Relativistic Kill 
Missiles for blowing up entire planets if need be,  
the super-big brothers of the Rods from 
God we discussed in Orbital Bombardment,  
or even how to Weaponize Black Holes or 
turn whole stars into weapons platforms,  
but these aren’t weapons that are hard to 
build, rather they’re just too big for use.  
Smaller, better targeted systems would seem like 
the more probable pathway of weapons development  
for now. So we’ll focus more on projects 
needing a lot of science and engineering  
than on purpose-built weapons, though we will 
mention some weaponizable aspects of the projects. 
The first potential project that comes to mind 
is a giant power-beaming grid of solar power  
satellites, and we have looked at those in detail, 
and we’ll save the notion of death rays for this  
weekend’s Scifi Sundays episode since it merits 
its own episode to itself I think. However as  
I discussed in the Power Satellites episode, I 
tend to think of a big grid of power generating  
satellites as one of our best candidates 
for kickstarting massive space development,  
given that the energy sector is a multi-trillion 
dollar one and also one of our perennially biggest  
areas of research. Proofing and building and 
deploying all that associated hardware is likely  
to parallel efforts to put up a rail system, 
highway system, or power or telephone grids. 
In the background of that will be successors 
to the International Space Station,  
which has already passed its original lifespan 
and while it could probably be patched up and kept  
going for a long time, potentially indefinitely, 
we are clearly moving toward needing a new one.  
The current one isn’t ideally configured for 
a lot of the experiments we need to do next,  
and isn’t well-designed for modular 
upgrade, replacement, or expansion. 
So what is next?
There are a lot of options  
being put forward, everything from the Gateway and 
Kalpana Stations on the bigger and rotating side  
to very modest replacements, indeed it's 
been suggested we might commercialize the ISS  
as an alternative to decommissioning it, and 
from a historical perspective it would be nice  
to have a space station from the dawn of things 
still around. We don’t want a lot of space junk  
lying around, but it would also be a shame 
to lose something so critical to our history,  
as we have its predecessors.
Now while big stations like  
Kalpana are big projects to build, designed for 
hundreds or even thousands of people at a time,  
I’m not sure I’d call building one itself a 
Manhattan Project. It’s more like a place where  
you would have hundreds of scientists working 
rather than one needing hundreds to design it.  
Though doubtless it would take hundreds if 
not thousands of scientists and engineers  
to draw up a final and detailed blueprint 
for such a place and all the infrastructure  
and efforts at assembling and maintaining it.
But the science being done inside that next  
upgraded station truly is a Manhattan 
Project because it will be all about  
getting the data and experiments that let 
us find out how to truly live in space. 
Right now we do not live there, folks visit 
to run experiments and maintain the facility.  
Nobody is born there, nobody grows food there, 
raises cows and chickens or lab-grown meat,  
meets their future spouses, 
goes to school, and so on.  
This is a vastly different thing and whatever 
experiments we do on the next station,  
the background experiment going on all the 
time will be finding out how to live in space. 
Two of things we’ll also have to learn is how 
to live on Mars and the Moon, and that’s not  
the same thing as living in space. We tend to 
think of space as everything outside of Earth,  
but the differences between living on the 
Moon and in Earth Orbit or in an asteroid  
or on Mars are enormous, bigger than the 
difference between living in Urban New York,  
frigid Antarctica, or humid Amazonian Jungle.
We’ve devoted dozens of episode to living in  
space, particularly our Outward Bound series 
and Becoming an Interplanetary Species series,  
and the reality is none of these places away 
from Earth have anything more in common with  
each other than with Earth or empty space, 
living on each will be very different. 
What they all share in common in a technological 
sense is that you have to learn how to exist where  
there’s no nature present handing you freebies. 
You can’t wander through the native vegetation  
drinking water running through rivers and 
breathing air cleaned by plants. You can’t  
reach over and eat something, you’ve got nothing 
to make a fire with to warm yourself, you’ve got  
no handy native flora or fauna to turn into rope 
or cloth or patches or tools. You’ve got to make  
everything and recycle efficiently. However this 
is technology that’s very useful on Earth too. 
I often hear folks, in and out of fiction, 
suggesting we might flee to other worlds  
to live on them when we wreck Earth. This is 
wrong, because while it's nice to have a backup,  
even if we nuked this planet so hard it vaporized 
off every scrap of air and water, it would still  
be easier to make that radioactive pit leftover 
on Earth livable again than any other planet,  
even ignoring that all our infrastructure and 
manpower is right here. All the technologies that  
let you live on the Moon or Mars are the ones that 
let you live on Earth better and fix the problems  
here easier. Indeed, vastly easier than making 
some distant world livable, even if we could open  
up a wormhole gate there and just run trains and 
pipelines through to carry equipment and people. 
That is another possible Manhattan Project for us, 
getting everything staged up for a very specific  
environmental goal. Right now we have hundreds 
of different R&D efforts and political goals in  
mind where the environment is concerned, not 
something tangible and specific like ‘making  
a working atom bomb’. That makes a lot of 
difference to running projects, and it’s a  
common complaint about modern wars, the generals 
often aren’t given a specific and attainable goal,  
no clear mission with clear 
goalposts or a victory condition. 
Instead you get dozens of nebulous 
and non-specific objectives,  
and we often see this with environmental groups 
today too, or lots of other causes and concerns.  
Often folks with roughly the same overarching 
objective in mind have very different and even  
contradictory paths for getting there, and will 
often criticize the other paths in favor of their  
own, frequently more loudly than even those 
who are the outright opposition to it would. 
Now I bring this up because it's one of the 
reasons why we don’t see these sorts of all-in  
strategies much, they are much easier to do 
when you have a tyrant running things who can  
just say ‘yes, I like X, make it happen’ and will 
stubbornly stick to that through every hurdle to  
the project. Those hurdles can include running 
out of pikes to put traitors heads on when they  
object to the project. It’s also easier of course 
during wars, or essentially it's easier to do big  
monolithic projects of these kinds when opposition 
to them is minimal. Which when you think about it,  
is not a very strong endorsement of 
these kinds of efforts. It raises the  
question then not what the next Manhattan 
Project would be, but if we even want one. 
An example of a possible Manhattan Project would 
be us spotting and handling a 50 kilometer wide  
asteroid heading our way destined to hit Earth in 
five years, because whatever government is running  
the show is in a great place to demand vast 
sacrifice and devotion to a course of action.  
It’s the sort of situation that lets you 
tell thousands of scientists with tenure  
and a relaxed life that they are getting 
on a plane to a remote dedicated facility  
where they will work on a specific project and 
not phrase it as a request or great opportunity,  
except an opportunity to do their duty. And 
similarly it lets you repurpose factories, shift  
the entire economy, freeze pay or benefits, and so 
on without revolt. Again, these sorts of projects  
are not necessarily things to look forward to 
and the history of a lot of grand projects tends  
to ignore that the great objective they sought 
usually was built on a lot of rough decisions. 
Even a lot of the non-military, economic-focused 
projects are not necessarily great in that regard.  
We rarely complain about the highway system in the 
US but it did involve a lot of hardship for folks  
whose land it cut through, for instance, and 
that sort of right of way issue will be one we  
have to deal with in the future whether it’s with 
hyperloop-style vacuum trains or orbital rings up  
in the vacuum of space. For something like a 
Space Elevator, that’s most easily placed on  
the equator, and the alternative is something like 
a tripod where you’ve got 3 or more cables running  
up to a common station in geostationary orbit. The 
former is easier but offers only one path up – or  
down - and only from the equator, which is not 
where most of our cities or developed nations are,  
which is why we even contemplate something 
like the pyramid space elevator approach. 
Orbital Rings are also best put around an 
equator in the far upper atmosphere but can  
be placed at an angle and leashed to the ground to 
avoid precession. Orbital Rings also don’t have to  
be shaped as perfect circle and for that matter 
they can actually touch the ground or even be cut  
down into tunnels underground in spots, same as we 
often contemplate using them to make shellworlds.  
We’ve discussed Orbital Rings and Space 
Elevators a lot, see those episodes for details,  
but they represent the high end of projects 
for getting into space. We contemplated a  
few others in our Upward Bound series and two of 
those were the Launch Loop and the Mass Driver,  
which are both essentially big ramps thousands of 
kilometers long for launching things into space. 
See their episodes in the 
Upward Bound series for details,  
but they represent logical Manhattan Project 
equivalents because they are big pushes,  
both in construction and R&D. There may be a 
day when Earth is covered in Orbital Rings or  
hosts hundreds of space elevator ports or launch 
loops, but in the nearer term they’d represent a  
decision to focus on a specific pathway to space, 
because they offer very cheap costs to get into  
space but only after you pay the big R&D and 
construction bill, and the maintenance bill.  
It’s like connecting major cities separated 
by a mountain range, you can do it by plane,  
or helicopter, or a tram over a mountain, or 
cutting a tunnel through for a canal or road  
or rail line, and you might one day do all of 
the above, but initially you have to pick one. 
As with most big projects, once you start, 
even if it turns out to be more expensive  
than you thought, or another method suddenly 
becomes demonstrably better and cheaper,  
you generally have to keep at it because you’re 
already invested. Emotionally and politically too,  
often even a new method can be demonstrated to 
be better and cheaper to switch to even with the  
original halfway done, you would have problems 
getting folks to switch tracks at that point.  
This is a very well known issue to governments 
and companies too, and is part of why they often  
hesitate to jump on board a given ship even 
if it's looking like the good one, because  
they know that it's real hard to switch ships, 
or change horses mid-stream, or various other  
analogies for being stuck with your selection 
even if it wasn’t the best pick in hindsight. 
I’m generally of the opinion no options for faster 
than light travel exist, but were there one,  
that would presumably be a Manhattan Project, and 
in some scifi settings or 4x space video games  
we see factions with different FTL systems, using 
different physics, implying different paths were  
pursued and that by going for one, it becomes 
too difficult to switch to another profitably  
as you’re too invested at that point. Of course 
if you decide to switch gears, then doing so is a  
Manhattan Project itself, probably including the 
need for overwhelming will or drive to push it. 
These sorts of things are not necessarily 
technological either, and often wouldn’t  
be principally. Something like switching 
your standards for measurement and units,  
or the way you teach math or reading, or 
standardizing your operating system for computers  
or power supply or so on can be tech or science 
influenced but are huge switchover projects that  
are an awful lot more about will and pressure 
to do it and inertia against changing. Transport  
systems and energy are both great examples of 
that, and also examples where I tend not to  
think standardization projects are necessarily 
wise but often tempting. Beyond the fact that  
a given power production or transport system 
isn’t necessarily as good in one area as another,  
diversity has a lot of pluses going for it, and 
sometimes having five or six different systems  
even when one is almost always better is good.
Alternatively if it is better by a wide enough  
margin, then no, and fusion for instance is an 
example of a power supply that’s just vastly  
better if we can get it working and arguably is 
an ongoing Manhattan Project, indeed arguably  
the real successor of that project given that 
fusion bombs were the follow up to fission bombs  
and controlled fusion power the follow up from 
there. It’s a bit ironic that basic fission power  
generation is much easier than a fission bomb, but 
that fusion bombs are easier than fusion power,  
especially given that fusion occurs naturally 
in stars. Folks back in the day made a decently  
logical guess that we would crack the fusion 
problem in a generation given how quick we did  
fission power, fission bombs, and fusion bombs, 
and again given that fusion occurs naturally  
in stars, and this gives us the constant and now 
very old joke that fusion power is just 20 years  
in the future and always will be. Which to be 
honest is getting up there with informing folks  
“Iceland is green and Greenland is icy” 
in terms of being overused and unhelpful. 
Of course that’s another interesting megaproject, 
not just developing fusion but dealing with ice  
melting, or alternatively intentionally melting 
that ice. In our Earth 2.0 series we looked at  
some scenarios for colonizing the Arctic and 
Antarctic, and we also contemplated some big  
projects like turning deserts into farmland 
or forest or constructing artificial islands,  
or ones floating in the sky for that matter.
I suspect we will see a push to first halt  
expanding desertification and then to push 
it back, in part because it’s a great place  
to dump carbon, and trying to turn several 
hundred thousand square kilometers of desert  
into productive land is potentially the 
sort of emotional or inspiring grand project  
that space races or cathedral and 
pyramid building had going for them. 
So that’s a short list of potential 
mega-projects for the next century or two,  
and again we have looked at several in more detail 
in other episodes, but perhaps the biggest feature  
of a Manhattan-style Project that we skipped 
is secrecy and the unknown. That project wasn’t  
being advertised of course, and we don’t know 
what the future holds. We have discussed some  
potentially grand and awesome concepts that might 
happen in the future but in many ways it's all  
the unknown ones that we haven’t even dreamt up 
yet that hold the potential to be game-changing. 
One thing seems sure, strange and 
surprising science and technology  
awaits us in the future, and many massive 
and amazing projects will come from them. 
So we’ll get to our upcoming schedule in 
a moment but first I wanted to welcome on  
board our newest sponsor, World Anvil, the 
award-winning worldbuilding toolset. As I’ve  
probably mentioned before, I’ve rolled my 
share of twenty-sided dice down the years  
in various pen and paper role-playing games, 
and like a lot of gamers or fiction writers,  
I tend to get very into the worldbuilding side 
of things, fleshing out my settings to often  
very deep levels. I’d imagine channel regulars can 
guess how detailed I can get in my worldbuilding. 
Down the years I’ve gotten increasingly used 
to having to join my gaming group remotely,  
something a lot of folks had to adjust 
to this year, and that often made it  
challenging to run games, using digital 
assets in a lot of cases, but at the same  
was a great opportunity to incorporate many 
new elements into those pen and paper games,  
but often hard to find, learn, 
and use all those various tools. 
So I was very impressed with World Anvil’s tools 
as it lets you both quickly create settings and  
flush them out to very deep and interactive 
levels, everything from leaving notes on maps  
and smaller maps to alternate timeline tracking 
for your world’s history. Whether you’re managing  
a campaign or writing a novel, whether you’re 
making city or dungeon maps or family genealogies,  
whether its scifi or fantasy genres, World 
Anvil lets you forge your setting better and  
easier than anything I’ve ever worked with before.
Some features that really impressed me though was  
that they have a giant collection of detailed 
tutorials videos for using the features and  
a FREE version so that you can not only try it 
out with most of the major features available,  
but selectively share your setting with others in 
your game, or anyone else for that matter, as they  
also incorporated ways to monetize your content, 
such as Patreon or Kofi or your own storefront. 
World Anvil offers wikipedia-like articles for 
your world setting, interactive maps, timelines,  
an RPG Campaign Manager and a full Novel-Writing 
Software, all the tools you’ll need to run your  
RPG Campaign or write your novel, and never lose 
your notes again! If you’d like to give World  
Anvil a try and let it help you forge new worlds, 
just click the link in this episode’s description! 
So that wraps us up for today but not for this 
week, as we have our Scifi Sunday episode,  
Death Rays, coming up in a few days, and we’ll 
examine if this popular scifi trope might emerge  
as a real weapon in the future. Then next Thursday 
we’ll be starting up our new Galactic Domination  
series with Empire Eternal, and in two weeks we’ll 
examine Brain Computer Interfaces then wrap the  
month up with our end of the month livestream Q&A.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes  
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel, 
and if you’d like to help support future episodes,  
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website, 
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode  
description below, along with all of our various 
social media forums where you can get updates  
and chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas. You can  
also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud, or Spotify 
to get our audio-only versions of the show. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
