Until the 1960s it was Venus, not Mars, that
everyone assumed we would first colonize and
terraform, as it turns out, they may have
been correct after all.
So today we will be following up our look
at Colonizing Mars by exploring the options
for colonizing and terraforming Venus, and
we will see that it is probably the best prospect
for true terraforming inside this solar system.
Until the 1960s, we thought it very likely
it might be a paradise planet.
It had clouds and was closer to the Sun than
us, but we didn’t know until we got a better
look that it was super-hot and had a day longer
than its year, that indeed will be the trickiest
part to properly terraforming it, as we’ll
see later.
We knew its mass was 82% of Earth’s, and
its surface gravity was 90% of Earth’s,
and again since we could see clouds we figured
there was a chance it might be habitable or
even inhabited.
As observations improved we found it wasn’t
a paradise but a good deal closer to a very
hot oven.
Even the clouds are made of sulfuric acid.
At the same time, we discovered it’s quite
possible that had not always been true.
Indeed, Venus might have been a lot more Earth-like
in the distant past, and maybe even hosted
life.
But while we can look at Mars and say maybe
it once did too, and cross our fingers of
finding fossil evidence of that, it’s very
unlikely any evidence would remain on Venus
if it ever had life, as the surface has been
periodically resurfaced by floods of lava.
Venus has the most volcanoes of any planet
in the solar system.
So when we found out how extremely hot this
planet was, most folks scratched colonizing
Venus off the list, and yet as we’ll see,
it’s not only a decent colony location,
but a great one for terraforming as well.
When we left off last time in the Colonizing
Mars episode, we followed a traveler who went
to Mars and explored the options for colonizing
it.
That traveler spent several years there and
has since decided to go home and returned
to Borman Station, our large space station
above the Moon.
I mentioned then that the Moon and Earth’s
orbit were decently settled already, but that
besides Mars and a few asteroid mines, the
only other manned mission in the solar system
was a floating scientific outpost above Venus.
That mission has wrapped up and just been
replaced by the first settlement floating
in the clouds, and the ship that brought it
there returned with the crew from the outpost.
When we get back to Borman Station that crew
has also just arrived themselves, to much
fanfare.
We get to talking to one of the members and
she happily recounts the basics.
Venus has a very thick atmosphere, about 100
times that of Earth, in defiance of its very
minimal magnetosphere and proximity to the
Sun, both of which should tend to result in
losing your atmosphere.
That atmosphere is almost all carbon dioxide,
with just over 3% being nitrogen and only
trace amounts of other gasses.
And yet, even though Earth’s atmosphere
is 78% nitrogen, Venus’s atmosphere has
more nitrogen than Earth’s simply because
it has so much more atmosphere.
Down on the surface the supercritical carbon
dioxide forms a sea, having characteristics
of both a liquid and gas, which will be important
for terraforming the planet.
However, like any atmosphere, the higher up
you get the thinner it gets, and it cools
down too.
At about 50 to 55 kilometers up, the atmosphere
is down to about normal Earth pressure and
temperature.
While pressure and temperature are now approximately
that of Earth, the gas mix is still almost
entirely carbon dioxide, which has a molecular
weight of 44, so any gas with a lower molecular
weight can act as a lifting gas like hydrogen
or helium do on Earth.
That means that hydrogen and helium, with
a molecular weight of 2 and 4 respectively,
work even better on Venus than on Earth, but
it also means that even our normal oxygen-nitrogen
air mix with an average molecular weight of
29 would float a balloon on Venus.
That’s obviously advantageous, since it
means a room full of air will float, assuming
the room and its other contents aren’t too
heavy, but hydrogen and helium are still better.
They are in dreadfully short supply on Venus
though.
However the lack of oxygen in the air also
means that hydrogen is a much safer lifting
gas than on Earth, and you can get hydrogen,
oxygen and water out of the sulfuric acid
that makes up the clouds.
So while it is neat and handy that normal
air is a lifting gas on Venus, you probably
want the majority of your lifting done by
hydrogen anyway.
Up in the higher atmosphere the lighting is
a lot like on Earth, except that if you stay
in the same spot you will have a day-night
cycle not of 24 hours but 243 days.
Since the day-night terminator creeps along
at a fast walking pace even at the equator,
you can opt to stay in perpetual sunlight
if you want to, making it handy for solar
power or growing plants to help recycle air
and water, and extend food supplies.
We tend to think of blimps needing to be very
small and light, but you can make some large
blimps, potentially some very large and sturdy
ones with mass manufacture of graphene, and
carbon for making graphene is hardly in short
supply on Venus.
You could potentially use that for making
diamond hard tethers anchoring you to the
ground, possibly able to survive the super-hot,
acidic, hurricane below, or use them like
harpoons with a winch to drag your settlement
around like a big octopus.
But we also have a super-abundance of solar
to power engines, and all that wind lets you
consider using wings to provide lift, like
a plane or kite, not just buoyancy.
Many normal restrictions get eased with enough
energy and strong enough materials.
So there are a lot of options for moving around
up there in the clouds.
And our companion on Borman Station is quite
upbeat about the idea of building even larger
habitats in the clouds of Venus.
Floating islands in the sky.
However, we are fresh back from Mars, and
the problems they were having there, so we
ask her why you would want to do that.
She’s just spent a couple years with a research
team that are very enthusiastic about Venus,
and knows we just came from Mars, so she is
a bit taken aback by the question.
From her perspective, ‘because we can’
is quite a sufficient motivation.
But back on Mars, we were already seeing some
of the problems that happen as a colony gets
big enough that science and prestige are no
longer good motivations for getting bigger.
We’re all for the Venus mission and even
a permanent floating habitat there, but the
notion of building thousands of giant floating
cities seems harder to justify.
We say as much and she points out that it’s
no different than Martian domes, indeed those
floating habitats are easier to construct
and maintain in many respects.
They can’t just mine up rock to build more,
but there’s plenty of material down on the
planet and we can build mining robots to be
controlled from the floating habitats that
can handle the heat and pressure and potentially
deliver those goods by either going up a tether
or popping compressed gas cartridges to fill
balloons and float back up.
Mars has the option to simply dome over the
entire planet, with various sized domes connected
together, a thing called a ‘worldhouse’,
Venus could do the same.
This approach, known as para-terraforming,
could produce archipelagos of floating habitats
around Venus or even entire continents of
space eventually.
But as we saw on Mars, it’s not too clear
why you would do this at that scale.
Sure you can float cities on Venus, but they
still have to be very thin and light to float,
and you can just orbit the planet in more
conventional rotating habitats instead, like
the one you’re on now.
She points out that being low in the atmosphere
protects you from meteors and some radiation,
and that the orbital speed around Venus is
not much lower than Earth, so the settlement
can float right over a spot you are mining.
We point out that those orbital settlements
can have very thick radiation shielding, which
also helps against meteors, which we can also
shoot down, but these floating habitats have
to be ultra-light.
So they’ve got the radiation concerns of
early space travel when every kilogram on
board a ship cost a fortune so shielding had
to be kept to a minimum.
Same now for Venus.
It has no magnetosphere of note, so its radiation
protection comes from that super-thick atmosphere,
and the cloud habitats float over most of
that.
We can put our blimps and water storage over
the settlement to add some shielding, but
radiation remains a concern.
We’re not convinced about the practicality
of this approach but we still decide we have
to see it for our ourselves.
Since they are sending the ship back to Venus
with the second round of colonists for that
first floating settlement, and we are already
here at Borman Station and trained in space
travel, we decide to put off returning to
Earth and join the crew.
When we went to Mars, it was already decently
settled with several thousand colonists.
Venus is less built up, just a few hundred
colonists on that first floating settlement,
Niobe, and a few dozen at their space station,
Vulcan.
It’s a shorter trip than to Mars, as Venus
is closer to Earth, but it’s still long
enough to get to know the other crewmembers.
We regale them with tales of Mars, as we’ve
seen things these people wouldn’t believe.
Standing atop the peak of Olympus Mons, hang
gliding through the canyons in Valles Marineris,
attack ships off the shoulder of Orion, well
that last one didn’t happen, but we tell
them anyway, many an awesome sight.
When we arrive at Vulcan Station in orbit
around Venus, we see it is a different setup
than with the Space Elevators from Tharsis
Station on Mars or Earth’s Orbital Ring.
Venus hasn’t got anything like the infrastructure
for an orbital ring yet, and its gravity is
too high for the space elevators we have at
the Moon and Mars.
Lower than Earth, but still too high.
Vulcan Station uses a rotating skyhook design,
or rotavator.
It’s a simple, small habitat at the center
of a long tether that spins in a circle as
the whole thing orbits the planet.
While the whole system orbits Venus just a
little slower than satellites around Earth,
the tip of tether spins backwards, canceling
out some of that velocity, making it easier
for ships to enter or leave the thick atmosphere
to or from the tether tip.
We come in on a shuttle much like an airplane,
and airbrake down to land on a large floating
runway.
It’s pretty neat landing on a runway that
just floats in the clouds, and we park next
to a wall designed to keep the wind off us
as we exit wearing nothing but a simple acid-
resistant suit and breathing mask.
Clouds above, clouds below.
We’ve stood on top of Olympus Mons, more
than twice as high as the peak of Mount Everest,
and right now we’re more than twice as high
as that.
It is quite a sight and worth the trip.
There’s no ground to see below, it’s like
looking upside down at a hurricane.
Once that awe passes and the ship is unpacked,
we find ourselves confronted by the same concerns
we expressed earlier though.
What is the appeal to major settlement here?
We can see a lot of tourism, it’s not that
long of a trip and you can wander around outside
without a heavy suit.
While we are working our way to the main structure,
we are nearly clipped by a colonist flying
overhead learning the ropes of hang-gliding
with just a simple air tank, mask, and a thin
acid-proof suit.
Those clouds are pretty, but still made of
sulphuric acid.
The equipment at this settlement is a lot
newer than the stuff on Mars, which was settled
a couple of decades before we first visited
several years back, so it is a lot more automated
here and folks have more free time.
We remark on this to one of the first wave
of settlers, as we settle in at the Venutian
Café, and he chuckles and says in the future
the first wave will be entirely robotic, and
the folks talking about colonizing Titan in
a few years are planning to go entirely robots
and cyborgs.
None of that here though, part of the appeal
of Venus is how Earth-like it can be, he says,
no need to be a cyborg or get tweaked genetically
to live here, you need a breathing mask and
an acid-proof skinsuit when outside, for now,
but that’s it.
No, Venus is ideal for Terraforming, down
the road of course.
It will be monstrously expensive though, and
Venus hasn’t got much for trade.
In fact, the thing it has an ample surplus
of is carbon dioxide and nitrogen in the atmosphere,
and energy for industrial processes.
If Mars wants to terraform itself, it will
need a lot of that nitrogen, and even if they
just want to para-terraform the planet they’ll
still need plenty.
If not, well all those rotating habitats being
built around Earth need nitrogen too, and
carbon might be abundant but it’s also something
we always need a lot of.
He envisions a huge floating mass driver launching
giant, thin-walled pods of nitrogen, and if
Mars wants them for actual terraforming, they
don’t even need to land them.
They can just machine gun them at the planet
to explode on arrival and have the fragments
of the pod burn up in the atmosphere.
They can get the metal for the pods from down
below.
Of course, mining the surface, which is essentially
under a super-hot acid hurricane, is rather
tricky, at least until they can terraform
Venus properly.
We’re curious about that and ask how.
After all, the clouds are fine but down below
it’s still a hellish landscape around 462
°C; or 863 °F
He shrugs, what makes Venus hot is its proximity
to the Sun.
There’s other factors, greenhouse gases
gone wild for instance, but if you shut off
the heat pump from the Sun, it will cool down.
We raise an eyebrow at that, the Sun does
not come with an on off switch and moving
planets is quite outside our reach, for now
anyway.
But he reminds us that there is only empty
space between the Sun and Venus, block the
light, and you block the heat.
Every planet has Lagrange points, specifically
an L-1 Lagrange point in between that planet
and the Sun.
Normally the closer to the Sun you are the
faster you orbit, so if we placed an object
between us and the Sun it would not stay there.
We can simply place a shade there, or mirror,
to reflect light away, it need not be very
thick or massive, though if it is too thin
or fragile, we won’t be able to cope with
the solar wind.
If it is too thick though, we would have problems
keeping it in place, since L-1 points are
only marginally stable.
Thin ones can use the light hitting them to
maneuver a bit, like a solar sail, so we don’t
need fuel.
So these shades aren’t exactly just a piece
of foil.
Your typical one might be as big as a football
field when deployed, but not weigh much, and
devote a fair portion of that weight to manipulating
the sail, the electronics to figure out how
much and when, and some solar panels and batteries
to power both processes.
Ideally, you want something very light and
strong, like graphene made of carbon, so you
can manufacture them back on the cloud cities
of Venus, deploying them to the L-1 point
by the millions until you shade the entire
planet.
Venus’s atmosphere is mostly carbon dioxide,
and we could also remove it from the planet.
Indeed, that might be the better option.
But if we block the light, the atmosphere
will begin to cool, and at the pressures on
Venus, it will liquefy at about room temperature.
So you’d lose the thick atmosphere in favor
of seas of liquid carbon dioxide, and if we
kept cooling it, the carbon dioxide would
freeze and the surface would all be dry ice.
If we wanted to we could pave that over, remove
enough of the solar shades to keep Venus at
a comfortable Earth-like temperature, and
introduce dirt and water.
We have to interrupt our companion though.
Certainly there’s no shortage of potential
dirt, but water is another story.
There’s a decent amount of water in Venus’s
thick atmosphere and all that sulfuric acid
can be dissociated into water and SO3, but
it isn’t enough for real oceans.
Venus’s entire atmosphere is incredibly
massive, about a third the mass of Earth’s
oceans, but only a small fraction of it is
water or hydrogen we could use to make water.
Plenty for people to drink and grow food with
inside greenhouses, but not enough for a classic
biosphere.
For that we’d need to come up with somewhere
between 10-100 billion megatons of hydrogen.
Our companion nods, hydrogen is an issue.
It’s the most plentiful stuff in the Universe,
and the solar system too, but outside of the
Sun itself the only real supplies of hydrogen
are the gas giants.
The Sun’s solar wind is a good source of
hydrogen, it blows out about a billion kilograms
of hydrogen a second, a megaton, but again
we need 10-100 billion megatons, and 10-100
billion seconds is 3000-30,000 years, and
that’s if we gathered it all up, and it
goes out in every direction.
We could bring in ices from further out but
that’s a more precious commodity and truth
be told, we really only want the hydrogen
which is only about a tenth of a water molecules’
mass anyway, so easier to move.
If we can get star lifting working, we could
boil hydrogen off the Sun, indeed, we could
use that trick to clear the atmosphere on
Venus too, using solar mirrors instead of
shades to heat the planet even more and evaporate
the atmosphere away.
Some folks have even been discussing how you
could colonize the Sun itself, and they could
ship hydrogen to Venus or even just aim a
diffuse beam of hydrogen at the planet, but
he thinks such ideas are still a little too
blue sky to be taken seriously.
Better, he thinks, to bring the hydrogen in
from Jupiter or Saturn.
That would be the trade item Venus wants to
import, hydrogen, which is in plentiful supply
even compared to their huge need for it.
All of which sounds good, it’s actually
a little less ambitious than the Terraforming
of Mars by bringing in nitrogen, since you
need a lot more of it by mass than Venus needs
in hydrogen, and you would end with an Earth-like
planet, not a low gravity one.
Except for the daylength issue.
Again, Venus’s day is longer than its year,
so the Sun is going to rise and stay there
for months before setting for more months.
We’ve got three possible approaches to this,
he says.
First we can just ignore it, and adapt life
there for that condition.
Same as the bioformers on Mars were thinking
about adapting life to live on Mars or meet
halfway in the middle.
However, Venus is the only planet in the solar
system we can realistically classically terraform,
so half-measures seem kind of wrong.
He points out that we already will have solar
shades to limit the amount of light getting
to Venus, so it doesn’t overheat, so we
could go in for mirrors too.
Mirrors on a 24 hour orbit around Venus could
be arranged to block incoming sunlight on
the sun-side and bounce light down on the
dark-side, and done so as to simulate a normal
24 hour day.
You could even make a decent fake sun that
way.
Lots of mirrors that bounce light to something
about the same angular size in the sky as
the Sun, which bounces it down to Venus.
That would look very natural even.
All those mirrors and shades would help protect
Venus from radiation too, though we’d probably
still want to consider an artificial magnetosphere
like was planned for Mars, to hold the atmosphere
in.
We can’t expect that to stick around on
its own once we make it Earth-like.
The other alternative is to go all-in, and
actually adjust Venus’s rotational speed
to a 24 hour day, or maybe save some energy
and let people sleep in longer with a 26 hour
day.
We have to raise an eyebrow at this though.
From a physics perspective it is certainly
possible, but it takes a lot of energy.
We would need to add over 10^29 joules of
rotational energy to Venus to do this.
That’s a lot of energy.
And yet, it also isn’t, relatively speaking.
We needed to ship those massive quantities
of hydrogen to Venus to give it real oceans,
and that’s going to require fairly similar
levels of energy too, it’s in the same ballpark,
shipping in an ocean versus spinning up a
planet.
While 10^29 joules of energy seems enormous,
and it is more than a billion times the amount
of electricity 21st century Earth used each
year, it’s also only a few minutes of total
energy output from the Sun.
Similarly, it is about 10,000 years worth
of solar energy hitting Venus, much of which
we want to block anyway.
And if we can build a planet’s worth of
shades, we can build that much, or more, of
solar panels too.
It’s tricky to convert that into rotational
energy though.
You can’t just put a big rocket thruster
on a planet, especially one you want to cool
down.
Even hitting it with energy beams, like spraying
a large ball with a hose on one side to make
it spin, is going to add a lot of heat too.
In fact, that might work with the hydrogen
as well, a big beam of it coming from the
sun like a water jet, hitting one side of
the planet and injecting hydrogen and spin
at the same time.
But if we are shipping in hydrogen from gas
giants instead, each of those ships or pods
is moving quite fast and carrying a lot of
kinetic energy, and as mentioned, the amount
needed for transport is in the same ballpark
as rotational energy.
So we just figure out how much hydrogen we
want, and how much rotational energy we need,
and make sure each pod full of hydrogen arriving
is moving at a speed to deliver that energy.
Indeed, if that were too fast, we might go
ahead and ship in ice instead of just hydrogen,
and let that extra mass carry the extra kinetic
energy.
We would kind of prefer slow because we want
to keep that mass, not having a ton of it
explode out into space and wander away.
Which is a big issue when just hitting planets
with asteroids or comets.
It would be tricky to get that process to
work, aiming big chunks of ice or pods of
hydrogen to impact Venus near the equator
on its edge to impart the maximum spin, but
it’s doable, and gets you two birds with
one stone.
Indeed possibly three since if Venus is spinning
faster it might have a strong enough magnetosphere
not to need an artificial one.
We also have the option of giving Venus a
moon, you can use those as gravity tractors
to move planets or impart spin too, and the
outer planets have an abundant supply of them
they’re not using, most of them have a surplus
of hydrogen too, so you could move one in,
again multiple birds with one stone.
Of course, you could also take a lot of that
excess carbon from Venus and make one, either
a full moon or a thick shell full of hydrogen
or some other filler material.
Building planets, or evens moons, sounds like
a huge project, but so is Terraforming in
general.
Such things would take thousands of years,
you can only go as fast as the planet can
get rid of the heat, but Terraforming is always
going to be a long game.
They don’t have to make any decisions on
it yet, they’re just a floating settlement
of a few hundred folks, but those are their
options.
They can go the orbital colony route, the
floating cities route, the para-terraforming
route, where they shade the planet to cool
it down and use orbital mirrors to produce
a realistic day, or go big and start slowly
spinning the planet up to a 24 hour day, where
possible by using incoming shipments of hydrogen
or water to impart much of that spin momentum.
Again, they don’t have to decide yet, but
the floating colonies can’t survive the
cool down process when the atmosphere eventually
liquefies.
You would probably have to abandon them and
retreat to orbital colonies, unless you could
figure out a way to safely modify them to
float in the air, then land on the carbon
dioxide sea, then transition to be being in
enclosed habitats on the surface as you make
the changeover to early terraforming.
We expect that during cooling you’d get
a ton of earthquakes and maybe volcanic activity,
while it snows dry ice and you eventually
have to pick a way to either export or permanently
sequester all that carbon dioxide so you can
warm the planet up to Earth-like temperature
and atmosphere composition.
There’s plenty of solid things you can make
out of carbon and oxygen but they all take
a lot of energy and even when you have plenty
to spare, you do have to worry about that
releasing heat, even for endothermic processes.
It is doable, but I tend to think that carbon
in the form of graphene is going to be the
prefered building material in the future so
Venus might export gigatons of that.
So we have a lot of options for Venus, and
as with Mars, we don’t necessarily have
to only do one, you could have many phases
with different configurations or with more
than one option pursued simultaneously where
they can be, but I think that Venus, as the
only planet really suitable for total terraforming,
is more likely to be terraformed, and all
the way too.
You’d always need some solar shades to keep
the heat down, but heck we might need those
on Earth eventually and you can make it so
they are seemingly invisible, just cutting
down on some of the light and particularly
from the frequencies like infrared we can’t
even see.
You can even move a planet if you really want
to, but that takes far more energy than even
spinning it would.
Colonizing though does not necessarily mean
terraforming, as we saw with Mars and we will
see even more in the next episode in the series,
Colonizing Titan.
Next week though, we are going to look at
the extreme alternative to Terraforming, where
you just build your planets instead, and return
to the Megastructures series to look at Ringworlds,
giant orbital habitats so large they wrap
around an entire star and provide a million
times the living area of Earth, first suggested
by author Larry Niven in his classic sci-fi
novel, Ringworld.
Since unsurprisingly that is going to be our
September Book of the Month, sponsored by
Audible, and we’ll be doing some spoilers,
you might want to click the link in the video
description to grab a copy of the audiobook
before then, if you haven't already read it,
though I will try to leave the story itself
mostly unspoiled in our discussion of the
megastructure itself.
The week after that we will be celebrating
the Third Anniversary of the channel, and
the original Megastructures episode, along
with the 100th episode on the channel, with
Smug Aliens, and discuss some concepts like
the Zoo Hypothesis and Star Trek Prime Directive.
And we will finish up the month of September
with a two part episode collaboration with
John Michael Godier to look at Uplifting,
the exact opposite of the Prime Directive,
where you visit planets without any technology
and give it to them, along with possibly altering
them to have the brains and physiology to
use it.
For alerts when those and other episode come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button, share it with others, and share your
your thoughts with others down below in the
comments section or the Facebook and reddit
groups, Science and Futurism with Isaac Arthur.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have
a great week!
