This episode is brought to you by Brilliant!
Benjamin Franklin once said “He that can
have patience can have what he will”, and
when it comes to space, it means having a
lot of patience, but the reward is an entire
galaxy.
So, science fiction often shows us faster-than-light
spaceships taking pioneers to new colony planets
halfway across the galaxy in mere months,
and on this show we often discuss how FTL
probably won’t be an option but we can still
colonize space, it will just take us longer,
requiring generation ships that might move
at 10 or 20% of light speed, needing a generation
or two to get to the nearest stars and maybe
several to get to a preferred candidate system.
However, while known physics certainly allows
such ships, it relies on a lot of optimistic
solutions to problems, not least of which
is, if it is really possible to build a ship
that could survive moving through space at
truly relativistic speeds.
What we normally do on this channel is to
show everyone that even if we don’t get
the FTL technologies ubiquitous in science
fiction, we can still colonize our galaxy.
Today we’ll take that a step further and
argue that even if we can’t get travel through
space while moving at a mere 10% of light
speed, we can still colonize the galaxy via
slow-boat ships, what we’ll call crawlonizing,
and we’ll also discuss how that might vary
in approach.
First, we need to talk about why we might
not be able to go faster than 1% of light
speed or maybe even .1%, and there are a number
of reasons this might turn out to be the case;
either hard limits or simply a matter of practicality
for big colony ships.
For instance, we might be able to send probes
or scouts to systems far quicker than we can
a big colony ship, also called a slow boat
at these speeds, for a combination of risk
and cost.
A robotic probe or a 100-ton scout carrying
a dozen crew members simply doesn’t come
with the same cost and risk as a 10 gigaton
O’Neill Cylinder designed for carrying a
hundred thousand people and an entire ecology.
That Slow boat needs 100 million times as
much mass and fuel to speed and slow it, and
it’s carrying families and a community,
not a handful of intrepid explorers who knew
the risks or a just computer who fears no
risk.
Even ignoring the rocket equation, which is
even harsher in cost for adding speed, a ship
moving ten times as fast, needs 10-squared
or a hundred times the energy or fuel, and
one moving a hundred times faster, 100-squared
or ten-thousand times the fuel.
We can make a very strong case for why this
is no real limit on colony ships, since that
fuel is often assumed to be hyperabundant
hydrogen or deuterium, but that does assume
we have gotten fusion working, at least deuterium-deuterium
fusion, and small enough for a spaceship.
We don’t have profitable fusion yet and
maybe never will.
What’s more, because a fusion reaction still
needs to convert that energy into thrust out
the back of a rocket ship made of real materials,
so that they don’t all melt, maximum speed
might be lower than the mass-to-energy conversion
of fusion implies.
I’ve heard folks question if we can achieve
a better exhaust velocity than perhaps 50
kilometers per second, with a fusion reaction,
hundreds of times less than that mass-to-energy
conversion rate should give us.
Now I think we can do way better but realistically,
if that were the limit, that puts us at about
triple the exhaust speed, 150 km/s, as a maximum
ship speed, from thrust alone anyway.
This is a touch slower than the Parker Solar
Probe got to as it accelerated toward the
Sun with gravity assisting, so don’t think
of this as a super-scifi velocity.
150 km/s is very fast, but the speed of light
is 2000 times faster.
We’re going to be talking about ships in
this speed range to about 20 times faster,
1% light speed, and for context 300 km/s is
.1% light speed, and 3000 km/s is 1%.
We often abridge kilometers per second as
k-m-s.
I’m not worried about being able to get
to .1% or 300 km/s, from a propulsion angle,
this is a limit induced by an assumption we
might find the engineering environment too
harsh to make ships able to go faster, or
that some other unanticipated constraint might
come in.
Plus, we have too many tricks for boosting
speeds, like slingshotting around planets
or stars or accelerating the ship with lasers
and using the fuel to slow down, or even a
light sail on a close approach to the destination
star.
A lot of those tricks don’t work as well
at significantly higher speeds though.
As an example, your classic solar sail slowing
your ship is all about the power the star
it is using is putting on that sail and how
long it can do that, and if you’re moving
fast, that time is decreased.
On the other side of things, the energy of
various little collisions of gas and dust
particles with a sail is massively enhanced
by moving faster, with a drag force whose
power rises with the cube of your speed.
So, a ship might leave a system using laser
propulsion on a sail, run itself on a nuclear
engine as it heads out into space, and then
use its sails again to slow on gas particle
collisions as it nears a system and let the
solar sails or mag sails finish the job of
bringing it to a halt around its destination
world.
There seems to be a strong consensus we can
achieve at least this .1% or 300 km/s speed
so we will use that as one of our cases today.
Getting above 1% though is a bit more debated
and a lot of that is because of those gas
and dust collisions rising in power with the
cube of speed.
See, the kinetic energy of an object rises
with the square of velocity, but how often
you smack into stuff along your path rises
with your velocity too, so if you go ten times
as fast, you hit stuff ten times as often
and each thing has ten-squared or 100 times
the energy, so ten-cubed or a thousand times
the power.
Now, you’ve probably heard before that even
running into a tiny grain of sand in space
will rip a ship to pieces and this is almost
entirely hyperbole.
For one thing, grains of sand vary in size
and mass by around a factor of about ten-thousand,
and generally, for a given square meter of
spaceship front, you’d expect it to be able
to absorb something like a single grain of
sand in collisions between a pair of stars.
Space is pretty empty, some parts emptier
than others and the variance in density of
interstellar dust and gas is a lot like the
variation in sand grain sizes.
Part of that hyperbole is about speed, but
a lot is from ignoring that most grains of
sand are the tinier ones and most parts of
space would have the thinner ones.
Colliding with a small grain of sand, say
a microgram grain, at 300 km/s, again .1%
of light speed, is releasing 45 joules of
energy, a little less than a typical tennis
ball would be carrying, though, slamming into
a spot only a micrometer wide so that spot
is taking real damage, and bear in mind that
a 1 microgram particle is in the lower mass
range for interstellar dust.
We can build the prow of the spaceship to
handle that level of damage, especially given
that it is not constant, so, plates on the
front that get dinged up can be removed, repaired
and replaced during flight.
Alternatively, a big grain of sand weighing
10 milligrams and moving at 86% of light speed,
260,000 km/s, has 900 billion joules of potential
energy in it, 20 billion times the energy
involved in that previous collision, and is
equivalent to about 215 tons of TNT.
Needless to say, that’s going to hurt, and
that is something you are likely to run into
with the front of a decently sized spaceship
during an interstellar flight.
Again, space is empty but not that empty.
The handy thing about moving at 86% light
speed is that from your perspective, the trip
is going to take half as long, from relativistic
time dilation, on top of your conventionally
higher speed.
So a trip taking a thousand years at 300 km/s
– which is only a light year – is taking
that ship at 86% light speed, just over a
year, but their own relativistic dilation
would make them think it was only half as
long, about 7 months.
Obviously, that is preferable but since it
involves spending millions of times more energy,
at best, and getting hit by what are effectively
large bombs along the way, some of which are
nuclear in scale, it’s a lot more iffy a
process both in terms of economics and engineering.
You also have way more detection and response
time if you see a bigger object, like a space
rock the size of an actual tennis ball, to
see it and either dodge it, or vaporize it.
Even seeing and responding to a rock that
small at 300 km/s is pretty tricky, that’s
a speed that’s about a thousand times faster
than a plane travels after all, so, giving
yourself ten seconds to spot and react to
such a stone means seeing it 3000 kilometers
or 2000 miles away, and remember, this is
something the size of a tennis ball.
That’s as far apart as west coast cities,
like LA and San Francisco, are from those
of us living around the Great Lakes, and is
the distance you’d need to be able to detect
that tennis ball at.
And for a little more context, hitting a tennis-ball-sized
rock at 1% of light speed is still going to
be a couple trillion joules of energy, depending
on what the tennis-ball-sized rock was made
of and how it hit, a bit more than the relativistic
grain of sand of a moment ago, though maybe
still survivable for a big ship with a big
thick forward prow.
So, things get pretty iffy at speeds above
1% light speed just for moving through space.
One bit of good news, for folks who aren’t
fond of calculating in relativistic effects,
is that relativity is pretty minimal at this
scale.
You can’t ignore it at an engineering level,
at 1% light speed your clocks are going to
be off by 4 seconds a day and that needs to
be factored into your positioning and so forth,
but it can be ignored when calculating flight
times and such by you or I, and 0.1% is even
less, about 43 milliseconds a day or 16 seconds
a year.
Of course, that definitely means you’re
not getting any time savings on your flight
for the passengers, where you’d need thousands
of years to even save a day from relativistic
effects.
And this takes us to our first key notion,
time is the biggest factor in decision making
at these speeds.
I’ve often suggested that we’re not likely
to be skipping around orange and red dwarf
stars and instead looking for much rarer yellow
twins of our own Sun or bypassing systems
that lack an Earth-like planet.
This seems even more true if it takes two
or three times as long to get to the nearest
yellow star, if a red or orange one happens
to be closer.
As a reminder, these are all white stars anyway,
the red, orange, yellow, blue, or white designations
just discuss where their peaks are at and
even a comparatively cool red dwarf varies
from our daylight in that it’s the same
color as traditional incandescent bulbs are.
You can definitely notice changes in color
warmth and tone, especially in blue shades,
with incandescent lighting, but not to the
point of it being a major quality of life
concern for colonists under red suns, especially
given that they can use daylight bulbs in
homes or stores.
A person contemplating setting up a colony
around a nearby red dwarf like Proxima Centauri
or Barnard’s Star, at even 1% of light speed,
versus Tau Ceti, the nearest yellow star besides
Alpha Centauri and our own Sun, is looking
at more than 600 years more travel to get
there at 1% light speed and 6000 years at
.1%.
600 years is a long time, longer than even
the most generous estimate for the Industrial
Age, and 6000 years ago predates recorded
history and enters the realm of pure archeology.
Of course, simply contemplating journey timelines
like this makes one wonder who would volunteer,
even if we were using hibernation options
like freezing people.
Which is a technology we cannot take for granted
will be developed, and as we note in our Sleeper
Ships episode, generally requires parallel
technologies to what you need for radical
life extension technology too, and longer
lifespans also alter the colonization dynamics.
Now, for my part, I don’t see that as preventing
things.
Fewer folks will volunteer for such long voyages
but since the entire colonization timeline
is slowed, you have a lot more time to recruit
in.
Just as an example, a colonial mission initiated
in the year 2200 AD meant to get to Tau Ceti
and planning on taking 1200 years, crawling
out at 1 lightyear per century, might opt
to freeze its colonists, and it might take
a few decades to get the final funding and
the ship built too, so, volunteers and early
investors might all opt to freeze themselves
to be loaded when the ship is ready to depart
and so when it leaves in 2222 AD, there might
have been thousands of people frozen for the
trip but only a hundred or so from any given
year from 2200 to 2222.
Tau Ceti is also only 11.9 light years away,
not 12, and suddenly that makes a real difference
because it’s an extra decade of flight time.
At our lower speed limit, .1% light speed,
that jumps to a century being shaved off a
12,000 year trip.
We have spent centuries building things before,
so I’m not worried about finding funding
or volunteers, even if I wouldn’t expect
the same kind of deluge we would get in some
other scenarios.
Those sorts of projects tended to be things
like cathedrals and so a similar degree of
group devotion might be needed, but that implies
a parallel source, like the Mormon colony
ship we see in The Expanse.
And if we just assumed every medium-large
nation and religious denomination decided
to fund a colony mission at some point, that
is around a hundred, enough to get one to
every star within 15 lightyears of us.
And we now need to contemplate that the trip
time to reach such a colony is similar or
even longer than what we need for that colony,
once established, to grow that colony to be
as populated and powerful as the homeworld
that sent them was, so that they might consider
sending out colony ships in their own turn.
If you need a thousand years to get to your
new homeland with your colonists, and a thousand
years after colonization you have an interplanetary
empire of billions there, then you’re probably
contemplating sending your own colony ships
on to any uncolonized neighboring systems.
Given that it is a founding piece of your
history and culture, it’s probably been
a prized goal for centuries.
You are descended from a race of explorers
and pioneers who settled your world, it’s
built into your culture and maybe even into
your DNA, and when folks suggest building
a next wave of colony ships, naysayers are
likely to have people point at the ground
everyone is standing on as proof it can and
should be done, and this argument will hold
a lot of weight with those present, maybe
even beyond what rational thought would permit,
as it is baked into their culture.
Many centuries later, on a star around a world
even further from Earth, that same conversation
is likely to replay again, leapfrogging through
time and space to the galactic rim and maybe
beyond.
So, when estimating the speed of galactic
colonization, FTL colonization tends to require
long incubation periods for growing your numbers
before you want a new colony, when compared
to your travel times to get there.
However, crawlonizing the galaxy is all about
travel times, not the incubation times at
each colony as you leap frog outwards.
I would say that you could comfortably estimate,
when contemplating crawlonizing the galaxy,
that the rate that occurred at would not be
less than half your typical colony ship cruising
speed.
Indeed, as we’ll discuss in a bit, probably
actually less than that cruising speed, but
at half the speed, assuming folks spend about
half the time traveling and half the time
incubating at the new colony before sending
out seeds, a 1% light speed cruise velocity
colonizes the whole galaxy in about 10 million
years and .1% in 100 million years and the
galaxy is estimated to be over 10 billion
years old.
Indeed, Earth itself orbits the galaxy in
about 230 million years, what we call a galactic
year.
So, even in an extreme crawl, at Voyager 1
speeds, you can get a galaxy colonized in
a timeline a bit longer than our orbit of
the galaxy.
However, I don’t believe this represents
a true colonization scenario anymore.
First, and we’ll come back to this in a
bit, there are a lot of options for speeding
things up at the galactic scale by throwing
extra effort into getting a few ships out
much further beforehand, and doing that by
exploiting options like the Interstellar Black
Hole Highway Network or Red Giant Hubs, which
we’ll come back to.
Second, colonizing the galaxy isn’t just
about getting to every star, because there’s
a lot more to the galaxy than those objects,
and crawlonizing the galaxy makes those other
spots even more important.
If you’re flying from star system to star
system at hundreds of times light speed on
your awesome sci-fi ship, you don’t need
to stop between stars, assuming it has a bathroom
and kitchen onboard anyway.
Conventional Star flight doesn’t encourage
taking breaks either, as you coast at speed
rather than having to keep the engine roaring
to stay at speed like with cars or planes,
burning fuel.
However, while space is pretty empty, there
are likely to be a lot of big rocks or ice
balls floating around between stars, each
a tiny potential oasis.
Truth be told, so long as I’ve got a functioning
fusion reactor, I can turn any rocky iceball
the size of a mountain into a space habitat,
able to support more people than all but the
largest of modern nations.
Now, in our episode: Colonizing the Oort Cloud,
some years back we examined this notion in
a little more detail, though it feels like
a topic I might want to revisit with an additional
episode, and so we’ll do an episode on Deep
Space Habitats in a couple weeks, but for
our purposes today, the key concept is that
places like Neptune or Pluto or the Kuiper
Belt that we think of as out near the edge
of our solar system are really not even a
thousandth of the way out to what we’d think
of as the territorial edge of your typical
star system.
Our planet is one AU from our Sun, Neptune
more like 30, and a light year is 63,000 AU.
There isn’t much matter out there when you
compare it to the vastness of space, and yet
there’s still also an awful lot.
Estimates are necessarily hazy for the outer
Oort Cloud but we think ours might contain
around a trillion objects a kilometer across
or more, and probably at least a percent of
those are going to be metal rich.
We also expect many billions in the larger
10+ kilometer diameter range.
Definitions are also somewhat hazy and for
instance, we have an asteroid belt between
Mars and Jupiter with about a million objects
a kilometer-wide or more, which is really
multiple belts, then we have the Kuiper Belt
out past Neptune which is really more of a
Torus or Donut shape, and the Scattered Disc,
which is more disc-like, in that same general
region.
Then you get to the inner Oort Cloud which
is also donut-shaped and sometimes called
the Hills Cloud now, and which stretches out
to about 20-30,000 AU or 4-6 light months
from the Sun, and it is thought to contain
5 times as many comets as the outer Oort Cloud.
Now, there’s nothing special about a kilometer-wide
object, you would expect at least twice as
many bodies half that wide or bigger if the
distribution is anything like our asteroid
belt, but there’s also something like 25
million asteroid belt objects bigger than
100 meters across, with a mass of at least
a megaton.
And any of those represents either structural
material for building a space habitat or the
filler to go inside as rock, water, or air.
We often talk about turning our asteroid belt
into a collection of artificial habitats,
able to comfortably house a quadrillion or
more people, and there’s a lot more mass
in the Oort Cloud to work with.
Probably several thousand times as much…
which isn’t actually all that much, Earth
itself is a couple thousand times heavier
than the entire belt, depending on estimates.
We usually estimate the Oort Cloud has at
least an Earth’s worth of material clumped
into usable bits, and it may be way more.
What it means though, is that the Oort Cloud
should have no problem providing the materials
for housing a million times as many people
as Earth does nowadays, if not, many more.
And if they’ve got working fusion, then
proximity to the Sun or inner system still
has a lot of plus sides but also means that
many of the things that would tempt someone
to travel to another star system could be
found by just immigrating to a space habitat
in the Oort Cloud.
Now, without fusion, we might find it’s
profitable to stretch long lines of relay
stations between our Sun and its hundred nearest
neighbors, possibly a long line of stations
refocusing an energy beam and sending it to
the next, or a mass stream to minimize attenuation.
If we assumed each relay point was 12 light
hours apart, one day of signal reply message
lag, and most of those relays were 10 light
years long on average, that’s a chain consisting
of about 7300 Stations.
If we have 100 total lines, that is 730,000
relay stations.
Sounds like a lot, and if those are O’Neill
Cylinders in scale, for the main habitation
drum of the relay station, then we’re looking
at anywhere up to a million people in easy
comfort.
730 Billion people in total, about 100 times
the population that Earth had on the year
this channel premiered, and probably in the
vicinity of a few quadrillion tons of building
material for all of them.
Which is like one large-ish asteroid of the
kind we only have a few hundred of in the
Asteroid Belt.
In other words, we expect no problems getting
the material for it.
Now, I mention these because once you’ve
slow-crawled out to a new star system, you
can use these relays to move ships a lot faster,
because you can relay power out from the Sun,
even if you don’t have fusion generators,
to use for pushing-beams, and you can keep
that area a lot clearer and better monitored
for space debris, allowing safer travel along
these interstellar laser highways.
If you don’t have fusion or something better,
then besides these relays, power is either
coming in beamed via some extensive infrastructure
and at significant cost, or you’re running
classic nuclear power plants, and that probably
means much more energy-compact approaches
to space habs that are still running through
kilograms of uranium or thorium a day.
Though, truth be told, that’s not much of
a bottleneck, as it might cost less than gasoline
does nowadays even though it's a million times
energy richer, and again we’ll do an episode
on Deep Space Habitats in a couple weeks to
examine this more.
Key concept for now, a lot of what folks will
want around distant planets, they can also
get by mining out some iceberg floating in
deep space, and a lot faster, and with a real
chance of maintaining contact with people
from home.
What’s more, a handful of colonists claiming
an entire solar system, or even just a planet,
is a much harder claim to maintain than grabbing
a small mountain in space, less folks seeking
to jump your claim or become your neighbor
on the other side of the continent.
Of course, you still have communications moving
at light speed in a slowboat environment,
and those relays are good for that too.
It also permits instantaneous teleportation
for post-humans with digital consciousnesses,
via data-transport teleportation.
Their mind moves at light speed and experiences
no time during transit.
A human might teleport this way too, with
their body and mind being duplicated on the
other side.
Now, this is really just a copy of their mind,
but for many, that might work, see our teleportation
episode for more on that, or, see also, our
androids, cyborgs, and transhumans playlist
for discussion of the pros, cons, and challenges
of digital consciousnesses and uploaded minds.
What it generally means though, is that we
would expect that Oort Clouds would be getting
colonized too and that you’re probably never
more than a light day away from some habitat,
when in long-colonized regions of the galaxy,
because even if we’re just talking a smaller
Kalpana Style Habitat for a few hundred folks,
or possibly for a single family that likes
its elbow room, there’s too many upsides
to having such outposts.
You’d need a few billion of them per system
for that one per light-day-density, but in
the context of a Kardashev-2 Dyson Swarm Civilization
– which are even more likely I’d say in
a Crawlonized Galaxy – that’s still a
smaller budget item proportionally than a
highway rest stop is for the US.
And I mean a rest stop, one, singular, not
all of them.
A few billion small space habitats just isn’t
anything noteworthy to build and fund at the
Kardashev Scale, so you could subsidize their
construction like crazy and even pay folks
to live there and still barely notice it as
a budget item compared to the inner system
economy, which benefits greatly from that
outer system.
If you do have fusion, or black hole power
generators, then they don’t need subsidy
them from in-system, they’re swimming in
reactor fuel out there.
So, now we have a galaxy-sprawling civilization
crawling out from Earth at somewhere between
0.05 and 0.5% of light speed, and by the year
10,000 AD, you’ve got our whole system Dyson
Swarmed up and well out into the Oort Cloud
and you can be shoving spaceships along relay
paths to our nearest neighbors.
Personally, I don’t see any problem going
much faster than that, but more importantly,
I said earlier that I’d expect the colonization
wave, at the galactic scale, to move as fast
or even faster as the typical colony ship’s
cruising speed and I want to finish by explaining
that.
It doesn’t seem to make sense that you could
colonize the whole galaxy faster than a single
ship typically moves, but here’s the key
piece.
We have four objects of note, black holes,
neutron stars, white dwarfs, and the red giants
that make them when they expand and die off,
sometimes as a supernova.
Now, we can sundive on stars as we travel
to build up more speed, much as we do with
planets, but you tend to get pretty scorched
doing that sort of thing, as closer is better.
Indeed, you can do some pretty neat tricks
diving on a star with a solar sail to expand
out, as you pass it, to cut down on fuel use
in a slingshot maneuver, but this is easier
to do around objects with more mass than brightness.
That means red giant stars are not your friend
for this maneuver, though they will be for
another, that we’ll get to in a minute.
Red dwarfs are better, being much less bright
per unit of mass than our own sun, let alone
a giant, and being the most common type of
star.
However, white dwarfs, the most common type
of dead star, are much better for slingshotting
around as they are typically around half as
massive as our sun – most current white
dwarfs come from stars that were originally
more massive than our Sun and some white dwarfs
are more massive than our Sun like Sirius
B, but a white dwarf is usually only about
1% as wide as our Sun and around a thousandth
as bright – though it varies a lot, meaning
you can get a lot closer to a lot more mass,
allowing slingshots to far higher speeds.
If your ship could handle being at 160 times
Earth’s solar illumination for a couple
days, maybe they have a nicely mirrored surface
for instance, then you could be within 38,000
kilometers of such a dead star, with a star’s
mass for accelerating you but without getting
burned, and that’s very close in, given
that our Sun is 18 times wider than that,
and you’d be flying through its core.
So, it’s very plausible a spaceship might
accelerate toward Sirius B or some other nearby
white dwarf.
There’s several within 20 light years of
us, most of which are cooler and dimmer than
Sirius B. So you catapult away from this to
gargantuan speeds, and point yourself toward
a neutron star or black hole close to where
in the galaxy you want to end up at.
Now, neutron stars are much rarer than white
dwarfs, we think there’s around a billion
in our galaxy, and the nearest is 400 light
years away, and older ones are dimmer and
thus much safer to slingshot around.
Black holes are considerably rarer, but there’s
still at least a million in our galaxy and
probably spaced out no more than a thousand
light years or so apart, thus you can use
them to hurl yourself up to decently high
speeds.
This works even better around binary pairs,
though these are fairly rare, or even a pair
of white dwarfs.
That is called a Dyson Slingshot by the way,
as Freeman Dyson suggested it for white dwarfs
or neutron star pairs about 60 years ago,
and we also have the Halo Drive as a more
advanced version of this using black holes
and lasers and able to go faster.
We will skip on further discussion of all
of those besides noting that any of these
approaches allow you to boost to over 1% of
light speed, indeed a lot more, though they
only really help if you have one in your home
system or are making a very long trip, where
such objects are considerably closer than
your trip length, thus you go to them first.
More importantly maybe, a slingshot maneuver
can be used to slow down too.
So you can hurl yourself toward a dead star
or dead star pair, hurl yourself toward another
one a large part of the way across the galaxy,
and slow down at that one to speeds that your
ship can use conventional methods to finish
slowing down on at some more-habitable neighboring
system.
You can also drag through a large, thin red
giant to further slow a ship, those are cold,
as stars go, but more importantly they are
huge and whispy.
So if you have a very reflective hull, then
much as you can stick your head into an oven
for a few moments, even though it’s hotter
than boiling water, which would scald you
almost instantly, you can slam through a red
giant’s upper layer to slow a ship, and
also use sails to slow using its sunlight
and solar wind, both of which are immense,
and then drag those sails more as you go through
that star.
As a result, we have a lot options for sending
ships out to some ideal hub systems that are
near such stars and dead stars and thus can
travel to them faster than our normal ship
speed, and given the times involved, shaving
time off on these dead star galactic highways
is likely to mean that this new hub world
has tens or even hundreds of thousands of
years of head-start as a new nexus to get
to some neighboring worlds than ships moving
at the normal cruising speed.
Think of the galaxy as the surface of a pond
as rain comes in, causing thousands of little
ripples out from where individual drops are
falling, only these ripples are that hub system,
colonizing thousands of stars bordering it,
or even millions, before expansion waves from
other neighbors or back home on Earth reached
them.
So even if we can’t ever get our awesome
fusion drives or FTL systems, we can still
crawl our way out to the edge of the galaxy,
covering it with our civilization in considerably
less time than a galactic year.
I think we will be able to do it far faster,
at well over 1% of light speed and maybe 20
or 30%, but even if we only can go a thousandth
the speed of light, we’ll get there one
day.
We don’t know if we share this galaxy with
other life forms that are not from earth,
but if we don’t, then the whole galaxy is
ours, and we do have the means to claim it.
Admittedly, it is going to require some patience
and determination, but as Samuel Johnson said,
“Great works are performed not by strength,
but by perseverance.”
One thing missing from a lot of our discussion
today was looking at how probability simulation
might less us determine how successful or
rapid galactic colonization occurred at various
speeds of travel, terraforming or habitat
construction, and population growth rates.
We tend to limit ourselves to intuitively
logical forecasting with that in mind but
it doesn't eliminate the value of that sort
of simulation and if you want an example,
Brilliant has an excellent one on Mission
success and lifetime on Mars that really helps
visually demonstrate that, along with great
courses on probability in general.
When it comes to math, beyond the fundamentals
when folks ask me if something is practical
for them to know and use, probability is an
absolute and emphatic yes.
It’s one of the greatest tools mathematics
gives us and it is incredibly useful in virtually
every aspect of life.
As an example, the Actuaries who calculate
risk for a living have the lowest divorce
rate of any profession, followed by physical
scientists.
Many key life decisions benefit from being
able to see the odds clearer.
It is also so much easier to learn with interactive
examples and that’s so often the hard part
for learning math or science, the best learning
is hands-on and interactive learning, hands
down, and Brilliant has worked tirelessly
over the years to offer more and ever better
interactive learning options for math, science,
and computer science.
Brilliant makes it easier for anyone to learn,
be it the basics or advanced materials.
Life gets a lot easier if you know how to
calculate your odds, and learning is much
easier if you’ve got Brilliant as your partner,
and they’ve been a partner supporting this
show and many other education focused shows
for years now, helping us make knowledge easier
to get and more abundant.
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own
pace, learn on the go, and learn something
new.
To get started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or click on the link in the description, and
the first 200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
All right, that wraps us up for today but
we’ll be back next Thursday to see what
Life as an Interplanetary Explorer might be
like, as we finish up our three-episode look
at surveying habitable star systems.
Then we have our livestream Q&A coming up
Sunday, June 26th.
After that it is on to July for a look at
Deep Space Habitats, then Extragalactic Sanctuaries
on July 14th.
Next we’ll have our mid-month Scifi Sunday
episode, Primitive Aliens, and the challenges
of interacting with them, on July 17th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like help support future episodes, please
visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways
to donate, or become a show patron over at
Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
