This episode is sponsored by Audible.
 
We often dream of a future in space 
as a future of prosperity, 
 
but what is involved in becoming a Utopia 
of near-endless energy and resources?
 
Recently we’ve been looking at how we 
might become an interplanetary species,  
and that’s focused principally on getting 
our civilization up and out to space and the  
worlds beyond, so today we’ll take a look 
a little closer to home at what’s going on  
back on Earth while all that is going on 
in space. What life could be like here,  
for the vast majority of folks who are 
not involved in leaving the planet.
 
It seems like a good time to focus on a positive 
future, and in the nearer term, given that 2020  
has been a heck of year, and I’m writing this at 
the end of August so it’s only two-thirds done.  
So how in this next century or 
maybe even in the next few decades,  
might we manage to become both a Kardashev-1 
Civilization and a Post-Scarcity Civilization?
 
For channels regulars, you’re probably already 
familiar with both those terms, but to review,  
the Kardashev Scale is a loose measurement 
of how powerful a civilization is, with a  
K-1 civilization being one that uses all the power 
of a planet, a K-2 using all the power of a star,  
and a K-3 being one that uses all the power 
of a galaxy. That’s it for the official scale  
and it doesn’t necessarily imply any particular 
population or technological level, for instance  
we could potentially be a K-2 civ using all our 
Sun’s light, 2 billion times what hits Earth,  
in even a couple centuries simply because the 
most basic way to do that, enveloping your Sun in  
bunch of thin foil mirrors, doesn’t require much 
technology beyond a robot able to dig up metals  
on some moon or asteroid, turn them into a foil, 
and make copies of itself that can do the same.  
As we’ll discuss more today, that’s not really 
that sophisticated in terms of robotics & AI,  
and even something as simple as that can kick 
a civilization into being post scarcity. For  
a given value of post-scarcity anyway, the basic 
definition of post-scarcity as unlimited resources  
wouldn’t seem possible in a finite universe, 
so we have to modify the concept a bit to use  
it in practical discussion and we’ll discuss 
that modification of definition momentarily.
 
But as a quick sidenote first, the original 
scale created by astronomer Nikolai Kardashev  
didn’t extend past 3, galaxy-spanning, but 
folks often tend to throw the idea of K4 or K5  
civilizations around, and indeed we actually 
had to ban use of the term K10 civilization  
on our facebook forum just because it got 
so synonymous with magical super-aliens  
rather than anything useful for discussion. We 
just don’t have context for them, other than  
knowing K9 Civilization would either be man’s 
best friend or have a bone to pick with us. 
 
Too many unknowns, so we’ll be trying to avoid 
that for discussing our future today, by limiting  
ourselves just to those technologies that seem 
very plausible under known science and R&D,  
though for the curious, when folks ask me for 
a K4-plus scale, I usually say K4 is galactic  
supercluster, K5 is Observable Universe, and 
anything beyond that implies folks with access  
to beyond the cosmological event horizon or 
parallel universes or alternate realities.
 
And that’s a good example of a technology that if 
you had it would bootstrap you right into being  
a post-scarcity civilization by its nominal 
standard definition, one with no scarcity of  
resources at all, as you can plunder the 
multiverse from your backyard. Inside a  
finite and closed universe that is not possible, 
and that does appear to be what we live in,  
since even if this Universe is infinite, the parts 
we can reach by travel without faster than light  
propulsion are not, due to Hubble Expansion.
Since post-scarcity of that type seems impossible,  
rather than having a useless term, we 
modify it to something apparently possible.  
Since folks use the term to basically refer 
to a level of technology where folks are not  
worried about basic survival anyway, we define 
post-scarcity in that context; one in which  
folks have no major anxiety over access to basic 
needs, because things like food and energy and  
basic goods and services are so readily abundant 
that they are like finding some air to breathe or  
a glass of water to drink, just not something 
most folks worry about in their daily life.
 
Of course what qualifies as a basic need is 
debatable, and we usually borrow from Maslow’s  
Hierarchy of Needs for that, a pyramid that runs 
from the ground floor of basic physiological needs  
like food, shelter, and sleep up to the 
more esoteric ones of personal esteem and  
enlightenment. The degree to which a civilization 
is post-scarcity is essentially measured based on  
how many of those needs are easily met, how easily 
and abundantly they are met, and how far up the  
Needs Pyramid they are. And this can be in a lot 
of different ways too, for instance a cyborg who  
could punch through a brick wall, walk around on 
an airless rock, and eat anything including dirt,  
is quite post-scarcity in terms of many 
needs whether he’s living in a cheerful  
utopia or some radiation-scorched 
wasteland full of violent lunatics.
 
So a civilization could end up as 
post-scarcity, at least in terms of the  
bottom tiers of physiological needs, simply 
by modifying themselves to be way tougher,  
stronger, or smarter, or all of the above. I 
usually say the big technologies for pushing  
us into a post-scarcity existence are better 
energy availability or better automation though,  
as if you have either you are in a position to 
tip into post-scarcity. Indeed, I’d argue we are  
already very close to it, at least those bottom 
tiers and in wealthier segments of the world,  
and a lot of what holds us back is 
that energy is scarce and so is human  
manpower to use that energy to make things. 
The key notion though is that there are a ton  
of technologies, or even just administrative or 
cultural changes, that individually or grouped up  
with some others do offer us at least that first 
tier of physiological needs as post-scarcity,  
again that being needs so easily fulfilled that 
folks don’t have anxiety about getting them.  
Now I use Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs 
strictly because it’s well known,  
it’s got a lot of revisions and variants and 
debates about which stuff should be where on it,  
but it works for our purpose as a general 
thermometer of how post-scarcity a civilizations  
is. In that bottom tier of physiological 
needs, usually given as air, water, food,  
shelter, clothing, sleep, and so on, we’ve been 
post-scarcity on air and water for a long time  
with some exceptions like smog-filled cities or 
desert lands or places torn up by war and chaos. 
 
Again there are exceptions, both for the 
civilization and for the individual’s lifetime,  
many a person might have suffered from dehydration 
at some point, but for most of us these are just  
not things we worry about. We also don’t worry 
about the cost of making long-distance phone  
calls or needing to make a collect call, but 
folks my age and older do remember times when  
the distance or duration of a phone call was a 
big worry and when keeping in touch with friends  
and relatives in other states or countries could 
become cost-prohibitive. Of course even a couple  
centuries before that, having a relative move 
to a different land meant a good chance you’d  
never speak to them again, when postal service 
wasn’t cheap or fast, or even didn’t exist,  
and when a trip home might be an extravagant 
luxury you saved up for years to do.
 
Incidentally that would be an example of a 
Tier 3 Need, feelings of love and belonging,  
and are also a good example of 
where technology of sheer abundance,  
like mass production of power or food, doesn’t 
help you out much or only indirectly. Your phone  
can’t love you, at least not very well, but it 
can keep you in touch with the people who do.  
Infinite energy or raw materials in of 
themselves doesn’t make you Tier 3 Post-Scarcity,  
because that’s all things like 
friendship and family and romance. 
 
Of course the same computers that give us 
better factories and automation and production  
also let folks stay in touch over continents 
or use dating software that helps them sift  
through the many fishes in the ocean 
to find the right partner for them,  
it also makes for shorter less exhausting work 
days with high prosperity to – in theory at  
least – spend more time with your loved ones and 
experience less safety and survival stresses. 
 
Note that I say in theory because in spite of 
us being the most prosperous civilization in  
human history, there’s pretty good evidence 
we’re as stressed out or even more stressed  
out than our ancestors, and plenty of data 
to suggest that higher personal prosperity  
has only a fairly loose relationship at best 
with happiness, stress, or contentment. 
 
Just as a reminder in there that there’s no 
single-solution magical wands in technology to  
make everything better, unless we’re discussing 
something like brainwashing or drugging folks  
to be anxiety free, and we define that as a 
Post-Discontent Society rather than post-scarcity,  
though would also include an example of a 
monk or aesthetic meditating somewhere too.
 
All right, definitions out of the way[a][b][c], 
let’s talk about the technologies on the radar  
for getting us there. And when folks ask me 
why I’m always so optimistic we’ll get there  
and sooner than later, it is because while any 
one of these given technologies might elude us,  
or only be developed in a way that doesn’t offer 
as much practical benefit as we might hope,  
it’s the sheer variety of options, any handful 
of which have the potential to get the job done,  
that keeps me optimistic about 
living to see this one day.
 
We’ll start with the power issue. Becoming 
a K-1 Civilization is another example of  
tricky definitions, because it means using all the 
power of an entire planet. And one could argue we  
already do since the sun keeps the planet warm and 
fuels not only our crops but the whole ecology.  
Problem is, that definition would make every 
civilization that ever existed K-1 Civilizations,  
so what we really mean is either that much 
electricity or power under our control  
or more directly utilized. It is a thing to 
keep in mind though, right now we tend to  
think of developed nations as being rather 
big energy gluttons, the average US citizen  
consuming about 10,000 Watts on average, but 
this ignores all the energy feeding our crops. 
 
We are quite capable with modern technology of 
feeding our whole population without needing  
additional farmland, let alone supplemental 
lighting for plants, but if you grow enough  
people you eventually have to start powering 
lights to shine on those plants in some sort  
of vertical farming scenario or start growing 
your food off-world. That’s a lot more than a  
century off though as even if we quadrupled 
our numbers this century like we did last  
century, ending with 6.15 billion in the year 
2000, we’d have about 25 billion by 2100,  
and that’s not really a problem with modern 
technology, even without deforesting everything,  
let alone needing to power light bulbs to 
grow food. Though it would benefit greatly  
from energy abundance since you could cheaply 
desalinate water and produce fertilizer and  
produce megatons of aluminum struts and glass or 
polycarbonate panels for greenhouses and so on.
 
Energy is what powers our economy 
so cheaper energy helps everywhere,  
and needless to say you can get the same benefits 
by being more efficient with your energy usage,  
more so too because all the energy you use 
ends up as heat that you have to get rid of.  
It’s within our ability to make quarter of a 
billion square kilometers of aluminum foil up in  
space, sourced off of the Moon, and just put that 
all in orbit of Earth bouncing light down on us,  
doubling the light on Earth, which would make us 
K1 but only for a little while before we scorched  
the planet. Obviously being able to double our 
average energy efficiency would be preferable. 
 
We hardly need that much power for now either. 
The Earth get’s 174 quadrillion watts of power  
from the Sun, and that’s K-1. So if we were 
talking raw electricity being produced,  
that’s 17.4 Trillion times the average US 
citizen’s power consumption. And if you are  
growing all your food hydroponically via LED lamps 
you could potentially grow food for one person on  
a similar power budget. Incidentally we use about 
9% of Earth’s surface area for agriculture of one  
type or another, so in raw power that’s a bit 
under 16 quadrillion watts to support just under  
8 billion people, or 2 million watts, 2 megawatts 
per person. Hence efficiency can do a lot of good  
too, not just brute force energy production, 
as mentioned you could probably support folks  
on about 1% of that using LED Lamp lit 
crops in climate-controlled facilities.  
See our episode on supporting a trillion people 
on earth for more discussion of that, but in  
the short term we don’t need K-1 power levels. 
For how we can get them anyway, see our episodes  
on Power Satellites, The Future of Fission, or 
Fusion Power, and any one of those offers huge  
gains in power production. I don’t want to focus 
too much on power as we’ve discussed it before,  
along with food production, but it is a central 
concept of Kardashev Civilizations. Again the  
Kardashev Scale really just refers to power being 
used, not how efficient, productive, or clever you  
are with it. Improvements in superconductors, 
battery storage, or even just how cheap we can  
produce solar panels or other energy related 
hardware can any of them, all by themselves,  
help a lot with the energy needs. So too could 
something like algae genetically tailored to  
heavily produce feedstock for biofuels, 
or other genetically modified food crops.
 
And automation also obviously helps. If you’ve got 
robots that can do all your tasks for you, you are  
post-scarcity, but we’re never too interested 
in entirely automated production chains,  
just adding in a little more automation here and 
there to improve production rates or consumption  
efficiency, and that’s not just the big stuff 
like tractors and engines but even small stuff  
like the motion detector light switches that 
come on and off if people are using a room  
or the one sorting gizmo that lets a job 10 folks 
do suddenly be done by 9 instead, or even 1. 
 
Never underestimate the effect of the thousand 
tiny things in the production chains in comparison  
to the one big tech. I remember when the 
virus first hit and there were a lot of  
shutdowns of non-essential jobs, I got asked 
by a lot of folks what qualified as essential.  
I said if we’re talking a few weeks, not too much, 
if we’re talking longer, almost everything. I’m  
sure everyone remembers the Toilet Paper Shortage 
of Spring 2020, but it hit a lot of things. Just  
personally, Sarah and I were planning to make some 
homemade applesauce as she’d picked up a bushel at  
a local orchard, and last night had us hunting for 
mason jars and lids and both being shocked out how  
many sources were out of stock and what the price 
was for those who weren’t, and I’d imagine we’ve  
all been a bit surprised by the stuff suddenly 
in short supply during the crisis either by an  
uptick in demand or a drop off in production 
because it was either deemed non-essential for  
a while or was particularly hard to operate 
under health safety measures now in place.
 
This is another way you can get post-scarcity 
too, and its flexibility of production,  
an example of which would be improvements in 3D 
printers in terms of speed, cost, or production  
sophistication. I just mentioned how we had those 
various scarcities and we have these amazing  
manufacturing and distribution capabilities 
compared to prior generations, but they can be  
very slow to change over. Even if you can suddenly 
repurpose a factory to produce some needed widget,  
that widget might have a thousand different 
components produced elsewhere at other factories,  
not all of which can be rapidly retooled 
to produce more of that component,  
or the components diverted from other products 
that use them, or the end-product adapted to  
use some other item we have in abundance. 
There are many types of waste and one of those  
is inventory, keeping whole buildings full of some 
product in case of a sudden demand or because of  
some sudden drop in that demand, and food is one 
of the big ones in that we generally waste 30-40%  
of it to various losses in harvesting, transport, 
storage, and at the cooking level. Some products  
are worse, others much more durable and cheap to 
store, but an ability to adapt production quickly  
is another lesser-mentioned technological pathway 
to being post-scarcity especially since it also  
implies an ability to rapidly upgrade to 
new technologies. Right now we often run  
on old tech simply because the upgrade costs, in 
terms of both hardware and training, is so high.  
So too better distribution and cataloguing helps 
a lot, for the latter so some company can find out  
that screw #45 might be maxed out on production 
from a given factory but that screw A-12 is nearly  
identical and sitting there in some warehouse 
unused. All sorts of smart software to help  
identify waste, be it in workflow or even day 
to day life, be it physical items or just time,  
energy, and personal stress expended when they 
needn’t have been, could also do wonders for us.
 
What other minor and non-obvious things can push 
us toward being post-scarcity? Well again it  
depends on which types of post-scarcity we mean. 
The higher Need Tiers often involve education  
for instance, and smarter workers and smarter 
inventors & innovators, plus more of them, can  
obviously help across the board, but consider the 
value of individual education over large classroom  
lectures. We all know one-on-one is better for 
teaching most things, but its cost is prohibitive.  
We also know part of that is the ability of a 
good teacher to tailor their efforts to the pupil,  
and not only might interactive teaching software 
help with instruction but it might help in  
analyzing a student to be better at tailoring that 
instruction. Same thing applies to almost any job  
or life task of course, and we are making huge 
improvements in such technology. Forget infinite  
power, a vastly more educated population 
will get you post-scarcity pretty quick. 
 
Something like radical life extension 
can make you post-scarcity too,  
even ignoring that a much longer and 
healthier life would seem like a goal  
of a post-scarcity civilization, suddenly 
having folks in their 90s in the workforce  
with all the vigor of their youth and 
all the experience of their lifetime  
is a massive gain. So too, any of the science 
fiction technologies, Clarketech as we call them,  
like anti-gravity or perpetual motion machines or 
anything that lets you bend or break the laws of  
thermodynamics is instant post-scarcity. But again 
we’re limiting ourselves to stuff on the radar.
 
Cheaper and renewable power, cheaper 
water purification or desalination,  
cheaper production of any raw materials, any and 
all minor improvements along the production chain,  
improvements in the skill or stamina of the 
workforce, all can take you to post-scarcity,  
or at least the low tiers of need. 
How about those higher-tiers? And what  
is life like in a fully post-scarcity civilization 
anyway?[d] Well those higher tiers of need focus  
more on the psychological, the longer term, the 
deeper or more philosophical aspects of life,  
and of course the big one for discussion in 
post-scarcity is fears over a loss of purpose,  
enough that we did an episode 
just on that a couple years back.  
However, one thing we need to keep in mind, 
especially as we start improving all those  
technologies for the human condition, things 
in the realms of psychology or neuroscience,  
cybernetics or prosthetics, medical gene 
therapy or alteration, and education,  
is that people aren’t likely to just be sitting 
around all day listlessly soaking up the sun in  
some lounge chair waited on hand and foot 
by robots in a post-scarcity civilization.
 
And I’m sure we would see that a 
lot too, might as well enjoy life,  
but as time rolls on and technology improves that 
relates to raising kids, the equation might alter.  
We can picture a post-scarcity civilization as one 
where everyone is indolent and lazy because they  
can do whatever they want their whole life but 
that’s ignoring their formative childhood years  
where they obviously can not, as those raising 
them determine what they can do. You probably  
never have accidental pregnancies anymore and 
every kid who is born was conceived intentionally  
by people who probably were aiming for their child 
to be a good citizen and exceptional.[e][f] 
 
In the longer term, with enough technology, that 
might mean every kid was a star athlete and genius  
by modern standards and further augmented 
by interactive education technology that  
was cramming learning into their head better than 
the most enthusiastic and skilled teachers could  
do nowadays even one-on-one full time. They might 
have improved their knowledge of the mind to the  
point they could rehabilitate any criminal or fix 
any addiction or mental issue in an afternoon.  
A civilization like that, whose kids could 
probably jump in a time machine to nowadays  
and get a full ride to any school on an academic 
and athletic scholarship, and got all the ethics  
in theirearly childhood too, and didn’t die of old 
age, doesn’t strike me as one prone to indolent  
and decadent descent or running some horribly 
mismanaged and corrupt society. So even that  
worry that post-scarcity civilization, if reached, 
might be a poison pill, doesn’t seem very likely.
 
What do they do with their time though? Well, some 
of them probably do sit around navel-gazing I’m  
sure, or picking up hobbies you or I would 
find pointless, and might or might not be,  
but they need to hit one other piece of the Needs 
Tier and that’s things like self-esteem and peer  
respect. Those are hard to satisfy with sheer 
abundance, indeed maybe harder to satisfy, as no  
one is particularly impressed you can kill a deer 
to feed the tribe or kill a wolf to protect the  
tribe anymore, or its modern equivalents. To some 
degree you have the advantage of the internet,  
which lets you find that small number of folks 
who share your obscure hobbies and interests,  
but we also have grand efforts and wonders, 
like building all those megastructures we  
talk about on the show or heading off to space 
to conquer and tame and terraform new worlds.
 
I get asked sometimes how we’ll come up with all 
the colonists for space, and I don’t think even  
now we’d ever have a shortage of volunteers, but 
folks often wonder if a post-scarcity civilization  
would find even fewer volunteers simply from 
losing out on all the luxuries and security they  
were used to. Quite to the contrary, they probably 
wouldn’t have to do without those much anyway,  
but if you have a civilization that’s full of 
folks who technology and techniques have made  
nearly superhuman, I suspect most might find the 
challenge of the frontier quite to their tastes.  
And we’ll look at some more of 
those challenges as we continue  
our Becoming an Interplanetary species series.
But as for becoming a Kardashev-1 Post-Scarcity  
Civilization, it won’t happen tomorrow but I 
firmly believe we’ll get the capacity for it  
fairly soon, maybe a generation, maybe a 
century, but I don’t see it being longer.  
Hard roads still ahead to get there to 
be sure, but sometimes the journey is as  
good as the destination, at least it gives us a 
purpose, and a pretty awesome one at that.
 
We were talking about Clarketech earlier,  
technologies so far up the ladder that they 
are indistinguishable from magic to us,  
and how any of those sorts of supertechnologies 
might elevate us to Post-Scarcity all on its own,  
and it reminded me that it is very hard to find 
examples of Post-Scarcity Utopias in fiction. Even  
when we do see them they tend to be intrinsically 
flawed or hiding over a dark side. Now that is  
because its fiction and genuine Utopias make for 
very boring stories, but I think it often paints  
a more pessimistic view of future civilization in 
much the same way just hearing bad news all day  
long can make you feel like the world is coming 
unglued even when many things are going well. 
 
Not every author paints bleak pictures though, 
and Arthur C. Clarke, famous for novels like 2001,  
Rendezvous with Rama, and Childhood’s End, 
and for whom we name the term “Clarketech”  
was one of the great scifi writers of the 20th 
century and one who often painted a more hopeful  
image of the future. His novel Childhood’s End, 
which was his first novel, is one where we see  
humanity encounter a peaceful and benevolent 
alien species who brings on a golden age for us,  
and is one of his most celebrated works that has 
inspired so many other stories down the years,  
so this month’s Audible Audiobook of the Month 
goes to Arthur C. Clarke’s “Childhood’s End”
 
You can find that audiobook, along with the 
rest of Arthur C. Clarke’s many excellent  
novels and short stories, over at Audible. They 
also have podcasts, guided-wellness programs,  
theatrical performances, and exclusive audible 
originals, indeed they have over three centuries  
worth of audio if you just hit the play 
button and ran it through every title.
 
If you want access to that massive collection 
of great audiobooks, like “Childhood’s End”,  
you can join Audible for a 30-day free trial, 
and Audible members not only get discounts on  
any audiobooks they buy, but a free book every 
month. Additionally, they are now giving unlimited  
access to their audible originals. You can start 
listening today with a 30-day Audible free trial.  
Just visit the link in the episode description, 
Audible.com/Isaac, or text “Isaac” to 500-500.
 
So we’re into November now and we’ve got a 
full schedule. Next week we’ll be looking  
at the concept of Interstellar Trade, then next 
Sunday we have a Bonus episode coming up on the  
Fermi Paradox and the Prime Directive, the notion 
that aliens might be out there but don't contact  
us because they have rules against it. Then 
we’ll be taking a look at Asteroid Mining,  
Orbital Settlements, and 
Life as a Space Colonist.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,  
and if you’d like to help support future episodes, 
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website,  
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode 
description below, along with all of our various  
social media forums where you can get updates 
and chat with others about the concepts in the  
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching,  
and have a great week!
[a]It  
took a while.
[b]too be fair,  
that's fairly par for the course for me :)
[c]No problem, I had my drink and a snack. :)
 
[d]Shouldn't this have been 
establishd earlier in the discussion?
 
[e]...but without any real 
effort their own parts.
 
[f]That might be the weird thing, 
and I hesitate to bring it up,  
but many folks might be entirely qualified 
and enthusiastic parents and still lean on  
the machines because they feel they'd do a better 
job and don't like to interfere with the 'expert'
