Stars give warmth and light to planets and 
make life possible, until they run out of  
fuel and die themselves, but could these dead 
stars still enable life to dwell around them?
There are hundreds of billions of stars in 
this galaxy and most are smaller than our Sun,  
and even of those that are bigger, virtually all 
will expand into a Red Giant one day then shuck  
off their outer layers and collapse inward into 
a burned out husk called a white dwarf. This is  
the fate of 97% of all stars, including our own, 
and so it stands to reason that we might want to  
have a game plan for living around them. Indeed, 
even though most stars that have ever formed are  
still alive, we still have around 10 billion white 
dwarfs in our galaxy already, including over a  
dozen in our nearby interstellar neighborhood 
out to about 30 light years. So while every  
civilization probably needs to have a plan for 
living around white dwarfs eventually, it probably  
behooves them, and us, to have a plan even sooner.
We will also be exploring some new megastructures  
and variants that work well around white dwarfs, 
and brown dwarfs too for that matter, such as  
Stripworlds and Solar Bracelets. So our journey 
today is going to take us to the heights of mega  
engineering and depths of deep time. Which means 
we’ll be here for a bit and a drink and snack  
might be a good idea, and don't forget to hit the 
like and subscribe buttons while you’re at it. 
Now our goal today is not to rehash the basic of 
what white dwarfs are or how they come to exist,  
I think most people do know that, but a lot of 
times that’s about where that knowledge ends,  
so while this isn’t an astronomy course, we will 
deep dive some of their function, especially some  
critical bits that I’ve noticed tend to get left 
out even in a lot of deeper discussions of them. 
Stars burn hydrogen in their core and this is a 
dreadfully slow process, the bigger they are the  
higher the pressure and temperature they can get 
and thus they burn way faster, but it also means  
that virtually all that fusion is going on in the 
core and bigger stars don’t really bubble and mix  
their insides much to move fresh hydrogen in 
from outer layers and remove helium. Bigger  
stars can burn helium into carbon and that too 
into heavier elements and those become Type 2  
Supernovae when they die. Everybody else slowly 
gets hotter and goes into a subgiant phase,  
which can last a very long time, then Red 
Giant, then a planetary nebula that scatters  
its outer layers and leaves you with a white 
dwarf that begins very hot and slowly cools. 
That lifecycle depends on the star and most white 
dwarfs in existence came from bigger stars than  
our own Sun, which I’ll clarify in a moment, 
but our Sun, which is 4.5 billions years old,  
is expected to grow gradually hotter till at 
about twice its current age it slips in being a  
sub-giant. This is not a fast transition either, 
the sun’s core will burn up fuel and contract a  
bit, which will ignite fusion in the layer of 
hydrogen right around that and this subgiant  
phase will last for around a billion years. The 
red giant phase comes on just as slowly and will  
probably last about half a billion more years.
Bigger stars do this all faster, smaller stars  
slower, though it’s not as smooth 
as a percentage of their lifetime,  
and the smallest stars won’t even have a red 
giant phase and will live over a trillion years. 
The end comes when that sun’s core finally burns 
through all that helium, turning it into carbon,  
and it can burn anymore and basically separates 
into two distinct bodies that are of about the  
same mass. That outer shell of the red giant, 
which is considerably thinner than air and  
stretches out possibly as far as Earth, 
and that contracted inner core of carbon,  
and the former becomes a planetary nebula while 
the latter collapses into a white dwarf somewhere  
around Earth’s size and about half the Sun’s mass, 
which will spend billions of years cooling down. 
Incidentally Planetary Nebulae have nothing to do 
with planets forming, and the description is from  
late 18th century when an early examination 
of them got described by William Herschel,  
the guy who discovered Uranus, as looking 
like a planet, which is to say it looked  
like a blurry blob through a telescope, like 
Uranus did, rather than a bright tiny dot the  
way stars do. This further got cemented when 
the gentleman who discovered the Ring Nebula,  
which is a planetary Nebula, described it as 
“very dim but perfectly outlined; it is as  
large as Jupiter and resembles a fading planet”.
So the name stuck, ironically so did ‘asteroid’  
which means star-like but describes minor 
planets rather than stars. That said, these  
nebulae don’t really eject at high speed the way 
supernovae do, so a lot of their material could be  
collected locally and probably does get grabbed 
by various remaining planets, and places like  
Jupiter and Saturn would largely survive a red 
giant phase though their moons probably wouldn’t,  
so they might sweep up a lot of this nebulae. 
Planetary nebulae are a great source of carbon,  
nitrogen, and oxygen, which are basically the 
three biggest things you need for building  
planets and ecosystems. Those elements plus 
hydrogen give us methane, ammonia, and water,  
and those elements plus hydrogen also make up 96% 
of your body mass and the same for most organisms. 
So a star that’s turned into a white dwarf 
isn’t necessarily a dead system for all time,  
even if it’s not too likely any planets that were 
life bearing before it was a red giant are still  
around as more than cinders and any that were 
habitable while it was a red giant will be much  
too cold. Smaller stars that live far longer than 
our sun might have modest enough red giant phases  
to not move the habitable zone too far, but again, 
none of them have died yet for us to observe. 
A white dwarf is much dimmer than the 
main sequence star that birthed it,  
let alone when it was a subgiant or red giant. 
Ironically it’s now much hotter than before,  
it’s just brightness is a mix of surface 
temperature and surface area. Normal star’s  
are huge, and thus produce enough light to warm 
planets tens or even hundreds of millions of  
miles away, white dwarfs are typically 
planet sized, and dimmer as a result. 
Sirius B, the tiny pup star neighbor of Sirius 
A, one of the brightest stars in our night sky,  
actually used to be bigger a bigger dog, and 
brighter than Sirius A, and about 120 million  
years ago was a massive red giant star that would 
have been the brightest night time object in our  
sky if it were near us then like it is now. We 
think it massed 5 times as much as our own star,  
now it masses about the same, 1.02 solar masses, 
with a surface temperature of 25,000 Kelvin,  
4 times our Sun’s surface temperature, but 
because it's less than 1% the Sun’s radius,  
it’s total luminosity or brightness is just 
5.6% of our Sun’s, and much more strongly  
into the ultraviolet region, so it would have 
a hard time keeping even our own planet Mercury  
warm and would be a fairly harsh spectrum for 
biology and biochemistry to take place under.
While we tend to say white dwarfs are roughly 
Earth size, they do vary quite a lot in size  
and mass, and even more in Luminosity, a 
trend that will continue as the Universe  
ages. The smallest white dwarf we’ve yet 
found is slightly larger than our own Moon,  
a good deal smaller than Earth, and yet out 
masses Earth by a factor of roughly 450,000,  
which indeed makes it about 36% more massive 
than our Sun and fairly close to that limit  
where white dwarfs turn into Type 1a Supernova.
Alternatively the least massive white dwarf yet  
detected is only about a fifth of our Sun’s 
mass and closer in size to Saturn. For stellar  
remnants, the more massive they are, the smaller 
and more compact they are. This particular ‘tiny’  
white dwarf is believed to have lost mass to a 
binary partner, in this case another dead star,  
as white dwarf’s win the binary tug of war 
for mass with normal stars which is what  
lets them reach their mass limit and explode.
White dwarfs are not very bright and thus hard  
to see, this one is only 7000 light years away, 
so in our sector of the galaxy, as it were. There  
are probably less massive ones too, however only 
by losing mass this way could you realistically  
have a white dwarf this small. At least while 
the Universe is this young. The more massive a  
star is, the shorter its lifespan, and most stars 
are a lot younger than the Universe, and as such,  
most stars that have ever existed are still alive. 
We would not expect any star less massive than  
90% of our own Sun’s mass to have burned out its 
fuel and gone red giant or white dwarf yet, even  
if it were among the very first stars… see our 
episode Primordial Planets for more discussion of  
the timelines of the earliest stars and planets.
Stars lose a lot of mass when they go red giant,  
but not enough for any naturally occurring 
white dwarf to be much under half a solar mass,  
and most are about 0.5 to 0.7 solar masses 
and have a radius of about 1-2% of the Sun’s,  
again making them roughly Earth-sized.
The bigger ones tend to be the less  
massive ones. Most we have found are between 
8000 Kelvin, just a bit hotter than our Sun,  
to 40,000 Kelvin, about 7 times as hot as our 
Sun, but the cooler ones are harder to see  
and the hotter ones rarer and spend less time in 
that range, and often would still be obscured by  
their planetary nebula during this early period.
Now if we know their size and their temperature we  
can calculate their luminosity - how bright they 
are, as they are solid black bodies that radiate  
light at a rate linear to their surface area or 
the fourth power of their temperature. One twice  
as wide thus has four times the surface area and 
radiates 4 times the light, while one twice as hot  
radiates two-to-the-fourth or 16 times the light, 
and cools down 16 times faster too. Using 1% of  
the Sun’s radius and 8000 Kelvin as our lower end 
of normal, and 2% of that radius and 40,000 Kelvin  
as the higher end, most white dwarfs are between 
0.03% as bright as our sun to 80% as bright as  
our Sun. Which would put their habitable zones at 
between 1.7% of Earth’s own distance to 89%, or  
0.017 Astronomical Units, or AU, to 0.89 AU. Over 
many hundreds of millions of years they will cool  
appreciably and that zone will shrink while also 
growing less harsh as a spectrum. As they cool,  
the rate they cool at decreases, as does the 
speed at which their habitable zone shrinks.
White dwarfs don’t produce new energy the 
way main sequence stars do, by fusion,  
which is why we call them dead stars, they 
are just big glowing embers slowly cooling  
off. Ironically until a little over a century ago, 
we assumed that was how all stars worked, heated  
by gravitational collapse and slowly cooling.
New ones can be as hot as 250,000 Kelvin 42  
times hotter than our sun, while even the coolest 
of white dwarfs, the very oldest, nearly as old as  
the universe, would be just a little colder than 
our Sun. They would also be much bigger white  
dwarfs since in order to be perhaps 12 billion 
years old, they would have had to have begun with  
a star that was just under the threshold to go 
supernova, so they would have had more heat to get  
rid of too. As the Universe ages we’ll get white 
dwarfs that no longer radiate any visible light,  
as is, most will give off the majority of 
their heat energy in the ultraviolet range. 
This is pretty critical to potentially 
colonizing them as once they’re under  
10,000 Kelvin they are giving off a survivable 
spectrum of light and might be emitting around  
thousandth the light our Sun does, which is 
itself about 2 billion times what Earth needs. 
However, there’s also the gravity to think of, 
because a star only a thousandth as bright as  
ours is, requires you to be about 33 times 
closer to it than Earth is to live, 0.033 AU,  
and that’s very nearly the distance at which 
a shell around our Sun would have Earth-like  
gravity on it, at 0.023 AU, a shell built 
around this hypothetical white dwarf at that  
distance would have 83% of Earth normal gravity.
This is going to be very rough on a planet in that  
range since it’s going to be close to its Roche 
limit and anything but a perfectly circular orbit  
is going to be harsh on tides… indeed planets 
further out getting less light might be able  
to stay warm by supplemental tidal heating, and 
obviously there are no natural planets this close  
to a white dwarf unless it stole some off some 
other star that passed dangerously close. Very  
dangerously too, if a white dwarf gets above 1.4 
Solar Masses it detonates as a Type 1a Supernova,  
either leaving nothing at all behind, 
or possibly a zombie star in some cases. 
So putting a shell around one 
is a good way to avoid this,  
and it also allows you to red shift your light 
to something nicer. As we’ve been building up to,  
we shouldn't expect natural life or colonizable 
planets to be common around these stellar remnants  
and they are great for colonizing but you have to 
be willing to do some building first. The stellar  
real estate equivalent of an old fixer-upper.
As mentioned there is likely to be a lot of  
carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen lying around that 
outer system, planetary nebulae usually are only  
moving 20-30 kilometers per second which makes 
them decently capturable by other existing objects  
in that outer system, and there should still be 
plenty of rocks leftover in the outer system that  
didn’t get evaporated by the red giant phase.
You should have plenty of material to make some  
sort megastructures, but our ideal case here 
would be Tungsten since it has a high melting  
temperature, and a thin shell of that around a 
star - or thin swarm of satellites if a rigid  
shell is too tricky, could be placed at a distance 
just far enough to not melt and will re-radiate  
light at a lower temperature, absorbing the 
harsh UV light and letting something redder  
out. A non-total shell, one with some holes, 
or a cloud swarm that wasn’t opaque, could  
allow a very nice overall spectrum of filtered 
and unfiltered light out to those around it. 
This is not the mass-intensive an effort as you 
might be thinking, see our Statites & Lagites  
episode for details, but it is unlikely you would 
even need a millimeter thick shell around that  
white dwarf and at a much reduced surface size 
to the typical Dyson, so even one modest asteroid  
worth should do. Of course you could build a 
thicker shell with more mass and at a cooler  
distance and just live on it but that’s probably 
more of a black dwarf phase, for once that white  
dwarf has cooled below the visible threshold.
At this point you can build artificial planets  
of whatever type you desire, same as you would 
around any normal star, but more mobile ones  
like rotating habitats probably make more sense 
since over time you will need to slowly contract  
that sphere to keep it in the same spectrum of 
light while it’s habitable zone around it also  
contracts and those habitats need to move. This 
is a process of billions of years incidentally,  
white dwarf lifetimes are generally longer 
than the stars that birthed them pre-red giant,  
though this is because most current white dwarfs 
came from more massive stars. Bigger cools faster,  
but again for white dwarfs bigger mean less 
massive and containing less total heat energy  
to radiate, so these bigger but less massive white 
dwarfs cool fastest, and everything cools faster  
when hotter too, so most white dwarfs will 
spend a lot more time in the 3-10,000 Kelvin  
range of decent sunlight than similarly-sized 
temperatures when hotter. Given that bigger  
stars live much less long than their smaller 
kindred, it seems fair somehow that their stellar  
remnants should live longer to make up for that.
So you could have a cloud of megastructures around  
one of these for billions of years, indeed tens 
of billions in some cases, especially if you’re  
willing to just collect infrared heat off them 
to generate power later on. You could eventually  
migrate to that shell yourself too, when it 
cools enough, though gravity gets rough once you  
get too close, and this might be something only 
post-biological life could really contemplate. 
For white dwarf megastructures, Stripworlds and 
planetary bracelets work well in this context  
too. These are large orbital rings placed around 
a planet, usually a gas giant or brown dwarf,  
at the distance where its gravity has dropped 
to Earth normal. On Jupiter, gravity is about  
two-and-a-half times higher than Earth, so by 
building a ring 26,000 miles or 42,000 kilometers  
above its surface we would have gravity the same 
as Earth, and if we built a band 443 miles wide  
at this height, it would have the same surface 
area as Earth, and might be much wider. Such  
Stripworlds or Planetary Bracelets, utilizing 
the active support technologies discussed in  
the Megastructure Compendium, may be popular 
habitats around gas giants closer to their sun. 
However they may also be constructed around 
older white dwarf stars where air walls and  
tilted mirrors on the side could allow sunlight 
to be bounced into Bracelets which might contain  
thousands of earth’s worth of living area. You 
have large and canted mirrors hanging off to the  
side and which are only reflective to the spectrum 
you want, with the other light being absorbed to  
run heat engines to produce power. These do 
need airwalls as otherwise the atmosphere,  
or atmo-ring, is going to just spill 
over the side down onto that dead star,  
and will be rather pyrotechnic when doing it.
Since you’re lighting is coming in through  
those mirrors, you can tilt them 
on and off to give day and night,  
and because of their proximity to the dead star 
and it essentially being a slowly draining bucket,  
it is perfectly practical to reflect unused 
light back down into the white dwarf, which  
will simply absorb and re-emit it, unlike in our 
normal starboosting process where we put mirrors  
over a star’s polar regions to reflect light back 
down on a cooler star so that its surface warms  
and we see a stronger and hotter spectrum emerge 
in its’ equatorial band where its planets are. 
We’ll call this particular megastructure a 
White Dwarf Bracelet, where we’ve built a  
hab ring at the Earth-gravity location. By 
default this is not rotating for gravity,  
nor even orbiting at the proper period since 
that would negate gravity. It is a ring being  
pulled equally down on all sides so it isn’t going 
anywhere, at least so long as you put stabilizers  
on it, which huge sun-mirrors could serve as.
Though an inverted orbital ring might have its  
inner ring stationary and the outer spin. Usually 
you make an orbital ring by having an inner  
rotating ring that rotates faster than normal 
orbital speed while outside it is a non-rotating  
sheath, but it can be done either way and the 
reversed version makes a nice launch system. In  
this case, a spinning outer ring would be on an 
order of about a day for most objects orbiting  
something of about our Sun’s mass at the distance 
that would equal one gravity, so you might  
have one big ‘fake sun’ mirror that was its own 
half-ring statite or lagite that floated above the  
orbiting ring on a 24 hour relative period and had 
noon and twilight regions. I should also note that  
you could spin a ring that needed to be closer to 
a white dwarf for warmth than allowed comfortable  
gravity and that centrifugal force would lower 
the surface gravity to something more livable. 
You have a lot of options for megastructures 
around these bodies and a lot of time too,  
while things are slowly changing, so you 
might see several different arrangements  
and phases of build up around a white dwarf.
You also might make that White Dwarf Bracelet  
as big as you can and cover the rest of 
the star in mirrors facing down to help  
keep light in for conservation. Indeed 
the underside of that habitation bracelet  
probably is reflective too, whatever parts 
aren’t used for power generation anyway. 
This could be what we do to our own Sun a long 
time from now, and if it lost half its mass,  
that bracelet would need to be at 0.016 AU 
to provide sufficient Earth-like gravity,  
which means it is 1.5 million miles or 2.4 million 
kilometers in radius, and 9.5 million miles or 15  
million kilometers in circumference, so if that 
band is just 21 miles or 34 kilometers in radius,  
it would have the same surface area as Earth.
Given that a slowly cooling stellar remnant is  
very popular in the Dying Earth Genre of fiction, 
back before we really got the life cycles of stars  
down, white dwarf bracelets fit this trope much 
better, but not for size, one just as wide as  
Earth is would have nearly 400 Earths worth of 
living area and would still look like a thin  
wire rather than a bracelet or band. For that band 
effect it would be anywhere in the 1000 to 20,000  
Earth’s size class. As to how much you could 
light, this just depends on temperature, and if  
you were building this when it was down to 
maybe 10,000 Kelvin surface temperature,  
with a reflective underside still to keep you from 
burning up, you’d still be able to light nearly a  
million Earths while reflecting harsher spectra 
back down to be absorbed and emitted later,  
preserving your energy. You could slowly walk 
your air walls in like glaciers marching from  
the edges of the world, at an ever slow pace, 
to contract your ring’s width as the white dwarf  
cooled so you keep an ever-decreasing region warm.
See our Dying Stars episode in the Civilizations  
at the End of Time series for more discussion 
around living on these things once they dip below  
the visible range, many billions of years later, 
and for discussion on how to keep star from going  
Red Giant or White Dwarfs in the first place, 
but as we saw today, for supposedly dead stars,  
they offer us some very nice colonization options.
As we’ve often noted about so-called short-lived  
stars, when we’re talking millions of years, 
that still orders of magnitude longer than any  
civilization we’ve ever built, indeed if longevity 
is any measure of accomplishment even a couple  
centuries is a good duration, and I’d say anything 
that lasts an order of magnitude longer than it  
took you to build and populate it is more than 
worth doing, but given that these white dwarfs  
live billions of years and glow warmly enough 
to light a million worlds while they do it,  
and some even more brightly early on, I 
think we can say they’re worth having. 
Of course, the question is what to do with them 
when they cool down one day below where you can  
get energy out of them, and one option is always 
to go ahead and drop some more matter down on  
them, since they explode when that happens and 
free that matter up. So you might have reserves  
of hydrogen or helium lying around in a system - 
indeed you might be using these as shell worlds,  
ederworlds, or bubble planets to store fusion fuel 
while enjoying their gravity while living on their  
surface, and slowly trickling matter down to that 
white dwarf. This will fuse basically instantly,  
and when it happens in large quantities causes 
a classic nova, rather than the supernova  
that occurs when it gets to 1.4 solar masses.
So you might bundle up all your loose hydrogen  
and helium into such storage planets 
orbiting the white dwarf’s equator,  
build reflective statites over its poles for 
reflecting back down and classic power generation,  
and slowly feed matter from those planets 
into the white dwarf, so that this new fuel  
and those reflective mirrors both add to the 
lifespan of that white dwarf or mini-nova,  
and massively extend it’s second life. You just 
make sure you’ve got as much as 1.4 solar masses  
minus what’s in the white dwarf in storage.
You could make a lot of shell worlds and bubble  
planets out of that much material, and when 
you finally have burned through all of that,  
after hundreds of billions of years at least, you 
either have a big party and drop the final mass in  
to set off a supernova, for a rather explosive 
farewell, or pack everyone up, blow it up,  
and it’s supernova remnants will help provide 
the heavy materials for future civilizations.  
It just depends on if you’re doing this to a 
white dwarf we colonize in a few centuries or  
in a few trillion years when new stars aren’t 
as common as they used to be to migrate too. 
Either way, not a bad run for a star that 
we normally write off as dead and useless.
I occasionally get asked what I do for fun 
and hobbies, and I try to keep a number of  
different ones going for variety, but board 
games and tabletop RPGs are a big favorite.  
My gaming group and I just wrapped up an 
adventure last night using Pathfinder 2.0,  
and we’ve used a lot of systems over the years. 
I’ve been with the same gaming group for 15 years  
now, indeed longer if you count that myself 
and one of the members, my best friend Bill,  
used to play together in the Army 20 years back, 
when I first introduced him to D&D. He and I are  
both very big into deep world building and long 
campaigns, and it definitely results in more  
engaged players who just enjoy the game more.
That’s where World Anvil can be an amazing tool  
for organizing your campaigns or stories, and 
also for helping craft content and share it.  
World Anvil, the award-winning Worldbuilding 
Toolset is an amazing suite of software for  
gaming and worldbuilding that lets you use all 
the awesome modern computerized options while  
still enjoying the versatility of pencil and paper 
gaming, or even writing fantasy and sci fi novels. 
Create customized articles and entries, 
interactive maps, wiki-style presentations,  
character chronicles, event timelines, genealogies 
of characters, and many other awesome features  
to help you craft your world. World Anvil is 
also amazing for helping you run your game,  
with a Digital GM screen & campaign manager 
with support for over 45 tabletop RPG systems,  
including a robust library of character 
sheets and stat blocks. Plus they have  
wonderful tutorial videos exploring features to 
make it easy for you and your players to use,  
and giving great worldbuilding and 
storycrafting ideas to help you on  
your Hero’s journey. World Anvil has 
all the tools you need, to try it out,  
just click the link in this episode’s 
description and start forging new worlds, today!
This episode airs on April 25th, 2024, which 
is the fourth anniversary of my marriage to  
my wonderful wife Sarah. We’ll be heading out 
shortly after this episode airs for our first  
vacation alone since we adopted our three kids 
last year, so apologies in advance for delayed  
replies to comments on the episode. These 
last four years have flown by, as time tends  
to do when you’re having fun, and I couldn’t have 
hoped for a better companion to travel life with. 
Speaking of companions, this weekend we will have 
a companion episode for today’s Colonizing White  
Dwarfs with a look at Colonizing Binary Stars and 
considering their habitability, both classically  
and in terms of paraterraforming options.
After that we’ll start May up with a look  
at the Banks Orbital, also known as God’s 
Bracelet, a megastructure space habitat  
hundreds of times larger than Earth, 
that advanced civilizations might build  
as an alternative to terraforming planets.
The week after that on Thursday May 9th we’ll  
look at the Interdiction Hypothesis of the Fermi 
Paradox, which asks if civilizations out in the  
galaxy might leave large buffer zones between 
their empires, and ask if Earth itself might  
be inside one such empty buffer zone.
Then we’ll continue the alien theme  
with a look at the reverse case of 
Interdiction, where civilizations sprawl  
near each other and set up alien embassies.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early 
and ad free on our streaming service,  
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content like 
Galactic Beacons, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
