This episode is brought to you by Skillshare.
If aliens exist there may come a day when
we live and work alongside them, and if the
internet has taught us anything, falling in
love with them too.
Science fiction often shows us busy spaceports
and metropolitan planets full of various aliens,
probably most famously that hive of scum and
villainy, the Mos Eisley Cantina in the original
Star Wars film and in the most detail in the
Babylon 5 series, where the titular space
station is essentially the city in space where
all the diplomats of a hundred races gather.
Today we’ll explore how likely that is,
having many different aliens working and living
together, and how it might actually function
if it were.
Also since this episode comes out on Valentine’s
Day, and such settings so often feature half-human,
half-alien hybrids, I thought we would explore
the notion of falling in love and marrying
an alien too.
We have to start by stipulating the existence
of alien civilizations, and an abundance of
them, for the scenario of multi-species civilizations
to exist, and channel regulars know that I’m
generally skeptical that aliens civilizations
exist anywhere in our own galaxy or even neighboring
ones.
So for today we will simply assume they are
quite common.
We will also explore both scenarios for faster
than light travel being possible, as it generally
is in such science fiction with lots of aliens,
and a no-FTL scenario.
It should however be noted that some of the
issues discussed here may be present in a
potential far future where different groups
of human descendants have diverged greatly,
either the old fashion way or more rapidly
through technology.
These divergent civilizations might be thought
of as effectively alien.
Indeed, given that common ancestry, it fits
the idea of aliens who share the humanoid
form, basic human psychology, and ability
to cross breed quite well.
So we will have that in the background for
today as our plausible and justifiable scenario,
and we’ll discuss it a bit more later on
too.
Absent that we get the big problem, how a
hundred species all evolved under different
conditions could ever have much in common
in terms of environment, let alone shape and
purpose.
How could a bug-eyed alien who breathes methane
ever live on the same world as a tentacular
monster used to swimming around icy seas of
liquid helium, let alone have anything in
common with them?
On the one hand, it is actually quite plausible
that the only worlds that ever produce intelligent
life that walks around, or slithers around,
is one with an oxygen-rich atmosphere.
Oxygen may have started off as a dangerous
waste product in the early days of Earth-life,
but there is good reason to think that being
able to breathe the stuff is the best way
to develop high-energy metabolisms able to
fuel large organisms that move around quickly.
We explored many other options in our episode
non-carbon based life, but while other chemistries
besides those focused on oxygen, carbon, and
water are potentially possible it does seem
like our setup would be the most common, and
certainly not rare.
Thus it is decently plausible a multi-species
tradeport might go for an oxygen-nitrogen
atmosphere and those who can’t handle that
would wear spacesuits.
Nobody is likely to enjoy walking around with
a breathing mask all day long, but as 2020
showed us, a lot of folks can get reasonably
comfortable wearing masks regularly.
We’re also not too sensitive to oxygen concentration,
so if the majority of species were adapted
to half an atmosphere of pressure to two atmospheres
of pressure, or oxygen concentrations of 10%
to 30%, they likely all could hang out together.
Neither oxygen nor nitrogen have any odor
either, in their pure diatomic forms anyway.
That’s probably a big one to keep in mind
too, the smell.
Humans notoriously have a bad sense of smell,
which is not actually the case, we outperform
dogs and pigs in some odor detection, but
they beat us out in most areas and it is easy
to imagine aliens with very good senses of
smell.
Even ignoring that alien smells might be truly
horrible on our noses and vice-versa, an alien
might find sharing common air horrifying simply
for the odors, not just the concerns over
spreading diseases.
Humans on the other hand have very, very good
vision, and we are quite detailed in our visual
decorating.
We might be above or below the alien norm,
but either way, our preferences for background
visual décor might be nauseating to other
aliens.
I mean literally too, not just that one civilization
might view another’s artwork and décor
as a crime against good taste.
Just little things like lighting, or some
background equipment hum we do not barely
notice, might send an alien into seizures
or their equivalent.
On the flip side, a human might start bleeding
from the ears and go deaf just walking around
in what some alien species considered their
equivalent of a noisy factory floor or crowded
social with folks chatting.
Some species that operate on echolocation
like bats might flat out die if exposed to
such an environment, or even our own normal
sound clutter, or at the very least be rendered
effectively “blind”, whereas the echolocation
used by several species of cetacean might
kill us.
Now, something similar might apply to light
and sound as would with oxygen, where we would
expect almost every species to have arisen
on oxygen-rich worlds.
We can imagine a race that existed on echolocation
or with enormous eyeballs because their world
was so dark, but realistically you almost
have to have that warm planet with photosynthesis
to have abundant ecologies able to generate
the diversity and large food chains we would
anticipate existing for intelligent life to
emerge from.
Again see our episode on non-carbon based
life for some alternative possibilities, but
it would seem like worlds able to spawn civilizations
would be those where both sunlight and noise
were common.
Wind makes noise, it knocks things over which
make loud sounds by picking up energy through
gravity and their impact, with amounts of
sound that are based on shared physical laws
common to all, not world-specific.
Cultures can diverge wildly but physical laws
are constant and universal.
So species coming from such worlds should
be used to sunlight and loud noises.
Nocturnal critters with eyeballs have eyelids,
often multiple layers of them, in order to
accommodate light changes.
Bats don’t do well in daylight, but they
like most nocturnal creatures hardly explode
when exposed to it, and it's not that uncommon
to see bats during the day, or raccoons or
any number of other nocturnal critters.
It would seem likely that those more sensitive
to light or sound, or certain frequencies
of either, would just wear ear plugs or the
equivalent of sunglasses to assist with that
if the shared environment went well beyond
their natural habitat, and even sunscreen
or vibration-dampening clothing if the ambient
light or sound was physically rough on their
skin or made them nauseous.
In the reverse, you probably wouldn’t see
many folks adapted to higher amounts of light,
as worlds much brighter than Earth would tend
to be much hotter, so unless we’re contemplating
aliens who evolve inside a star it wouldn’t
be likely you’d meet aliens used to vastly
more light than us.
It’s also worth noting that human eyes are
highly variable in sensitivity.
Noon-time sunlight is a thousand times brighter
than what we would consider a decently lit
room, and more than a million times brighter
than a moonless night.
Aliens on planets with days and nights should
be similarly adapted to variation in light.
Maybe a species that developed on the sunny
side of a tidally locked world would have
problems adapting to a darker environment
like our own, but it’s probably not a common
ailment.
On the other hand a lot of humans have light-sensitivity
issues to things like fluorescent bulbs, and
so lighting might be problematic in a shared
environment.
It isn’t too hard then to imagine a tradeport
where aliens would hold their nose against
smells or wear a breathing mask to fix air
composition issues, or wear earplugs or sunglasses
to handle the environment while doing business
and retreat to their ship or apartment when
business was done, where the environment is
more-tailored to their needs.
Or even neighborhoods of a large space station
tailored to certain general conditions, like
the low oxygen, high-pressure regions low
in a rotating habitat for the residents of
thick-atmosphere high-gravity Super-Earth,
or the methane rich icy penthouses in the
center region of the habitat for the aliens
from larger methane rich icy moons.
We see examples of large O’Neill Cylinder
habitats serving as home to broad multi-species
societies in two popular science fiction works,
the aforementioned titular Babylon 5 and the
Citadel in the game franchise Mass Effect,
which is often thought to have been influenced
by Babylon 5.
The only reasonably practical way we know
to simulate gravity on a space station is
by rotation, and handily such gravity varies
with how far away you are from the central
axis, strongest when farthest away and dropping
to nothing at the axis itself.
So you can vary your gravity in layers of
such a station or have it be more curved in
shape like an egg instead of a cylinder or
have specific radial nodes for more extreme
conditions.
As it is a space station, it's rather easy
to isolate areas in terms of fluids, as you
can build it with such sectioning of air and
water in mind from the outset.
If we’re talking about being on a planet
and buying someone’s warehouse at the port
to use as your own, you can’t simply convert
it from its normal oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere
at about 300 Kelvin to a pure hydrogen environment
at 30 atmospheres of pressure or some near
vacuum helium gas atmosphere at 30 Kelvin.
The warehouse simply wouldn’t be built with
expensive pressure and temperature insulation
in mind.
Truth be told you probably couldn’t do that
room to room on a space station either unless
it was built and internally insulated with
that in mind, but that is more likely on a
space station, where things would tend to
be built with air tight compartments.
In shared environments it may be necessary
to have some or all foods excluded, foods
that can safely be ingested by one species
might be deadly to be in the presence of another.
Or even explosive in some environments, it
is the nature of food to be energy rich afterall,
and some species might have a beverage they
drink in their native Antarctic conditions
that explodes or vaporizes at room temperature.
Worlds will vary in gravity, but it is unlikely
most life forms couldn’t temporarily handle
lower gravity than they were naturally evolved
in, and you also really would not expect to
find life adapted to much more than twice
normal Earth Gravity.
It’s a popular notion in fiction to have
some organism used to crushing gravity, but
there are only three planets in our solar
system with higher gravity than Earth, and
those are Saturn, Neptune, and Jupiter.
Gravity is only 7.5 and 13.7% heavier on Saturn
and Neptune respectively, though on Jupiter
it’s 153% heavier, so any things living
in its atmosphere must be used to that gravity.
Life from such a world is often envisioned
as a giant floating gas bag, whale size or
bigger, and thus might need a separate habitat
just for size considerations.
Folks might ask why it can’t be smaller
but keep in mind that while the gravity on
Jupiter might be very high, the density of
the upper atmosphere is not, it’s a good
deal thinner than air, thus something living
there needs to be huge for it to be plausible
they could have enough mass to have a brain.
Jupiter has no meaningful surface, the atmosphere
goes on for thousands of kilometers until
hitting those pressure zones where conventional
concepts of liquids and gases start getting
vague.
Prior to that, regardless of the pressure,
which can be ridiculously high, you’ve got
no method for staying afloat beyond buoyancy
by some organism sucking in the raw atmosphere
and filtering it for hydrogen, which would
act as a weak lifting gas because of the presence
of helium, argon, and various other gases
in the air that are heavier than hydrogen.
It is a weak lifting gas compared to even
helium blimps on Earth, where you need whale-sized
objects to lift people-sized masses with people-sized-brains,
hence the assumption such life forms must
be giant bags of gas.
It’s even worse on the surfaces of stars,
where gravity is higher but the so-called
surface is just the place where the light
is coming from.
The Photosphere of our sun is a million times
less dense than air and a billion times less
dense than water, so any sun-born life form
would have to be even bigger.
They’d also presumably find the temperatures
of a shared habitat much too cold unless they
kept their living quarters in the station’s
fusion reactor.
We’ll bypass discussing the habitats of
theoretical organisms that might live on a
neutron star for today.
We’ll also skip things living on the nominal
surface of gas giants, which we assume to
have rocky cores or metallic hydrogen layers.
I don’t know how life could develop in such
places anymore than inside stars, nor do I
know what sort of Clarketech would be needed
to make a spacesuit that could handle visiting
such an environment or vice-versa, though
Iain M. Banks played with the notion in his
Cultures series novel “Excession” for
the gas giant dwelling species known as “The
Affront”
So the only remaining options for high gravity
lifeforms are super-Earths, and a thing about
gravity is that if your density is remaining
the same, a planet needs to be 8 times more
massive than Earth to have twice the surface
gravity, and it gets very dubious if such
a world could have ocean and sky and land
like our own world does.
Nor would it be likely to have gravity from
a higher density than Earth.
Earth’s core is largely iron and nickel,
not the densest elements but the densest in
common supply.
I really don’t see much of a case for worlds
with complex life at even 2 gravities, let
alone a spacefaring civilization, but I suspect
they’d handle Earth gravity fine enough,
and we’ll know better once we visit places
with about half our gravity like Mars.
So you likely would not need your station
to provide much more gravity than Earth-normal,
which it could on lower levels, and higher
is easy to do.
Temperature and atmosphere controls wouldn’t
be too problematic either.
Size is an issue though.
If two folks, one from Earth gravity and another
from half-earth gravity want to share a place,
they don’t necessarily need to pick a compromise
value.
In a big space station they can’t be close,
as the gravity one prefers is at half the
station radius of the others, but we could
go smaller.
Cylinder habitats can be any length you want,
it is their radius that is their control factor
for structural strength.
You can also build a cone shape instead of
a cylinder, such a cone would have microgravity
on the inner floor near the tip and full gravity
at the edge near its base.
Halfway up that cone you’ve got half-gravity,
and you need not build the whole cone of course.
Now the cone only needs to be big enough to
avoid causing rotational nausea to its inhabitants,
and we can only speculate about what that
would be for non-humans.
Odds are good bigger organisms handle faster
rotation worse than smaller ones, which is
somewhat okay since you also need to build
a bigger rotating habit to accommodate them
anyway, in part because the gravity does drop
with height and if you’re on the same scale
as your rotating drum habitat, you might get
sick from lower gravity on your head than
feet.
Some critter that is enormous and slow in
nature, thus not needing a body used to rapid
movements, might get very ill or even die
from what we might find normal.
I shouldn’t think you would need folks from
wildly different gravity sharing a small cone
habitat, though we did say we would discuss
alien hybrids and romantic relationships today
and that would be one of many challenges facing
such an alien partnership.
I think a space habitat that had to work around
many such variations of gravity would either
go for that cone shape or some other shape
not symmetric down its rotational axis, instead
of just doing many layers.
The latter approach is more compact but adds
lots of heating and structural strength issues
that the cone-habitat doesn’t have.
So that is probably the main structural approach,
though you could also connect a lot of habitats
together and have compromise zones for each
stretching between.
That would be far more probable in a no-FTL
setup since you would expect to only have
two species sharing a border or maybe three.
Though that’s assuming they don’t share
solar systems.
One could easily imagine a galaxy shared by
as many as five sentient species, dividing
the space not by pie-slices or even stellar
systems, but by individual bodies of preferred
traits.
One species like us inhabits the Earth-like
bodies, another takes the furnace worlds like
Venus, another the gas giants, another the
icy moons, and another lives inside the stars.
I’ve seen this in some science fiction franchises,
but of course it only makes sense if the species
decide to inefficiently live on the native
celestial bodies, not in the more likely scenario
where they just build artificial megastructure
habitats.
Things like wormholes, at least the kind we
see in shows like Stargate, make such planet-focused
colonization possible, in which case an embassy
planet might seem a likely approach to multi-species
interaction and I think there you might just
link several planets together via wormhole.
It depends on how easy the wormholes are to
do and how compact.
As we looked at in our wormholes episode,
such technology isn’t just good for getting
from point A to point B, it lets you have
a wormhole in your closet to a warehouse or
your fridge to an arctic storage vault.
Now another issue facing multi-species habitats
is disease control, and ironically this might
be more dangerous in a technological civilization
in some ways.
Microorganisms and viruses often have difficulty
jumping species.
What makes a tree sick would not make a human
sick, and an alien is even more removed than
that, genetically.
While a virus needs to be tailored to match
your DNA, a microbe doesn’t care about your
DNA at all.
It just cares about the basic conditions it's
growing in, either in your habitat or when
using you as its habitat.
Space travel by its nature makes quarantine
easier.
Folks doing it are likely to be comfortable
with spacesuits and could wear one even inside
if there were concerns about a contagion or
similar.
Nor is an alien race likely to be that contagion,
in the sense of being bacteria-sized, though
you might have complex colony organisms whose
individual components were bacteria.
But we often consider cybernetic, chemical,
or genetic alteration to allow more comfortable
living in off-Earth environments, potentially
a wide variety of environments, indeed that
is the original meaning of the term cyborg,
adapting people for off-Earth living, and
folks sharing a planet with some aliens might
find that you or they or both had made some
alterations to themselves to make living on
that world easier, or living with those other
people, or both.
We talked near the beginning about how humans
colonizing other worlds might seem rather
alien after adapting and aliens adapting to
a similar world might be rather alien to their
homeworld in much the same ways.
Indeed they might use the exact same basic
equipment for augmentation or environmental
protection, some mask designed for filtering
air to a higher concentration of oxygen before
putting it down your lungs is operating on
the same principle even if the mask is designed
for something more like a beak or muzzle.
Such being the case, a computer virus controlling
its hardware probably works on all models,
and concepts like technorganic viruses, viruses
that attack machinery instead of biology or
software, might get all models too.
Another thing to be asking is why folks live
with aliens.
Now we assume this is for trade or some border
interaction but the reality is that it would
be very unlikely two alien species from alien
ecologies who just happened to share a border
would just happen to share anything like the
same physiologies and psychologies and they
do not need to share a room, or a planet,
to engage in trade or diplomacy.
I don’t think most people would want to
spend time with aliens either, or vice-versa,
after the initial novelty when you are likely
to find them physically revolting rather interesting
and vice-versa.
But people have varying and often strange
tastes, and in empires of quadrillions you
are likely to have many millions sharing any
given taste, even the weird ones like wishing
to emulate an alien species with a drastically
different physical form.
What’s more, if you share a border with
some species it is natural to have a greater
interest in them.
Indeed it is quite likely you view them in
a parental or child role, as if you’re sharing
a border with them, given that one of you
is likely millions of years older as a civilization
than the other, that this started as a peaceful
and potentially helpful relationship, like
one gave technology to another and land grants
on many worlds or to many worlds in their
own empire.
Essentially the one civilization uplifted
the other civilization, or species.
When you uplift some species you are definitely
tampering with their society, even if it's
only technological uplifting, not physiological
or neurological uplifting.
Such being the case, you are arguably just
creating a new sub-civilization in your own
civilization, as we might expect if we uplifted
cats, dogs, dolphins, and elephants.
Mentioning those critters is a good reminder
that we already cohabitate with different
species, and that it is very likely we will
create smarter versions of these critters
down the road as pets.
There would obviously be an enormous market
for cats and dogs of higher intelligence,
maybe less so for one of human-level intelligence
but that would be there too.
Once you have time and genetic engineering
in play, these things can progress.
I think we should consider it more likely
than not that within a century or two a lot
of pets in households will have elevated intelligences,
to chimpanzee level or higher.
Beyond that is more iffy in the sense that
most of us would be uncomfortable with something
human intelligent in our home, but on the
other hand, some folks are going to think
that is a good idea and that is likely to
self-perpetuate.
I wouldn’t approve of making things like
dog-people or cat-people as some uplifted
hybrid of our existing pets, but once they
existed I’d disapprove even more of an attempt
to get rid of them, and I suspect most would
feel the same.
Once you’re down that road though you will
have an almost inevitable route to your civilization
having several uplifted hybrid species in
it, some living in your primary civilization
and others perhaps forming their own.
Indeed you might have them sharing households.
As I said I think most of us would welcome
smarter pets but not human intelligent ones,
but that might be a sliding scale, one generation
isn’t comfortable with their pet actually
carrying on conversations with them but the
next one grew up doing so as a kid and always
regretted that faithful fido felt rather stupid
once they were past 6 years old themselves,
so when they had kids they got a smarter dog,
and their kids did the same, and their great
grand-kids fought for uplifted species rights
and land grants.
We discussed some more concepts on this in
our Future of Pets episode.
This gives us our pathway for alien cohabitation
though, and again the ‘aliens’ of the
future are very likely to have ancestors from
Earth too, even if the chain is not direct
because they were created not born.
An artificial intelligence or organism that
was so bio-engineered that it doesn’t even
use DNA, like some silicon-based lifeform
we made, is still likely to regard Earth as
its cradle world even if it has no common
ancestors with anything from that world.
They are likely to have some citizens who
want to visit or immigrate to Earth as a result.
Now making a smarter cat is very different
than making a cat-person hybrid, and I suspect
you’d see not just both but many variations
on the them, like a cat or dog that just had
slightly better paws for manipulating objects,
but after a while the variations will vary
even more, and you would have people born
a cat-person decide they wanted to transition
to either being a more cat or a human form.
With sufficient technology that becomes possible
in a single generation.
Technologically assisted reproduction need
not be terrestrial but could be alien too.
There is not a natural pathway for a human
to have sex with an alien and have a child,
unless it was something like they lay an egg
in you like a wasp and it is born later.
You won’t get half-human hybrids from genuine
aliens anymore than you would get Ents like
from Lord of the Rings by marrying a tree.
But technology alters the situation.
It is quite likely someone who really wants
to be an alien could simply have an android
form made that they controlled remotely or
had their brain implanted into, and it might
not be an android but a tailored organism
instead, like a clone.
In these sorts of scenarios, where co-alien
habitation involves cybernetics or bioforming
to be more like the other, we can assume mostly
the same environment for all parties.
Indeed they might be meeting in the middle.
A pair of species that go to a world that
isn’t their home might both alter to fit
that new world, or just as we might expect
some humans to be xenophiles who want to live
with and maybe even marry an alien, you would
presumably have aliens who felt the same and
gravitated to the same places, those border
worlds.
Realistically an alien obsessed with humanity
is likely to be more open to building a life
together with a human obsessed with their
own species.
If both of them are determined to though,
and their technology is up for it, they could
create hybrid children even if it required
building them in a lab from the ground floor
up.
Now we always need to remember that these
aren’t going to be Star Trek Aliens, ones
that look human except for having some spray
paint on the skin and latex on their head.
Humanoid might be a common enough form, but
presumably isn’t the only one and that leaves
a lot of room for variation anyway, potentially
horrifying variation.
Even then though, it's never the physical
differences that matter most, it’s the cultural
and psychological ones.
Sharing a habitat with a giant squid creature
who looks like Cthulhu’s offspring is one
thing, sharing a habitat with enlightened,
hive aliens who like to keep cute cuddly rabbits
around, so they can eat them alive, or have
children every month and only let the top
10% of those to live past being a toddler
is going to be a lot harder to adapt to than
living with the slimy tentacles.
Whether the aliens originated elsewhere in
the galaxy or are descendants of humans, genetically
diversified by time and space, or uplifted
critters or machine entities we made, odds
are good wherever you had clusters of two
or more bordering each other, there would
be enclaves where they made a go at living
together.
And probably always new ones too, as such
enclaves would eventually become their own
distinct societies if they lasted long enough,
while those other clusters they came from
continued to diversify and became several
groups with shared origins, then eventually
alien to each other too.
One way or another though, in the future there
will be aliens, and there will be folks who
want to live with them and marry them.
Speaking of marrying, I’d done various studios
upgrades when I got married including buying
a DSLR Camera with the intent of upgrading
our Monthly Livestreams, and it helped with
visual quality a lot but my wife instantly
stole the thing for non-livestream days as
she enjoys photographing nature as a casual
hobby and the DSLR was a big upgrade on her
phone’s camera.
If you’ve ever tried doing photography beyond
snapping quick pics with your phone, you know
there’s a lot more to it than just pointing
and clicking, and there is a wonderful course
on using DSLR cameras by Justin Bridges over
on Skillshare, and he covers everything from
the basics up to understanding all the terminology
and practical applications, including how
to buy new lenses.
This year is a great chance to learn new skillshares,
whether it's how to take photographs or how
to cook or how to invest or start a business,
take advantage of these times to enhance yourself
and your toolbox and skillset.
Perhaps you’re trying to adjust to working
in a new environment or just looking to pick
up some new skill or hobby, Skillshare has
a course for it, whether you’re a beginner,
a pro, a dabler, or a master, Skillshare has
thousands of classes on a wide variety of
topics from experts to help you learn.
Skillshare is an online learning community
for creatives, where millions come together
to take the next step in their creative journey,
and Members get unlimited access to thousands
of inspiring classes, with hands-on projects
and feedback from a community of millions.
If you’d like to give it a try the first
1,000 people to click the link in my episode
description will get a free trial of Skillshare
premium so you can explore your creativity.
Act now, and start learning, today.
So today we wrapped our Scifi Sunday episode,
and next month we’ll be having a look at
Exo-Stellar civilizations living in the voids
of space, rather than near stars, for our
mid-month Sunday episode.
We also have our Monthly Livestream Q&A two
Sundays from now to close out the Month of
February, on Sunday, February 28th at 4pm
Eastern Time.
But before that we still have our regularly
scheduled episodes, and this Thursday we will
be looking at Orbital Bombardment, as we return
to our Space Warfare series, then Thursday
February 25h we will look at Colonizing Giant
Stars.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
