This episode is brought to you by World Anvil.
When it comes to adopting nuclear energy,
the saying goes that the best time to plant
a reactor was yesterday, and the next best
time is today.
So today we will be looking at Nuclear Power,
and how and if we should finally embrace it
as a major energy source after decades of
controversy and association with nuclear weapons.
This episode comes out on August 5th of 2021,
76 years after the first and only use of atomic
weapons in warfare, at Hiroshima and Nagasaki
on August 6th and 9th of 1945 respectively.
A full human lifetime has passed since then,
and we’re still not sure how many people
died during the attack itself, or from radiation-related
illnesses afterward, but most figures put
it at well over 100,000.
Thankfully no other atomic weapons have seen
battlefield use, though that would have been
surprising to most folks who lived during
the Cold War that followed.
I was 10 years old when the Berlin Wall fell,
an event that is usually seen as the end of
the Cold War in much the same way Hiroshima
and Nagasaki are seen as the end of World
War 2, and prior to that it was taken as a
given by so many people that atomic warfare
would be the death of our civilization - and
probably sooner than later.
Taken in that context, it makes sense why
nuclear energy seemed to be an easy sell during
the cold war, when nuclear technology was
already being mass produced, and is at least
partially at fault for much of the anti-nuclear
sentiment we saw in the years that followed.
There are rational reasons to fear using nuclear
energy, but also a lot of irrational ones
too, and many that maybe straddle that gap.
For those who remember living under the looming
fear of impending nuclear war, the desire
to scrap every bomb and powerplant could be
understandable.
If you’re going to title an episode Embracing
Nuclear Power, it generally won’t shock
folks that it has a pro-nuclear theme, but
we also aren’t going to bury our heads in
the sand about potential problems with nuclear
power, or the advantages of alternative technologies.
There’s a lot of bad arguments against nuclear
power, but there’s some bad ones for promoting
it too.
For instance, a lot more folks have died mining
coal and drilling for oil than in all of our
nuclear accidents combined.
And while those numbers would be dramatic
to quote, it’s also not a terribly fair
argument against those technologies, let alone
solar, wind, hydroelectric, and geothermal.
A lot of folks have died in accidents building,
maintaining, and installing those power sources
too, but the entire line of reasoning is flawed.
Coal Mining deaths in the US have dropped
from over 2000 a year a century ago to about
10 a year today.
Part of that is due to advances in technology,
and more serious efforts at workplace safety,
but a lot of it is simply a result of practice
and knowledge.
Any technology is going to have risks associated
with it, some obviously a lot more than others,
but we often can’t know how to properly
control and mitigate those risks until we’ve
experienced enough of them to understand where
they exist.
Sadly, it’s hard to do any sort of risk
analysis without a significant amount of firsthand
experience, and statistical analysis only
works with data.
We also need to keep in mind that statistics
can also be used to distort real risks, and
it’s downright contemptible how some anti-nuclear
advocacy groups warp the dangers to suit their
agendas.
However, that also doesn’t justify nuclear
advocates fighting fire with fire, so to speak,
and it’s unfortunately common to see folks
advocating for nuclear by overplaying the
dangers of the alternatives.
The reality is that none of our current energy
generation methods are particularly risky
to their workers compared to how many die
just driving to their job and back, which
we all treat as actuarial noise in our modern
lifestyle.
It’s also important to consider that those
risk-related statistics are hardly static.
I’ve heard folks say that solar power exposes
its workers to skin cancer, and in some sense
that’s probably true, since solar panels
are generally installed in sunnier places,
necessarily outdoors, and likely during the
daytime, meaning that the folks doing that
work get more sun and thus potentially more
skin cancer than someone working in a different
sector.
But even ignoring how many jobs are out in
the Sun, and the apparent health benefits
of sunlight, should that turn out to be a
real risk, we could just make an effort to
encourage the use of sunscreen and UV protective
clothing by folks in the industry.
So to recap: while we’re fairly free about
being pro-nuclear on this show, as we go through
some of the potential options for nuclear
energy and its integration into our society,
we’ll refrain from using fear of its alternatives
as a motivating argument.
Nuclear could only become a main power generation
option if folks were comfortable with it.
Between the constant bashing of renewable
sources, and the fact that much of our current
grid depends on things we feel we know and
understand, it’s unsurprising to see an
attitude toward sticking with the status quo
and the devil we know, rather than taking
a risk on something new.
And on that note, let’s start by discussing
the safety through distance or NIMBY option
of distant and large reactors.
NIMBY, short for Not in my Back Yard, is the
concept for folks wanting something, like
garbage dumps or wind turbines, but nowhere
near their own house.
One way to allay fears of nuclear is just
to have it far from where folks live in large
numbers.
We’ll be discussing small reactors today
too, but smaller is often less efficient in
raw economic terms.
Often bigger power plants generate more power
per unit of fuel too, but an awful lot of
your construction and operating costs also
don’t scale up evenly with size.
For example, you usually would not need to
double your security guards, parking lot size,
roads to the facility, or a hundred other
minor factors by having multiple reactors
at the same site, or a reactor that’s twice
as big.
One of the problems with putting a bunch of
reactors in the middle of a desert or tundra
is that while people may not live there now,
workers and their families would have to move
there, as would a lot of the support personnel,
and everything that comes with supporting
a community, from convenience store clerks
to teachers and doctors.
Being remote also means you’ll lose a lot
of power to transmission on wires.
A lot of what gets generated at a power plant
is lost before reaching your electric outlet,
and the longer the distance between power
plant and consumer, the more will be lost.
In many ways having a large reactor is the
most attractive path for deploying nuclear,
since it lets us run maybe a dozen big sites
far from human habitation, not in anyone’s
backyard except for those who pay for the
mortgage of their backyard by working at said
power plant.
So how do you make it easier to place power
generation far from habitation?
If the big concerns are transmission and isolation,
we’ll have to look toward superconductors
for transmission, and robots for the labour.
Superconductors are still a developing technology,
where the cost of production is changing quite
a lot each year.
Since new technology for the manufacture,
maintenance, and installation of superconducting
power lines is constantly emerging, it’s
hard to say when we’ll hit the point where
it’s practical to replace existing infrastructure
with its superconducting equivalent.
Another recent technology currently being
used to reduce losses over long distances
is Ultra-High Voltage DC transmission, or
UHVDC, and while it’s not as efficient as
superconductors, it remains practical and
cost-effective given our current capabilities.
But while using better trunk lines make large
remote nuclear plants more attractive economically,
it also does the same for solar.
It’s always a clear sunny day somewhere,
and the places with the clearest and sunniest
days tend to be rather remote and uninhabited,
like the desert.
As we’ll see today though, we’re not interested
in an exclusively nuclear future, but rather
one in which it simply plays a very big role.
No single existing power source is likely
to be the cure-all by itself, and a single
power source also has the added downside of
lending itself to monopoly or cartel behavior
in its production.
As for making things safer, robotics are likely
to play a big role in the future of nuclear
power, as they likely will in other sectors
of the economy as well.
This applies not only to what we might immediately
imagine, in terms of avoiding direct exposure,
but to other areas also.
Many issues with nuclear waste come from the
production of tons of barely irradiated safety
gear, and unlike high-level waste, which we’ll
cover soon, such contaminated equipment can’t
be reused, forcing us to issue new gear each
time someone enters the relevant areas of
the plant.
But a robot doesn’t need to constantly replace
its protective layers, or be decontaminated
before going home.
We can even use other robotic systems to perform
remote maintenance on the contaminated robots,
adding yet another layer of protection in
defense of outside contamination.
90% of nuclear waste is this type of low-level
radioactive waste, with intermediate waste
like decommissioning reactor parts making
up most of the remainder, and the high-level
waste being the least common.
That 90% contains less than 1% of the radioactivity,
but it’s an expensive logistical problem
from the constant use and disposal of equipment
that robots can potentially solve.
Putting more robotics into play lowers the
dangers and the costs, both direct and secondary,
improving the economic viability of nuclear
power.
It’s also likely to help with public perception,
since using robots would remove much of the
risk to humans, and many of the dangers presented
by human error, which has historically played
a major role, and is still seen by some members
of the public as an insurmountable barrier
to safety.
Of course, much like superconducting trunklines,
better robotics also improves other power
generation options, especially renewables,
where manufacturing or maintenance represent
a big chunk of the cost.
That’s important to consider, since one
objection I’ve heard regarding nuclear power
is if it’s so economically advantageous,
and if we’ve made so many safety and operational
improvements in recent decades, why aren’t
we using more of it?
There are many reasons for the absence of
nuclear growth, but one of the simplest is
that while improvements have been made for
nuclear power, we’ve also improved everything
else.
For instance, in the half century from when
we landed on the Moon till now, the fuel efficiency
of the average vehicle went from 13 miles
per gallon to 22, a 70% increase, while solar
power went from being a novelty item mostly
seen on hand calculators, to a major form
of power generation today, being more efficient
per panel and vastly cheaper to produce.
So while it’s true that nuclear has been
improving across the board, this is true of
its alternatives, as well.
Speaking of those little solar hand calculators
of my youth, part of the reason you don’t
see many solar powered hand devices anymore
has to do with the development of better batteries,
and the invention of other technologies which
allow us to complete many tasks on our smartphones
or the cloud.
Potential advancements in wireless recharging
and improvements to batteries overall might
strongly impact the future of handheld and
portable devices, and we might also see nuclear
emerge in an ultra-tiny form.
The suggestion of having a small nuclear reactor
or RTG in your pocket might raise some concerns,
so it’s probably wise to put those dangers
into context with a quick look at the different
kinds of radiation.
Of the 4 major types of ionizing radiation,
alpha, beta, gamma, and neutron, one of the
least damaging and dangerous is beta, coming
in under gamma’s weaker cousins X-Rays and
UV light.
Beta particles consist of electrons and their
antimatter counterparts positrons.
The best example of beta radiation is the
Banana Equivalent Dose, a unit of measure
mostly used to make it clear how omnipresent
radiation is and how minimal its impact typically
is.
Bananas contain a lot of potassium, which
has many isotopes, one of which is Potassium-40
with a half-life of over a billion years,
typically decaying into Calcium by emitting
an electron.
This electron gets spat out rather fast, and
is like a little bullet slamming through the
delicate machinery of organic cells.
But because it’s an electron, it interacts
with nearly everything, and so it gets absorbed
by any molecule it happens to encounter pretty
quickly.
In machinery terms, think of a human cell
as an incredibly delicate bit of glassware
or clockwork, a bullet will break something
if it zips through, but if that glassware
or clockwork is housed inside a mountain bunker,
someone shooting the side of that mountain
with a pistol isn’t going to do much apart
from chipping at some rock.
In this analogy, humans have a layer of dead
skin playing the role of the rock; alpha and
beta radiation just can’t penetrate it,
while neutron and gamma radiation are more
like cannonballs or bunker buster missiles.
For this reason, beta emitters aren’t really
a concern when it comes to radiation sources.
There’s also a lot of potassium in your
body, stored in places like your bones.
This includes potassium-40, which even now
is decaying and doing some amount of damage.
As we noted in our Sleeper Ships episode,
where we contemplated freezing folks for the
long journeys to other solar systems, if you
freeze someone for a few thousand years they
will absorb a lethal dose of radiation during
their stasis, just from the slow decay of
isotopes like potassium-40 inside their own
body.
But even ignoring your skin as a protective
layer, a thin sheet of aluminum foil or nearly
anything else will stop beta radiation dead
in its tracks.
But why does all this matter?
While it’s safe and easy to contain, beta
radiation is also fairly easy to use for power
generation, its electrons and it converts
easily to electricity.
Instead of using thermocouples to generate
power from the heat of the nuclear decay,
we can use semiconductors instead.
Because of the relative safety, such devices
are potentially ideal for implanted medical
applications, and other low-power devices.
There are a lot of beta-decaying isotopes
out there, but for compactness you want something
that decays a lot faster than potassium-40
at over a billion years.
Carbon-14 is a nice option, as it’s created
in the graphite blocks of graphite-moderated
reactors, and has a half-life of 5700 years.
This is the method employed in the nuclear
diamond batteries you’ve probably heard
of, and which we discussed a bit more in our
episode on Portable Power.
Another option which was briefly discussed
in our episode on Graphene is using it to
directly capture the kinetic energy of alpha
and beta decay particles, and convert it directly
to power that way.
In fact, that technology is being actively
researched today.
Speaking of graphene, we also discussed graphite-moderated
reactors, and what reactor moderation was,
in our episode “The Future of Fission”,
where we delved into more of the actual function
of reactors.
Today we’re more interested in how nuclear
might find its way into more common usage.
On top of being generally safe, one of the
big concerns with anything nuclear is that
it could somehow melt down.
This simply isn’t possible with radioisotope
batteries, though even with the lack of safety
issues, I suspect a lot of folks would have
concerns over holding a smartphone with an
atomic power supply next to their head, especially
given all the anxiety folks already have about
microwaves and radio signals from their phones.
I think the way these enter regular usage
is probably with implanted devices, where
any concerns of radiation are minimal compared
to battery toxicity concerns or infection
risks of skin-breaching devices, like a power
jack piercing the skin, or from surgeries
to replace a worn-out battery.
Implanted devices are also less likely than
consumer gadgets to get burned up in an accidental
fire, to become litter, or to be improperly
discarded in the general purpose waste stream,
and it’s fair to acknowledge that casual
disposal of radioactive objects - even weak
and short-lived beta emitters - would be a
concern.
Although handily they would be easily detected
and removed from garbage dumps, or even garbage
trucks, as radiation detectors are quite cheap
and compact.
This idea of radiation used for medical applications
is already normalized to some extent, with
most folks knowing about radiation therapy
for cancer, and few people have issues with
going for an x-ray.
There’s also a lot of very low draw devices
where something as simple as a radioisotope
generator is ideal, but they are specifically
for more remote applications, and so don’t
strike me as a path toward humans embracing
nuclear in their daily lives, whereas for
medical and cybernetic implants, you are embracing
such power supplies in a very literal sense.
So that’s the mega-huge option and the micro-tiny-option
covered, and as for its role in space travel,
we examined that in more detail in our episode
the Nuclear Option.
But what about the smaller modular reactors?
What about Thorium?
And can it run your car?
Now years back there was the notion of a Thorium
car making the rounds on social media, and
while that was nonsense, atomic cars are technically
possible.
However, it's hard to get a reactor down to
a size that small and still generate enough
power safely, where you can throttle the reaction
rate so it’s providing only as much power
as needed.
It's much more viable for things like trains,
where they spend far more time in motion,
and have more room for batteries to charge
or drain for use in tandem with the reactor.
It also gives you more space for the reactor
and its shielding.
Plus let us be honest, none of us really would
want to trust the average driver with a kilogram
of radioactive material.
I don’t see much likelihood for something
smaller being used, like atomic buses or trucks,
but I could imagine atomic freight trains
being viable since in addition to having more
space for the reactor and batteries, they’re
also on rails and have fewer risks associated
with them than road-driven vehicles.
It's also technically an option for airplanes,
especially big ones, but the safety concern
here and for trains is less about danger to
the passenger than spreading of radioactive
material in a crash.
I also suspect that many people might be made
uncomfortable travelling in such a vehicle.
Another option might be large nuclear-powered
cargo ships, particularly since this technology
is already in use.
The US concepted it back in the late 50’s,
and the Russians have a few nuclear-powered
icebreaker & shipping hybrid vessels currently
in service - but the problem with it is simply
retraining the workforce to nuclear standards.
If that can be done, much of the infrastructure
to implement it is already in place, thanks
to the demand for nuclear-powered military
vessels, so it might just be a matter of will,
time, and economics.
So I wouldn’t expect atomic vehicles to
be the pathway for nuclear power getting into
our lives more casually - at least, not directly.
Indirectly speaking, electric vehicles powered
by nuclear energy are already a thing, especially
in countries like France, which has the second
highest nuclear power production on the planet,
a close second to the entire US, and the highest
per capita production by far.
But once larger nuclear vehicles have taken
hold, it could potentially spread to smaller
applications.
I’m a physicist; I’ve worked with radioactive
samples, including plutonium, since I was
a teenager.
I know how it works, and I’ve lived near
a nuclear power plant for most of my life.
Riding on an atomic train or plane wouldn’t
bother me, even in terms of a possible vehicle
accident.
All that heavy metal flying around at high
speeds is a lot more lethal than the radioactive
material itself, and if the housing were to
crack open you can evacuate the spot and send
in robots to clean up the easily-detectable
radioactive bits.
People can learn to relax around radiation,
as we do around fire, and we shouldn’t assume
a constant anxiety about all things nuclear
is inherent to humans anymore than we worry
constantly about using flammables like gasoline
or natural gas constantly flowing around us
in our vehicles and homes.
Fire still kills far more people than nuclear
power ever has, but most people don’t get
anxious roasting marshmallows.
We’re not just talking today about how we’ll
get to be comfortable with nuclear power,
but what forms it will take if we manage to
achieve that level of comfort.
It’s possible people might someday carry
around a belt-strapped power plant as casually
as we carry a phone or wallet today, if that
comfort level were high enough, because we
could make things that small, and being the
source of your own wireless power grid has
some advantages.
But let's get to probably the most commonly
discussed scenario these days for nuclear
power to grow into our society: SMRs or small
modular reactors.
First, I should note that the term “small”
is very relative, and what we’re mostly
talking about when we say small is the total
amount of power generation compared to larger
existing plants.
A classic nuclear power plant looks like a
big, almost monolithic industrial site , usually
with a massive concrete cooling tower, and
employs about a small town’s worth of people.
SMRs generate less than 300 Megawatts, and
some designs for Very Small Reactors are only
15 megawatts.
We’ve just discussed nuclear power options
in the sub-megawatt range for vehicles, and
in the milliwatt range for medical implants,
so something generating enough power to supply
thousands of homes doesn’t seem small, much
less very small.
So too, when we say modular in this case,
it mostly relates to construction and maintenance.
With a modular reactor, much of this work
could be done off-site in a controlled factory
environment, then shipped as modules for assembly
at the power plant site, speeding up construction
and repairs, and enhancing both efficiency
and safety.
Factory production also means economies of
scale and standardization in production, reducing
the one-off construction costs and overhead
associated with many larger power plant designs.
As an additional boon, maintenance and quality
control also improve with the standardization
and mass production you get from producing
modules.
I’ll add as an aside that 3D printing might
see a role in power plant construction too,
an expansion on what we see with Oak Ridge’s
Transformational Challenge Reactor program
3D printing that reactor’s core.
3D printing allows remote fabrication, where
hazardous materials might be a factor, and
we can make big 3D printers that print whole
buildings too.
This might rival the advantages of off site
construction, but another advantage to modular
forms is that you can pull out an entire section
and replace it, or move things elsewhere for
safe recycling and disposal.
I think the popular view of SMRs when they
show up is a reactor you could carry in the
back of a truck or on a train car for rapid
deployment, and while there are some models
in development along those lines, I should
note that this is not what’s generally meant
when the topic’s discussed.
The upper end of SMRs, like the 440 Megawatt
Rolls-Royce SMR, is around half the size of
a big power plant, but it still has a construction
time of years, and the plant itself takes
up 4 hectares or 10 acres, which is only a
tenth the size of most existing plants, but
still about 9 football fields’ worth of
space.
So it’s not something you can easily put
in the middle of an existing city, albeit
nobody is really clamoring for building them
that close.
But it’s hardly huge, and we have plenty
of shopping centers that dwarf that; your
typical Walmart plus parking lot is bigger,
and this is still at the larger end of SMR
designs.
On the smaller end, we can start discussing
thorium, though a full discussion is too large
of a topic for today.
Now it isn’t that Thorium reactors are inherently
smaller than uranium or plutonium ones, but
the theory is that they offer advantages in
fuel chemistry with molten salts, and in security
of nuclear materials.
“Meltdown-free” reactors are a technology
we technically already have, they just haven’t
passed the licensing for commercial construction
and use.
But they do exist - molten salt, liquid metal,
and gas cooled reactors are all pushing through
to begin construction within the next 10 years.
As we retire all the old reactors that might
plausibly meltdown, public fear of it happening
will hopefully go away, leaving us mostly
with the remaining concerns about security,
excess waste, and mining.
Worries over people stealing enriched uranium
or plutonium from power plants are rather
overblown in the first place, with the real
concern being the theft of the material while
it’s en route to or from the site.
You don’t send a commando team or group
of thieves into a reactor to grab fuel rods,
that’s not going to work out well for them,
or anyone else involved.
However, it might be a bigger concern for
small reactors with presumably less overall
security.
Also most of the time, when someone is talking
about thorium and security, they actually
mean energy security, in that thorium is a
lot more plentiful and geologically available
than mineable reserves of Uranium, and so
it offers more security of supply in the long
run.
But in terms of nuclear proliferation, Thorium
is also quite attractive, as it’s much harder
to utilize for any kind of weapons production.
Note I said harder, not impossible.
The thorium fuel cycle produces Uranium-233,
in fact it’s the Uranium-233 that’s doing
the power production.
The Thorium is simply there to absorb neutrons,
so it can move from the naturally available
Thorium 232 into Thorium-233, which then Beta
decays into the short lived Protactinum-233,
in turn decaying into Uranium-233.
Ironically one of our big improvements in
nuclear technology is using lasers to separate
the different isotopes, an idea that’s been
thrown around to clean up high-level nuclear
waste, but which would also make separating
Uranium-233 from Uranium-232 much easier,
allowing for Uranium-233 based nuclear bombs.
In the past the US tested a Uranium-233 based
warhead, and found it was otherwise too tricky
to make and too inefficient to be practical,
but laser separation might minimize the benefits
of thorium from a nuclear proliferation standpoint.
All that being said though, you’d still
need some very high-end gear to even make
such an attempt, so it’s worth repeating
that it would certainly still be difficult
and expensive.
I’ve been asked a lot over the years to
discuss Thorium-based nuclear power in more
detail, but I don’t want to shoehorn that
discussion into today’s episode, which is
already longer than average, so we will give
Thorium its own dedicated episode a bit later
in the year.
For the moment, that covers the basic function,
advantage, and concern.
The thorium fuel cycle has a lot of pros and
cons, but also shows a lot of promise.
The exact function of classic and modern uranium
reactors is discussed in more detail in our
episode The Future of Fission, but the reality
is that how they work isn’t terribly relevant
to whether we use them more in the future,
or how we might convince folks that we should.
Fundamentally, the issue is in convincing
folks that radiation is mundane, and not some
dangerous phantasmic boogeyman.
It’s everywhere around us, and really just
particles moving quicker than normal, bouncing
around till they get absorbed.
There’s no perfectly safe reactor, anymore
than there’s a perfectly safe combustion
engine.
Trying to convince folks it’s safe by statistics
isn’t likely to sway them, because we don’t
really process dangers in that way, and it’s
more in how they poke at us psychologically.
Necessity and familiarity are what let us
handle fire and knives constantly without
excessive concerns, and that’s one reason
why communities around these power plants
have really high approval of them, compared
to communities that aren’t.
I’ve spent most of my life living in sight
of one for instance, and never realized how
much distrust other communities had of them
till I went away to college to learn physics,
so it wasn’t a deeper knowledge of physics
and radiation that made me feel comfortable
with them, nor most of my neighbors who aren’t
physicists or nuclear engineers.
As to necessity, that’s a bit debatable
in truth, because solar is shaping up to be
a viable mainstay for power generation.
It’s just that the two of them together,
fission plus the sun’s own fusion giving
us sunlight and wind, especially in tandem
with better batteries and superconductors,
offers us true energy security.
There’s enough uranium to last us a long
time, centuries, even without using breeder
reactors, seawater extraction, or Thorium,
all of which offer far more.
If we can’t get fusion working by then,
then it probably can’t be done, and we’d
then have to switch to solar exclusively at
some point.
But that’s okay too, since space-based solar
is great at Earth’s orbit.
See our episode Power Satellites for more
on that.
A good case can be made that we’ll have
good solar or even fusion long before we run
out of fissionable material, or even conventional
fossil fuels.
Some might argue that investing into a fission-based
power infrastructure simply switches focus
away from other renewables in what is often
perceived to be a deadline or race to get
off fossil fuels.
But as I touched on earlier, while I think
we should use more fission power, I don’t
think that all arguments against it are irrational
either.
There’s also the argument that we should
instead be investing our power infrastructure
money in fusion research, in a type of “Manhattan
Project” to free us from energy production
waste, but there’s no guarantee that it
would succeed, or that it would free us from
that waste, as a reminder, nuclear fusion
produces radiation too.
Ironically, one of the most fear-mongering
concerns about nuclear energy – that it
will encourage weapon proliferation – is
also the one I believe to be the most inaccurate.
It’s a strange way to think of it, but I’ve
always thought of the fight against nuclear
proliferation as a bit of a lost cause.
There’s no particular secret to building
an atomic bomb, and any nation with a handful
of decent physicists and engineers could throw
together a decent design in short order if
they couldn’t just steal or buy one from
another power, so it’s always been more
about keeping the enriched material away.
The thing is, 3D printing, robotics, and improvements
in material processing, not to mention in
conventional explosives and switches, make
building bombs vastly easier than it was in
the 1940s and 50s, so I don’t think you
can really keep a modern nation from having
one except by threats and coercion, and given
that atomic bombs are often seen by nations
as the ultimate defense – people can only
play so rough with you if you’ve got them
– I tend to think of preventing nuclear
proliferation by controlling fissionable materials
and enrichment processes as a bit of a lost
cause in the long term and that other methods
will have to be utilized.
Presumably soft power and other techniques
can be effective, given that most nations
could have nukes if they wanted but still
don’t have them, and there’s really not
much point in having them secretly if your
intent is to use them as deterrence.
Possibly not the most cheerful note to end
on, but if that turns out to be the case,
it might be that the reason we embrace nuclear
power is the same one that probably encouraged
us during the cold war.
If having nuclear power plants isn’t seen
as increasing the odds of anyone getting the
bomb, then a lot of the concerns about those
power plants will simply go away.
Admittedly, it does leave the door open for
a lot of other concerns, but once we can move
past that initial fear, I suspect it’s likely
that solutions for those issues will be easier
to find.
And while we can speculate all day about what
improvements we will make to solar or wind,
or when fusion might finally be ready, all
those improvements are speculative at best,
and we never really know how the economics
of it will work out until it’s actually
done.
We have nuclear now, and we’ve had safer
and more-efficient designs for decades, but
we’ve resisted using them largely because
of fear.
So far, our aversion to nuclear hasn’t made
us any safer, or kept us away from nuclear
war.
Instead, it’s led to a continued reliance
on an ever-dwindling supply of fossil fuels
whose environmental and health effects outweigh
any of the risks that even the harshest critics
have levied on nuclear.
The time to switch to nuclear power isn’t
tomorrow, or a decade from now if alternative
energy sources don’t pan out as well as
we’d hope.
The time was decades ago, and it could have
brought us much more prosperity and much less
environmental harm.
But because we missed a great chance then,
doesn’t mean we shouldn’t adopt nuclear
energy now, merely that we should take the
opportunity while we have the chance for cheaper,
cleaner sources of power.
All that’s holding us back is our willingness
to use it; we’ve never been cowards about
dangerous technology, and shouldn’t let
ourselves flinch from something as tiny as
an atom.
Something that probably represents one of
the biggest background sources of resistance
to nuclear power is just how much media we
have showing post-apocalyptic wastelands,
though they happen to make for some great
fiction.
From video games like Fallout, to classic
pen and paper role playing games like RIFTS.
Now odds are pretty good if you’re a channel
regular you’ve watched or read a lot of
scifi and fantasy, rattled around your fair
share of 20-sided dice, and dreamed up some
worlds or stories for your own amusement or
possibly for a novel.
A lot of the time, the hardest part of turning
your ideas into a game or story is simply
having a good worldbuilding toolset that lets
you quickly create and easily organize all
the ideas going through your head, and if
you’re running an RPG, of making it easily
accessible and clearly understandable to your
players.
That’s where World Anvil, the award-winning
worldbuilding toolset, comes in.
Over the years I’ve helped create settings
for books, video games, and tons of RPGs,
and World Anvil is that tool for creators
I’ve always wished for.
It’s quick and easy to learn, for you and
your players, but has so many additional handy
features, and has an amazing set of tutorials
walking you through how to use them that also
inspires you in many new ways to use them
to improve your setting.
World Anvil’s tools lets you quickly create
settings and flush them out to very deep and
interactive levels, everything from leaving
notes on maps and smaller maps to alternate
timeline tracking for your world’s history.
Whether you’re managing a campaign or writing
a novel, whether you’re making city or dungeon
maps or family genealogies, whether it's scifi
or fantasy genres, World Anvil lets you forge
your setting better and easier than anything
I’ve ever worked with before, and it has
a free version so you can share it with others,
and selectively, so they’re not seeing secret
content.
And you can also incorporate ways to monetize
your content, such as Patreon or Kofi or your
own storefront.
World Anvil offers wikipedia-like articles
for your world setting, interactive maps,
timelines, an RPG Campaign Manager and a full
Novel-Writing Software, all the tools you’ll
need to run your RPG Campaign or write your
novel, and never lose your notes again!
If you’d like to give World Anvil a try
and let it help you forge new worlds, just
click the link in this episode’s description!
So this wraps us up for today but we’re
just getting started for August, and next
week we’ll look at what the next space station
after the ISS will be, before we have our
mid-month Scifi Sunday episode: Alien Artifacts
& Xenoarcheology, on August 15th.
Then in two weeks we’ll look at Fusion Propulsion
designs and concepts for Spaceships before
closing the Month out by heading all the way
out to the Edge of the Universe, on Thursday,
August 26th, then we’ll have our Monthly
Livestream Q&A on Sunday, August 29th at 4
pm Eastern Time.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
