A space elevator might be tricky to do on Earth,  
but they’re much easier on the Moon 
and may be perfect for helping with  
in-situ resource extraction to fuel our 
expansion into the wider solar system. 
The concept of a Space Elevator is one that has 
fascinated folks since the late 20th century,  
and one we have discussed on this show quite 
a few times, but it also has some interesting  
variants worth discussing too. One example of 
that is a Space Tower, something we recently  
did an episode on, and those are enormously tall 
structures that rise up to low orbit rather than  
hanging down from geostationary orbit, relying 
on compressive strength rather than tensile  
strength. We also have an abridged version of 
elevators, such as the Skyhook or Rotovator,  
that a spaceship meets halfway up into the sky 
and uses to get the rest of the way into orbit. 
But another example is an Elevator that is not 
on Earth, but is on planets or moons with very  
different gravities and day lengths, both 
of which really change the dynamics of an  
Elevator and what you need to construct it. And 
indeed whether or not it would make sense to use  
one of those other approaches instead, like a 
Lunar Skyhook or Space Tower, or a mass driver  
or space catapult to simply launch ships down a 
very long track, up to high speed and into space. 
Of course that’s our focus for today, the 
particular case of a Space Elevator on the  
Moon. This may turn out to be the first place we 
end up building a space elevator, and building  
one there rather than on Earth has several 
advantages as well as a few additional challenges. 
In order to discuss those, we’ll first need 
to briefly discuss elevator basics, such as  
material strength, how gravity impacts that, how 
they hang in space, how long they need to be;  
based on day length, and what their throughput 
would be. That last one is a pretty big deal with  
space elevators because they are long in the same 
way a continent-spanning railroad or freeway is,  
and the usefulness of something like that 
is diminished if it can only have one  
train or cargo truck on it at the same time.
Before we discuss those space elevator basics  
though, let’s talk about the Moon. The Moon orbits 
Earth about once a month and critical to today’s  
topic is the reminder that the month-long orbit of 
the Moon around Earth is both the Moon’s day and  
year. It turns very slowly and indeed orbits 
very slowly. Earth orbits the Sun at around  
67,000 miles or 108,000 kilometers per hour. 
At its equator, Earth spins around once a day  
at 1000 miles or 1600 kilometers per hour. The 
speed needed for low orbit around Earth is 17,000  
miles or 28,000 kilometers per hour.
All of those are faster than the Moon, which  
orbits Earth at 2300 miles or 3700 kilometers per 
hour, and rotates on its axis at a mere 10 miles  
or 17 kilometers per hour – which is about the 
speed I usually average when I’m biking with my  
wife, and we don’t aim for speed. It is certainly 
not the supersonic rotational speed of Earth.  
Low orbital speed on the Moon – which 
is very low orbit indeed since there’s  
no atmosphere to rise above, is roughly 
3800 miles or 6000 kilometers per hour,  
not even a quarter what it is on Earth 
and that’s even less than it sounds like  
in the context of the rocket equation 
or kinetic energy of a ship leaving. 
Which begs the question of if we really even need 
some big piece of infrastructure like an elevator,  
tower or mass driver on the Moon, and is 
part of what we’ll be discussing today. 
Now, the key concept of a space elevator is 
that if you can find a material strong enough,  
you can run a tether – or a tower, if we’re 
talking compressive rather than tensile  
strength – between the ground here on Earth and 
orbit. We generally assume the bottom is attached  
to the equator somewhere, though we’ll discuss 
some other options like polar landing sites later. 
If you’re on the ground, you’re whirling around 
Earth’ equator at 1000 miles or 1600 kilometers  
per hour, this obviously isn’t orbital speed 
or all the ground would fly off into space from  
there, and indeed it’s about 17 times faster, 
and that speed is the circumference of Earth,  
at its surface divided by how quick 
the Earth turns, once every 24 hours. 
But the higher you are, the wider the 
circumference of a circle you’re making in that  
same 24 hours, so the faster you would need to be 
going in order to remain in geosynchronous orbit,  
while at the same time, the speed you need to 
orbit the further you are from the planet goes  
down. This is the key concept of a space elevator, 
eventually those two speeds meet, and for Earth  
that’s at what we call geosynchronous orbit, once 
every 24 hours, and the specific version of that  
right over the equator is geostationary, as you 
are orbiting right over the same spot all day. 
Problem is, this is very high up, 22,000 miles or 
36,000 kilometers above Earth, considerably higher  
than the planet is wide. What’s more, we actually 
want to go even higher if we can, since if our  
tether or tower reaches still higher, then the 
velocity it’s whirling around at will keep rising,  
while the speed to orbit drops further, and 
above geostationary it will exceed what it needs,  
giving it a great boost to launch into deep 
space. And you need a counterweight on a  
tether above this height so it doesn’t just 
fall down, towers don’t have this problem,  
they can be arbitrarily tall provided you have 
new materials with enough compressive strength  
or have mastered active support technology. 
See that episode, Space Towers, for discussion. 
Either version needs to be way stronger 
though because they are trying to not only  
hold up the weight of whichever vehicles we have 
climbing up them but also their own weight too,  
and the stronger they are, the less of their 
own weight they need to hold. Every material  
has what we call a breaking limit, the amount 
of that material, based on its tensile strength  
and its density, that it could hold up as 
a rope of uniform diameter in normal Earth  
gravity before it breaks. Picture a rope, 
if long enough and dangled from high enough,  
it will reach a length where its own mass snaps 
it free, its breaking length or breaking limit. 
We have no material that at a uniform diameter 
has a breaking limit of 22,000 miles or 36,000  
kilometers, not even graphene or carbon 
nanotubes, but we don’t need that because  
you can make something thicker or thinner on one 
side, rather than uniform in diameter, tapering  
off like very long cylinder or cone, and so you 
can put the thick end up in space where that  
portion of the tether is practically weightless, 
and you can hang a longer cord that way than the  
breaking length would ordinarily allow. Also that 
breaking length is in normal gravity, and that  
gravity gets weaker as you get further away.
So, we can do a tapered elevator on Earth,  
maybe. There’s a lot of other challenges, 
like weather, and we looked at that more in  
our Space Elevator episode way back.
The Moon is an easier case in almost  
every aspect, one would think. After all 
it has way weaker gravity and no air,  
and both of those factors absolutely do help. We 
have materials that you could build a lunar space  
elevator tether from today, and one that’s tens 
of thousands of miles or kilometers long. So too,  
a space tower is way easier when you have vastly 
lower gravity and no air or weather. By this same  
logic, space elevators should work far better on 
places like the Moon, Mars, or Mercury, which have  
little to no atmosphere, and far weaker gravity 
compared to Earth, and presumably even on Venus,  
which while far closer to Earth’s mass, still 
has a low enough gravity there that we could do  
an elevator there much more easily than on Earth. 
Indeed we need not anchor it to the ground there,  
which is basically lava, we could have a moving 
tether sliding through the upper atmosphere,  
which lets us change some of the dynamics 
involved in terms of altitudes and speeds. 
Our problem here is that except for Mars, whose 
day length is just a little longer than Earth’s,  
all those places I mentioned have way longer 
day lengths, or rotational rates. The term  
geostationary is specific to Earth but to use it 
generically for a moment: Geostationary on Mars is  
8500 miles or 13,600 kilometers above the equator, 
and at a velocity of 3300 miles or 5200 kilometers  
per hour. Very doable and potentially useful, 
but our topic today is not Martian Elevators,  
and sadly it is the best case of those 4.
It still works for our other two planets  
though. For Mercury the geostationary is 150,000 
miles or 240,000 kilometers high and the orbital  
velocity up there is just about 700 miles 
or 1100 kilometers per hour. Venus is worse  
at first glance, at 950,000 miles or 1,530,000 
kilometers height to geostationary, and an orbital  
speed of 1000 miles or 1600 kilometers per hour. 
We can actually cheat on Venus though, and leave  
the bottom of our tower in the upper atmosphere, 
moving faster than the planet rotates, and this  
lets us makes a shorter tether and one a little 
further out of Venus’ gravity well on the bottom,  
though technically this is a non-rotating skyhook.
This episode is not about skyhooks, mostly,  
or other planets, but they illustrate the issue 
the Moon has, and its own geostationary height is  
54,000 miles or 87,000 kilometers up, and the 
velocity up there to maintain geostationary orbit  
is only 540 miles or 860 kilometers per hour. 
Which is all fine except ‘up there’ on a Moon is a  
tricky concept at that scale. The Moon is orbiting 
Earth and is only about 4 times further away than  
that geostationary height would calculate at, if 
it were just the Moon. We can largely -though not  
entirely – ignore the gravity the Moon has on an 
Earth Space Elevator since geostationary height  
over Earth is around a tenth the distance to the 
Moon, not a quarter, and the earth is 80 times  
more massive than the moon and 80 times stronger 
in its gravity as a result, or 8000 times stronger  
than the gravity the moon exerts at that distance.
What that means is that not only does Earth  
massively perturb anything orbiting the Moon 
that far away, but it’s actually stronger  
than the pull of gravity the Moon exerts at the 
Moon’s own geostationary distance. Or in summary,  
there isn’t any geostationary orbit over the Moon. 
We’ve got several materials we can already mass  
produce that are strong enough, even for that 
enormous length, but there’s currently no known  
stable place for a classic elevator concept.
Now, does that mean we can’t build it?  
No, we’ve got a number of options at this 
point, including a modified elevator option,  
skyhooks, space towers, and the mass driver 
approach, and our real question is what is best,  
but let’s discuss the basic lunar elevator.
One of our options is to abandon aiming for  
geosynchronous and instead aim for Lagrange 
Points. Every two body system has 5 Lagrange  
points, Earth has 5 with the Sun, and 5 with 
the Moon. Jupiter’s has 5 with the Sun and two  
of them, the L4 and L5 Trojan Points, which are 
60 degrees ahead and behind it, have their own  
large asteroid fields. These are reasonably 
stable places to put artificial constructs,  
especially if you have the option for some station 
keeping, but the L1, L2, and L3 points are also  
options. L1 is always in between the two objects, 
and closer to the less massive of the pair,  
L2 is behind them, and L3 is on the exact opposite 
side. How far the L1 and L2 are is dependent on  
the mass ratio of the two bodies in question, 
and in the Earth-Moon case, it’s around 5/6ths  
of the way to the Moon from Earth to L1, about 
200,000 miles or 330,000 kilometers from Earth,  
and about 7/6ths that distance to out past 
the Moon from Earth to L2, about 240,000  
miles or 385,000 kilometers from Earth, and that’s 
basically where we put the James Webb Telescope. 
For Lunar Space Elevators, the Earth-Moon L1 and 
L2 are both attractive options. If you’re curious,  
all 5 are potentially usable, but for L3, L4, 
and L5 we would be talking about making a big  
long ring along the Moon’s orbital path 
around Earth. There are actual reasons  
why you might do that in a more distant 
future with a large build up of orbital  
habitats and infrastructure in Cis-Lunar Space 
but we’ll save that discussion for another time. 
L1 and L2 are, in the Moon’s case, actually Lunar 
Synchronous, the equivalent of geosynchronous,  
but for the Moon. They are for any tidally locked 
moon around its planet, objects in 1:1 Orbital  
Resonance, which is true of very nearly every 
moon, and would be for tidally locked planets  
too. There are none in our solar system, Mercury 
is in 3:2 Orbital Resonance, rotating 3 times for  
every two orbits around the Sun, and probably 
isn’t tidally locked simply because of how  
eccentric its orbit is, and we tend to assume 
most cinder-like planets or even habitable ones  
around the smaller red dwarf stars are tidally 
locked, and in all these cases their L1 and L2  
points will be the places to put elevators, and 
also out from which you would be putting any  
arrays of solar shades to cool off the lightside 
or give it a day/night cycle, and at the L2,  
any mirrors for lighting the night side.
Getting back to the Moon, the L1 and L2 are  
not stable for the Moon and only would be in the 
case of a perfectly circular orbit and with few  
other bodies in play to perturb things. When the 
Earth and moon are closest to each other, perigee,  
the distance to L1, or L2 for that matter, 
from the Moon’s surface, actually changes. 
Pluto and its moon, Charon, is about as stable as 
that arrangement gets of known bodies and there,  
with both of them being tidally locked, you can 
actually forge a cable right between the two,  
surface to surface, we dubbed that construct the 
Acheron River in our episode Colonizing Pluto,  
but it should be noted that you could set 
up ring and tether systems between moving  
bodies like the Galilean Moons of Jupiter.
In our case, if we built an orbital ring  
around Earth out at geostationary, or further 
out for that matter, we could run a tether  
from that to the Earth-Moon L1 point, it would 
need to move around that ring, and fairly fast,  
but at speeds where a direct transfer is feasible, 
allowing a rail car to leave any point on Earth,  
and assuming it was air-tight, able to deliver 
cargo or people directly to the Moon, non-stop  
if timed well. That’s a little more far future 
than we’re discussing today, though it requires  
no super-advanced technology, and we’ll discuss 
it more next month in our episode Interplanetary  
Infrastructure. It’s mostly tricky because 
the Moon’s distance to Earth is not constant. 
Our Moon is not particularly eccentric in its 
orbit but it still varies by about 10% in distance  
from when it is closest to Earth, perigee, and 
furthest from Earth, apogee. The upside about  
unstable transport tethers though is that you 
can do a lot of station keeping just by being  
a bit smart and calculated about when and how 
you move and release mass from the tether. You  
can adjust tether length, by having winches and 
excess length at either end or at midpoints even,  
and just spool or unspool it as needed.
Also tethers are not super-big and massive,  
so on planets with decent magnetic fields you can 
use solar panels to run electromagnets to give  
them corrective shoves. Our moon can’t really go 
that path but at the same time, an alternate use  
for a very thin solar mirror besides shining light 
on a photovoltaic or thermal power generator is to  
bounce off incoming photons in a chosen direction 
and you can do station-keeping with that too,  
if you’re using solar-sail thin panels.
That does allow some atypical scenarios  
for elevators on low-gravity objects with 
low spin rates and no real stable spots.  
That generally means moons though, most 
asteroids spin faster than Earth does,  
often rotating in a few hours. Objects tend to 
have their rotational rates slowed when they  
get snatched up as moons of other bodies, and it 
bleeds off until their rotational rate matches  
their orbital rate, or they get ‘tidally locked’.
In the moon’s case a lot of correction can be made  
using all the metal or fuel being moved off 
the surface, so the stability of that orbit  
isn’t too big a concern. The question then is 
if you want the L1 or L2 for your elevator,  
and if you want to ship from the equator, as 
the poles are often of more interest to us on  
the Moon than the equator is. Though I was at 
a great talk recently by my friend Pascal Lee  
who made the case that the lunar polar regions 
aren’t necessarily such great places to do in  
situ extraction as we’d been thinking they were.
The main reasoning though was that we think we  
have a good chance of finding water ice there 
on those poles. Particularly the South Pole,  
and this is handy because you can actually run 
a tether from the south pole to the L1 as well. 
As we’ve noted in other discussions of space 
elevators, one option for avoiding using the  
equator for these is to have three or more tethers 
with non-equatorial anchor points on the planet  
or moon below, at least 1 in each hemisphere, 
rising to a shared geostationary terminus point  
and acting like guy wires on it. This requires a 
stronger tether, though not a lot stronger, and we  
have more than strong enough materials for a lunar 
elevator so options like this become possible.  
We also don’t necessarily need to use more 
than two and one in both hemispheres for a  
lunar elevator. You need not have your tethers 
attached to the equator or poles for that  
matter, it lets you put them anywhere.
Critically it isn’t a bad idea to do a  
pair of polar tethers, one from each pole, and to 
equatorial tethers running out to L1 and L2. They  
both serve different functions. Indeed you might 
space 4 equatorial sites out at 90 degrees around  
the equator with each terminus station at L1 and 
L2 connected to 2 of those equatorial sites and  
each of those poles, and you can now correct a lot 
of perturbation simply by having big winches on  
those tethers that can lengthen or contract each 
tether, and you have 4 lines up to each station,  
and down from them. More is better in my 
opinion, both multiple tethers running a  
few meters apart and parallel, and more sites, 
which helps a lot if one gets damaged and severed. 
The handy aspect here is that there are plenty 
of mundane materials that can do the job,  
and for a context, while these cables might 
be made arbitrarily thick or thin depending  
on anticipated throughput, a wrist-thick cable 
of most of the materials contemplated for this  
on the moon would mass in the vicinity of 
10 kilograms a meter or 10 tons a kilometer,  
and be able to move cargo like a freight train 
would. But the basic design puts forth calls for  
a pencil-thick cable coming in at something like 
88,000 pounds or 40,000 kilograms for the whole  
lunar elevator and allowing a tether-crawler 
of significant capacity. You start small and  
build up, or just add more parallel tethers.
You can have an internal power supply in such  
a crawler but we can also run a power cord 
along the tether or beam energy to it. So too,  
you can run fiber optics up it to allow very 
high bandwidth communications, and the L1  
point is always visible from Earth, something 
that is not true of the back side of the moon,  
or even a lot of the crater locations we might 
be preferring for lunar installations. So you can  
have a continuous and dedicated communication 
portal from Earth to any point on the Moon. 
Incidentally, in practice, while you can 
build a non-tapering tether for the Moon,  
you probably still would taper the tether to 
be widest at the Lagrange point and skinnier at  
the connections to the Moon or to any extending 
whip-like segment going out even further. Also  
note that this need not be a single tether, 
you can multi-strand, have connection points,  
and have redundant cables running parallel that 
a crawler could connect to multiple of, and to  
allow two-way traffic or passing slower crawlers.
Alternatively, you can do a non-tapering tether,  
one whose thickness or cross-section remains 
the same, and put it on double-pulley setup,  
one at L1, one down on the ground, and this 
is considered easier to repair. It has the  
downside of requiring a wide strut to 
keep the cables from tangling but you  
have similar concerns for cables running 
close together in parallel for redundancy.  
We don’t necessarily need redundancy here 
either, the crawler is an air-tight pod and  
there’s time to react to a severed 
cable or pods that skip the tether. 
Earth-side you can build a parachute in for 
instance, and on the Moon we might strap on  
an emergency fuel tank to allow options. It’s 
even possible a liquid oxygen air reserve might  
do double duty as an emergency fuel supply, or 
rather oxidizer, since the majority of the weight  
of many rocket fuels is oxygen and oxygen might 
also be a common byproduct of industries on the  
Moon and regularly shipped out in this form 
for use on space station and ships. So too,  
we often imagine shipping fuel from the Moon to 
ships in cis-lunar space, and having a rig up  
there that allowed cargo pods to use that in 
an emergency is plausible enough as a safety  
feature. There are a lot of other options too, 
but critically that low gravity gives us way more  
reaction time to help or rescue a damaged 
or de-railed pod or with a broken tether. 
Estimating the actual cost of a tether is a bit 
of a wild stab in the dark, you’ll get figures  
of anywhere from ten-thousand to a million 
dollars a pound to get something to the Moon,  
but a price tag of several billion dollars 
seems plausible, if we’re shipping from home.  
That’s viable of course, but the good news is 
that some of the material options for a lunar  
elevator would permit plausible manufacture on 
the Moon from in-situ resources, which is handy  
if you want to shift from pencil-thick cables 
to several redundant wrist-thick megaton cables  
running to multiple sites. We mostly want such 
a tether for shipping things we’re making on  
the Moon up into orbit, not for just a handful of 
rovers or astronauts, so it would seem plausible  
that an effort to get in-situ production of 
fuel or construction materials going on the  
moon could include the fabrication of the thicker 
tethers for the elevator to ship stuff off with. 
The upside of the L1 tether of course is 
to ship stuff back home to Earth easier,  
but also to make landing easier. The Moon has no 
atmosphere to aerobrake in, and while its gravity  
is low, it isn’t trivial etiher. You need fuel 
for that descent. The upside of something like  
a mass driver, a giant electromagnetic catapult 
tube to shoot spaceships or cargo pods out of,  
is that it can fire things out into space without 
fuel and is very easy to build in a low gravity  
and airless environment. The downside is that 
you can’t really land on that and bleed speed  
off. It is hypothetically possible to bleed 
speed off a ship by that same arrangement,  
instead of adding it, but that is trying to 
thread the eye of a needle while moving over  
a thousand miles per hour. And if you mess 
up, you wreck that ship, that mass driver,  
and anything or anyone on that ship or nearby.
Alternatively, you can make a rendezvous with  
a space station at L1 much easier, using fuel to 
slow your relative velocities to a crawl before  
docking, and we do have some tricks we discussed 
in Colonizing Ceres for bleeding speed off ships  
without using fuel for those seeking to 
rendezvous with larger airless moons and  
asteroids. Often this might be by basically 
harpooning the ship with another tether. 
Incidentally the L2 tether offers us the 
advantage of interplanetary launch. That  
L2 point behind the Moon is of interest as a place 
constantly shielded from Earth’s transmissions for  
doing good astronomy. As mentioned, that’s 
where we put the James Webb Telescope and  
others and for that reason, and it will only 
get more crowded in the next century or two,  
but the value of a tether extending to there 
and beyond is that it’s a great slingshot for  
hurling ships out into the deeper solar system.
Earth orbits the Sun quickly, and far more quickly  
than the Moon orbits us, but you can add the 
Moon’s orbital velocity to ours for the purpose  
of launching something out to Mars, the Asteroid 
Belt, Jupiter and so on. You can add even more  
with that L2 tether, and you could let that tether 
extend as far as your materials could handle it,  
keeping in mind that you are increasingly 
far from both the Moon and Earth’s gravity  
exerting force on the tether. Though it should 
be noted that things accelerating down a tether  
are yanking on it at their own acceleration 
rate, so the faster you try to accelerate,  
the more stress you put on that tether.
And for a fixed tether or track length,  
your final speed is very dependent on how fast 
you can accelerate. That is one advantage a  
mass driver has on an airless body like the Moon 
over a tether, on the Moon it only needs to rise  
high enough to clear any large crater rim walls 
the track needs to pass through to stay fairly  
straight and avoid having the ship slam into them 
either. There’s no air to climb above to escape  
drag forces like on Earth. That track can be 
arbitrarily massive and pinned deep to the ground,  
so your ship or launch platform can be both 
very massive and haul down that thing in a  
way a tether doesn’t accommodate as easily.
The existence of a lunar elevator and lunar  
mass driver do not conflict with each other, each 
has their value and pros and cons, and a lunar  
mass driver can contemplate blasting things into 
space at speeds high enough to reach other planets  
in weeks for instance, and we’re not really 
contemplating that for tether-based launches. 
We also have the abridged versions of 
space elevators, the skyhook or rotovator,  
which involves the same basic mechanics but, 
much like in our Venus case, is not attached  
to the ground or sea, but just dangles in the 
air, and we can put it on a drift rather than  
geostationary or lunar stationary orbit. 
You can also whirl them around like bolas,  
and all of this works way better without air 
and with lower gravity. They’re a great option  
when a space elevator isn’t as practical.
See the Skyhooks episode for more details  
on how those work. But for the Moon, I’d imagine 
the more likely deployment scenario would be a  
low orbit skyhook that orbited every 2 or 3 
hours and revolved rather than just dangled,  
to achieve a near stationary lowest dip 
point at the top of crater wall or tower  
near a mining site or fuel refinery to swing that 
cargo back up into orbit or fling it off to Earth. 
Speaking of towers, you might wonder if we 
might just build a space tower off the Moon,  
where no wind and low gravity make building 
enormously tall towers much easier, and this  
is definitely an option as an alternative to a 
dangling tether. Indeed, you can even use them  
in conjunction to allow a space tower that rises 
out of the atmosphere and strongest gravity and  
has a space elevator connecting to its top or a 
skyhook that swings nearby periodically. Or your  
tower stretches above the atmosphere and that’s 
what your mass driver connects to for the top of  
its track to allow an exit over the atmosphere. 
But I don’t see the need on the Moon, with the  
exception of towers at the poles that would be out 
of the Moon’s shadow and thus eternally sunlit and  
handy for solar power, and that requires no great 
structural strength. I can definitely envision  
shorter, wider conventional towers that had the 
space elevator tether connected to their tops. 
So, should we build a Lunar Elevator? For my 
part I’d say yes. I think it’s definitely a  
phase 2 or 3 project for developing the Moon, the 
sort of thing that waits until you have permanent  
installations already functioning. This is 
why the polar or non-equatorial option for  
the elevator is handy – you can potentially 
run your elevator to a pre-existing base,  
or bases, when that stage of development 
is reached. No special apparatus is needed  
at the connection site besides a winch to 
allow tightening or loosening of the tether,  
and pre-existing landing facilities 
can still be converted if desired. 
In the end, it is a great place to test 
and practice with bigger scale tethers,  
close to home but not so close as to represent 
a hazard, so we can try them on the Moon,  
same for skyhooks or mass drivers too, and 
get that technology perfected before we try  
deploying them on more distant planets, 
moons, and asteroids. Or even on Earth. 
In the end, we always talk about the Moon as a 
gateway to space, literally and metaphorically,  
and this is just one more example of how 
that’s true, and who knows, one day you  
might be able to take an elevator or train ride 
straight from any city on Earth to the Moon.
We'll get to the full upcoming schedule in a 
moment but next week’s episode, the Last Planet,  
is about life in the very distant future, at the 
end of time, and one of the common solutions to  
surviving that end is to time travel back to an 
earlier universe, we don’t look at that option in  
the episode but finishing production up on that 
made me want to discuss time travel again and I  
ended up writing the episode Retrocausality, 
which folks who vote in Episode Image Polls  
know has come in as a runner up a few times now. 
I decided to do it as a bonus episode over Nebula,  
and a chance to discuss what physics and quantum 
really tell us about time travel and cause and  
effect minus a lot of techno-speak and handwaves 
that people often use for the topic. You can see  
Retrocausality now over on NEbula, our streaming 
service, and it’s just the latest of dozens of  
bonus episodes and extended editions of our show, 
which you can see, along with every episode of  
this show, video and audio, without ads or sponsor 
reads, and days before they’re out anywhere else.. 
If you subscribe to Nebula, not only do you get to 
see every regular episode of SFIA a few days early  
and ad free, but we have lots of bonus content, 
including extended editions of many episodes,  
as well as bonus and exclusive content, like 
Retrocausality, Nomadic Miners on the Moon,  
Orch Or & Free Will, Conformal Cyclic Cosmology, 
Planets Vs Megastructures, Space Freighters,  
Colonizing Binary Stars, and many more.
Nebula has tons of great content from an  
ever-growing community of creators. Using 
my link and discount it’s available now for  
just over $2.50 a month, less than the price of 
the drink or snack you might have been enjoying  
during the episode, and it goes to supporting 
new content from myself and other creators. 
When you sign up at my link, 
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur  
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only get 
access to all of the great stuff Nebula offers,  
you’ll also be directly supporting this 
show. Again, to see SFIA early, ad free,  
and with all the exclusive bonus content, 
go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
So that will wrap us up for today but 
we’re just getting started for August.  
And next week we’ll head trillions of years 
into the future to the end of time and the  
final twilight on the Last Planet. Then it 
will be time for our monthly Scifi Sunday,  
on Cyborg Armies, followed by exploring where 
we might get water and other volatiles in space,  
with Comet Mining. And after that we’ll 
look at the concept of Devolution, and ask  
if fictional mutant degenerates like Morlocks 
and C.H.U.D.s might be possible in our future. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
