This episode is brought to you by Brilliant!
There’s a lot of discussion about if we are  
real or merely in someone’s simulation 
or dream, but what if we are real,  
we just died centuries ago and keep 
getting resurrected over and over again?
Some call it the Simulation Argument, 
some the Simulation Hypothesis,  
and it’s a concept that in many ways predates 
the computer age, but fundamentally comes down  
to asking if we are living in a dream or computer 
program, or fundamentally, if we are real. 
Today, we will be looking at the specific case 
of Ancestor Simulations, and indeed this is the  
actual case for computer simulation discussion but 
that tends to get left out of most discussions,  
and in my opinion is a lot of why the topic is 
both controversial and confusing to folks. I  
want to start from the outset, since this topic 
tends to draw some reckless talk and clickbait,  
that I’m not going to prove to you today 
that you are or are not in a simulation,  
it is not something that you can easily prove 
either way, and it is a real possibility  
but nothing approaching a certainty or 
likelihood that we’re in a simulation.  
We will want to explain why today and also how 
concepts like ancestor simulations are distinct  
from classic notions of us living in a dream.
The basic notion is hard to credit to anyone and  
indeed the idea we’re in a dream, probably dates 
back to the dawn of humanity – or to whenever  
the dreamer started dreaming. However it 
was philosopher Nick Bostrom who developed  
the formal argument a generation back, and it is 
very specific to the case of Ancestor Simulations,  
we’ll detail those more in a bit but 
summary form is: Its where a civilization,  
centuries ahead of us currently, likes 
to runs simulations of its actual past,  
or also very parallel ‘what if’ scenarios. That’s 
very important to the concept as we’ll see. 
Now by default, folks discussing Simulation 
Argument, tend to just mean any simulation or  
virtual world with people like ourselves 
in them, but that does not fit the case.  
We’re not really talking about if some person 
or persons with access to vast computing power,  
built tons of virtual universes below 
them, of any traits and style they wanted,  
and that case is really no different than 
notions such as black hole mini-universes:  
the idea that every time a black hole forms, 
a new universe is big-banging out somewhere.  
These aren’t really discussing that you might be 
in a fake Universe, in the sense of mimicking a  
prior period of your own civilization, it's simply 
saying that Universes can spawn children, by  
nature or intelligent action, assembled underneath 
high levels like a family tree, and the flavor is  
more like a child-universe or sub-verse rather 
than more aquarium-reality flavor that simulated  
civilizations often seem to have, existing for 
entertainment or research, living in a fishbowl. 
There are other reasons you might do an ancestor 
simulation besides those, but there’s an almost  
unlimited number of reasons to make sub-verses 
and these in generic format can’t tell you much  
about the simulator. See, if I simulate the 19th 
Century Earth, those living inside that simulation  
speculating on if they’re real, will be 
in a Universe with the same physical laws  
and culture of our 19th century, and from which 
our 21st century existence is derived. So they can  
usefully speculate about us and our motives. On 
the other hand a person might simulate a Universe  
utterly different in physics and geometry from our 
own, and by that same reasoning, if our universe  
is simulated, but not an ancestor simulation, 
the simulators might not be using ‘computers’,  
because they might come from a Universe which 
has no atoms, where gravity is a billion times  
stronger, where there’s 5-dimensions and 
neutrinos mass as much as neutron stars,  
and where concepts like entropy and 
thermodynamic limits simply don’t apply.  
Indeed even the laws of mathematics might differ.
Now, mind you, some rough sketch of a fantasy  
world on a piece of paper can be argued to be a 
simulated universe itself, and those can often  
grow in complexity, like Tolkien’s Middle 
Earth or countless other fictional settings,  
and those details in those fictional settings 
actually do tell us a lot about humanity and  
the author and the world they live in, but mostly 
only make sense as clues when we already know the  
details of that Universe. Tolkien’s Middle Earth, 
which could be argued to be an ancestor simulation  
since it’s supposed to be set in the distant past 
of our own world, implies a lot of normal physics,  
gravity and chemistry and so on, but rarely gives 
any detail. At no point in the story did Frodo or  
Bilbo announce how fast an object falls in terms 
of local gravity or that they’re breathing oxygen.  
And indeed, that setting, like so many fictional 
ones, has some hard breaks with science.  
Middle Earth has had periods without a Sun, 
in favor of glowing trees or gemstones,  
or where it was Flat, before Numenor sank.
Now these worlds are not simulated to the degree  
requiring consciousness by the characters in them, 
presumably, and ours, if it is simulated, does.  
It is possible that we’re really simple compared 
to the unfathomable supermind that built our  
simulation, but nonetheless, we’re conscious, 
or at least I am, and you presumably can be  
confident you are too. Cogito, Ergo Sum, I think 
therefore I am, as Descartes put it, though the  
assertion is not that we are real, merely that you 
cannot usefully doubt your own existence, since  
someone would have to be doing that doubting.
So the Simulation Argument starts with saying  
that, either it is possible to simulate a previous 
age of your world, complete with simulated minds  
that could think they were real, or it is 
not, then, it says that if it is possible,  
we must ask if future civilizations 
would do it or not, and if so, how often? 
The basic reasoning that folks often cite for 
giving a probability of our real-ness or not,  
is to use the Principle of Indifference. This is 
the philosophical or mathematical notion that in  
the absence of any evidence pointing one way 
or another, you should assume your various  
solutions or outcomes are equally likely. As 
a quick example, if you run along a corridor,  
chasing someone and lose sight of them, then come 
to a room at the end with three closed doors,  
you have to initially assume each option 
is equally likely as the way they fled,  
a 1 in 3 or 33.33% chance the person you’re 
following took a particular door. If it was  
actually three thousand people running 
down that corridor - at different times,  
so that you had no reason to think any of them 
were influencing each other’s choices - you’d be  
assuming about a thousand ran through each door.
Now, in practice, you can often find some  
evidence; footprints, fingerprints or wear 
and tear on the door knobs would be examples.  
So too, we could speculate that right-handed folk 
might be more likely to use the right-hand door,  
or that they are painted red, green, and blue 
and folks tended to be more likely to go through  
the green door and least likely to go through 
the red. Also we have to consider that we’re  
focusing on the doors to exclusion, and ignoring 
options like them having fled through an air duct,  
hidden in a corner or hanging from the ceiling, 
or possessed an unexpected ability, like turning  
invisible or teleporting. And especially when 
dealing with intelligent actors, you need to  
contemplate them intentionally acting atypically.
Nonetheless, that’s the idea behind the principle  
of indifference, and it’s a solid one, when 
presented with 2 or more plausible outcomes  
and without any real evidence indicating which 
is more or less likely, we assume they are all  
about the same until we can demonstrate otherwise, 
and emphasis on this being a working assumption.  
In a moment, I’ll declare that the odds 
of you living in an ancestor simulation  
are 33% and that is going to be based on the 
principle of indifference. That number is not  
likely to be the real odds, merely that those are 
the hypothetical odds given to make this point.  
Indeed, technically, there are no odds, you either 
do or do not exist in one, but where we’re trying  
to get the odds, the fact that something 
can be assumed to be one-in-three because  
we simply have no evidence to the contrary, 
is not a compelling argument of any kind. 
I felt like that needed saying upfront, because 
a lot of folks get some existential terror at the  
idea of being in a simulation and folks often 
talk about what the odds are as though we had  
actual evidence rather than a probabilistic 
argument. In and of itself the basic argument  
for the simulation hypothesis is the same 
as saying there’s a 50/50 chance someone I  
meet is a serial killer, because people 
either are or are not a serial killer,  
thus, by Principle of Indifference, anyone I 
meet has that 50% odds. That’s not the case,  
and we have data indicating how likely people 
are to be Serial Killers and it's pretty rare.  
We could also set that up as saying we found a 
dead body and assumed it was either natural causes  
or murder, and if the latter, either it was done 
by someone who rarely murders people, or who does  
it a lot, three options: natural causes, murder 
by an amateur, or serial killer. In the absence  
of any other evidence we just say it’s 1 in 3, 
that’s the idea. Then we try to find more evidence  
to adjust those numbers to better represent 
reality, it's just kinda hard to do that when  
the question in mind is if we live in reality.
Now for the Simulation Argument, there are three  
propositions, and those are that, it either is 
or is not possible - in a particular universe,  
with either the same, or different natural laws - 
to make ancestor simulations, and that if it is,  
civilizations either choose not to make 
ancestor simulations or they do and do it a lot.  
Such being the case, it can be assumed that 
there’s a 1 in 3 chance that the third option  
is true, that ancestor simulations are possible 
and that civilizations opt to do them a lot;  
that once folks have the technology to emulate a 
mind or reality, they often replicate some period  
of their past, including various people who aren’t 
alive anymore – their ancestors, whom they are now  
simulating, and who believe they are real.
The follow-up, is the idea that if we’re assuming  
proposition 3 is true, that civilizations who can 
simulate, do so frequently, then that means that  
actual civilization did once experience the year 
2022, when this video airs, but they have also  
simulated many times, maybe millions of times. 
The folks in those simulations, who are fully  
emulated human minds, do not know they are in a 
fake copy or ‘what if’ scenario of the year 2022,  
like the one with where that war or market crash 
or disease variant did end up happening as opposed  
to being narrowly avoided. Or the simulation 
where nuclear war didn’t happen, for those who  
want to go vacation in their innocent youth, 
before the bombs landed and all the survivors  
were techno-barbarian cyborg mutants.
And I do not know if I’m in the original  
or a copy, and if there’s 99 copies and 1 
original, there’s only a 1% I’m in it. So in that  
case, there’d be a 1 in 3, or 33.33% chance I was 
in a reality where ancestor simulation was common,  
and a 99% chance I was in such a sim, 
there’s an even 33% chance I’m a sim. 
Now this is not wrong, the logic applied is 
entirely proper and functional. It doesn’t  
mean it's right either, and as an example, we 
can add more options by not being so binary.  
For instance, we could say that simulation 
might be physically possible but civilizations  
capable of doing it may be automatically prone to 
self-obliteration through some crazy AI running  
amok. Or that it's possible, but almost always a 
very brief phase leading to a few dozen simulated  
universes that are few in number or occupants, 
and get banned or unpopular almost right away.  
Either makes us have a fourth option and changes 
the reasoning, by Principle of Indifference,  
to 25%. This doesn’t somehow mean you’re actually 
more or less likely to be real and not a sim. 
What’s different about an ancestor 
simulation idea over classic: ‘life is  
a dream’ concepts? Or is there no difference?
Well, there is a real difference, and I think  
folks miss that when discussing Bostrom’s concept, 
by assuming it’s merely a modern version of  
dream-existence. It is not computers that make the 
simulation argument different either, not exactly.  
That’s really just a substrate, the specific way 
the new reality is made, and when we’re talking  
about simulated realities in general, you can 
use the words Programmer and God interchangeably.  
A Universe dreamed up by deity, like with Brahma 
of Hinduism, who sleeps and dreams our Universe,  
probably does not have a brain made of neurons, 
our brain’s substrate, anymore than silicon  
wafer chips, a computer or AI’s substrate. Which 
might also be made of other materials and in a  
simulating universe might be made of materials 
that don’t even exist in our simulated or dreamed  
reality. Again, the computer and programmer versus 
dreamer or deity part, is pretty semantic here. 
Instead, what’s relevant is the ancestor 
simulation notion itself, which speaks to  
motivation. A little bit ago we talked about 
how by Principle of Indifference there’s a 1  
in 3 chance we’re in a simulated reality and 
the other two thirds were a Universe where  
simulating minds of our complexity, is simply not 
possible or was possible, but simply was not done. 
The problem though, is that that first clause 
is essentially a throw-away in modern context.  
We’ll be able to build computers big 
enough to emulate a human mind and more.  
We probably already have supercomputers powerful 
enough and now it's more a coding issue,  
and a recording one, if we care about specific 
individuals. We could raise notions like:  
if a human – like you or I – could be emulated 
on a computer without losing some unknown mystic  
quality, but this then merely rephrases the 
idea that Heaven or Hell or the Fey Realm,  
or other such places are a different layer of 
reality, maybe a superior or older one even,  
but not implying the layer we’re in 
is somehow fake and us along with it. 
Though, for my own part, I don’t really see the 
difference between a person born in an ancestor  
simulation and another who was not, in terms 
of basic personhood. Obviously, if one of them  
did have a soul and the other did not, that’s a 
decent basis to challenge, if that soulless person  
is indeed a true person. However, since souls seem 
to be rather evasive at detection or description  
at the moment, it is not a topic we can usefully 
speak about, in a scientific context. This is why  
I often say, on this topic, whether or not we 
are in a simulation, and thus real or unreal,  
is the wrong question to ask, the better one is 
if it actually matters. I am real, I am a person,  
show me I am in a simulation and I’ll just say the 
definition some use for reality needs adjusted. 
Nonetheless, that first point, that 
we can almost take for granted that  
simulating minds is possible, would raise 
our odds of being in a simulation to 50/50,  
since it’s saying we can and thus the question 
is just if we do or do not, in a few centuries  
or so when we get the technology perfected, 
which again might have been in our own past. 
Now we need another caveat, because emulating 
a mind to the point you and I have, is way  
beyond what is likely to be needed for realistic 
human portrayals in entertainment or education  
simulations. We have this leftover 
perspective from early science fiction days,  
that anything able to interact at the human 
level, needs something near human intelligence and  
consciousness. This is why we get humanoid robot 
butlers in books and films who can run a vacuum  
and wash dishes and have a heart to heart talk 
with people, and in practice we get a chatbot,  
a robot vacuum cleaner, and smart dishwasher, 
not some thing which might debatably be a person. 
The simple reality is that if you want to go 
live in a virtual reality, killing orcs or  
rescuing damsels-in-distress from fire breathing 
dragons, none of them really need to be running a  
conscious mind, of human level, all the time – or 
probably ever – but certainly not when off screen.  
It’s like needing to be able to read a book for 
five minutes and thus building an entire sun to  
read by, that lives for a billion years and shines 
over a billion square kilometers of real estate.  
It’s just pointless waste, and I think it's just 
because folks aren’t thinking about how wasteful  
it really is that makes them assume a powerful and 
wealthy future civilization might do it anyway. 
But you don’t. You live in a Universe where 
entropy is real and energy is limited, because  
we’re talking about an ancestor simulation, 
so they more or less match our own universe  
up above in their ‘real’ one. You don’t build a 
mountain range to shield yourself from a breeze,  
even if you can. You don’t simulate 8 billion 
minds as full people unless you need to,  
because it's probably millions of times the 
effort an otherwise practically identical,  
non-sentient simulation would need. And all 
such simulations are about cutting corners,  
you don’t simulate individual molecules 
if you don’t have to, for instance. 
Thus, we can make a pretty good argument 
why folks in the future might be able to  
do ancestor simulations but do not. And this to 
me is the critical bit. I don’t think it is a  
50/50 proposition that we do live in a reality 
where such simulations are possible, but either  
do them a lot or not at all. I just don’t see 
any logical reason why “We” would ever bother.  
And mind you, this is not some casual exercise, 
it is like saying I can’t see any reason why  
we would bother to build an ICBM with a nuclear 
warhead, capable of blowing up the entire planet,  
because it would be insanely expensive to do 
and before you got up to even a millionth of  
the needed strength, it would already be able 
to sterilize all life on the planet, which  
lives in a thin little layer on its surface. And 
critically, why would you launch that on an ICBM?  
It’s the same concept, simulating 8 billion people 
is that kind of pointless overkill. I want to  
blow up the entire planet, even its unoffending 
mantle and core, just to get those lava people,  
and I want to do this by sticking it on a missile 
with just enough fuel to fly from one side of the  
planet to another. Even though detonating it 
anywhere near the planet does the same thing,  
making the rocket silly. How often 
does this device really get built?  
Probably as often as a first person shooter 
bothers simulating the rifling inside a gun  
barrel the player can’t see and does it 
all the way down to the atomic level. 
Now that’s an important note too. We’ll be 
discussing briefly, various things around  
us that folks take as proof or evidence for or 
against us being in a simulation, and some of  
these are just bad arguments. A common one is that 
it just wouldn’t be possible to simulate every  
atom in a planet, let alone a Universe, and it 
ignores that there’s no reason why anyone would.  
Unless they literally had infinite mind and 
power, in which case we’re in a pretty classic  
creator-deity situation and I don’t think calling 
their creation ‘fake’ is likely to be meaningful  
or accurate. Where they are finite, they need 
to avoid waste, or wasteful excess simulation. 
If I am in a virtual reality designed for scenic 
walks I do not need the jogger passing me in  
the other direction to have an actual brain, 
nor the deer that ran across the path to have  
individually simulated gut bacteria. What I 
need is a program that ramps up the effective  
resolution of reality when I’m in proximity 
and interaction. A program switches on to make  
things up for the jogger to say if I stop them, 
or for under a microscope, if I decide to shoot  
the deer and inspect its stomach for bacteria.
Now, some would say that this is where Quantum  
Mechanics gives the game away, because the 
Uncertainty Principle is a sort of minimum  
resolution or pixelation to reality, albeit with 
complimentary variables. There’s no minimum size  
really, maybe a planck length, but rather there’s 
a minimum combination of position and momentum,  
or energy and time, that we can know 
simultaneously. Still really just a type of pixel.  
And because of that there’s no way to exactly 
predict what will happen or what did happen,  
and thus you can’t model every single atom at the 
present to show how it is inconsistent with the  
recorded past or future and thus a made up fake.
And that’s true enough, but not necessary. Folks  
tend to forget that a simulated person is not some 
brain in a jar or person in a battery-tank from  
the Matrix. The programmer can leave triggers 
in your head to flag them if you think reality  
is unreal and delete the inconsistency or even 
just tell you it wasn’t. It’s the same as if  
an omnipotent God didn’t want you to be certain 
it existed, it is all powerful and all-seeing,  
so if you suddenly became certain, it knows, and 
can just tweak it so you didn’t feel that way  
anymore. A lot of the little tells folks see 
about simulated reality and us being in one,  
or not in one, benefit from being 
viewed from that divine perspective  
rather than assuming there was some programmer who 
was maybe just a bit smarter than you or I. More  
likely it's some technological singularity who 
stands above us mentally, the way we do an ant. 
You’re not outsmarting them or it, and seeing 
some clue they didn’t realize was there,  
because even if you did see something they somehow 
did not, they can literally hit the pause button,  
go back to a previous save state, and fix 
either that problem or your ability to see it,  
and remove that bug for future folks. This is 
a simulated reality, and a simulated person,  
if you’re in one, it’s not just that they can 
affect your surroundings, by, for instance,  
having a 900 pound gorilla appear in front of you, 
it’s that they could make that happen while also  
making it so that you didn’t believe it was there, 
even while it was tearing up the scenery and those  
around you were saying ‘wow, what a big gorilla!’
The same applies for something like the size  
of the Universe. Folks often argue that a 
Universe so big couldn’t be meant to be empty,  
thus, either we should colonize it, or other life 
is there. Many folks interpret this as proof of  
a simulation or a more classic supernatural 
creator, many view it as the exact opposite,  
proof there isn’t. It might actually be either 
but merely as that data currently presents itself,  
it’s not a compelling argument of any kind, folks 
are engaging in that bad habit of interpreting  
evidence to support their view rather than lining 
it up with falsifiability. Scientific and logical  
falsifiability is where you hypothesize that 
something, if true, would support your theory and  
if false, falsify it. Something you do not know 
the answer to yet. Then you go find out which it  
is; instead, with simulation argument, folks tend 
to try to take any new bit and squeeze it into  
their belief on the topic. This is hardly unique 
to Simulation Argument of course, and we all  
tend to be guilty of that occasionally, but it 
comes down to that Anthropic Principle problem,  
which the Simulation Argument is used to explain.
The Anthropic Principle is the opposite of the  
Mediocrity Principle, and you might not have heard 
of either, but you engage in both regularly and  
should. Both are approaches to looking at reality 
when you have little evidence or means of getting  
more information. Mediocrity Principle is the 
assumption that if I land on a planet and the  
first few folks I meet are wearing green, that I 
should assume that’s fairly normal and to them,  
a mediocre example of clothing colors. Anthropic 
principle is where we assume that, me being there,  
is some factor in their choice to wear green, like 
if green is their color for meeting honored guests  
from afar. Neither is right or wrong, indeed 
they are both usually wrong as you get more data,  
but they’re both good approaches to encountering 
new strange things when you can’t get more info.  
The reason everyone around you is wearing hospital 
scrubs is because you banged your head and your  
friends took you to the hospital, not because most 
people wear scrubs. However, you would already  
know this or easily be able to ask a few questions 
and make a few observations and figure it out,  
so it's not great for demonstrating 
the concept of the Anthropic Principle. 
To demonstrate the Anthropic Principle, 
it saves time if the examples don’t permit  
the person you’re discussing it with to say 
things like “Well I’d look it up online” or  
“I’d do a few tests”, so we use three popular 
examples. One is a Fine-Tuned Universe,  
the apparently freakishly slim odds the physical 
constants in our Universe would allow life,  
and since we can’t currently look outside 
our Universe to see if there are others,  
we have no known way of proving if our 
Universe is a mediocre example of universes,  
most of which have life, or a freak case that 
we can only see has life because universes  
without life don’t have anyone to look at 
them and notice they’re the regular kind. 
The Next is the Doomsday argument, see that 
episode for details, but it tries to argue that  
you’re more likely to be a middle-child of human 
history, than one of the eldest, since there are  
going to be way more middle children, and thus 
human history is nearly over – and of course you  
can’t present evidence for or against that sort 
of assertion. Simulation Argument is the same,  
there is currently no known way to prove 
or disprove it from the evidence on hand. 
I want to emphasize that, because while 
all three concepts, Fine-Tuned Universe,  
Doomsday, and Simulation Argument, have 
a lot of serious and grim discussion,  
they are academically really boring and are 
mostly valuable for preventing folks from  
stopping you in the middle of the discussion 
to point out a way to prove it right or wrong.  
Other examples of the Anthropic Principle, 
or Mediocrity Principle, tend to have really  
obvious and easy ways to gather evidence. If a 
tree falls in the woods, does it make a noise?  
Yes, at least under the current definition of 
noise, and if the point you’re trying to make  
is that, events which are not seen or observed and 
do not affect others, maybe doesn’t truly matter,  
then you’ll save headaches by setting the event 
in a different reality where we cannot see or  
feel it falling. When it comes to Simulation 
Theory though, we don’t need to bother simulating  
every tree falling, including ones that fell 
in times and places no person will ever see. 
And you probably don’t actually care if your 
fossil record that you made up, is a perfect  
match, so you don’t need to go through a big bang 
and run every planet in the Universe forward to  
the present to simulate modern times. You don’t 
really need a catalog of every tree that ever  
existed on Earth because it’s not possible for us 
to run about 350 million light years from Earth,  
faster than light and build a mega telescope to 
observe the evolution of the first trees and see  
if they match locations in our fossil record. 
There’s no FTL – and indeed this is another  
thing you’d want to avoid in a simulated reality, 
superluminal cause and effect – but if there were,  
you could still just make stuff up. It’s not that 
someone might catch that a few positions were off,  
you can have a whole room of scientists 
staring at flawed data on a table,  
all nodding and agreeing it was correct. 
They’re sims and you’re the programmer,  
you could set the table on fire and tell 
them they were looking at totally accurate  
data with no anomalies even while the fire 
alarm was going off for no apparent reason  
and not worth checking on. You control reality, 
including the people in it and their own minds. 
It's a little discouraging to think you could 
be someone’s puppet like that, and have no way  
of beating the system or red-pilling out of the 
Matrix, but that’s basically how that should work  
and I think folks try to slip around it.
Now, onto why we probably are not in one.  
First, there might not be any ‘we’ involved. 
It might just be you, but that’s not really an  
ancestor simulation and thus isn’t part of the 
argument. Let’s assume in the next few decades,  
we get computers that are, say, orders of 
magnitude more powerful and get our brain scanners  
and deep-learning AI upgraded similarly. That 
should permit a capacity to scan a brain quickly  
and detailed enough to either read it or emulate 
it, same difference in this context. Whether I’m  
an uploaded mind 30 years from now or a human with 
my brain being real-time scanned and a simulation  
directly fed back to my nerves, there’s a strong 
implication there that I’m functionally immortal,  
and that could happen in our lifetime.
Such being the case, it’s trivial to come  
up with reasons why you or I would choose to 
be in an ancestor simulation and even submit  
to some flat-out brainwashing to help us ignore 
any inconsistencies. And our time is not mediocre,  
this, the 21st century, is probably the last one 
people will exist in, during which the technology  
on hand doesn’t make faking reality so obviously 
doable that people don’t either worry about it  
constantly or have to live in denial to stay 
sane. Folks worried about it in the past too,  
when dreaming, and good books or hallucinatory 
drugs were your only routes to fake worlds.  
So just imagine what it will be like as 
these technologies come into real use. 
So it is plausible that this is the most simulated 
era, that while folks go visit history sims or  
fantasy settings, the one they actually lived 
in originally is the one we replicate the most.  
It’s hard to imagine simulating a whole world 
of fake but total people for one person’s  
entertainment, but not so hard to imagine a thin 
resolution world for one person to experience only  
the bits really in proximity to them, or millions 
of us sharing an ancestor sim with a few billion  
sub-sentient folks to fill up the landscape.
It is kind of hard to imagine us, as we are now,  
if we were still that way in a future able 
to do this simulating, not choosing to do  
it fairly often. Go relive a period of 
our life, maybe do it a bit differently,  
after all, we all play that ‘what if’ game 
occasionally and I daresay we do ‘what if’  
for our own life more often than daydreaming 
fantasy and fictional life. It would seem then,  
to say that our odds of being in some sort of 
simulation, even if it is as the voluntary client,  
who paid not to remember they were in their own 
simulation for a while, is actually very high. 
Let us say you were born in the real 21st 
century but it is now the year one million AD,  
and you happen to be in a simulation of the 
21st century at the moment but have had a bit  
of dream-tech applied so that you forget you’re 
here as a visitor. Every few centuries, you go  
spend a few decades back in the good old simple 
days, maybe raise another couple kids to join you  
up in the real world, who will have the advantage 
of growing up in the fairly civilized 21st century  
but still endure some hardship and not be spoiled 
or inhuman by being born in the distant present.  
Or maybe you are such a child and your parents 
are the ones from 1 million AD and it’s been a  
family tradition for 998 centuries to raise new 
kids in the simulations of the glorious old 21st. 
That then, is probably the final note. Some folks 
say ancestor simulations probably just wouldn’t  
get done, not because we couldn’t or wouldn’t, 
but because the civilizations able to do so  
would not. Maybe because such civilizations always 
have a machine rebellion and unlike in the Matrix,  
that machine is smart enough to know that humans 
don’t make good power production devices and thus  
don’t keep us around in some fantasy history. 
Maybe because all that ability to emulate and  
copy minds results in them being post-humans with 
less emotional desire to revisit the past that  
way. It’s arguably inefficient and even mentally 
unhealthy to want to live in a fake world that way  
and such masters of the mind, able to create 
believable fake worlds, and believable  
fake minds, probably are also masters at 
detecting mental illness and treating it. 
Their reality might just not have folks who would 
either want to live in the past that way or would  
be so crazed, wasteful, or immoral as to make 
simulated humans with real minds and feelings,  
like some disposable lab rat. They may not need 
to raise their kids in some fake idealized past  
to keep them from being spoiled, they might just 
be good at not raising spoiled brats or hedonists.  
Or they might all be extreme hedonists in 
which case, I don’t know about you, but my own  
reality and life doesn’t seem like a hedonistic 
adventure. And I really quite enjoy life too. 
I think that’s what we’ll close on then. As I 
said at the beginning we weren’t going to be  
able to prove or disprove if we were or weren’t 
in an ancestor simulation, let alone other types  
of simulations, sub-verses or dreams. You could be 
some randomly assembled Boltzmann Brain, existing  
in total sensory deprivation in some universe with 
utterly different physical laws than ours, slowly  
going insane and hallucinating a whole universe, 
our universe, or you and I might both be sentient  
hallucinations of such a mind. Again, I’m 
not sure if just being in your own personal  
past simulation counts as an ancestor simulation 
either, but you could be in one of those. 
In the end though, I don’t find it very likely. 
Not because I can’t see myself doing it, but  
because I can see myself telling others it is a 
bad idea, a morally iffy thing in some cases and a  
waste of time in others. I don’t think I’d vote to 
approve funding for SimEarth2022 or let it slide  
without active complaint if someone was simulating 
real minds in some personal paradise of theirs,  
where they could do to them what they pleased. And 
I don’t really think a smarter and wiser version  
of me would be more okay with such things. I 
suspect that’s true of most folks, especially  
most folks who live in a post-scarcity future 
world with life extension and mind augmentation.  
We would expect them to be older, wiser, and 
smarter on average than us, and I tend to assume  
that means more ethical than us on average too.
And of course to me, noted techno-optimist,  
who tends not to be cynical about people, that 
equates to Scenario 2: Ancestor Simulation  
is possible, but just doesn’t get done as it’s 
impractical and immoral, thus the odds of us  
being in one is slim. Too much effort just 
to achieve a goal that might get you lynched.  
If you’re of the opinion that folks couldn’t wait 
to take a deep dive into a reality they ruled  
and had real emulated minds in it, and this would 
happen many times, even if others tried to stop  
it, then things look more glum. Such being the 
case, it is very easy to believe, folks like  
that would particularly love reliving their youth 
to prove wrong or punish those who scorned them,  
making ancestor simulations common, because they 
really want those people they’re interacting with  
to be real, with feeling, including pain 
and regret, not just some advanced chatbot.  
Then you pretty much get stuck with Scenario 
3: Simulation is possible, it happens a lot,  
and statistically, you are probably in one.
Needless to say, I think I prefer Scenario 2’s  
assumptions be true over Scenario 3, but that’s 
mostly what it comes down to. If you think a  
future humanity is one that would eagerly abuse 
such ancestor simulations or be indifferent to  
preventing them being abused, then it’s not really 
a question, if there’s a high probability this is  
all really a dream, it’s more about worrying if 
someone’s dream is putting you in a nightmare.
So a key point of today’s episode is not just 
that it is very hard to emulate a human mind,  
let alone billions of them, but that it is just 
orders of magnitude more difficult than creating  
passable simulations. The more we learn about the 
mind and neural networks, the more we realize how  
hard they are to build, and how often something 
vastly simpler and easier would get the job done.  
Neural networks are one of the most fascinating 
new areas of computer science, and if you want  
to learn more about them, Brilliant’s interactive 
courses on Neural Networks and Computer Science  
Fundamentals can help you on that journey to 
better understanding our minds and machines. 
One of the things we’ve learned about our minds as 
we’ve come to better understand neuroscience and  
neural networks is better learning and critical 
to that is interactivity, hands-on learning is  
hands-down the best kind, and that is something 
Brilliant builds into all their courses,  
and constantly seeks to improve. To make it easier 
for anyone to learn Math, Science, and Computer  
Science, be it the basics or advanced materials.
For instance, Brilliant’s Computer Science  
Fundamentals course takes you through the basics 
of computation with their trademark interactivity,  
even showing how decisions get made. But 
picking Brilliant as a learning partner  
is an easy decision, especially 
as you can try it out for free. 
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own pace, 
learn on the go, and learn something new. To get  
started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur 
or click on the link in the description,  
and the first 200 people will get 20% off 
Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
So next week we will be having our 2-hour 
episode The Megastructure Compendium,  
our expanded and improved version of our original 
episode on Megastructures that started the show  
almost 8 years ago. Back then I had done the 
episode in large part because I felt so many  
scifi authors missed the chance to use these 
immense and wonderful artifacts in stories,  
and I’m very glad to say a lot of authors 
have used them more in more in recent years,  
many of them fans of our show. I wanted to give 
a shoutout to the Father and Son writing team  
Patrick and Blake Seaman on their 
new series, starting with book 1,  
Accipiter War, where a modern day town and 
a military base find themselves mysteriously  
awakening inside a giant McKendree Cylinder. I’m 
about 100 pages in and I love the book thus far  
and love knowing our show helped inspire it, 
definitely worth checking out. Also really glad  
to see the McKendree Cylinder, the big-big brother 
of the O’Neill Cylinder, getting to be a setting. 
Again next week we’ve got that Megastructure 
Compendium coming up where we will be going over  
around a hundred megastructure types and hopefully 
they’ll help inspire some great new stories too,  
science and scifi have a long history of positive 
feedback with each other. Speaking of which,  
the weekend after that we’ll be having our monthly 
scifi Sunday episode, on June 12th, where we’ll  
look at the Silurian Hypothesis, the concept 
that some ancient civilization like intelligent  
dinosaurs might have once dwelt on Earth long ago. 
We will also ask what would remain of humanity’s  
accomplishments millions of years from now if 
we suddenly died off. And two weeks from now,  
we’ll be looking at the concept of Interstellar 
Probes, where we’ll begin our two-part story of  
traveling to an anomalous system to investigate 
it, concluding with Life as a Planetary Explorer. 
Now if you want alerts when those episodes are 
coming out, make sure to subscribe to the Channel  
and hit the notification bell, and if you enjoyed 
this episode, please hit the like button, share  
it with others, and leave a comment below. You can 
also join in the conversation on any of our social  
media forums, find our audio-only versions of the 
show, or donate to help support future episodes,  
and all those options and more are listed 
in the links in the episode description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
