This Episode is sponsored by Brilliant
It’s always amazing to watch a rocket take
off from the ground and fly up through the
clouds into space, but why not start off higher
up to begin with, and launch from above the
clouds?
So today we’re back to the Upward Bound
series to cover a topic that’s been requested
a lot, which is why we don’t launch rockets
from blimps or planes, and if we could.
Since we’ve been discussing floating whole
cities or even continents in the sky of late,
it felt appropriate to cover floating launches.
Plus, we’ve been spending a lot of time
in the far future in recent episodes and some
folks have asked for an episode about near
future prospects and grounded in the emerging
technologies of today, and this topic seemed
appropriate.
Except for the grounded part obviously.
One out of two ain’t bad.
We’ll also be taking a look at JP Aerospace’s
Dark Sky Strato-Station, an enormous lighter-than-air
lifter that offers a somewhat slow but very
cheap route to space, some non-space applications
of these technologies, and we’ll jump out
a little further ahead in the future to look
at what might be on the table for aerial launch
systems if we’ve got an abundant source
of power.
We should start though by asking why you’d
ever want to launch from higher up.
Because you definitely do if you can, but
not for the reasons most folks think.
As we’ve mentioned throughout the series,
the big challenge for launching from Earth
isn’t getting up high, it’s getting up
to orbital speeds and doing it through a thick
atmosphere.
Atmospheres are handy for planes and air-breathing
craft in general, but it’s very hard to
get up to orbital speeds with that approach,
and like a lot of hybrid launch concepts,
each stage operates differently, involves
different and heavy equipment cutting into
your payload, and more possibilities for critical
failure.
That’s a pretty big reason why we prefer
single-stage launch craft where possible and
why we launch from the ground, rather than
from higher up.
It’s where all our assets are, and even
building up high on a mountain near the equator,
the best ground-based launch location, tends
not to be worth the problems that come with
trying to make, staff, and maintain that facility
compared to something within commuting distance
of our population and industrial centers.
That makes something like a blimp carrying
a rocket a very attractive alternative, because
you launch the rocket and blimp from a facility,
and then launch the rocket once the blimp
achieves the necessary altitude, but it requires
a lot of blimp to lift that much rocket.
Now I want to emphasize, you’re not lifting
that rocket up because it gets you several
kilometers toward your goal of orbiting a
few hundred kilometers up.
Rocket launches aren’t about height, they’re
about energy and speed, and that blimp isn’t
adding much to one.
It’s just cutting down on the amount of
air you have to smash through on your way
out and up to speed.
That speed matters, stuff stays in space because
it’s spinning around the planet fast, not
because it’s high up.
If you lose enough velocity, you’ll just
fall out of orbit.
Now, the alternative to a blimp would be a
rigid aircraft moving at high speed that a
rocket launched from, and that offers a nice
speed boost while cutting down on the air
you have to plow through, and we’ll look
at that today too, and more when we get to
spaceplanes next month.
But the short form is that any launch system
is dependent on how much thrust and specific
impulse it can offer, and a good rocket fuel
offers around 400 seconds of specific impulse.
As a reminder, specific impulse is measured
as the time that rocket could sustain a thrust
equal to gravity, to basically hover in place.
Needless to say we burn the fuel a lot faster
than what’s required to levitate them.
An air-breathing plane can do way better in
terms of thrust off any given fuel because
first off, it doesn’t have to include any
oxygen to burn that fuel with, while a spaceship
obviously does, and if you’re burning something
like hydrogen, oxidizing it and producing
water, well it might be H2O, but those two
hydrogen atoms weigh a lot less than that
one oxygen atom does.
Moreover, flying through the air, you don’t
need a propellant, since you can use a ramjet.
You suck air in and shove it out the back
to add momentum to your craft, while you can’t
do that in space.
If you want to move, you have to throw mass
out the backside and you have to be carrying
it with you.
This is the fundamental limitation of the
rocket equation.
So ideally we’d want to get up to speed
in the atmosphere where we can take advantage
of all that air rather than carry all that
oxidizer and propellant.
However, there are some big constraints on
trying to use that air, not to mention glide
through it, at supersonic speeds, though we’ll
save discussion of things like Ramjets and
Scramjets for the spaceplanes episode.
Key thing, to orbit Earth you need to be moving
7.8 km/s or about Mach 23, and you need to
get up to and maintain that speed while plowing
through air, so anything you can do to cut
into that helps a lot.
But starting off at Mach 1 and getting to
Mach 23 is not the same as having done 1/23rd
of your work already, as kinetic energy increases
with the square of velocity, so you’re only
about a 500th of the way there, and that’s
ignoring drag and the whole rocket equation
issue too.
So it’s saving energy, but not a huge amount,
and the same applies to being near the equator
where you can add the Earth’s spin, about
Mach 1.3, to your ship.
Combining the two, plus getting several kilometers
of thick air out of the way, makes it very
tempting to launch something carrying a rocket
that will fly down to the equator and get
as fast and high as it can go, and then let
the rocket off, but it’s not such a huge
benefit that it’s generally seen as making
up for all the extra problems and costs and
points of possible failure that adding those
in will add to your launch.
That’s obviously debatable, and hinges on
technological and economic factors that are
always in motion too.
For instance, our best lifting gas for a blimp
is hydrogen, which is also our best rocket
propellant, but we tend not to use it for
either as much as we could because it’s
a bit of nightmare to work with.
And we don’t see too many blimps because
helium is quite rare on Earth, despite that
it’s the second most abundant thing in the
Universe, and tiny helium atoms tend to leak
through materials, so blimps can get rather
expensive.
This is one of the reasons we like satellites,
for communications you want a very broad range,
which is mostly about being up high, and towers
are expensive.
We can float communications balloons up higher,
but it’s a big thing that can be blown around
by the wind and is leaking expensive helium.
If we get better at managing those issues,
it would make a lot of sense to stick a big
floating solar powered communications balloon
over a city to provide cellphone and wifi
coverage, instead of an expensive geosynchronous
satellite tens of thousands of kilometers
up.
The few hundred kilometers to low orbit or
the tens of kilometers that get you well above
weather issues for blowing your balloon around
or shading it’s solar panels from sunlight
offers a great deal of cost savings, and decreased
signal time.
Indeed various projects looking at those options
are also reviving thoughts of maybe doing
these blimp style rocket launches, as they
rely on a lot of the same tech and infrastructure.
But before we jump into future projects, let’s
discuss some existing ones.
One of these is the rockoon, a combination
rocket and balloon, and those of you who catch
our monthly live streams might remember back
around the beginning of the year someone asked
a question about those that got garbled as
‘Vacuum Raccoons’, which was confusing
but still sound like an awesome idea, as raccoons
are pretty cool.
But the rockoon is an old idea predating the
space program, something James Van Allen came
up with, for whom the Van Allen Belt around
Earth is named.
It’s a simple idea, and it had to be since
it predated computers.
You stick a rocket on a balloon, and instead
of lighting the rocket immediately, you let
it float up and then ignite it.
The main problem then was that we couldn’t
really steer them and rockets were far more
prone to blowing up back then, so it required
a very large safe area around your launch
site, since people tend to object to having
a ton of flaming debris land in their front
lawn.
Needless to say, in the 70 years since the
notion was suggested, we’ve made a few technological
improvements, and quite a few companies have
been taking a second look at this concept
in the last couple decades, and more in the
last few years as cubesats and other small
satellites are making small private launches
a more tangible business model, especially
after the success of private launch companies
like SpaceX.
This channel tends to focus a lot on very
large and high capacity launch approaches,
but in terms of developing a real and sustainable
space economy, small launches that many different
companies with many different approaches can
get into might be the better way to blaze
the trail.
Which is kind of amusing since these smaller
rockets and balloons would generally not leave
the giant flaming blazing trail in the sky
that a normal rocket would.
They’re handy too though, because as I mentioned
we don’t build launch sites in optimal places
like mountain tops because they’re far from
our population and industrial centers, but
these giant booster rockets we use can’t
be too close to cities either, whereas these
small ones can be launched much closer, and
for a rockoon, could be released right in
the middle of a city, since they could drift
before the rocket turned on.
Nor do they have to drift, again this isn’t
70 years ago, blimps always had propellers
and we can easily put remote controlled balloons
up, same as we can drones, and we do have
the option for heavier than air powered flight
too.
Not to mention all those other methods of
getting things to stay in the air we discussed
in Cloud Cities a few months back.
Fundamentally it will save you mass to follow
such paths, it’s just whether or not it
will save you money and cargo, as with all
hybrid launch systems, you have to worry about
the cost of the hybrid, the weight, the extra
chance for failure, and chokepoints on transport
too.
For instance let’s just say we had a big
sky platform big enough for airplanes to land
on and rockets to take off from.
You’re saving fuel this way, assuming the
platform isn’t burning any, but you need
people up there, you need both the plane and
the rocket, you need to unload people and
cargo from one to the other on the platform,
and that all takes time and money too, to
build and maintain and operate and to insure
against the extra risks of something going
wrong.
And every person you add on-site to minimize
problems switching stages is introducing more
mass, all their supplies and living room and
even the weight of the air in their pressurized
quarters.
But those problems can likely be tackled,
for instance remote-controlled robots minimize
how much crew you need up there.
We’ll talk about some high-tech paths in
a moment, but we’ve got a serious option
on the table for modern tech from JP Aerospace
that is a type of Strato-Station, designed
to operate 140,000 feet or 42 kilometers up
in the air, called the Dark Sky Station.
This thing is pretty large, bordering on a
megastructure, though modest compared to other
launch megastructures we’ve discussed like
the Loftstrom Loop or Orbital Ring.
It is part of their “Airship to Orbit”
system, and is about three kilometers across,
looking like a big starfish, which is appropriate
given it’s suggested role in getting us
to the stars.
Airship to Orbit relies on a three stage approach.
The first is an airship that uses a hybrid
of buoyancy, aerodynamics, and near-vacuum
propellers to get off the ground and reach
the Dark Sky Station.
Up there, folks and cargo depart, stage two,
and we have another, kilometer-scale spaceship
waiting that can only exist and operate way
up there where there’s virtually no air.
Instead of rockets, you get on these huge
secondary airships for stage three that will
ascend to orbital speeds and heights by a
mix of chemical and electric propulsion, but
take several hours to do it, rather than the
minutes a rocket would.
This is a downside but not a very big one,
particularly considering how cheap the launch
cost is.
They estimate about 31 cents per kilogram
launched, rather than the several thousand
dollars a kilogram we pay now, and it is a
bulk lifter, designed for carrying many tons.
I don’t know about you, but I don’t mind
taking a day to get to orbit if it costs me
as much as a bus ticket.
Needless to say, it’s not ready for launch
yet, but it has no really huge technical issues
requiring massive advances and they promote
it as a pay as you go approach, since many
of the steps involved to full scale deployment
have economically viable options too.
Of course we have some other big options like
the Lofstrom Loop or Star Tram and Mass Drivers
we’ve discussed before, and those all feature
long lines that you accelerate down that either
end in the upper atmosphere or even start
there.
Some of those concepts already contemplate
using a launch track that’s floating by
buoyancy anyway, so a multi-kilometer long
track floating up there is an option too.
What’s more, since those are essentially
electric, we could be supplying the power
from groundside, up some long powerlines that
acted as tethers for helping keep the thing
in place and to lift people and cargo to it.
If such tethers are impractical, you could
still fly up there and either get your power
from solar energy or beam it to them.
These things are quite big after all, with
plenty of room for panels, or you could install
a rectenna for power-beaming, either from
groundside power stations or power satellites,
like we discussed in the episode of that name.
Microwave beaming mostly requires a big thin
mesh to act as the rectenna, and that’s
pretty easy to incorporate into a giant blimp.
But if you’re supplying power from elsewhere,
why only use if for launch?
As we’ve mentioned before, we can make either
atomic powered planes that never have to land,
or ones where the energy gets beamed in.
There’s nothing high-tech about a nuclear
plane, we just don’t build them because
they make folks nervous.
And legitimately so too, they’re pretty
safe, especially newer designs, but concerns
about them aren’t the same as the usual
over-the-top technophobia we often see with
atomic energy.
They obviously still can crash and having
a kilometer-long floating spaceport land on
you is bad enough without adding uranium to
the mix.
However, just because something is flying
around under power doesn’t mean it has to
go anywhere.
Ignoring the helicopter or helicarrier option,
you can just have one circle around over a
spot off the coast of whatever city it services.
Because it’s moving at a set speed normally,
albeit in a loop, your ground-based connection
flights can find optimum times to land on
it without needing to match its actual speed,
meaning it can get away with going much faster
than the things needing to rendezvous with
it.
But also, because it is moving very fast,
especially if it’s flying counter-clockwise,
in the northern hemisphere anyway, on that
southern edge of its circular path, it gets
to add all that speed to the earth’s rotation
and launch things to space with that.
If it’s enough speed, and you’ve got strong
tensile materials, it might even be fast enough
to match up directly to a skyhook or rotovator,
but at the least it would give a big headstart
to any scramjet that was seeking to do so.
We’ll get to that option more in the Spaceplanes
episode though, I mention it because if it
is circling you could potentially have a cable
running up to it like a whirling slingshot,
and if your materials can handle that and
the air drag issues, you could have an ascender
run up that line from your groundside spaceport
that basically just had a sail.
Indeed, you could have multiple layers of
these, each higher up and probably wider out,
though it need not be concentric.
You presumably want your turn radius low enough
that you can just tilt the floors on the sky
platform a little so everyone just feels a
little heavier walking around it.
You accelerate when turning and if you’re
trying to keep that platform cruising around
at a few kilometers a second, about half orbital
speed, that turn radius needs to be almost
a thousand kilometers, though considering
how fast you’re going you’d complete a
circle about every half hour.
So you could potentially have a big one that
serviced the northern Atlantic, whirled around
at about half orbital speed way up in the
stratosphere, and local regions would have
more modest loops for letting subsonic or
modestly supersonic planes land on, which
would also be a very handy way of moving around
Earth too.
Something like that is fairly ambitious but
a good reminder that when you can make and
move a lot of power cheaply, many constraints
are altered and new options that would seem
absurd in the past suddenly become viable.
As we’ll see when we get to moving stars
around next week, there is a big difference
between that which seems absurd because it
breaks known physics, and that which simply
seems so because it’s like explaining a
skyscraper or railroad track to someone at
the dawn of the iron age when building large
structures or roads out of iron and steel
would simply seem absurd because of the relative
scarcity and cost of that material.
So is there a future for these kind of approaches?
That’s hard to say, they’re not pie in
the sky as we just saw, but the question on
any new technology isn’t just if we can
do it that way, but if we’ve got something
better, and that can be very hard to predict
since it relies on a fairly solid image of
the specific tech and economics of not just
one but two or more technologies.
We’ve seen some of those other ones like
mass drivers and orbital rings in earlier
episodes and of course we’ve seen what reusable
rockets are shaping up to do already.
The ideal one, or what most of us tend to
view that way from science fiction and modern
air travel, is a craft you get on at your
local airport and which flies directly to
a space station, and as mentioned we’ll
be looking at spaceplanes next month.
One advantage these approaches have is they
do have direct smaller applications in our
economy, which gives a good pathway for development
to something grander.
As I’ve mentioned before, a lot of things
we can do with satellites we can do with big
floating balloons too, like solar shades or
mirrors for warming or cooling the planet
or regions of it, or power generation by wind
or solar.
They’re fundamentally better than geosynchronous
satellites as communication hubs too, because
while light moves fast, even light takes a
noticeable time to get up to geosynch and
back, and that’s a lot of distance, not
to mention air, to move a signal through.
So I do think there’s a good chance we might
see some serious advancement and utilization
of some of these pathways in the future, and
maybe even some of the more ambitious approaches
we looked at in Cloud Cities or for Colonizing
Venus and Neptune.
Not as fast as a rocket, but maybe safer and
cheaper, and if the trip takes longer, you
have to admit, the view would be pretty awesome.
We were talking today about how it takes far
more energy to get upto orbital speeds than
supersonic speeds, even far more than the
usual velocity-squared formula for kinetic
energy implies, and that can be quite daunting
in many ways.
The orbital energy of, say, a one-ton car,
is about 30 billion joules, which sounds like
a lot but is only the chemical energy contained
in about 250 gallons of gasoline, or about
two-thirds of a ton, less than car.
It can be a bit confusing why most of our
launch systems require dozens of times more
fuel than payload.
To understand why this is so, and why various
launch systems are often more practical, it
helps to have a good grasp of concepts like
energy and momentum conservation, that dictate
everything from orbital mechanics and rocketry
to mundane matters like your car’s fuel
efficiency.
That’s where Brilliant’s courses on topics
like Classical Mechanics can help you out,
with interactive quizzes and visual explanations
of topics.
All of their courses include handy quizzes
to check and improve your knowledge, like
their one on rocketry.
In addition to many great courses, they have
fun, daily challenges in math, science, and
computer science.
If you get stuck, there's a community of thousands
of other users that are discussing the problem
and writing solutions.
If you’d like to learn more science and
math, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur and
sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription...so you can view all the Daily
Problems in the archives and unlock dozens
of interactive problem-solving courses.
Before we get to upcoming schedule, I was
mentioning a moment ago how handy it can be
to have a community to discuss ideas and solutions
with, and it’s a very integral part of this
channel.
Indeed it’s our communities on Facebook,
Reddit, Patreon, and the SFIA website’s
new forums where we draw not only most of
our new topics but most of the crew who help
me out brainstorming, writing, editing, and
animating these episodes these days.
If you’re looking for a place with folks
who share your interests to have a polite
chat or ask questions, try out one of those
communities, linked in every episode’s description.
So next week we’ll be talking about propulsion
and launches again, only instead of how we
get off Earth to explore the solar system,
we’ll be talking about how to move entire
solar systems to explore or reshape the Universe,
in Fleet of Stars.
The week after that we’ll be heading back
the Outward Bound series to look at Colonizing
Black Holes, and we’ll see if these objects,
most notoriously the most dangerous places
in the Universe, might turn out to be rather
inviting places to live.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
