This episode is sponsored by Audible.
In the future humanity may meet alien  
life or even create whole new species, but could 
we ever work together to forge a greater union?
Well we’re back again for another Scifi Sunday 
here on SFIA and we return to one of our favorite  
topics, Alien Civilizations and how they might 
behave, if any exist out there in our galaxy.  
A frequent part of our approach is to look at 
examples of alien behavior from science fiction  
and ask how plausible they are. One of 
the frequent scenarios in science fiction  
is for there to be multiple alien 
civilizations we are interacting with and  
sometimes under the same nation or confederation.
We see examples with the Republic and Empire of  
Star Wars, the Confederation of Independent 
Systems, or Separatists, also from Star Wars,  
the Federation of Star Trek, and maybe arguably 
also the species-assimilating Borg of Star Trek,  
as well as the Planetary Union from the Trek 
Parody The Orville. We also have the League of  
Non-Aligned Worlds and Interstellar Alliance of 
Babylon Five, the Citadel Council of Mass Effect,  
the Systems Commonwealth of Andromeda, the de 
facto empire of the Peacekeepers from Farscape,  
the Alliance of Four Great Races from 
Stargate, and many, many more, and each  
represents a different style and are examples 
of how such species might run an empire of many. 
Indeed it’s a common trope in the fantasy 
genre too, in everything from, the Unseelie  
Accords of Dresden Files urban fantasy, to the 
Alliance of the Warcraft video game franchise,  
and countless examples of elves, dwarves, humans 
and more, trying to get along in so many fantasy  
settings since Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings 
and various Dungeons and Dragons settings. 
Now as often as not, when there are many alien 
species, they each have their own territory,  
and there’s no mixed rule, outside of maybe 
some equivalent of the United Nations or  
particularly cosmopolitan city or space 
station. And indeed such places definitely  
add a new flavor to the term cosmopolitan, which 
traditionally implied either a multi-ethnic city  
or a person who viewed themselves as more of 
a citizen of the world than of some place,  
and in this case, the actual cosmos, 
or at least a big chunk of the galaxy.  
Our focus today though is on the examples 
where we see joint empires, hence the examples. 
Incidentally if you actually recognized each of 
those various empires and settings I rattled off,  
you definitely get at least a 9 out of 10 on the 
Geekometer, and if not, don’t worry, we’ll give  
the necessary context and highlights, though those 
are all recommended reading, watching, or playing,  
all great picks to steal away your free time.
Now governments come in many forms, so we could  
be looking at involuntary unions under one 
despotic race, semi-voluntary unions under  
a semi-benevolent powerful race, or at an equal 
and democratic alliance. Even then, it might be  
nothing more than a loose agreement not to kill 
each other or an agreement to certain trade rules  
or a full integration down to aliens immigrating 
to each other’s homeworlds. What’s more, you could  
easily have an empire composed of many species 
at war with another empire who was composed of  
a single species and many of that species were 
also members of that first multi-species empire. 
Or for that matter multiple empires that were 
multi-species and shared many member species.  
Like if the Star Trek Federation went to war 
with some breakaway human colony, or if the  
federation split down the middle with colonies 
of many species breaking to both new factions.  
For that matter, in the fourth season of the scifi 
classic Babylon 5, we see humanity in a civil war  
with Earth controlled by an oppressive Orwellian 
regime, and numerous colonies and deserter fleet  
elements are eventually joined by a ton of alien 
ships to assault Earth’s defenses, and that regime  
had been receiving massive covert resistance from 
an alien civilization known as the Shadows, who  
were themselves a multi-species Empire of those 
Shadows and their servant species like the Drakh. 
I also want to emphasize that we’re being pretty 
loose with the term ‘species’ here because in  
scifi it usually means the lone species that 
developed technology on a planet that was their  
homeworld. But you could have humanity and its 
Klingon allies at war with uplifted whales also  
from Earth and related to us. Maybe who’d teamed 
up with whatever that weird probe was from Star  
Trek IV. That’s the time travel film where Kirk, 
Spock, and company go back to modern Earth to save  
the whales because some massively powerful probe 
showed up around future Earth, wrecking everything  
whilst looking for whales, which had gone extinct. 
That probe did a lot of damage to Earth, the  
Federation fleet, and the Klingons, so it would 
not be surprising if they wanted some payback.  
In the film it’s implied the damage is accidental 
or indifferent, but when you think about it, an  
advanced race sending out a probe capable of doing 
that much damage really hasn’t got much excuse  
for being that reckless. Some probe so apparently 
blind to other types of life is much more likely –  
and justifiably I’d say – to be classified as 
the product of someone violently xenophobic. 
And that’s a point worth noting too, because we 
usually assume xenophobia in scifi context means  
aliens from another planet but it might only be 
of certain types. Maybe they are okay with whale  
and dolphin-like critters, but loathe anything 
with wings. Maybe they especially hate uplifted  
species from their own homeworld, or they get on 
fine with aliens but hate their mutant cousins  
from all their interstellar colonies. Xenophobia 
isn’t usually noted for being terribly rational,  
so you might get some interesting perturbations. 
Of course we also want to be careful not to imply  
xenophobia is always and utterly irrational 
either, and it’s usually rooted out of the  
fairly reasonable biological fear 
of the unknown, or stranger danger.  
Visitors to your territory, in nature, usually 
only represent a positive if you’re planning to  
mate with them or eat them, or sometimes both, 
otherwise they’re competition or a threat. A  
certain amount of fear of the unknown is probably 
healthy, and how justified such fears are really  
depends on the setting and authors in ficiton. 
We don’t know what the Universe or Multiverse  
is going to hold for us in terms of aliens; 
what the average is going to be, so to speak. 
And we also need to consider the motivations for 
union. In Star Trek, it’s just general goodwill,  
because most advanced species are pretty kind and 
enlightened, and with enough goodwill and effort,  
you can find a way to make peace, at least until 
the Borg showed up, as a sort of cruel mockery of  
the Federation, having way more member races, as 
they just assimilated everything into themselves.  
I always consider ‘mockery’ an appropriate word 
there because the Borg were introduced to the crew  
of the Enterprise by the omnipotent trickster 
entity, known as Q, in order to humble them,  
because the TNG-era season 1 and 2 crew came off 
as very cocky and smug, as did the Federation. 
We’re not going to beat up on the Federation 
and its ethics today, we’ve done that before,  
but there was often something worrisome about how 
the Federation kept growing and how its capital  
was on Earth and virtually all its spaceships in 
its starfleet were human-captained and crewed.  
This could be an example of the semi-benevolent 
powerful species I mentioned before,  
ruling over species that joined semi-voluntarily. 
And this actually is historically accurate,  
even if unintentionally so, because many 
ancient Earth empires were really one powerful  
nation ruling over conquered nations. Often 
their military came almost exclusively from  
that one nation or city-state as a result.
Now it is common in science fiction, for  
humans to be over-represented in the settings, 
and the in-Universe explanations vary, but  
by and large it’s because it’s a lot easier and 
cheaper to put a human in a costume with regular  
old makeup than to sit around gluing prosthetics 
to their head for five hours before each shot.  
This could be justified for a multi-species 
empire where everyone was genuinely very alien.  
In such a case, it might be that everybody had 
plenty of representation in their fleets and on  
space stations and planets, they just tended 
to be segregated for life support reasons.  
You probably don’t mix crews much because 
it’s a pain to maintain fifty different  
atmosphere mixes, temperatures, and lighting.
What’s more, the various hierarchical and  
leadership talents of officers probably 
don’t translate as well to other species.  
Fifty-foot tall, hundred-armed mega crabs who show 
their approval with 160 decibel roars, probably  
don’t mix well on spaceships designed around human 
scales. So there’s really not a big problem with  
justifying why they might all get along as a 
unified group of civilizations but not really  
share ships and planets much. One might wonder why 
they are unified when they need to be inherently  
separate but there’s many degrees of unity and 
it might be just simple mutual defense treaties,  
standardized currency and trade measures, and 
sharing your technology and science. None of  
which require you have many types of aliens trying 
to share a ship. Problem with this, for science  
fiction, is it doesn’t let you have a couple neat 
alien crewmembers on your mostly human starship,  
no Spock or Worf as interesting characters.
There are get arounds to that, maybe they  
are the rare exchange officer who agreed to be 
transplanted into a humanoid body or android,  
or they remotely control one from back in their 
own quarters with its specialized life support,  
and a mind-machine link to that body. Or 
your show might ignore it and tell the fans  
outright that you crammed in as many aliens as 
your special effects budgets allowed and they  
should just mentally substitute in more aliens 
where they see random extras. Maybe you could say  
everybody walks around in augmented reality and 
their alien peers have their appearance and words  
shifted to a human perspective and vice-versa. 
Indeed you might have space stations where  
everybody walked around in a spacesuit and their 
feeds were all altered to show and hear everyone  
put in their species appearance and languages.
Nonetheless we do get a lot of in-Universe  
explanations including “Humans are Special”, 
in that we have some particular quality that  
makes us uniquely suited to be running 
or forging a multi-species empire.  
Maybe the best justification I heard for that 
was in the Masters of Orion Video Games, where,  
of the various alien factions, humans happened 
to be the most diplomatic and charismatic,  
rather than the smartest or kindest or best 
fighters or whichever, all of which might be  
handy for forging various types of empires. And it 
wouldn’t be surprising if an empire was forged by  
folks who stood out in some way that helped with 
such forging, by words or by hammer and anvil. 
Now the problem here is that while we shouldn’t 
assume ours was the only pathway to technology,  
it is pretty reasonable to assume that things 
which helped us claw our way up Darwin’s Ladder  
into space are probably not uncommon traits in 
aliens, especially where they make a lot of sense.  
I’m not really sure how you build a civilization 
without some very strong analogies for diplomacy  
and charisma. Even when we suggest a hive 
species, be it the Borg or someone more friendly,  
the impression every critter in that hive 
just obeys because it does, as we seem to see  
in nature, seems only justified by them being 
very stupid. I keep some hives of honey bees,  
they’re neat and an impressive example what a 
hive can do, but they’re dumb, not loyal. They  
follow a very specific pathway for survival. Same 
for the cells in our bodies, they’re not obedient  
and loyal, they don’t have brains. They do their 
functions because versions of them that didn’t,  
tended to cause the organism to die, and thus 
didn’t propagate whereas versions that did do  
their functions, benefited the organism, and 
thus went on to propagate. This is additionally  
complicated by most of the creatures in the hive 
being only indirectly involved in procreation. 
And a hive intelligence composed of 
stupid members isn’t a civilization,  
it’s a person, same as you and I are composed 
of many individual cells and organisms,  
many of which have none of our DNA. This is 
generally not what we mean by multi-species  
empire, and so we will mostly bypass the Borg 
from Star Trek after this point, the Collective  
is an entity, it’s constituent members really 
are not, even if still individually intelligent.  
By this same reasoning we can remove from our 
list of multi-species empires, an example like the  
Wraith from Stargate Atlantis, a vampire species 
that feeds on humans for their lifeforce energy,  
because there’s no intertwined civilization 
going on there, anymore than humans and cows,  
except that the Wraith seem to take perverse 
pleasure in terrorizing their prey too.  
It's not that either the Borg or Wraith or 
for that matter, the Reapers from Mass Effect  
aren’t examples of Multi-Species Empires, they 
just aren’t what we are usually picturing as  
one, in a Space Opera context, and one can make a 
pretty good argument that the Borg are essentially  
a deconstruction or dark mirror of the classic 
humans & aliens federations of Star Trek and  
many other series, though in a different way than 
the brutal empires we see in Star Trek’s various  
Mirror Universe episodes. Those are cruel and 
sadistic, like the Wraith, the Borg are just cold. 
Now we can’t actually rule out an empire that’s 
basically founded on the principle that there’s  
one species or group that totally runs the 
show and keeps everyone else around for its  
own depraved delights and hobbies. It seems rather 
unlikely and we explored it more in our episode  
Gods & Monsters a few years back, but another 
Stargate example, the original evil aliens,  
the Goa’uld, were a race of parasites who 
lived in human hosts, kept other humans as  
slaves and worshippers, and had modified 
some humans into a new species, the Jaffa,  
who were combination soldier and incubator, 
though still every bit as much the slaves. 
It isn’t too hard to imagine a fairly 
conquest-oriented civilization keeping a lot of  
slaves or tributary kingdoms. And it also isn’t 
too hard to imagine them selectively breeding  
or genetically modifying them to be better at 
some roles. Genetically perfected caste systems  
are common in scifi and I can’t say they’re 
terribly implausible either. This could obviously  
mean you found or made or modified a race of 
critters who were great as soldiers and another  
that were great as administrators, and that might 
mean you had modified a single species from one  
world or a whole bunch from different worlds.
Calling two aliens evolved on separate planets  
‘of different species’ is probably abusing the 
word, especially if you’re simultaneously trying  
to use it to describe a bunch of branches or 
modifications of an actual species from one world,  
as aliens from different worlds aren’t even in the 
same biological kingdom or phylum as each other,  
less related than mushrooms, dolphins, 
and Ebola are too each other and us.  
Nonetheless, it happens a lot in scifi, and I 
think for today we really only mean “Multi-Species  
Empire” where the distance apart is a lot more 
than, say, human, chimpanzees, and orangutans.  
Not simply where someone has modified a species 
a bit or it’s undergone speciation from a few  
millennia of isolation. Of course in galactic 
empire terms, especially without FTL, we could be  
talking civilizations millions of years old. And 
we could also be looking at uplifted animals, like  
dolphins taken and given hands and bigger brains.
We see an example of specialized races and  
uplifting with the Jem’hadar and Vorta in 
totalitarian Dominion of Star Trek: Deep Space  
Nine, who play the military and administration 
of that empire. The Empire’s founders,  
called the Founders, have massively modified 
the genetics of both species – programming in  
utter loyalty and even drug addiction, and 
of course great skill at their chosen role. 
This is one way a multi-species empire can form 
too, and plausible in my opinion. One of the  
big problems with a galaxy full of thousands of 
worlds where intelligent life separately arose,  
is that somebody had to be first, and with 
FTL they should have had the galaxy utterly  
colonized in a few thousand years, as quick 
as they could reasonably grow and explore.  
Whereas even a thousand species, big as that 
is, spread over a billion years of galactic  
emergence would only mean one every million 
years popped up. Even without FTL though,  
it should only take about a million years, 
tops, for one civilization to spread over  
the whole galaxy and claim it. So we don’t 
really expect rival empires of different alien  
species popping up simultaneously, except 
by fragmentation of the original empire. 
However we wouldn’t expect all these 
worlds to be devoid of life. They might be,  
life might be that rare and need to get seeded on 
barren worlds. More likely though, if we assumed  
a thousand worlds per galaxy would eventually 
produce intelligent life independently by now,  
your species would be getting to space about the 
same time a hundred other planets were getting to  
various levels of fairly smart animal, running 
some spectrum from dinosaurs up to dolphins or  
maybe even a chimp or neanderthal. The galaxy is 
yours, you own an empire of a trillion worlds,  
it’s not hard to imagine you deciding to keep 
those critters around as a curiosity. To you  
a single planet in your galaxy is to us what a 
single small zoo the size of a football field is. 
With these primitive aliens, maybe they start 
getting smart on their own and you uplift some  
to help manage and police things, so you need 
not bother personally, they can share the load,  
and the blame. This is essentially the origin 
story of the Peacekeepers from Farscape, they were  
uplifted and organized by a species known as the 
Eidolons who were pacifists and so the group got  
their name unironically originally, but eventually 
the Eidolons disappeared from the scene and the  
Peacekeeper organization slowly turned into 
something much more violent and authoritarian.  
It is not too hard to imagine creating 
specialized agents to handle things for you,  
and while we might frown on that ourselves, aliens 
might not. More to the point, we wouldn’t feel too  
bad about creating artificial intelligence to 
perform such roles, and it’s very debatable if  
making a biological organism from scratch is any 
different than that. It also is hardly implausible  
a future galaxy is one ruled and populated 
by artificial intelligence, and those could  
come in just as many species, mutation happens.
Something to keep in mind for colonizing a galaxy.  
You’re the Firstborn species of a newly founded 
galactic empire, and all over the galaxy,  
folks are speciating while at the same time you’re 
uplifting your own pets, smart cats, smart dogs,  
and creating artificial intelligence. Someone’s 
probably tried uplifting a few of these alien  
species too. Time is creeping on, a million 
years, two, three, even left alone a couple  
of them are getting smart now, but after a few 
million years, your own colonies a hundred light  
years away are no closer to you in appearance 
and behavior, and honestly probably genetics,  
than those uplifted pets you had. So you 
might spawn a multi-species empire that way. 
Specialized races certainly seems plausible, but 
I’d be more dubious about them being natural.  
It is easy to imagine we might meet 10 or 20 other 
species and find each of us was just better at  
some major task than the others. Our genius or 
virtuoso at some area is their average citizen.  
So the nominal 10 or 20 departments or key 
organizations of the empire are basically  
each run by that species, your Klingon 
soldiers, your Vulcan scientists, and so on.  
And again this is plausible enough as it 
would seem likely that getting yourself  
from smart animal to technological 
civilization probably relies on,  
to borrow a term from RPGs, bumping up your stats 
a lot. In D&D, that would be Intelligence, Wisdom,  
and Charisma traditionally, for non-physical ones, 
and White Wolf had Charisma, Intelligence, Wits,  
Perception, Manipulation, and Appearance. Lots 
of other systems had other stats and scales. 
There are a lot of traits that are handy to 
have in our civilization, and which would seem  
to be necessary for that civilization or make it 
much easier for it to exist and improve anyway.  
Those are numerous and they come in many flavors, 
and one might imagine each civilization having,  
say, ten relevant stats each with a score of 
1 to 10, we’ll just call them math, logic,  
judgment, negotiation, administration, 
leadership, agreeableness, aggressiveness,  
creativity, and patience – those were 
pretty arbitrarily selected by the way. 
So everybody has a 1 to 10 in each and presumably 
starts fairly low and evolution slowly adds points  
to various groups. You could have a score of 
anywhere from 0-100 as an individual and as a  
species average. Say a score of 50 is enough to 
start making you look more than just an animal  
and a score of 60 gets you in the technological 
avalanche to modern times. Well some species have  
Captain Average stats, like about a 6 in 
everything – this is often humans in scifi –  
and others might have a lot more 1s and 10s.
And it might be that you just can’t get into  
space until one or two of those stats specifically 
hits an 8, like logic, you just can’t get rockets  
working without being good at it. So maybe 
evolution got all your other stats up to 9s  
and 10s before that finally happened and you get 
on the galactic stage as near supermen when you  
do – this is also often implied with humans in 
scifi. Or maybe you got found, you never need  
to know rockets because another species who did 
came across you and was impressed with your other  
stats. The Krogan in Mass Effect come close to 
this, they come from a planet that’s basically  
a suburb of hell so they are tough as nails, 
breed and grow fast, and are very good at war.  
They are decent with technology, enough to have 
gotten themselves into several nuclear wars,  
and they get uplifted by another race, the 
tech-savvy Salarians, to help fight their battles.  
Needless to say, if you can 
modify your species’ stats,  
genetically or cybernetically, this somewhat 
cuts into any argument for species caste systems 
Now, this brings up another issue with 
Multi-species empires, and that’s birth rates.  
The Krogan made a great military ally because 
they bred like rabbits and liked fighting,  
but that also makes them bad peacetime neighbors. 
They could have a thousand kids a year, each,  
who all needed a place to live and 
didn’t mind taking someone else’s.  
The answer the Salarians came up with was 
basically to give them a virus that wrecked  
their fertility. The morality of that is 
at best a ‘lesser of two horrendous evils’,  
and I always liked Mass Effect for not giving 
easy moral outs to the players and characters,  
like a lot of scifi does. In any event, it 
is a likely issue in multi-species empires. 
Now on the one hand, nature has two basic 
approaches to reproduction: quantity and quality;  
which is to say that you ensure your species 
survives by either having tons of offspring  
or by putting tons of effort into a small number. 
Now this is actually a false dichotomy, you could  
have a species that had a ton of children and each 
with a high survival rate but that usually isn’t  
necessary given how fast a species can double 
and fill up an environment compared to how fast  
it can mutate. Generally speaking we would expect 
single births or smaller and less frequent litters  
to be more common with intelligent species 
though there’s a lot of assumptions in there  
about how intelligence forms biologically that 
might have a big terrestrial bias. There really  
is no ironclad rule saying an organism can’t 
hatch from an egg able to take care of itself  
and still grow to be human intelligent and 
also still want to have social relationships. 
Even if that is true though, that species 
with technology usually come from low birth  
rate species, there is still likely to be a huge 
difference in growth rates, by both technology and  
culture. Consider, a civilization whose numbers 
increased by 1% a year – about what Earth’s does  
nowadays – versus 2%, then a thousand years 
from now, both starting with the population  
we have now, there’s 200 trillion of that first 
civilization, 20,000 times as many of them, and  
maybe 20,000 colonized worlds in their empire, and 
the second civilization actually has 4 quintillion  
people and more like 400 million worlds. Compound 
interest is an impressive thing. Now imagine a  
planet just like ours came on the scene at that 
point, a thousand years later, 3000 AD, when  
Civilization A controls 20,000 worlds and 
B has 400 Million. Let’s say they have a 3%  
growth-rate per year, well, come the year 4000 AD, 
they, Civilization C, go from one lone planet to 7  
trillion of them, probably about every reasonably 
terraformable rock in this galaxy. Civilization A,  
at 20,000 worlds in 3000 AD is now up to 400 
million in the year 4000 AD. As big as B was  
in 3000 AD, but now dwarfed by civilization 
C, when a thousand years back they had an  
empire of 20,000 worlds and C only had 1.
Civilization B, at 400 Million in 3000AD,  
come 4000 AD, is up to 160 Quadrillion, 
which represents a fair chunk of the  
worlds in a Supercluster of galaxies, though 
more realistically would represent something  
like 10-12 million Kardashev 2 solar systems, 
especially without FTL, Faster Than Light Travel,  
and be in a rough sphere a couple thousand light 
years wide, a tiny little dot in the galaxy still.  
Come the year 5000 AD, Civilization 
C will have caught up to them too. 
Note that in all of these cases they have easily 
populated a whole galaxy in a handful of millenia,  
not even a millionth of the time this 
galaxy has been around. Also note that  
human population growth rates, tiny compared to 
things like cats or dogs, let alone egg layers,  
is currently 1.1% and has been as high as 3% 
and higher. This generally is why we tend to  
think the first species on the galactic stage gets 
to control that stage, either by being the only  
people on it or just being more numerous by far.
Now you can actively seek to curb or accelerate  
growth, and high-tech civilizations can use 
fertility meds, devote more time to child-rearing  
than basic survival, even have extended lifespans 
and cloning technology, or flat out duplication  
for post-humans. However, it is still very easy 
to imagine lots of tension between civilizations  
based on how quickly they are claiming new worlds 
and filling them up, or immigrating to other  
species’ worlds inside this galactic empire. 
Indeed we could imagine terrorist style groups  
trying to emulate Thanos inside such empires to 
either curb the growth of one very fertile species  
or to clear room for them. It is not hard to 
imagine lots of conflict and strife in such cases.  
To keep up the MCU references, they may have a 
vested interest in curbing technological growth  
too, unless you hatch some Tiamat-style Celestial 
from your world in the form of a Technological  
Singularity, that takes over the whole galaxy.
Another strategy, especially for high-tech and  
early arrivers on the scene, is not to worry 
about your species at all. Obviously there is  
an implication in a multi-species empire of the 
more friendly kinds we see in science fiction,  
that species shouldn’t matter and that one focuses 
on ideals, or more selfishly maybe, one’s self.  
If you’re potentially immortal through your own 
technology, well exponential cumulative growth  
works on stock markets and ownership as well as it 
does for breeding. Right now if humanity divided  
up the whole galaxy to each living person, we 
would each get something like 50 stars a piece.  
If we wrote that up as a big old contract, 
and issued deeds to those stars to everyone,  
then by the end of the year, I’d imagine at 
least half the population would have sold  
theirs, and probably for less than a 
thousand bucks a piece, when in the  
long term each is considerably more valuable 
than our entire current planetary economy. 
Mind you, selling those might be smart, and 
taking the money and investing it in something  
more short term or in the company 
that builds colony ships or such.  
Imagine we also found life extension technology 
soon too and folks could realistically expect to  
live a few million years. A million years from 
now you might have a couple billion folks who  
kept their system deeds, or most of them, and 
even bought more of them, and who had a vested  
interest in making sure those remained valid. They 
might be people still, they might be some giant  
computer intelligence or super brain, but they’ve 
got that deed and everything that grew up on it. 
And all those fleets and banks and marketing 
firms and other assets to help them retain power.  
They might easily be in charge of such a 
multi-species empire a billion years down the road  
and not really care which of those species 
were direct descendants, mutant cousins,  
uplifted cats or dogs, or alien tentacle monsters 
from some system ten thousand light years from  
their homeworld. All of these things are 
alien to what you used to be or are now,  
and far more than any star trek alien of the week 
with a couple bumps or spots on their forehead.  
Aliens so alien in appearance or motive that the 
very idea of living and working with them might be  
unimaginable or disgusting, while others might 
be alliances of convenience or bonds as close as  
humans have with cats, dogs, and horses.
And the thing to keep in mind is,  
even in a real universe where FTL travel and 
communication is probably not in the cards,  
you could have large regions of space, some 
local mega-swarm of a thousand solar systems  
all composed of thinly overlapping sea, of 
space habitats numbering in the quadrillions,  
home to a trillion, trillion people, where you 
had constant waves of aliens immigrating in and  
out of parts of that swarm or from neighboring 
regions, raising thousands of giant multi-species  
empires lasting decades or millenia, all inside a 
relatively tiny piece of the galaxy no bigger to  
that galaxy than a small village is to Earth.
And yet in that little village might be that  
trillion, trillion people, which could easily 
allow a trillion ‘species’ of a trillion people  
each. Inside a colonized galaxy there is no 
reason folks might not still migrate around,  
and find themselves meeting new and strange 
people and hoping to carve out a home,  
peacefully or by force, and forming new nations 
or alliances. Many might find themselves spending  
centuries on exodus and arriving at places that 
had more alien-ish species than all of modern  
scifi has produced combined, living around just 
one star, each of those millions of species having  
millions of factions composed of millions 
of people, and again, just around one star. 
So on first approximation we tend to think 
Multi-species empires would be rare things,  
but as we often note on this show, aliens may be 
rare now, but wait a million years and they’ll be  
all over the galaxy, even if they maybe all had 
a connection back to Earth or to some scientist  
from Earth that created them in a lab or uplifted 
them on a primitive world. Such being the case,  
it seems almost inevitable that you would 
have multi-species empires as a result,  
assuming the term even means anything by then. 
And given the sheer quantities involved, across  
a whole galaxy, we would expect them to come in 
virtually every flavor, from military conquests to  
peaceful alliances, close sharing of worlds, to an 
agreement to mind each other’s space, totalitarian  
expansionists to pacifist reclusive, and a 
million, billion, trillion shades in between. 
As always, one of the few things we can say 
about the future with much certainty, is that,  
if we live to see it, it should 
be a pretty interesting place,  
since there will be so much of it… and it 
should be full of many interesting peoples.
So we have a few announcements to get to along 
with our schedule but first it is time for the  
Audible Audiobook of the Month and keeping with 
today’s theme I wanted to recommend the awesome  
ongoing space opera series Dread Empire’s Fall 
by Walter Jon Williams, the tale of humanity  
and many other species kept under the thumb of an 
oppressive empire that’s finally started falling  
apart after untold millennia and the wars and 
alliance that break out as that empire collapses. 
I’d encountered Dread Empire’s Fall by 
coincidence, having been grabbing an  
audiobook from Glen Cook’s excellent Dread Empire 
series when I saw the similar series title and  
saw they were narrated by Stefan Rudnicki, one of 
my favorite audiobook narrators, so I thought I’d  
give it a try. It didn’t take me long to realize 
that Walter Jon Williams was an emerging space  
opera author to rival greats like David Weber, 
John Ringo, Timothy Zahn, and Micheal Stackpole.  
Dread Empire’s Fall is everything I love about 
Space Opera and military scifi, and William’s  
take on why a ruthless ancient civilization is 
finally falling is inventive and novel, so I’m  
glad to award the first novel in the series, 
Praxis, our Audible Audiobook of the Month. 
So we mentioned an awful lots of books and authors 
there and even more throughout the episode and  
one of the things I love about Audible is just how 
comprehensive their collection of audiobooks is,  
but also how they have encouraged so many 
authors to take their work and make it available  
as an audiobook too. But they don’t just have 
audiobooks, including many excellent podcasts,  
such as Science & Futurism with Isaac 
Arthur. It also has Reels of Justice,  
the podcast show where movies are brought before 
a jury to be tried, and I recently was on for  
another appearance to serve as the Defense for 
the 2021 version of Frank Herbert’s classic Dune. 
That’s just some of the great 
content in the Audible Plus Catalog,  
which also has sleep & meditation tracks 
available, as well as guided fitness programs  
for getting into shape for the spring, and Audible 
Original’s like Impact Winter, from the folks who  
brought you Pacific Rim and the Walking Dead.
Audible has got literally centuries worth  
of content for you to pick from to keep you 
entertained while commuting or working out,  
including about 500 hours of this show now, and 
the whole Audible Plus Catalog full of free books  
and other content, comes as a bonus when you 
join Audible, in addition to your usual 1 free  
audiobook each month and big member discounts on 
additional ones, and as always, new members can  
try Audible for free for the first month, just go 
to Audible.com/isaac, or text isaac to 500-500. 
So down the years a lot of folks have generously 
supported this show on Patreon but for one reason  
or another many have decided to leave that 
platform and been requesting I open up an  
additional option, so SFIA will also now be on 
Subscribestar, and I will link that in the episode  
description. We are remaining on Patreon too and 
you can also help fund the channel by joining  
Nebula, or donating via paypal or even snail 
mail, or by clicking on our sponsors, and as  
always we’re grateful for everyone’s continued 
support especially in rough economic times. 
Also again, I recently re-appeared on the Reels 
of Justice podcast to look at the Dune 2021 film  
and as usual they were a ton of fun to work 
with, make sure to check that episode out. 
Speaking of episodes, next week we’ll be asking 
what would happen if Earth lost the sun and became  
a rogue planet? After that we’ll ask how people 
travel around planets once they settle there,  
be it hang gliding through the clouds of 
Venus or darting between shadowy craters  
on sun-roasted Mercury. Then we’ll take a look 
at the concept of a Technological Singularity,  
an artificial intelligence of stunning 
capability appearing seemingly overnight,  
and ask if that outcome is inevitable. And 
Two Sunday’s from now we’ll have our Monthly  
Livestream Q&A on April 24th, 4 pm Eastern Time.
Now if you want alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to 
the Channel and hit the notifications bell,  
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit 
the like button, share it with others, and  
leave a comment below. You can also join in the 
conversation on any of our social media forums,  
find our audio-only versions of the show, 
or donate to support future episodes,  
and all those options and more are listed 
in the links in the episode description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
