Today’s episode is the third and final of
a three part series looking at what life might
be like on colonies or colonial spaceships.
Today we are focusing on interstellar colonies,
or more accurately early interstellar colonies.
As we have noted before, with the barrier
of light speed communication, in many ways
a colony around another star is almost an
alien civilization, as we can expect them
to diverge from us quite quickly, as these
things go.
This is something we discussed before in the
episode on the Kardashev Scale, cultures diverge
pretty quickly in isolation and when you toss
in options for genetic engineering and cybernetics
you could get major physical and psychological
divergences quite quickly.
So that is why our focus today is on Early
Extrasolar Colonies.
What the ones relatively near Earth would
be like early on, not what some colony halfway
across the galaxy might be like by the time
we get their message saying they arrived safely,
fifty thousand years after they sent it and
maybe half a million years since they left.
Possibly hopping from planet to planet, settling
each in a long chain from Earth all the way
to the edge of the galaxy.
As you might recall from last episode, I introduced
the idea of a Gardener Ship, a vessel that
did just that, leaving Earth and stopping
at stars to drop off most of its passenger
and equipment, and remaining for a few years
to help them get setup and to bring on new
fuel and raw materials.
Once they left they would repopulate their
numbers on the long journey and manufacture
new colonial equipment in their many decades
of space flight to the next system.
We named our example ship Unity, after the
colony ship from one of my favorite games
about colonizing alien planets, Sid Meier’s
Alpha Centauri.
When we left off in episode 2 Unity had just
arrived at our target System of Tau Ceti.
Now Unity was a big ship, 500 meters wide
and 2000 long, massing over a hundred million
tons, and able to travel at 10% of light speed.
It’s a huge ship that when it left Earth
had 200,000 souls aboard, and arrived 120
years later with 300,000.
We will also assume they have a couple dozen
smaller interplanetary colonial ships like
we discussed last time, the Hyperion, except
in that our example Hyperion was intentional
made very slow for what a fusion craft should
be capable of so we could analyze a longer
voyage.
We will assume fusion reactors are still pretty
big and massive things not suited for landing
in atmospheres let alone leaving them, so
we will say they have larger fusion powered
freighters meant for space alone and more
aerodynamic shuttles meant for landing on
planets, using some chemical fuel like now,
probably hydrogen and oxygen, so they can
get back off a planet too but not with much
cargo.
Shuttles and Freighters.
I will also assume someone has figured out
a material cheap enough to mass produce and
strong enough to serve as a space elevator
on an Earth-mass planet, so that we can use
one on Aurora.
Not a huge stretch, as we’ve discussed before
there are materials that will do that job
for any object decently less massive than
Earth and it possible Graphene, the miraculously
strong carbon allotrope, could get the job
done on Earth.
If not we would have to fall back on some
other launch assist methods we discussed before
but I don’t think it is too huge of a stretch
to assume these technologies for our discussion
today, just so long as we keep in mind there
are lower technology approaches to fall back
on if we do not have these.
Okay, let us walk through the mechanics of
this colonization, with those assumptions.
Our New Solar System
We picked Tau Ceti as the system for our hypothetical
example for a few reasons.
At 12 light years from Earth it is the closest
G-type star that isn’t a binary or multiple
star system.
As a G8 star it is dimmer and smaller than
our own sun, a G2, making it only about half
as bright as our own sun.
It is also older than our sun by a billion
years and change but that’s okay, since
it is smaller, it will live a few billion
years longer anyway.
It has long been a popular place in science
fiction for those reasons.
Tons of authors have used it as setting, including
my namesake Isaac Asimov, who used it as the
home system for the planet Aurora, the most
powerful of the fifty ‘Spacer Worlds’
in his classic Robot series.
It has always been considered a great candidate
for planets too.
Which we know it has, now that our telescopes
are good enough to see them.
And it has lots of them.
We’ve only found five so far, but they are
all either quite big or quite close to their
sun.
It is always easier to see the ones that are
bigger or closer to their sun.
So we are on pretty safe ground to assume
there’s plenty more.
It also has a huge debris disk, estimated
to contain ten times the asteroids and comets
our solar system has.
So even if it doesn’t have a good Earth
Analogue we have doubtless got tons of moons
and asteroids to work with.
As we saw in episode 1 and discussed many
times before, moons and asteroids are in many
ways easier to colonize, especially if we
have fusion as a power source, which we do
today.
So we don’t need to worry about if any of
those planets are of a good size and distance
for classic terraforming.
Truth be told, odds are good that by the time
we get around to doing interstellar colonization
a very large part of humanity, possibly a
super-majority, will have been born and raised
inside cylinder habitats inside asteroids
so many might not only be indifferent to whether
there is an Earth-like planet in a system
they could terraform but quite uncomfortable
at the notion of living on one.
Still, we wouldn’t be thorough if we bypassed
this option so we will assume a fair amount
of the colonists came on this trip because
they wanted an Earth-like planet to settle
now that Earth is fairly full.
Probably most of the folks who went on ice
for the voyage.
Since we are not actually talking about Tau
Ceti so much as any random solar system we
will assume there is a decently Earth-like
habitable zone planet there so we can discuss
that option, and I will go ahead and call
it Aurora.
I will also assume it has got some sort of
gas giant decently far from its sun, a safe
enough bet.
Unity, here to help us setup and also needing
to pick up new raw materials and fuel, is
not suited for landing on Aurora, at least
not if we wants to take off again, we might
be able to land it in one piece.
This means our first stop is not Aurora.
That’s a major point worth clarifying.
We always think of the first stop in a new
solar system being the planet we plan to terraform,
but from a practical perspective it is the
last place you want to stop.
Gravity is not your friend, the hardest part
about creating a large industrial infrastructure
in our own solar system is getting the equipment
and manpower off Earth to begin with.
When arriving in a new solar system you want
to get that basic space infrastructure in
place before landing on that planet.
This is even more true in our case since Unity
is not going to land on Aurora.
It is also going to leave the Tau Ceti System
in a few years.
It needs fuel and raw materials for that trip,
and it also needs them to maneuver around
this solar system helping with colonization.
It needs fuel, hydrogen or deuterium, and
that is going to be abundant anywhere in the
outer solar system where methane and water
ice will contain plenty of hydrogen, oxygen,
and carbon.
Even as huge as Unity is it could retank all
its fuel, water, and air off even a modest
comet or icy moon, probably hundreds of time
over.
Gravity isn’t your friend if you are spaceship
so we would probably be looking for a decent
sized icy body as close in toward the sun
as we could find.
That’s going to be our true alpha base because
Unity is going to go right up to thing and
just park on it for a while.
So Unity spots a large number of moons around
that gas giant, three of interest being a
moon with its own thick nitrogen atmosphere
like Titan has, one a smaller icy moon, and
another smaller, rocky one that shows signs
of being heavy in metals and carbon.
They also notice the gas giant has one giant
eye-shaped perpetual storm a bit like Jupiter’s
Great Red Spot, and decide for thematic purposes
to name the gas giant Odin, as mythological
parallel to Jupiter, and Odin had only one
eye.
Having done so they name the rocky Moon Thor,
the Titan-like planet with its atmosphere
Njord, for the Norse God of Wind, and our
icy moon Hodor, for the Norse God of Winter,
not the Game of Thrones character, though
I am going to pronounce it that way anyway
because I loved that character.
Incidentally I’m naming these things and
getting a bit specific because we are planning
to discuss administration and governance this
time and that is going to be easier if we
try to use some examples.
So Unity is going to head into Hodor and make
it the first place it lands.
Landing
Now Njord is the only one of these moons that
Unity couldn’t land and take off from, so
they go ahead and find a nice large crater
on Hodor, and land just inside the rim.
Odin is probably hitting them with a fair
amount of radiation and Tau Ceti probably
has a lot more debris wandering around risking
collision damage.
Unity is quite heavily armored but the colony
here won’t be initially, so they will be
setting up around the rim and probably building
things better resembling igloos than domes.
Now that they have water they have energy
to spare, since removing hydrogen from water,
or even deuterium, costs a tiny fraction of
the energy it will produce when used in a
fusion reactor.
Since they do have fusion they don’t care
about the distant and dim sun as a source
of power, the colony here does not need the
sunlight.
Also, Hodor isn’t a big moon, we didn’t
want a big moon with lots of gravity, so the
colonists will be living inside spin-gravity
habitats anyway and won’t consider the surface
to be ‘up’ in the normal sense.
Those buildings on the surface will possess
just enough gravity to make things fall down
and will exist just to handle operations on
the surface which will mostly be loading and
unloading freighters.
It is very easy to dig deep because it is
all ice, plus some rocky meteors mixed in.
They can just melt tunnels though more likely
they’d cut blocks of ice out and move them.
A meter wide cube of ice might weigh one ton
on Earth, but here a person could carry one
on each shoulder like they were just big cushions.
You could also make large ice domes by just
having a thin dome frame, with another a bit
above it, and filling the interior with water
then letting it freeze and removing your frame
to use elsewhere.
Unity had a giant power plant, as mentioned
last time, so they could be melting megatons
of water and have huge hoses snaking to hundreds
of domes if they wanted, each meant to be
meters thick of ice sturdy enough to act as
bomb shelters, because gravity is so low that
all those meters of ice don’t require any
structural support.
Later on they will probably want to include
a ceiling with thick insulation so they can
heat those domes without melting them but
for now they will do.
They are basically just making warehouses
for the moment.
So everyone is popping champagne corks of
course, probably on 120 year old bottles brought
from Earth.
As mentioned last time, of the original 200,000
colonists, half stayed awake and half went
on ice.
Those that stayed awake are still alive, again
as mentioned last time, the simple ability
to restore life to people who have been frozen
for a century also strongly implies the technology
to extend human lifetimes indefinitely.
During the voyage those original 100,000 gave
birth to another 100,000 people, though many
are probably their grandkids and great-grand-kids
too.
Assuming half a liter of champagne each, incidentally,
means they stored and drank roughly 150 tons
of champagne.
Everyone is happy and excited and ready to
get to work of course.
Here on Hodor they are setting up a couple
of fusion reactors to power the colony and
melt ice and use electrolysis to separate
the hydrogen and oxygen for those reactors
and for Unity.
Unity is not staying long.
Probably just a few weeks to off load cargo,
restock its tanks with fuel, water, and oxygen,
and give everyone a chance to get off the
ship, stretch their legs and look around.
They will then go ahead and leave Hodor, leaving
behind all their freighters.
Those will follow along with more water and
oxygen and fuel in a week or so when they
are full.
The colonists on Hodor have the easiest job
of the three moons so they are also expected
to do most of the food growth for Odin.
They have tons of hydroponics equipment on
Unity, which won’t need most of it anymore
since most of its passengers are disembarking
in the coming months.
The big construction task is going to be setting
up tons of hydroponics.
However they do not have a lot of nitrogen
locally or minerals, and the former is going
to come from Njord.
It has that big thick nitrogen atmosphere
but it also has a gravity well that is a bit
much for freighters.
So before we go there we will be looking into
getting minerals needed for plant nutrients
and construction.
So they head over to Thor, which is a rocky,
airless moon with even less gravity than Hodor.
Here they are going to have to spend more
time, digging in and getting smelters and
refineries running.
While they are digging they are going to take
some of rock on board to process into metal
and test their ability to make tethers for
space elevators.
Njord will need one, though even modern day
materials would do for that.
Still we said we have better materials and
we will act accordingly.
Once again they landed in a crater and they
began digging into the floor and rim again,
and assembling cylinder habitats inside, but
not as many because it is mostly just meant
for living room.
There will be hydroponics, which may be expanded
to full self-sufficiency later, but for now
they are just going to have enough of that
for water and air recycling and some fresh
produce.
They are also going to do something a bit
weird.
Onlookers who weren’t paying much attention
to mission briefings will notice two larger
rocky outcroppings are having cylinders built
right up in them, which seems a bit of strange
activity.
They are bit surprised when the the freighters
from Hodor arrive with their first shipment
a month later and Unity lifts off and rips
both of those outcroppings free and drags
them along into space.
Unity has plenty of fuel now and can easily
drag an equal mass of rock around these moons.
When they get to Njord, our bigger moon with
a nitrogen atmosphere, one of those big outcroppings
gets positioned at stationary orbit and a
space elevator goes down with an end attached
to a shuttle that goes to land on the surface
below.
Now cargo can come back up that way and go
down too.
Space elevators require counterweights and
big thick ones meant for lots of cargo require
larger ones plus a port facility, so we just
brought one along to serve as counterweight
and orbital hub.
Once more Unity remains for a while to get
things in place and to unload cargo and take
on a lot of nitrogen.
Those freighters have probably gone back and
forth between Hodor and Thor a few times by
now and will start a circuit back and forth
between those two moons and the orbital dock
on Njord.
We have now completed a genuine, self-sufficient
interstellar colony.
They don’t really need much trade between
them either after the first few rounds, so
they really only need two freighters, one
as a spare, and they could just meander around
on the same circuit, one following the route
backwards.
In fact those two alone probably have far
more cargo capacity than would be necessary
for centuries to come since they could carry
at least a ton of cargo each trip for every
single citizen at their destination.
But the real goal is to colonize Aurora, our
Earth-like planet, so we will head there next.
First though, we are going to drop off a lot
of the folks currently planning to leave with
Unity.
We will have to return to pick up fuel and
raw material for the ship before it leaves
and about half of the folks will remain behind
to help with setup and production.
Most of those will ride back to Hodor and
Thor on the freighters.
We don’t particularly need those for Aurora
which seems to have a decent amount of nitrogen
in its own atmosphere and oceans.
Now we did an entire episode on Terraforming
and terraforming a planet that is about the
mass and temperature of Earth is not too hard.
We are going arrive in orbit with our remaining
orbital hub and deploy it.
However, this time we will be doing an extra
trick.
Back in the space elevators episode I pointed
out that you can have more than one tether
running up to the same hub, but with their
bases on the ground far apart.
Sort of like guy wires on a radio mast.
So long as at least one of those tethers is
in the north and south hemisphere each we
can keep the hub in equilibrium and can put
our tethers wherever we like, not just on
the equator.
This will allow us to cheaply unload to multiple
sites and also gives a handy means of traveling
back and forth between locations.
In fact the tethers can meet up before the
orbital hub at a lower hub to make surface
to surface transport easier.
There will be a non-stop flow of goods coming
down from Unity in large part to test its
ability to manufacture tons of goods.
The ship wasn’t originally meant to be a
perpetual mobile factory so while it all works
on paper they want to test it.
Virtually all of those goods, in terms of
raw mass, will be glass and struts for domes.
Those won’t be actual glass but something
more like transparent metal, we have stuff
these days that we can make like that so presumably
they will have something better or gotten
the process down better.
Now I have often pointed out the flaw of the
idea of living under glass domes on Mars or
the Moon, so it might seem peculiar I’m
suggesting it now, but Aurora already has
a decently thick atmosphere that burns up
meteors so it works here.
Aurora doesn’t have the right atmosphere
mix, it is terribly unlikely any would which
didn’t already have life on them, but we
will assume the right stuff is there just
not in the right mix or density.
It wouldn’t matter much if the pressure
was too high or too low, just so long as it
is thick enough to burn up meteors and not
so thick sunlight can’t get through or the
pressure is so high the domes would need to
be as sturdy as a submarine.
The funny thing is that we don’t just need
domes overhead but floors underneath.
We cannot just assume the native rock will
be right for Earth life.
Not right away.
You could have a fair amount of heavy metals
and radioactive isotopes in the top layer
of regolith.
So you will probably be using tons of vats
of algae that you have crushed up local rock
into to build up your more Earthlike topsoil.
This will be a long, long process.
It won’t be done when Unity gets to its
next system, nor likely totally complete when
it gets to its tenth stop.
We have people on this colony that were probably
not young when they left Earth and spent 120
years coming here, but they will have to live
at least as long before Aurora is a place
you can walk around on outside a dome without
a breathing mask and possibly a pressure suit.
It’s not just the land and air either.
Those oceans probably don’t have the right
salt content, and it will take a long time
before it can support a full marine ecosystem.
That process itself is not our main focus
today, again we discussed it in the Terraforming
episode, but today it is a backdrop for the
culture here.
The folks back around Odin will need years
to create the sort of nice cylinder habitats
they will be living in.
Maybe even decades, but their task of making
gardens in a bottle is a thousand times easier
and faster than terraforming a planet.
What we have here in this system is three
different civilizations already.
One is set on making a New Earth down on Aurora,
a task of centuries before it is achieved.
One is set on replicating the huge swarms
of small asteroids habitats that were springing
up everywhere around our own solar system
when they left.
A task for generations too, but with each
new one completed within a generation, each
created piecemeal, not a whole planet done
at once.
The third has an eternal task.
Unity will leave this place behind soon on
what amounts to a near eternal mission, working
for a century at a time en route to their
destination before leaving most of their people
behind in a new system and repeating the task.
Cultures adapt to their priorities and generally
tend to enshrine them.
So let’s add to the mix.
Unity spends a couple years in orbit of Aurora
and leaves it with a population of 200,000
as originally planned.
When it gets back to Odin, those moons and
the ship have a combined population of a hundred
thousand, probably a little more as people
have been getting married and having kids
the last few year since they arrived in-system.
Now those moons had a specific trio of tasks
with their own benchmarks, ones they were
probably a bit over-prepared for since you
tend to be conservative and cautious when
drawing up plans for something that’s never
been done before and is life and death a hundred
years from humanity’s homeworld.
Their first task was for setting themselves
up as a mostly self-sufficient group.
Their second was tied to that, getting the
space infrastructure in place in the Tau Ceti
system.
The third was getting Unity all the raw materials
and fuel it needed.
They have also been receiving updates in technology
from Earth this whole time, so besides their
benchmarks for success being on the easy side
of what they could have done originally, they
also have a century of new technology and
strategy for colonizing moons and asteroids.
Plus they have way more people then they originally
expected too.
So they are beyond ahead of schedule.
Part of their surplus time and energy is going
into relaxing and making their homes a bit
more luxurious of course.
Part was getting even more supplies for Unity
than was originally planned.
They’re going to go ahead and do some expansion
and improvements on the ship.
But they also have folks looking around at
all of Odin’s other moons and its own collection
of Trojan Asteroids and all those extra freighters
and thinking some expansion of their own is
a good idea.
All the equipment they are producing is exactly
what they need to settle those and the freighters
are not doing much.
We haven’t talked too much about individual
family homes, but as I noted back in episode
1 a lot smaller asteroids would work for that.
The cylinder on board Hyperion we discussed
last episode, if it was just a single level
with dirt and grass on it, makes for a fairly
nice house with a lawn of about one hectare
or two acres.
It’s not an arduous task to make such a
cylinder either.
In a fusion economy, even ignoring the automation
you probably have, you can spew out tons of
metal plating for pennies on the dollar.
Especially aluminum, which is costly because
of the energy demands of making it, and is
a nice lightweight building material that
won’t rust.
So all over these original three moons you
probably have a ton of small cylinders going
in that are just the equivalent of housing
developments or even individual homes.
Probably manufactured in a big complex and
taken to the site, it is very easy to move
large and heavy things on an airless moon
with very little gravity.
Not all of those are going in on those three
moons.
So when Unity arrives for resupply they find
out that a couple dozen of Odin’s moons
have settlements on them now.
They also find out that a lot of folks who
planned to come with them have since changed
their minds while others have decided they
don’t like the idea of living on these moons
or Aurora and sign onboard for Unity’s second
mission.
Lots of people change around their place while
Unity is docked for a few months retrofitting.
Some come back from Aurora, to live around
Odin or on Unity, some go off to those other
moons and Trojan Asteroids, some leave Unity,
and finally the Captain says that’s enough,
they are leaving in a week and come tomorrow
you are where you are.
We also have a lot of folks thinking about
their original charter drawn up almost 130
years ago back on Earth.
The situation has changed a lot since then
and is going to change a lot more.
Back in the planning phase they only planned
on a small initial space infrastructure, now
they have a fairly large one.
They also have over a century of technological
updates from home.
So how should they govern themselves?
Folks around Odin make up 20% of their population,
not a few percent as originally planned.
Some on Odin are thinking they should be a
separate state.
Back on the ship they just held popular elections,
there were no real districts, now they have
districts.
Each of those three moons around Odin and
each of the three landing sites.
On top of that people are spreading out from
the landing sites and to other moons and asteroids.
For those big six, if they do districts, should
they elect their representatives to the system
government at large by proportional allocation
or one representative per district elected
by a majority?
Ideologies will mutate too.
Many will want to take that new technology
and embrace an even faster rate of terraforming
while others will say stick to the original
timeline and use that new tech to increase
the standard of living.
Others will suggest the good idea is to keep
to both the original timeline and standard
of living and divert resources to having and
raising more children.
On top of that, Tau Ceti is an old system,
older than Earth, so even though the planet
initially appeared lifeless they might find
some very basic life deep down in the oceans.
How would that alter their plans?
Others might want to use that new technology
to make lifeforms which can survive in the
existing environment, and over time people
might object to replacing that new life with
old Earth life.
It is entirely possible that the ship Unity
would barely have left the system before the
colony’s unity begins to depart too.
Even inside the template of democracy there
are dozens of major variations and options
and thousands of iterations, and as their
population grows and their communities become
more divergent and distinct it is very unlikely
everyone will want to govern themselves the
same way even if they maintain some loose
system-wide government.
The next century is bound to see a lot of
changes to their colony.
I imagine news of these changes would catch
up to our ship Unity, and be a major source
of conversation on board.
How to do it better next time?
What to iron out in advance?
I also find the notion of what sort of culture
might develop on board those Gardener Ships
as interesting as the colonies.
As they plod their way out across the galaxy
for thousand of years just settling place
after place like it was a holy duty, which
it might well become to them.
That is assuming they don’t just stop at
some point and ask “Hey, who is actually
paying us to do this?”
Which also raises the interesting question
of what sort of currency they use back on
the colony and what they use on the ship itself.
On the ship the only external thing of value
is information from back home and from their
daughter colonies they’ve been seeding behind
them.
Technology, culture, and entertainment.
They can only be paid to continue their mission
in that coin, but it is a pretty cheap one
to pay people in though very valuable to them.
On board the ship the situation is a bit different,
at each stop they refuel but then have a set
amount of raw material and energy to get to
the next place which has to be rationed.
You could get some very interesting cultures
and economies on board those.
Potentially an ever-changing one, but since
they also stop every century to leave most
of their people behind they also have a pressure
vent to remove those people least content
with life on the ship.
So some good food for thought there I hope,
we still never have really answered the question
of what life in a colony would be like but
I think we did reach our goal of not just
explaining some of the mechanics of colonization
but putting a more human face on it, seeing
some of the non-technical challenges.
To do much more than that we would have to
go the route of fiction where we can not only
set our specific technologies available but
follow along with some characters we can get
to know and empathize with.
There are a lot of great books on that score
too, especially on the human front, I can
recommend a few: The Mars Trilogy by Kim Stanley
Robinson, The Martian Chronicles by Ray Bradbury,
Speaker for the Dead and Ender in Exile by
Orson Scott Card, and Ben Bova’s Grand Tour
series.
Next week we will return to the Fermi Paradox
Series to discuss the idea of Stay-at-Home
Civilizations, the idea that some alien civilizations
might never leave their home planet, in contrast
to our topic for today.
We will explore the idea that we might never
leave Earth and why that might be.
If you want alerts when that and other videos
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode, make sure to
hit the like button, share it with others,
and try out some of the other episodes on
the channel.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great day!
