The sun is a mass of incandescent gas, a giant
nuclear furnace.
Without the sun, without a doubt, there’d
be no you and me, but the sun is hot, and
it is not a place where we could live… or
is it?
Welcome back to Science and Futurism with
Isaac Arthur, and welcome to our fourth year.
I am your host, the aforementioned Isaac Arthur.
If there’s one thing this channel tends
to be known for, it is truly enormous and
over-the-top concepts, like artificial planets
or moving solar systems or even galaxies.
But we always try to stick to things inside
known physical laws, and on those rare occasions
we don’t we hang a flag on it and explain
both why it probably can’t be done and some
of the other potential applications it could
be used for that get missed when using it
in science fiction.
We are going to stay inside those limits of
known physical science today, but I’ll just
warn from the outset that we are going to
be pushing that a lot.
When I first suggested an episode about colonizing
the Sun, as a chapter in our on -going look
at colonizing the solar system, the Outward
Bound series, the initial response was mostly
to assume I was joking or talking about Dyson
Swarms.
In fact, I mostly was - joking that is.
About halfway through last year I gathered
up volunteers to help review the scripts for
the episodes, and to bounce episode ideas
off of, and while I hate to admit it, their
initial response at how crazy it was is actually
what spurred me to give it a more serious
look.
While “Oh yeah?
I’ll show you!” isn’t the best motivation
for doing things, I’m glad I did succumb
to that because it made me try to tackle the
problem and it turned out there are a lot
of options there for utilizing the Sun in
a very hands-on manner.
Now in truth we have talked about utilizing
the Sun before on many occasions.
A sun-encompassing swarm of habitats or power
collectors or mirrors, a Dyson Sphere, is
something I mention on the channel at least
once a month, and is a type of Stellar Engine,
a device or group of devices meant to utilize
most of a star’s energy to some purpose,
and we’ve discussed others like the Shkadov
Thruster or Nicoll-Dyson Beam.
We will review those concepts today, and some
new ones.
We have also talked about Starlifting, a way
of mining resources from the Sun, which contains
99.8% of all resources in the solar system,
not just hydrogen or helium but all the other
elements too.
We’ll talk about that today too, but we
are going to go further and by the end of
the episode we will be talking about walking
around on the Sun or even in the Sun.
This is important as our main motivation though.
99.8% of the solar system is compacted into
that giant ball of shining plasma.
998 out of every thousand atoms are in the
sun, 1 is in Jupiter, and the remaining 1
is spread over the solar system, mostly in
the remaining three gas giants.
Classic space colonization tends to ignore
all that mass as being unavailable, even the
stuff in gas giants.
Truth be told even most of the mass in planets
gets treated as serving no purpose but to
generate gravity and fuel the occasional land
replenishment via volcano.
Even concepts like Dyson Swarms typically
still ignore all that mass in a Sun as anything
other than a source of energy.
A very big source of energy admittedly, less
than a billionth of the Sun’s light ever
reaches Earth and only a small portion of
that gets used for anything other than heat.
The ratio is so small it would be like creating
an entire hurricane just so you can get a
glass of water, or breaking into Fort Knox
to steal one person’s gold wedding ring.
This gets at the entire appeal of a Dyson
Sphere: you use all the energy, not just that
minuscule portion of it that hits planets.
You stick wads of solar panels or artificial
habitats around a star in a roughly spherical
cloud to use all that light up.
Yet again, it still ignores all that mass
in the Sun, except as a power source.
Most people find even a Dyson Sphere to be
a pretty ridiculous object, albeit mostly
because even those who have heard of one think
it’s supposed to be some giant inside-out
planet.
This was never what a Dyson Sphere was, but
the misnomer stuck so instead we call the
original a Dyson Swarm.
Such a construct takes a ton of mass to build,
and how much depends on how thick you want
to build it.
There’s plenty of mass even just on Mercury
to build solar panels all around the Sun,
but trying to build habitats with the available
mass in the solar system is much trickier,
which is where we saw the value of Starlifitng,
harvesting a star for its matter, not just
its energy.
This of course is a bit of an issue.
You can’t land on the Sun with a bucket
and shovel and start mining for metals.
Not because they aren’t there; in fact,
if you scoop some solar matter off the surface,
there’s a lot of stuff besides hydrogen
and helium in that, over 1%.
The reason is because it’s so hot, and also
because a bucket full of the Sun contains
virtually no matter, less than a bucket of
air.
The photosphere, the nominal surface of the
Sun and where the light mostly comes from,
is about 5700 Kelvin, hotter than any known
element or alloy can remain solid at, and
is a surface only in the sense that we can’t
see deeper than that.
The density of the ‘ground’ is about one
ten-millionth that of the various rocks and
dirt we walk on, and actually only about a
thousandth as dense as the air you are breathing.
Above that is the chromosphere and then the
Corona, both of which are increasingly less
dense, and finally the Heliosphere, which
is actually where all the planets are located.
So this image we have of the Sun as a sort
of molten liquid is all wrong since you don’t
crash into it any more than you crash into
a sky.
It’s not even a gas, either, but rather
a plasma.
It’s not dense at all, though far more so
than Red Giant stars - what our sun will eventually
turn into - which are so thin you could fly
a spaceship through one if it wasn’t for
the heat.
It gets denser as you go deeper, eventually
getting to be a dozen of times the density
of lead at the center, but you have to go
quite deep before it even gets as thick as
Earth’s atmosphere, let alone oceans.
There’s very little matter immediately under
your feet on the Sun, again much less than
air, and gravity is 28 times higher than on
Earth, so you’d fall down very fast with
all that force acting on you and almost nothing
in the way.
If you could dangle Earth down a long cord
into the sun, like an apple on a fishing hook
lowered into the sea, it would actually take
quite a while to destroy the planet.
It wouldn’t detonate in an instant like
people would visualize.
Indeed when we discussed one of the types
of Stellar Engine, the Weaponized death-star
like variety called a Nicoll-Dyson Beam, we
saw that you’d need to leave one on full
power on Earth for around a week to vaporize
it, though you’d roast the biosphere off
it in minutes.
The Sun gives off 63 megawatts of light per
square meter, around 60,000 times what the
light intensity hitting Earth is, so if you
had a floor between you and the sun and poked
a hole in it with a needle it would light
that room up as effectively as a normal window.
Even diluted by spreading out for 150 million
kilometers on its way to Earth, it’s still
so energy dense that looking at it will blind
you.
So at first glance it would seem like being
anywhere near the Sun ought to obliterate
you, but it’s important to understand that
damage is not just about temperature, it’s
about energy transfer.
We think of space as cold but there are plenty
of giant pockets of it a lot hotter than Earth
is, and you wouldn’t be burned to death
in them because they are so thin no real heat
will transfer to you.
Your oven is a lot hotter than a pot of boiling
water, but if you stick your hand in your
oven without touching any metal for a moment
it’s just uncomfortable.
Stick your hand in a pot of boiling water
for a moment and you are going to get badly
scalded.
There’s a thousand times more particles
hitting every chunk of skin in that water
than in the hot air.
Indeed the surface of the Sun is actually
a good deal cooler than its higher layers,
the chromosphere and the corona, which are
hundreds of times hotter.
However, we have two tricks for getting near
the Sun.
First, until you get to the Corona, all you
are encountering is lots of photons and a
little solar wind.
Photons can be reflected by mirrors.
We use a lot of metal foils, silver, aluminum,
and gold, though we’ve got newer materials
that work better.
People tend to think of mirrors as glass but
there’s a reason why we talk about them
being silvered: we used to use silver plating
on the back of them, but aluminum plating
is more the norm these days.
Not everything reflective to visual light
is as good a reflector to other frequencies
either, so don’t assume a traditional mirror
you look at your reflection in is ideal.
The Sun gives off a lot of light in frequencies
we can’t see and which typical mirrors don’t
bounce well.
However if you assumed you had a mirror that
was 99% reflective to the Sun’s full spectrum,
you’d only absorb 1% of the light you normally
would, and so could get to a place where the
sun was 100 times brighter than Earth.
Since light falls with the square of distance,
that would be 10 times closer, .1 AU.
A quarter of the distance Mercury is from
the Sun, a place already so light blasted
that we could only consider colonizing it
by living in mushroom habitats and sitting
on stilts over the ground and shielded by
a big mirror from the Sun.
This close to the Sun, only a tenth as far
away as Earth is, is actually where we say
the Sun officially ends, the outermost edge
of the Corona.
If you make some reflective shield up front
of your spacecraft you can get this close,
.1 AU, and indeed the Parker Solar Probe scheduled
for launch later this year is supposed to
get to just .04 AU from the Sun, ten times
closer to the Sun than Mercury is and 25 times
closer than Earth.
You can get closer, too, either by having
a shinier mirror or by having a lot of heat
radiators trailing behind in the shield’s
shadow, cooling the shield and radiating heat
away in that shadow.
As you get closer to the Sun you eventually
need to make that mirror shield more bowl
shaped so the whole thing looks like a mushroom,
as sunlight is no longer coming directly at
you only from the front.
If you’ve seen the film Sunshine, which
is one of my favorites, at least the first
hour before it turns into horror film, you
can see how the ship uses that basic concept
with a gold covered forward solar shield reflecting
light away.
The more you can reflect, the closer you can
get to the Sun.
So how shiny can you make a mirror?
Theoretically 100%, and indeed labs have made
materials that are completely reflective at
a particular frequency.
Keep that in mind for later, but generally
a material will reflect different wavelengths
of light better or worse, and the Sun emits
a wide spectrum of wavelengths.
You do get two other problems once you get
inside this range though.
First, the sun does radiate more than just
photons you can reflect away, and as you get
closer you aren’t just dealing with a higher
density of solar wind but particles in the
Sun’s upper atmosphere, the Corona, which
can be around 2 million Kelvin.
Second, the Sun has an insanely powerful and
strange magnetosphere, and can start generating
heat by magnetic induction through things.
All those particles are ionized so we can
reflect or deflect them with a magnetic field,
but you need power to run such a thing and
that means heat.
Nonetheless, if you can bounce away all those
particles no heat will transfer to you; so
it’s actually conceivable you might be able
to get very close, indeed all the way down
to the photosphere ‘surface’ with materials
that were ultra-reflective and by deflecting
those ionized particles.
This is just inside the realm of known physics.
If we move over to science fiction, suns are
always treated as automatic killamajigs.
However, those ships often have force fields
or wormholes, and if you did have that kind
of tech - the game changes.
I’ve pointed out before that a handy power
source can be made with a wormhole by dropping
one mouth into a star, but you could do that
in reverse and suck heat out from some space
station inside a star to keep it cool.
This is much trickier without such technologies
though.
You could have a highly conductive or even
superconductive material - such as a tether
rising off the sun, carrying heat away from
your base on the sun as fast as it got in.
The problem is, that close to the Sun light
is coming in from every direction below you,
much like the Earth and it’s own horizon
when standing on the ground, and indeed from
above you too.
The Chromosphere and Corona both emit light,
just less than the photosphere, so you need
to sheathe those tethers as well.
It would also snap.
A Space Elevator is hard to engineer on Earth,
when it has to hold up its own weight for
thousands of kilometers in Earth gravity.
Gravity is even higher on the Sun and you
have a lot more of it.
You have to be at 5.3 solar radiuses, or about
3 million kilometers above the photosphere,
before gravity drops to Earth normal.
If you built a sphere that far over the sun,
3.7 million kilometers in radius, or .024
AU, it would have a surface area 330,000 times
that of Earth, as big in area compared to
Earth as the Sun is massive compared to Earth.
If you remember our episode on Mega Earths
I pointed out there that if you are trying
to keep the same surface gravity there’s
a linear relationship between the object’s
mass and surface area or living space.
Ten times the mass, ten times the surface
area, a hundred times the mass, a hundred
times the surface area.
Of course the Sun may be 330,000 times as
massive as Earth but as we’ve mentioned,
it gives off enough sunlight to illuminate
Earth a couple billion times over again.
So this sphere would be getting 6000 times
the light you want it to get.
However this is about as close to the sun
as a person would want to get since the gravity
is rising.
Using the orbital ring technology we have
discussed before, the giant stationary rings
full of super-fast moving magnetic material,
like a pipe full of running water, you could
construct a permanent stationary ring around
the Sun, assuming you can reflect enough light
and deflect enough particles.
You could then walk around on top of this
ring, with the same gravity as on Earth, and
be well inside the Sun’s Corona.
Now, before we ask why anyone would want to
live there, let’s ask if this is as close
as a human could live?
Not a cyborg meant for higher gravity or heat
tolerance but an actual normal old human.
And the answer is no.
You would have to be standing on the ring
surface facing away from the Sun as the Sun’s
gravity is pulling you down onto the ring.
If the ring was stationary when a person experiences
1 g, normal Earth- gravity, then if the ring
is placed closer to the Sun then the gravity
increases.
We can offset that increase, though, by spinning
the ring.
Spinning the ring has the effect of introducing
an artificial gravity on you away from the
Sun.
No matter how much gravity you would usually
experience if the ring were stationary, we
can offset that by spinning the ring faster
so you always experience 1 g.
Unlike a normal spinning habitat, this ring
contains two sections, an inner and outer,
which don’t move at the same speed, but
whose combined momentum is what they need
to orbit classically.
In this case, we keep the inner ring stationary
and spin the outer one, or even spin the inner
one in the opposite direction.
You can also keep a third stationary sheath
outside this to prevent friction with whatever
environment is outside.
This trick can be used to produce low-gravity
bands near any star, gas giant, or Super Earth,
see the Orbital Rings episode for a more detailed
explanation of the mechanics.
Needless to say it takes a lot of power to
run such rings, which are giant magnetic machines,
but you aren’t short of energy near the
Sun; and when it comes to extracting matter
from the Sun, the main method of Starlifting
we’ve previously discussed specifically
uses a giant magnetic ring to rip matter off
the star.
Other methods all have the problem that it
takes huge amounts of energy to lift matter
out of that gravity well, but the entire original
point of an orbital ring is that it makes
a phenomenal way to move huge amounts of matter
out of gravity wells.
You can also use concentric stacks of them,
each a little further out, connected with
tethers to act as elevators.
We’ve used that trick before but it has
two added advantages here.
First each higher one is getting some light
blocked by the lower ones, and second, you
could probably transport heat up those tethers
to help cool the lower ones, ending with one
really high up, very wide, but perpendicular
to the Sun.
With a low solar cross section such a massive
radiator serves for the ones below and as
a pickup and storage point for ships coming
in to collect material harvested below.
I should note that our Sun is not the only
star either, in fact it is on the large and
hot side.
Many are much cooler, even having surface
temperatures lower than the melting points
of some known materials, and for big red giants,
they are not only cool but vastly less dense,
and using these tricks you might be able to
flat out construct machinery right over or
even inside their photospheres.
We will look at that more, and the interesting
case of doing this with white dwarf or neutrons
stars, in our next episode of “Civilizations
at the End of Time: Dying Stars”
So while we would definitely need to come
up with a lot of new technologies to live
this close to the sun, we don’t necessarily
need any new physics.
But why live there, in, on, or very near the
Sun?
It is worth noting from the outset, as pointed
out in Colonizing Titan, that colonizing is
not the same as terraforming and indeed doesn’t
necessarily mean anyone lives there, let alone
that they need to be traditionally human.
We have a lot more options on the table if
we are including alternatives like artificial
intelligence too, but for today we will assume
you’d need regular old humans on-site or
in proximity.
While it might not be a big hub for actual
living, the value of a colony near the Sun,
if you can successfully build it, is so huge
that it would rapidly come to dominate the
entire system economy.
Even if it only takes a skeleton crew to operate
some of these immense machines, so that it
was like one person working inside a large
modern warehouse, when industrialized you
could have trillions of people working there,
supplying untold billions of megatons of raw
materials and trillions of gigawatts of power
to a growing solar economy.
There is nothing in this solar system that
the Sun doesn’t have more of, except empty
space and lower temperatures.
From the Sun we can run giant energy beams
out to distant energy-hungry colonies (more
on that in a moment), we can use it to maneuver
and accelerate spaceships, we can harvest
it for huge amounts of hydrogen and helium
as well as heavier elements.
Beyond those, you can use surplus power to
run a giant ring shaped supercollider… which
is also basically an orbital ring… to turn
lighter elements into heavier ones.
You could potentially even be making anti-matter
or kugelblitz blacks holes to store energy
or use as spaceship engines.
Whenever we talk about fully harnessing the
Sun for power I get asked what we’d do with
all of it, around 20 trillion times humanity’s
total power consumption, and these are just
some of the examples of what you can do, but
in a nutshell, if you’ve got trillions of
times the energy and matter, you run trillions
of times the industrial output.
Now I want to talk about Beam Propulsion again
because we’ve been talking about using lasers
to push ships in some of the episodes from
late last year and we just mentioned beaming
power.
I often mention both as alternatives, if we
never make fusion reactors a reality.
Laser beams spread out gradually with distance,
they aren’t beams of even width the whole
way and the tighter you can keep them over
distance the better.
Now the traditional way to make these lasers
is to suck up energy from sunlight via solar
panels and use that to run a classic laser,
albeit a gigantic one, however that is a fairly
inefficient process and we have a far more
efficient, cheaper, and vastly easier option
called a Stellar Laser, or Stellaser.
Here we describe a version conceived decades
ago by Steve Nixon, who coined the term Stellaser.
We are going to turn the Sun itself into a
laser.
Now we talk about lasers on this channel a
lot but I’ve never really explained them,
and this seems a good occasion to do so in
some detail.
At its simplest, a laser consists of a lasing
medium we can excite, such as a gas that gets
placed between two mirrors.
We can excite the medium, usually with electricity
or a big lamp, raising the energy of a population
of atoms in the medium to the point they behave
strangely.
They behave less randomly, more in unison;
they are stimulated to lase.
Mirrors help stabilize the process..
As it turns out, the Sun’s corona is a natural
lasing medium, already conveniently excited
by the Sun's brilliance, like a giant lamp,
and a rather powerful one at that!
In the Sun, an ion is an atom where one or
more of its outer electrons has been knocked
off.
In the Sun’s corona there are naturally-occurring
heavy ions that have lost several electrons
thanks to the high temperature there.
Some of these ions are found in that special
higher-energy quantum state.
What makes the special state special is some
atoms can easily enter via collisions, but
it’s a one way trip because the normal transitions
back to lower energy are forbidden quantum
transitions.
De-excitation from normal states is easy and
fast, but de-excitation from this special
state is rare, so these excited ions accumulate
in the Sun’s corona.
A concentration of such excited, but inhibited,
particles is called a population inversion.
This excited medium provides us with the powerful
opportunity we need as it sets the stage for
lasing, much like happens in a Helium-Neon
laser, in which excited helium atoms transfer
energy to neon atoms by colliding with them.
Iron ions in the solar corona are already
in this special excited state, all pumped
up at 2 million Kelvin, trapped in that state
and ready to lase.
What do they need to enable lasing?
Mirrors pointed at each other, mirrors of
very high reflectivity at the wavelength of
interest, such as a green light for iron,
and as we said, we can make mirrors almost
perfectly reflective at a specific wavelength
these days.
These mirrors need to be of high optical quality,
very smooth, fairly large diameter, and positioned
far enough apart to pass a beam between, through
a small fraction of the solar corona... which
is still a large volume.
So put them in orbits at the same altitude
above the Sun, or any other star, but positioned
so the star is almost between the mirrors…
just off to one side.
Point the mirrors at each other and wait a
bit.
Spontaneous emission does occur, rarely, despite
the forbidden transition.
When such a photon happens to come from between
the mirrors and be directed at one, it will
begin to bounce back and forth.
As it does, it will encounter excited ions
like the one that emitted it, and will stimulate
them to emit as well.
These new photons will be emitted in the same
direction and with the same phase as the incoming
photon.
This is the essence of Light Amplification
by Stimulated Emission of Radiation, the LASER.
After bouncing back and forth a few times,
the resonating energy becomes quite large,
nearly monochromatic, and mostly in-phase
or coherent.
A few additional components inside the laser
cavity will make it very monochromatic and
coherent.
With good mirrors, the rays will be extremely
parallel and will bounce many times.
Rays which are not parallel will escape and
no longer contribute to the laser’s resonant
amplification.
Nor will escaped rays subtract any more from
the available energy.
After a while, only parallel rays are being
amplified.
Stellaser mirrors are a bit of a technical
challenge, but technology always improves
when there is a goal and a motive.
Use of large diameter mirrors eases some of
the problems and makes it possible to keep
a tight beam for a very long way.
Huge volumes of solar corona means equally
huge energies are stored there and the Stellaser
taps into it, organizes it and unleashes that
energy.
We could make a small Stellaser with today’s
technology.
You could potentially be making these mirrors
thousands of kilometers across, or putting
thousands around the sun.
You could also potentially use other substances
besides iron as well, you’re not limited
to that specific element and a green beam.
This very simple design is also ideal for
use in interstellar travel.
We send in an advanced probe that arrives
ahead of a larger interstellar vessel to construct
a Stellaser before the other bigger ship arrives
and use it to slow the ship down without fuel,
as well as provide all the power would-be
explorers or colonists might need.
It could also be bootstrapped and expanded
to assist a second wave of incoming ships
moving far faster and carrying more cargo
proportionally.
So potentially these are just as useful for
arriving at a distant solar system as helping
you leave ours.
Next time in the Outward Bound series we will
do just that, and jump to Alpha Centauri,
to discuss interstellar colonization concepts
and the specific case of solar systems around
binary stars, which has some interesting aspects,
restrictions, and possibilities.
Binary Stars have a lot of differences in
how you colonize them than single star systems,
and for that matter there’s a huge variation
in how individuals ones behave.
Their life cycles and how you go about utilizing
them varies by a lot more than just how long
they live and what color they are, and you
need to adapt your colonization plans accordingly.
As I explained at the start, we're still staying
within the limits of known physical science
in order to colonize the sun, and so this
absurd sounding proposal is actually not that
far-fetched.
If you want to understand the scientific possibilities
and limitations of modern space travel, then
I recommend that you check out Brilliant.org.
Their astronomy course provides you with the
physics tools that astrophysicists use to
understand the cosmos, the life cycles of
stars, and the fate of the universe.
Through active problem solving, you build
up your frameworks to understand these concepts,
instead of just memorizing formulas from a
textbook.
You can dive right in at whatever your skill
level is and explore at your own pace.
I can never overemphasize how handy that math
and science skill-set is to have in your mental
toolbox, and Brilliant is a great place to
get started.
To support the channel and learn more about
Brilliant, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription.
That’s the subscription I’ve been using
to explore their multitude of thought-provoking
puzzles.
Next week we’ll come back to Earth and consider
how we might evacuate our planet if some disaster
was going to render it uninhabitable, and
look at everything from the most basic ways
to save some remnant of our civilization up
to moving the whole ecology of our planet
elsewhere in Evacuation: Earth.
And the week after will be joined by Astrophysicist
Paul Sutter to examine many of the various
theories for however the Universe might end.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching and have a great week!
