And on the pedestal, these words appear:
My name is Ozymandias, King of Kings; 
Look on my Works, ye Mighty, and despair!
Nothing beside remains. Round the decay 
Of that colossal Wreck, boundless and bare
The lone and level sands stretch far away.”
Welcome to Science & Futurism with 
Isaac Arthur, and I am your host,  
the aforementioned Isaac Arthur, and I’ve been 
your host for 9 years now, as we celebrate the 9th  
Anniversary of our first show, back on September 
17th of 2014. We’ll talk about that more toward  
the end of the episode but that original episode, 
and its unplanned sequel some months later, were  
focused on the idea that our image of the future 
from sci-fi of being a civilization of thousands  
of planets spread-out over a galaxy was wrong.
In Space Opera, humanity colonized endless worlds  
around yellow stars and occasionally other kinds 
too, and maybe has a few other minor outposts  
or space stations in any given star system. 
Maybe one star in a hundred has people living  
around it and probably less than a billion 
of them.This got stuck in our minds and it’s  
how we tend to think alien civilizations would 
behave too. And we often picture these planets,  
even when inhabited, more like a single city and 
its suburbs, not each individually greater in  
size than any empire we’ve ever seen in history.
In that context it’s not really surprising people  
might think that the reason why we don’t detect or 
hear from ancient alien civilizations all the time  
is because they’re a lot of scattered planets 
and such empires can fall, and their works,  
once mighty, be gone from sight and record, like 
those of Ozymandias in Shelley’s famous poem. 
And yet as we’ll see today, even empires like 
that, let alone the great realms that seem likely,  
should be so robust against being made 
extinct that only the most obsessed and  
monomaniacal aggressor could hope to wipe 
them out… and then the question becomes  
what happened to them? Where did that aggressor 
that brought doom go? Did someone else come for  
them and spell their doom? And where then they?
In that first and second episode of the show,  
we confronted the scale of this assumption, 
the flawed notion that such empires would be  
spread so thin, and that any given star system 
they encounter would be colonized and composed  
of at least many millions of settled minor 
planets if not full Dyson Swarms.That our  
future is not just on large planets, or even 
minor ones, but mostly in vast megastructures  
serving as artificial habitats, be they 
biological or post-biological hosting ones. 
And I thought today we would try to examine the 
question of the Fermi Paradox from the idea that  
such empires could exist and could fall and asking 
what if any evidence we might have that they did.  
To ask what sort of wars or weapons might doom 
such civilizations, or what else could annihilate  
them so completely. We’ll contemplate everything 
from quasar cannona and other galaxy-rending mega  
weapons to psychic or cultural poisons and how 
effective they might be, and if there is any way  
those could have been used and the user somehow 
not destroyed along with the original target. 
While common in sci-fi for entire massive galactic 
empires to just fall or disappear, this has always  
struck me as rather bizarre and improbable. 
Nonetheless, since this is a Sci-fi Sunday  
here on SFIA, we will try to ask how that might 
happen and also what it would look like if it did. 
Ever since becoming the President of the National 
Space Society, I’ve tended to have fairly regular  
chats with this or that NSS director or 
long time member and lots of interesting  
space topics tend to come up, and one of those 
was how likely an interstellar asteroid like  
ʻOumuamua might be a piece of a busted up old 
spaceship from some ancient battle or accident.  
Possibly having collected a coating of ice and 
dust from floating around the void for eons. 
I got to thinking about that and it’s a much 
more complex question than one might first think.  
First of all, we might ask if any such fragments 
should be floating around between solar systems.  
And generally speaking the answer is no, if 
we’re discussing either in-system battles,  
or ones occurring at interstellar velocities. 
The escape velocity of any solar system,  
or galaxy for that matter, depends a lot on where 
you were in that system when you got blown up,  
or your ship went derelict or rammed 
into something. Loosely speaking,  
for solar systems, the escape velocity is 
tens of kilometers a second, and for galaxies,  
it’s hundreds of kilometers a second.
Hence, no ship moving at above 1% light speed,  
which is 3000 kilometers per second, is going 
to have any fragment of itself still meandering  
around the galaxy several million years 
later. Assuming the derelict or fragment  
didn’t ram into something, it will have 
entered the intergalactic void by then.  
At some speed beneath 1% it is more plausible 
that it might have slowed from interactions with  
interstellar dust and gravity in general to some 
velocity that left it orbiting around the galaxy.  
Possibly quite elliptically or out in the deep and 
sparser regions of the galactic rim or halo, where  
we’re less likely to encounter or detect them.
Though anywhere above 0.1% of light speed it’s  
decently likely it would leave the galaxy 
eventually, and depending on where and what  
direction they were headed, it might be even a 
hundred million years before it got out of the  
galaxy even if it was outward bound. Similarly 
we don’t want to ignore the idea that some piece  
of battle debris from a neighboring galaxy 
might have had time to get to us by now.
Alternatively, we wouldn't really expect 
anything moving less than 0.01% of light  
speed - 30 kilometers per second - to be 
traveling around between stars for very long,  
in galactic terms anyway. That’s roughly how 
fast Earth orbits the Sun, The Sun orbits the  
galaxy at roughly 8 times that velocity, 230 
kilometers per second or 0.08% of light speed,  
and stars in our region of the galaxy 
tend to be roughly that same speed. So  
anything moving slower than that relative 
to the galaxy is getting tugged along by  
this or that passing star system until 
one grabs it and pulls it into orbit. 
Debris from battles or calamities taking place 
inside solar systems at interplanetary speeds  
then, will generally stay in that system, though 
some might be ejected to roam the galaxy. But you  
aren’t having huge interstellar wars if your 
ships can only do 1% of light speed and we  
are not really expecting space battles to involve 
huge juggernauts plowing through space at a high  
fraction of light speed to waste huge amounts 
of fuel and energy to park themselves at slower  
speeds where an enemy can more easily pound 
on them and where they lose the extra punch  
each of their attacks would have from that 
higher speed. Though unexpected technologies  
like hyperspace jump drives or inertial mass 
altering drives might change this dynamic. 
So we would not expect the normal result of a 
battle to be the remnants of ships meandering  
around interstellar space for eons. It’s entirely 
plausible ships would occasionally get wrecked at  
such speeds, or that the shattered remains 
of a space station that got nuked or slammed  
by something at high speed might have fragments 
moving above the local escape velocity. We’d tend  
to assume recovery efforts would be common though, 
even if just to minimize navigational hazards. 
So too, if you’re engaging in interstellar 
conflicts it would tend to make sense to have lots  
of space fortresses out past your system’s own 
inner regions. The escape velocity from the solar  
system at Earth’s distance, 1 Astronomical Unit or 
AU, is about 42 kilometers or 26 miles per second,  
and that drops off with the inverse square root 
of distance, so something at 4 AU has half that  
escape velocity, 9 AU a third, which is how 
far Saturn is, 16 AU is a quarter, 25 a fifth,  
and Pluto at around 36 AU would be only about 
7 kilometers or 4 miles a second, which is in  
the range of what mundane explosive shrapnel 
might be. And that’s out to the Kuiper Belt,  
the Oort Cloud is far further out and something 
might be at 10,000 AU, about 2 light months from  
the Sun. That’s where I’d be wanting to put 
my first lines of defense, not just a couple  
light hours from my system center. And there it is 
only a hundredth the escape velocity it is around  
Earth, 420 meters per second or just under a 
thousand miles per hour. And odds are whatever  
station or icy body I’ve built a fortress in 
doesn't have any significant gravity of its own. 
That’s still high enough that something 
blown out of an airlock by compressed gas  
venting into space is not leaving that solar 
system. But it is definitely low enough that  
fragments from explosions might fly off into the 
interstellar void. It’s also where you would be a  
lot less likely to be bothered with trying to 
grab the pieces to avoid navigational hazards  
or be efficient and recycle. It is also very 
likely someone trying to sneak in or cut up  
some Oort Cloud listening post might have come in 
relatively slow to minimize being spotted and to  
make sure the outpost buried in some mountain 
sized iceball is completely dead, not waiting  
for a chance to set off the millions tons of 
antimatter or nuclear warheads they have there. 
So, we established that this can happen and thus 
can ask how much of such debris we would need to  
have a chance of spotting such remnants nowadays.
If someone had an empire of a thousand worlds  
and each of those has a couple dozen 
such detection and defense stations  
that might have gotten smashed up in a war that 
happened a million years ago, the answer is no,  
we’re not gonna spot that except by freak luck. 
There are half a trillion stars in this galaxy  
and even if we assumed that that empire-ending 
catastrophe left half a million football stadium  
sized bits of debris meandering around the 
galaxy, then even if they got distributed  
evenly there'd only be one per million stars.
Worse though, the volume of our inner solar  
system in which we might spot such a body nowadays 
is probably no more than 4000 cubic AU or so,  
while the galaxy’s total volume is about 
4 billion-billion-billion cubic AU. So a  
million such fragments would give us a one in a 
billion-billion chance that such a fragment was  
passing through our volume at the moment. The 
far vaster Kardashev 3 civilizations we discuss  
on the show though, those who number their 
people like grains of sand on a desert planet,  
could leave such ruins behind that their debris 
might float regularly through our star system.  
Over time collecting dust and ice on the fragments 
to look more mundane. And currently, they could  
have thousands of derelict old probes or defense 
installations floating around our system covered  
in dust and ice and we would not know it.
Now in the future, probably not more than  
a couple centuries from now, we will probably be 
able to spot any house-sized object anywhere in  
this solar system out to the Kuiper Belt 
or beyond, and take core samples to see  
if it's a regular rock or snowball or some 
piece of ancient alien ship that’s gotten  
caked with them as it hurtled through space in 
a million year eulogy to the crew it once held. 
But the Fermi Paradox doesn’t care about 
our future except in trying to forecast  
how visible some alien civilization might be by 
comparing them to our potential future state. 
The Fermi Paradox discusses the 
apparent contradiction between  
the age and immensity of our Universe and its 
assumed abundance of high-tech civilizations,  
and that apparent absence of our current ability 
to spot them. So, some lone and quiet planet of  
people who never spread out to the stars could be 
just a few hundred light years from us and still  
remain undetected, and the galaxy could have a 
million such worlds, or even more if they tend  
to have a half life of thousands of years.
It also doesn't contemplate life without  
intelligence, as we could have that right now, 
as close to us as on Mars or on Jupiter’s Moon,  
Europa. We can’t tell yet, let alone if 
there’s some planet, fifty light years  
from here with dinosaurs or robust ecologies 
inhabited by even iron age civilizations. 
We could only see current civilizations, 
or their ruins, if interstellar travel is a  
practical option. In the latter case because 
that’s the only way they could either have  
left enough debris around for some to swing by 
our planet, or, because we could then have the  
ability to visit many planets and search them for 
ruins… which is no fast task given that erosion  
and sediment and other factors will bury most 
planet-bound civilization ruins pretty quickly. 
But you’ll find them because you won’t be 
visiting them, you’ll be settling them. 
In the absence of FTL, Faster Than Light Travel, 
your ships take centuries to get anywhere,  
and your archaeological team isn’t beaming down 
to an abandoned planet for an afternoon of poking  
around one building. It’s an entire planet. You 
need a lot of time and people to explore that,  
and it took you centuries to get there and 
you probably need as long to do the job. So,  
you colonized that rock the same as 
you colonized all of them you visited. 
To play devil’s advocate though, we’ve only been 
at the science game for a few hundred years and  
it is entirely possible that FTL is possible, as 
contradictory to our current knowledge of physics  
though that would be. In such a case you really 
might show up and scan planets and go home a few  
days later and arrive a few more days later. 
You also might be engaging in interstellar  
battles at relative stops, because your ship 
went into hyperspace and back and never moved  
much faster than orbital speeds while doing it.
Such being the case, interstellar colonization  
ought to be way easier and you really ought to 
have trillions of ships around at some point,  
if not, far more, whose remnants might be way 
easier to see. A cataclysm that wrecked one  
planet can also more easily get many others if 
you have FTL, as you might have a galaxy wide war  
fought in just a few years as opposed to a few 
million, or a virus may lay dormant and spread  
through the galaxy before it is detected, 
by which time it proves to be too late to  
prevent its devastating impact. And of course, 
if ships can move Faster Than Light, it implies a  
possibility of Natural disasters which might too, 
which itself is a good Fermi Paradox Explanation. 
Also, you might need little time to get 
a survey done. As we noted in our episode  
The Future of Archeology, remote scanning and 
artificial intelligence allows us to do very  
quickly what it used to take large teams years 
to achieve, when it comes to finding and mapping  
out buried ruins or spotting some tower top or 
rectangular piece of strut sticking out of the  
ground. So they might get the job done faster and 
with fewer people than you’d want for a colony,  
and they might have come there in stasis and plan 
to go home or to the next spot because what they  
love is xenoarchaeology, not colonizing planets.
It is also entirely possible a lot of  
civilizations might have some sort of black box 
tech designed to keep a rosetta stone and archive  
around in some bunker or off-world asteroid 
with a beacon on a timer or deadman switch to  
let folks know what happened to them, and some 
digital archive the size of a room might easily  
have more info about a civilization than 
every single record we now have on Earth  
in every library and harddrive combined.
Either way, neither really alters our own  
equation, if I can send some archaeologist 
to a planet to check it out, I can send some  
colonists to it as well, and if my civilization 
has been kicking around for thousands of years  
after finding such planets and scouting them, it’s 
very unlikely that no one is going to decide to go  
settle it. It really only takes a hundred 
or so malcontents who want to be far from  
home to found a colony, and technically a single 
person could, with the right tech. ET Clone Home.
But the other thing is that you really shouldn’t 
expect abandoned ruins. We believe our galaxy is  
thrice as old as our planet, which in turn 
appears to be roughly a million times older  
than our recorded history. And we believe there 
were only about 5-30 million of us when we entered  
that period where some folks started writing stuff 
down, about a thousandth the current population.  
One of the stronger theories popular nowadays 
is that we nearly went extinct 70,000 years ago,  
down to at most 10,000 humans and maybe even into 
the hundreds. It’s hard to guess precisely from  
genetics after catastrophes because you might 
have had lots of lone individuals survive far  
from others, or just a small and decimated 
tribe that never bred back into the main mix  
because they survived the catastrophe but the next 
couple generations couldn’t rebuild and recover,  
and some winter fever or dispute in the 
tribe or whatever just finished them off. 
If true though, it means 7000 years ago 
there was around one person alive for  
every thousand nowadays and 70,000 years ago, 
one person for every million alive these days.  
The Toba Supervolcano is usually blamed 
as the culprit for that catastrophe too. 
But a technological civilization would be way 
more robust against such natural catastrophes,  
and even a nuclear war at the height of the 
Cold War wouldn’t have pushed us back to that  
10 million figure, let alone 10,000 survivors. 
Either way, 70,000 years later, some planet  
decimated that horribly would be back to current 
numbers, if not way before, and probably not need  
to reinvent spaceships to go and resettle any 
worlds that might have been perma-killed. And  
we’re assuming they lost technology and went 
back to being primitive again, when in all  
likelihood they didn’t lose any technology 
and they’re probably all heavily-augmented  
cyborgs or post-biological critters too, 
which alters the recovery timelines a lot. 
A civilization that not only settled every 
star in its galaxy, but built habitats inside  
every minor planet takes a lot of killing too. 
Some rotating habitat or computer core buried  
kilometers deep inside some asteroid or iceball is 
a tough nut to crack, assuming you even know it’s  
there. It’s very unlikely any plague, or even 
some nanobot murder machines with a superhuman  
swarm intelligence, is likely to get everybody in 
each of the million or more installations of each  
star system in some billion-star empire.
With a total population in each system of  
quintillions, where only a thousand might need to 
survive, you need to have a failure rate of less  
than one person missed out of every trillion. 
And they might not even need those odds. Those  
survivors might be individually superhumanly 
strong and smart and long living. In a lot  
less than a million years, one lone survivor 
of an apocalyptic war that got everyone else  
might be able to clone themselves up a partner, 
or build themselves a breeding tank and rebuild  
their civilization complete with full records of 
everything important and full genetic diversity,  
assuming they need it, of not just 
themselves but their whole ecology. 
DNA is very compressible. A given strand 
might store in the area of a gigabyte of  
data but it is very nearly identical to one for 
any other member of its species. Other species  
aren’t that much more different, and while we 
talk about millions of species on Earth, maybe  
even millions we don’t even know yet, those are 
bugs and bacteria, not large critters or plants.  
We covered this more in our episode Evacuation 
Earth way back, but the short form is that it  
is entirely plausible an entire alien world's 
ecology and history and art could be stored in  
something pocket sized. And it's also possible 
such archives with 3D printers or better might  
be routine in any interstellar spaceship a 
civilization built, as a common and cheap  
feature of Standard Templates, from which they 
can effortlessly construct new colonies, not much  
more costly or uncommon than having a dictionary 
in your house is today, and maybe the same size. 
It seems that people from advanced civilizations 
are really hard to wipe out and shouldn’t have  
any problem regrowing themselves very quickly on 
galactic timeline scales. Really, very nearly as  
fast as their surviving ships can travel back 
to each lost world to reseed it. Thousands of  
years perhaps, but what is that against billions?
So an empire might fall but not for long. Also,  
if they did fall, in such a case, it must surely 
have been against some other intelligence,  
and what the heck happened to them? 
Why didn’t they claim all those worlds? 
What odds are there that the war was so 
evenly matched it came down to just one  
lone survivor who collapsed in exhaustion 
on top of their mountain of enemy skulls?
Again though, to play devil's advocate, those 
same sort of advantages for surviving might  
also often apply to helping be thorough 
in your efforts to wipe someone out,  
and those methods may be designed 
to function even if you died and  
to ensure they were on timer so as to not 
pose a threat to you yourselves. Your mega  
murder machines suicide after the job is 
done, leaving the galaxy a silent grave. 
There’s a logic to it too, albeit a twisted 
and brutal one, or maybe just a ruthlessly cold  
one. You may not believe there is any option for 
sharing the galaxy with other intelligences and  
decide the only option is to rip them out, root 
and stem. This isn’t necessarily an alien either,  
it may be a faction of your own civilization. And 
as we covered in Extragalactic Sanctuaries, they  
should almost always be able to escape, even if by 
fleeing so fast that no turn around was possible,  
and over the cosmological event horizon to the 
edge of Space and Time. But that only helps you  
escape with a seed of your civilization beyond any 
hope of return, not to share the galaxy in peace. 
In a case like that you may feel your only 
option is to crush them because even one  
single colony might be able to turn around 
and unleash doomsday weapons of horrifying  
and disproportionate destructive power, given time 
and concealment. We’ve discussed some truly insane  
levels of weaponry on this show before, indeed I 
paused while writing this script to make a short  
video on the Quasar Cannon, a weapon that came 
to mind that would let you convert one black hole  
anywhere in the galaxy or near it into a weapon 
able to sterilize the whole galaxy, and that  
could best be thought of as a machine gun that 
fires directed supernovae or gamma ray bursts. 
We don’t actually know what causes gamma ray 
bursts, we suspect they have multiple different  
origins, indeed we only determined what quasars 
were relatively recently, but it’s possible some  
of those we detect are the equivalent of muzzle 
flares of weapons so terrifying you only deploy  
them to kill galaxies, or maybe gods. These 
are the weapons simple Kardashev 2 or K2  
civilizations can deploy, those in total mastery 
of single star system and maybe a few neighbors. 
What a K3 civilization might do is orders of 
magnitude worse, where whole regions of galaxies  
might be turned into weapons. Civilizations 
of such immensity they can turn whole stars  
into cannons and field more of those than we have 
rifles. Where every soldier is likely so trained  
and augmented that they’re a one man army, and 
where the memorial walls carved with their names  
might stretch for thousands of kilometers. Indeed 
one can imagine landing on an extinct alien planet  
covered in what resembles labyrinthe-like 
mazes and walls spanning entire continents;  
ten billion miles of walls, all as tall as 
those around any fortress we ever built,  
only to realize every inch of them was carved 
with a name, rank, and serial number just big  
enough to read, and that the whole planet was one 
commemorative memorial to a minor galactic war.
Trying to wipe an enemy out like that, you pound 
any world of theirs so hard that nothing but a  
bacteria could survive, and precious few of them, 
and maybe only because a handful were frozen and  
intact in the shattered debris blown into space 
by your assault, where they landed on some other  
planets later to spark basic life back off again 
in an exercise of ultra-violent panspermia. 
And that’s the minimum, even if you don’t colonize 
those wrecked enemy territories after you wipe  
them out, you should be grinding them to pieces. 
Not just salting the earth or even scorching it,  
but disassembling it. Every world they have you 
should pound with doomsday devices and nukes,  
dump murderbots on, then take the place apart to 
build more armadas to hunt down any survivors. 
But the thing is, we should be able to see that. 
You could see stuff like Quasar cannons fired in  
distant galaxies and ancient wars, or in their 
modern aftermath, so we’re not talking wholesale  
ruin. Unless, again, a lot of the gamma-ray 
bursts and other galaxy-rending events that  
we see aren’t as natural as we thought they were.
It seems like the stuff of epic stories, and by  
all means feel free to borrow that plot, but it 
isn’t a good Fermi Paradox answer. Because it only  
says that places too far away for us to really 
see might be absent of aliens because they utterly  
obliterated themselves. It doesn't explain why our 
galaxy is empty of intelligent life currently and  
doesn't explain what happened to the aggressors.
One option is that the battle was so even  
that practically all of them died, or that 
their remaining automated devices got them,  
but that rather implies it's been at least a few 
billions years since that happened in this galaxy,  
since they should have ripped Earth to pieces 
looking for any enemy survivors. Again, just one  
tiny ship fleeing to Earth and hiding under the 
ocean could hibernate for a few centuries then  
rebuild a whole civilization if not many more.
Maybe they try to spare other primitive life.  
And to be fair, as devastating as those weapons 
are that we mentioned, they are the brute force  
end of the spectrum. It is likely you could send a 
quintillion microbots down to a planet with orders  
to burrow in anywhere and look for anything 
big enough to be the enemy or some backed-up  
digital version of them. Hypothetically, someone 
could drop that off on this planet today and we  
might never know it was happening. Ten trillion 
microscopic and surgical battles went on under  
our noses… or even in them occasionally, after 
all, they already do. An alien intelligence might  
not need to be very big if post-biological, 
and like bullets or a swarm of piranhas,  
the sub-intelligent things killing them 
probably need not even be a fraction their size. 
Another option is that they died off from ennui, 
a feeling of pointlessness, as they realized that  
all their mortal empires were doomed to fall and 
nothing they did would matter at the cosmic scale,  
and that nothing mattered at all. Nihilism is a 
common suggestion for ways civilizations can end,  
the equivalent of a psychic poison, and it's hard 
to argue that it’s a real threat but I just have  
such a problem imagining that every member of a 
civilization would simultaneously succumb to that,  
especially in a no-FTL universe. If many people 
suddenly fell to despair, surely those that did  
not would be cautious in investigating why, and if 
everybody had a book on the shelf that said ‘why  
free will is a lie’, they could choose not to read 
it and come to teach after generations it was a  
poison book worse than the Necronomicon. And while 
some might still read it in later generations,  
even if it wasn’t banned and every copy burned, 
it would still not reach every colony and those  
would later settle those abandoned worlds 
if somehow an entire world fell to it. 
But perhaps they feared that their colonies 
would turn on them one day, as well they might,  
and were a greater existential threat than 
any asteroid or supernova, and thus guarded  
their skies not against invaders, but against any 
ships seeking to race out to settle a new world. 
It seems so clear that it should be 
possible to build such epic civilizations,  
so immense their ruined debris would flood the 
galaxy till we couldn’t miss it, and that they  
should desire to be so great, and that even if 
they did not, they should pursue that immensity  
so that they were safe from any outside force or 
rebel faction that sought to become a leviathan  
out in the unending depths of the ocean of 
night, and in turn, sweep them aside. Perhaps  
they simply came not to care, but what of those 
who did sweep them aside? Where did leviathan go? 
One category of options suggested in Alastair 
Reynolds’ Revelation Space series and also in  
Peter Watts’ novel, Blindsight, is that you don’t 
need conscious and intelligent civilizations to  
wipe out intelligence and keep it wiped out. 
Something sub-intelligent but very smart,  
so to speak, like ChatGPT or even the old 
supercomputers that first beat Chessmasters  
might be able to be unleashed as a swarm 
intelligence of self-replicating drones,  
and simply overwhelm us regardless of our 
ingenuity. Those entities could potentially  
have a reaction of briefly combining to raise 
their collective intelligence when needed,  
to handle a more difficult problem, then dissipate 
back down when the threat is ended. Leviathan  
is not a great beast of the depths, but merely 
forms in pockets like a storm when it needs to. 
They may not have the ability to invent tech 
but can keep making it, and imitating it when  
they find it. Indeed, much as we tended to 
assume conversation and discussion were the  
realm of true sentience in the past, and now see 
chatbots that are nowhere near-human intelligence,  
it may be that the ingenuity and creativity 
of the human genius scale is just as easily  
done by a dedicated but dumb machine as any 
of the more mindless tasks we have them do,  
like lifting objects no human could or cutting 
materials more precisely than any surgeon. 
Could it be that the inevitable result 
of playing with artificial intelligence  
isn’t to unleash some dark god on 
a civilization that wipes them out  
but rather an unintelligent swarm like 
gray goo only able to invent technology? 
In the end, the simple answer is that we do 
not know. We know our own nature[a] though,  
that it can be cautious or reckless, brave or 
timid, kind or spiteful, inventive or destructive,  
resilient or forlorn, and we have no reason 
to think any of these traits would be rare  
among other intelligences. It is so easy to 
see the seeds of doom being planted on any  
world we colonize right along with every 
other more mundane seed we bring with us. 
But to me it doesn't wash. I cannot see these 
scenarios that seem to require every member of  
every civilization to pick some course of action, 
the same one, and often at the same time, even if  
logical or biologically pressured, so why would we 
expect civilization not to seek to grow when their  
biology so inclines them and logic suggests it's a 
good idea. I feel the bulk of evidence encourages  
us to assume that intelligence occurs so rarely 
that if we have seen it at all, it really is a  
case like a gamma-ray burst a billion light 
years away and no one has ever lived closer. 
I think the evidence tilts that way but I think 
it's the better choice to contemplate anyway,  
since otherwise it implies such galaxy 
spanning grandeur is a dream we can  
never make reality or that if we did it was 
just a short dream fated to inevitably end  
in a nightmare of destruction, where whole 
worlds burned like leaves in a forest fire. 
In the end, only time will tell, but as our 
technology improves every day and our eyes see  
the heavens ever more clearly, it may be a good 
omen that we still see no one else out there,  
as it means we can build a great civilization 
out among those stars on worlds that have  
never seen life before, rather than being 
built on the ashes of ancient empires.
So as we mentioned, today’s episode marks the 9th 
anniversary of the show and when it began I never  
was thinking about this channel being more than a 
single video encouraging more realism in science  
fiction. But from the outset I understood that to 
promote science and the future you need to convey  
the material in a way that folks can understand 
and get enthusiastic about, and that’s something  
our long time partner, Brilliant.org, understands 
too. Brilliant understands what works. They know  
the best approach is interactive learning, and 
that learning is a lifelong journey that should  
be fun and done in bit-sized bits. Brilliant 
has thousands of lessons from basic to advanced  
concepts that you can learn at your own pace, at 
home or on the go, and to fit your needs, whether  
you’re trying to stay up to date on math, science, 
and computer science or level up your career. You  
don’t need to spend years and thousands of dollars 
to learn these topics, Brilliant gives you access  
to custom content to fit your needs and help 
you learn at a fraction of the time and cost. 
Brilliant’s been a great partner to this 
show from our early days, and you can trust  
them be your partner on your journey too, 
try them out for free, for a full 30 days,  
by visiting brilliant.org/IsaacArthur or 
clicking on the link in the description,  
and the first 200 people will get 20% off 
Brilliant's annual premium subscription. 
With 9 years and over 600 posted videos we have 
shared a lot of time together, and let me start by  
saying how grateful I am every single day to get 
to make this show and see how many people still  
tune in, more now than ever before. I’m proud of 
the work I did before the show too, and mostly  
enjoyed it, whether it was my time in college 
or grad school, or in the Army during the War,  
or in government working to serve my local 
community, which I still get to do. Still,  
I’ve never loved any job like I do this 
one, and it's brought me a great deal of  
joy. Life’s been pretty good since then too. I 
got married to my wife Sarah a few years back,  
and started adopting our three children almost a 
year ago, which irritatingly is still progress,  
paperwork takes forever, so I can’t say either 
of my sons or my daughter’s names but they have  
brought great joy to my life. And six months back 
I was elected the President of the National Space  
Society which has been a great honor and 
opportunity, and also a great deal of fun. 
Were the show to end tomorrow, I would consider it 
time well spent and myself lucky to have had such  
an amazing audience for so long, but of course 
folks aren’t here for me they’re here for the cool  
topics about the future, and the neat thing about 
the future is there is always so much more of it,  
so I plan to keep doing episodes until the 
world ends or they put me to bed with a shovel,  
and I’m grateful for the opportunity to talk 
to you every week. I hope you have found or  
find somethings you enjoy as much as I have, 
and I encourage you to dream big and pursue  
those dreams with relentless vigor, because as we 
all know on this show, the sky is not the limit.
So that’s it for today and for our Ninth 
year of SFIA. This Thursday, September 21st,  
we’ll start year 10 off by asking how we can 
mine atmospheres like those on Venus or Titan,  
or even Gas Giants and Stars. Then we’ll close 
out the month with our Livestream Q&A on Sunday,  
September 24th, and then on the 28th we will have 
an exploration of what traveling the galaxy as an  
adventurer or lone wanderer will be like in Have 
Space Suit - Will Travel. After that we’ll jump  
into October to explain what Vacuum and Zero Point 
Energy are, on October 5th, and then we’ll have an  
episode not on spaceships, but the factories that 
will make them, on October 12th. And stay tuned  
for our next Sci Fi Sunday, on October 15th, where 
we’ll contemplate entire planets turned into giant  
factories, in Forgeworlds & Industrial Planets.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can  
also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting our 
website, IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch  
all of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on our 
streaming service, Nebula, along with hours of  
bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a  
Great Week!
