People often wonder what space has to offer
Earth, besides near infinite strange new worlds
to seek out and explore, but it also offers
us a number of clean and abundant energy options
for back here at home.
Whenever I think about the future I try to
do it in the context of imagining a civilization
out there where they have the sort of energy
abundance that we would have if we had an
unlimited supply of oil and no environmental
negatives to burning it.
Where we could pump and refine it for 10-20
dollars a barrel and a gallon of gasoline
cost a buck in modern cash.
That’s a civilization that has cheap transportation,
cheap heating and cooling, cheap supplies
of fresh water for homes and farming, and
cheap fertilizer for those farms.
It results in the drop in cost of almost everything,
while ensuring more funds are available publicly
and privately for other services and projects
to benefit humanity in general and raise the
standard of living for the individual and
family worldwide.
This is not a pie in the sky idea, or a thing
of the distant future, it’s just what happens
when you don’t have a dwindling supply of
oil that also causes environmental issues
when we use it.
There’s a lot of solutions we can contemplate
down here on Earth but the Solar System is
a much bigger place and also where the Sun
is actually at, not here on Earth, and today
we’ll be talking about ways we can get that
clean and super-abundant energy we need from
space.
Our primary focus will be on solar power,
particularly power beaming, but there’s
a few different forms of that, like solar
thermal, and we also want to contemplate a
couple other options like Earth’s magnetic
field or rotation, or nuclear power, fission
and fusion.
One thing we won’t be doing here is talking
too much about price per joule or kilowatt
hour, while that’s vitally important to
deployment, the reality is that trying to
price power up on any system that’s not
even been fully prototyped is more than a
bit dubious, and more importantly, the space
market place itself is constantly shifting
and so is the energy marketplace.
We also often have arbitrary values getting
plugged in by those in favor or against a
system in the absence of hard data or even
just because it's a round number.
Just as an example, we had a recent report
out saying solar power satellites, or SPS,
would run about 60 cents a kilowatt hour,
at the time I’m writing this the US national
average is 19 cents, so just over three times
as much.
It did that by assuming SPS lifetimes of 10
years, whereas the SPS-Alpha group usually
puts that service lifetime at 30 years, three
times as long, and longer if maintenance was
possible.
Since virtually all the cost is launching
that satellite, 30 years would suddenly make
it economically viable.
It was also assuming rather high launch costs,
not what Space-X is anticipating for a few
years down the road, let alone if we were
trying to move a multi-trillion dollar sector
of the economy into space which would see
launch costs drop massively as everything
just scaled up.
Also, while we generally want these devices
in higher orbits, which takes more fuel, they
need their own method of station-keeping,
like an ion drive, and obviously have their
own power supply, so they do not really need
the additional and significant cost of moving
from low orbit to higher orbits included in
their launch cost.
It’s rarely a bad idea to be pessimistic
about new technology start-up costs but that
report is assuming much too high of launch
costs and much too low of service lifetimes.
And this is always current technology too,
which is proper when you’re doing a business
plan for a start up but not when you’re
trying to guess the state of play two generations
from now.
Trying to determine how much a given power
system would cost at least 20-30 years before
it deploys at scale would be like trying to
determine how much backing up your computer
would cost in nowadays money using available
storage from the late 90s, when writable CDs
were still all the rage and floppy disks were
still common, and memory cost many thousands
of time more than now.
For my part I think we could make a system
like SPS work right now, and I was a late
convert to the idea maybe 6 or 7 years back.
I have a lot of friends and colleagues who
work on it and other systems and who also
have the job of being critical of them too,
and that’s only grown since I was elected
president of the National Space Society, which
is a big advocate of space-based power unsurprisingly.
It also means I’m not the most neutral source
on the matter, nor am I an economist, but
I’ll try to present the topic as fairly
as I can while in a general advocate role.
I want to stress though that neither advocates
nor critics are really in a good place to
offer concrete numbers on costs and performance
at this stage other than to say that the march
of time and progress will tend to improve
them.
Though as I often like to note on this sort
of topic, it tends to improve their competitors
too, and some systems might improve 100% in
efficiency and surpass how a current competitor
performs, but that same competitor might improve
60% in the meantime and thus still be ahead.
Either way, we as consumers and citizens generally
benefit, but it can mean that a given up and
coming alternative energy or production method
can still hit all its goalposts to improve
and not become a clearly superior choice simply
because one or more existing methods also
improved in that time and enough to make a
conversion less than tempting.
With that caution in mind, we still have lots
to be optimistic about in the energy front
for space and as we’ll see, that includes
pathways other than solar panels there too.
Again, looking at launch costs and tempo from
the last decade doesn’t paint a clear picture
of price that we would see if we were launching
dozens of big solar satellites a month.
Nor does it tell us what the economic environment
looks like if we’re just launching delicate
components and assembling a given power generator
in orbit from those and bulk materials like
metals or silicon sourced from the moon, or
asteroids.
Or alternatively, if we were bringing in fission
or fusion fuel from those sources or a gas
giant for non-solar power sources.
Many of these systems do have extensive white
papers done on them that seek to estimate
cost, some more up to date or developed than
others, if you want to continue your research
after today.
And I would say almost without exception such
papers represent sincere and diligent efforts
to be honest in projection, but there’s
a lot of unknowns and unknown unknowns out
there.
I should also note that there’s production
of energy in space and then shipping that
energy back to Earth, and we should not assume
these are always hand-in-hand.
They also have very different key dynamics.
For instance, the default system for moving
energy back to Earth is typically microwave
transmission.
Microwaves are easy to convert from electricity
and then back into electricity, at a relatively
low loss rate, and they go through almost
anything.
The microwaves in your home projecting your
wi-fi signal and heating your food in the
microwave oven are the same thing, and pass
harmlessly through virtually everything but
are very easy to absorb or reflect with certain
materials and equipment.
Hence, the typical microwave photon in your
oven may bounce around inside that oven a
million times before it actually gets absorbed,
but a photon can bounce around a space like
that a billion times a second.
I think folks worry about getting cooked by
microwaves themselves and don’t really understand
that we use them because they get absorbed
by virtually nothing and easily pass through,
compared to say visible light, which is also
thousands of times stronger per photon too,
so even when a microwave hits a piece of flesh
it isn’t doing anything but slightly warming
it and less than a random visible light photon
would.
But a light photon will only heat the surface
of food, whereas microwaves are better at
getting in deeper, precisely because they
get absorbed less.
It is also very hard to focus beams of any
photon into tight spots and harder the bigger
the photon’s wavelength - microwaves are
many thousands of times higher in wavelength
and lower in energy than visible photons.
You can build one that could concentrate microwaves
very intensely on a spot, much like you can
with light, and indeed the microwave equivalent
of a laser is called a maser.
The thing is, trying to focus one tight enough
to hurt people or the local environment rather
than move energy - making a death ray - would
mean a costly and expensive upgrade to such
a beaming system which would also not be even
a little bit covert.
Everybody can see your satellites, especially
the ones with huge sunlight collectors on
them.
Indeed one of the bigger objections to these
is that they would be naked-eye visible and
add to light pollution, even though we tend
to put them in much higher orbits where they
don’t get shadowed much by Earth, though
that adds costs.
By default we tend to think of putting an
SPS system at Geostationary, which is a hundred
times further away than low orbit, and thus
thousands of times dimmer to our eyes, but
these things are huge mirrors so even there
you are going to tend to see them.
They also can be in higher and lower orbits,
this requires you to be able to switch where
you’re beaming energy down to, but also
avoids the issue with geostationary being
fairly limited and valuable real estate.
Regardless, they’re just not covert.
So nobody builds them as a secret weapon nor
can someone easily hijack one and convert
it.
It could be done, but it would be a really
inefficient and risky way to obtain a fairly
weak weapon.
Conceptually, it would be like trying to build
a compressed gas machine gun by hijacking
a porsche or jet plane, when you could have
spent far less time and energy to get your
hands on a vastly superior weapon system.
I wanted to get that out of the way because
the main objection to power-beaming is usually
this and yet you won’t see it come up much
in papers on the topic except to clarify why
it wouldn’t work and isn’t a worry.
And there are plenty of papers critical of
this approach, but not on the weaponization
point, usually cost and transmission coordination
concerns.
Another thing I like to note though is that
everything is weaponizable, especially energy,
it’s just that in a case like this you are
better off weaponizing a power satellite by
using it to power a weapons factory.
Or running a normal factory and using the
increased prosperity and tax revenue to pay
for troops and tanks.
But while that’s the main method contemplated
for moving power to Earth, it isn’t the
only one and more to the point, it can be
used for moving multiple types of power.
We picture a sunlight-collecting power plant
sending it down to Earth but these could as
easily be solar-thermal plants or thermal
wadis on the Moon or even nuclear fission
or fusion reactors.
Indeed we often contemplate using micro black
holes as a power source and one orbiting the
planet at a distance and beaming energy home
might be viewed as wiser approach, even if
a micro black hole would need longer to eat
our planet than we have before the Sun burns
out, so that under known theory, one wouldn’t
be a threat even if it got lost in the middle
of Earth or the Sun.
Beaming stations also represent a very interesting
economic marketplace.
One of the things we like about orbital solar
power is there’s no weather or nighttime
up there so except for when your station moves
into the planetary shadow for a bit, assuming
it even does, you can transmit at full power
constantly and to the dark side of Earth or
right through bad weather.
But your satellite isn’t stationary and
while we might be able to target individual
houses or yards with their own receivers,
we usually assume large receiver fields servicing
a modestly large region like a city or county.
Such fields could still serve other purposes
too, you can grow crops or pasture in one,
and indeed I could make a very good case in
colder climates for weaving the receivers
into greenhouses since a modest fraction is
turning into heat when received and converted
back into electricity.
Thus you get to put a receiver into a structure
easily modified to that end which gives it
some free warmth and an abundant energy supply
for supplemental lighting.
This means that a satellite is constantly
shifting who it transmits too, as it orbits
Earth, and odds are you get a very elaborate
and fairly automated auction system.
We might have a million of these satellites,
each generating 10 megawatts of power, and
each selling power for one hour blocks.
That would be 10 trillion watts, which is
about half the total power consumption of
humanity right now, and just gets auctioned
off constantly and works in conjunction with
other existing power sources.
Prices go up, people build more of them, they
go down, people build less or folks start
buying those non-peak supplies to use for
marginal purposes.
That can include sucking carbon dioxide right
out of the air to combine with hydrogen from
water into methane, gasoline, or other hydrocarbon
fuels, which then become carbon neutral.
You’ll spend more energy doing that then
you’ll get out of it, but much like charging
a battery, there’s a lot of cases where
that mobile power supply is very worth that
increased cost.
It is not the only way to get power down to
Earth though, and the most obvious is us bringing
it in on space freighters.
Nuclear can make folks hesitant, especially
when it's being used near Earth, but it's
great for interplanetary spaceships or on
places like the Moon that are already soaked
in radiation anyway.
I could easily imagine a nuclear fission economy
growing in space and using lots of breeder
reactors to produce more abundant and handy
fuels like plutonium, and shipping those back
home to Earth.
This is even more true if we get fusion working,
though a note of caution here.
You will hear a lot about helium 3 and the
Moon and there’s two big caveats that tend
to get left out.
First, there isn't much Helium-3 on the Moon,
it's exaggerated as a source, and second,
it is much harder to fuse than deuterium is.
So it’s mostly attractive because the aneutronic
process of helium-3 fusion allows a much lighter
reactor with less shielding and less wear
and tear.
Which means it’s much more useful for spaceships
than down on a planet where shielding mass
is cheap, and replacement parts are abundant.
More importantly, if you’ve got helium-3
reactors then you’ve got fusion-powered
spacecraft that can fly out fairly quickly
to the outer planets where Helium-3 is vastly
more abundant.
See our episode Colonizing Neptune for a more
detailed discussion of such an economy and
its dynamics.
Deuterium is also abundant there and much
easier to fuse but critically, there’s a
huge amount of it here on Earth and no reason
not to use it first.
The overwhelming majority of the normal matter
in this universe is hydrogen or helium, and
both of their isotopes of deuterium and helium-3
are very common everywhere you go except the
inner-system and Earth-like planets, where
helium is rare and hydrogen and deuterium
are still abundant but not nearly as much
as elsewhere.
This is another reason photovoltaics are popular
for space, because water is fairly rare near
the Sun and most of it is down here on Earth,
so your option for cheap and abundant working
fluids and coolants for classic heat engines
like coal power plants or nuclear reactors
is fairly limited.
Though we’ll return to that point in a bit
to discuss solar thermal power.
It’s also a reminder that we’re not just
interested in power production in space for
here on Earth.
There’s all those future facilities we’d
like to make in space, all those spaceships,
moon bases, Martian colonies, and even habitats
in deep space or on seemingly unlivable worlds
like Mercury and Venus.
We should also be mindful that in some scenarios
it might be easier to transmit power from
a planet to space instead of the other way
around.
We tend to assume we’re using abundant and
renewable solar which is more plentiful and
stable in space, but we could have fusion
reactors down here that transmitted to low
orbital satellites when they were in Earth's
shadow.
One of the biggest issues with power in space
is hauling your equipment up there and maintaining
it there, and if it costs you a tenth the
price to build and maintain down here, then
you might find that easier.
One big exception is when you start having
enough power generation that simply creating
and using electricity is producing too much
heat for your planet.
This is beyond greenhouse gas concerns - which
clean energy from space is meant to fix but
which fusion reactors groundside would too.
The thing is that such engines are always
producing at least half their energy, and
typically more, as raw heat in the process
of making electricity, so if you’re doing
that up in space instead, it lets you increase
the electricity available on Earth without
overheating the planet.
Now this is where microwaves are handy because
we can reliably pull off much higher rates
of microwaves to electricity and lower rates
of microwaves to heat then we can with any
steam engine or turbine.
85% efficiency is very achievable with a rectenna
- which is the type of antennae we use for
grabbing microwaves.
We delved into that process in more detail
in our power satellites episode way back in
2016 and it remains the same now.
The thing is, you only really need to worry
about that electricity to heat loss as a maximum
cap on your civilization if you’re aiming
for some trillion-person ecumenopolis or planet-wide
city.
However, that same civilization could simply
use space towers to bring electricity down
on superconductors or ultra-low resistance
wires.
And we might do something like that too.
An alternative to power satellites is simply
sticking your solar panels up above the weather
on something like an orbital ring or tethered
ring.
Which keeps them at a spot in the atmosphere
safe from space debris issues - or causing
space debris issues for that matter - while
also giving you a launch platform to space
that massively outperforms modern rockets.
There are even some extreme engineering methods
that can allow physical tether connections
to the Moon or Lagrange Points, like we discussed
in Interplanetary Infrastructure, and while
those would be major projects, they are well
within the bounds of known science and the
construction capability of such a civilization.
Which circumvents the entire issue of beaming
energy to Earth.
So too, ships bringing in plutonium or helium-3,
or pods going down such space towers, elevators,
or tethers, are carrying a super-dense energy
source where even a single modest freighter
landing once a month would likely supply the
entire planet’s energy needs for that period,
if not far longer.
And a ship full of helium-3 crashing is utterly
harmless - minus the debris - while fuels
like uranium and plutonium are so dense and
sturdy that they wouldn’t fragment much
on re-entry and be fairly easy to recover
without much concern if a ship did fall apart
during atmospheric entry.
Needless to say you can find them easily with
a geiger counter in any place they might land
that is dangerous to humans.
And because water is so good at absorbing
radiation, any small fragments landing in
the deep ocean would be relatively harmless,
and would sink like bricks and get buried
in the sediment.
You should still retrieve them though, and
for entirely non-altruistic reasons, plutonium
is very valuable stuff.
All in all, I still favor a solar power satellite
especially in the near to mid-term, but we
do have options and their viability is hard
to really assess compared to alternatives.
I’m sure no one will be shocked when I say
I’d like to see trial and pilot projects
on all of the above.
I don’t think we gain much by focusing down
on one when we have thousands of enthusiastic
scientists and engineers who’d like to try
each of several approaches and enthusiasm
is a huge and often underappreciated aspect
of productivity in every area of human endeavor
but particularly science and engineering.
I tend to feel the populace as a whole prefers
the multi-pronged and aggressive approach
to R&D too, which is why I tend to be irritated
at circular firing squads in science that
emerge when one group wants to get their project
funded and beats up on their perceived competition.
Though that can be a healthy and necessary
process too.
As an example, there tends to be a focus on
photovoltaics these days, and improvements
in semiconductors and solar panels justify
a lot of that, but you’ve probably heard
of solar thermal towers.
This is where we get a bunch of focusing mirrors
on the ground that point their light at some
central spot that gets heated up and moves
water or molten salts around with that heat
to generate power.
One big problem with them is that unless you
want to open a rotisserie on that site, you’ve
got a problem with birds flying through the
concentrating spot and getting themselves
extra crispy.
You could dome that over but then you’re
losing some light to transmission through
that dome and of course, paying for a big
dome.
Many other solutions have been suggested for
that but there are no birds in space and there’s
also no complex supply chains there for making
solar panels.
Alternatively there’s tons of metal on the
Moon and it’s easily extracted with solar
kilns and nothing complex is involved in taking
that metal and rolling it into big polished
sheets which are fairly immune to wear and
tear in space.
So we could do this with robots, especially
since those robots could be controlled remotely
from Earth with minimal time lag.
Even if you’re taking up twice as much space
to generate the same amount of power, you’re
not exactly short of that in the empty void
of space or on places like Mercury where there’s
no concern of dust covering your mirrors or
panels.
It would also be very easy to design some
cleaner or polishing bot that walked around
on magnetic legs around such panels or mirrors
and went back to its hub to recharge or even
had a wired electric connection which served
as a safety tether too.
This might be entirely automated or even remote
controlled from groundside facilities here
on Earth.
And these might be groundside facilities too.
One reason we like molten salt on Earth is
that it remains a liquid even when very hot
and full of energy, rather than turning to
steam like hot water does, requiring pipes
that can handle a lot of pressure and are
prone to rupture.
You can store a lot of heat in such molten
materials and for a long while, and on airless
rocks like the Moon, we can do this even better
inside what we call thermal wadis.
This can be as simple as pouring heat into
a big natural thermal reservoir, by having
a lot of metal mirrors focused on it or on
a heater attached to molten salts piping that
heat in, and back out later for power generation.
This can also involve the equivalent of a
thermos-cup, since there’s no air and any
container suspended on the Moon to minimally
touch things around it can only lose heat
by radiation and can store it a long time,
and longer the bigger it is.
This is mostly viewed as a way to help keep
power at a base on the Moon, where its ultra-slow
rotation makes it so the lunar day is two
weeks long and the lunar night just as long.
But while the Sun may disappear from the Moon’s
sky for weeks at a time, Earth doesn’t.
It’s either there all the time, on the side
of the Moon facing us, where we can send a
beam from constantly, be it communication
or power, or you are on its metaphorical dark
side where we cannot.
This is what’s tempting about the Moon for
Solar power as it might beam excess energy
home to Earth while using the majority for
the creation of more of these big metal sheets
and rocket fuel to be used for ships in orbit
of Earth planning on interplanetary voyages,
and saving on rocket fuel we need to make
and burn here on Earth, few of which are noted
for being terribly eco friendly either.
Some by how you mine or refine them, and some
like aluminum are just energy hogs, readily
available and easy to mine and make if you
have a cheap power source beamed in to run
things.
Alternatively you can move a lot of more problematic
industries off Earth if you have power, especially
if you have good automation.
Power made in space can be used for making
fuel for space travel or running industries
or space stations and habitats.
One way to get cleaner energy on earth is
basically just to reduce how much of it we
have to produce here and that includes lowering
our demand.
And strange as it sounds, it might be easier
or better to ship metals home not just to
Earth orbit but Earth itself in some cases,
rather than making them here.
You don’t have to use microwaves for power
transmission either.
They just tend to be our easiest and most
efficient to convert energy back and forth
from heat or sunlight into electricity somewhere
else.
Sometimes you might want to use a visible
range laser beam as an alternative, especially
if you’re trying to send it far away where
having a shorter wavelength can allow a tighter
focus.
We often contemplate them for helping push
spaceships along, either by the raw radiant
pressure of those photons or super-heating
some propellant to temperatures beyond what
any fuel might burn at and thus achieve higher
speeds.
Or for moving comets in-system.
A weird quasi-tractor beam can be used to
on a comet or asteroid by having a power receiver
on that ice ball or rock and using the received
energy to vaporize matter there and propel
it out in the direction of your choice like
a rocket flame, including in-system toward
that beam, which pushes against it but not
nearly as much as the matter stream coming
off in terms of net momentum.
So you send a simple robot probe there to
land, embed itself, or perhaps two probes
to the north or south pole, spread out their
receivers, and use that to collect energy
and vaporize material to be fired out in the
direction you want.
Which might be out-system too.
Interstellar speeds are possible this way,
and it's something to do with excess power
production since you always want to have some
production even above your peak needs.
This is also a good way to support settlements
or outposts far from the Sun.
Now I mentioned two probes landing on a comet
or asteroid for such a push and that’s because
if you are at a pole you probably can keep
your receiver constantly visible from your
distant power transmitter, but if you start
blowing material from just one spot like that
you’ll start spinning the asteroid or comet
into a wobble or rotation, whereas two points
would negate that.
But it’s a good reminder that while we’ve
been talking about heat engines producing
power by moving heat around, the way we originally
generated electricity is by using that to
spin a dynamo.
That’s just some spinning object, usually
a disc, spinning through a magnet which slows
it down and generates electric current in
the process, converting that kinetic rotational
energy to electricity.
These days we generally use an alternator
over a dynamo, which generates alternating
current, dynamos generate direct current incidentally.
Spinning an asteroid around to act as a power
storage might seem crazy but you can do that
and a lot of rotating habitats, since they
rotate to produce spin-gravity anyway and
through a frictionless vacuum, might subtly
alter their spin rate to store or withdraw
energy this way.
So maybe gravity is higher in the evening
by a few percent and lower in the morning
by a few percent.
Or they might just pump water or some other
liquid from their core to the exterior to
compensate with changing angular momentum
but stable gravity.
You can actually do this to an entire planet,
especially one like earth with a big magnetosphere,
and we’ve discussed doing this before to
alter a planet’s rotational speed.
You spin it faster to shorten the day length
or withdraw energy to lengthen the day.
Earth’s rotational energy is a 214 billion-billion-billion
joules, so if we were okay with sucking 1%
of that energy out over a million year period
we would be getting about 2 billion-trillion
joules a year out, which is 68,000 gigawatts
of power, 20 times the current power consumption
of humanity.
I doubt that we’d ever opt for this path,
but it is available and you can also restore
it later if you want, and many terraforming
projects on other planets might pursue this
method to get the day length they want.
You can also move things around in Earth's
magnetosphere this way via electrodynamic
tethering, which lets you use a long thin
conductive tether - potentially thousands
of miles long - to suck energy from that magnetosphere,
or alternatively, push up and out from Earth
by running power into it in reverse.
We contemplate that in the devices known as
skyhooks and rotavators, and you can do it
with a full space elevator too.
I could imagine planets with more eccentric
orbits or a north or south hemisphere that
had more land but was colder, opting to add
rotational energy during one season or orbital
phase to store it, and withdraw that to warm
them during the other phase.
This would be a barely measurable change in
rotational energy for an object of that scale
too.
Obviously one of those options that’s fairly
far out there and probably never of use on
Earth, but it’s good to know our options
and there’s a reason this show is called
Science & Futurism after all.
You can learn more about power satellites
in our episode of that name from 8 years back
or over at the National Space Society’s
website, nss.org, and we’ve discussed most
of the topics today in more detail in other
episodes though usually with different focuses,
often for developing the moon, settling Mars,
or terraforming planets.
Our playlist on the future of power and industry
also examines many of the options from basic
fission and solar through advanced concepts
like thorium, fusion, black hole power generation,
and even vacuum energy and zero point energy.
For my part I remain a big fan of solar power
satellites and hope our improvements in both
solar power and space launch costs will see
some prototypes fielded sooner than later,
and while it has it challenges and downsides
too, like many of the others we looked at
today, I think it offers a promising way to
meet our rising energy needs in a way that
lets us get our power cheaper, safer, and
more abundantly than now.
And I think it’s very proper that our path
to a brighter future might involve bringing
more sunlight down to Earth.
So as we saw today, there are a lot of ways
to get power from space, especially for use
up in space, to let us run a growing orbital
and even interplanetary infrastructure and
that inevitably raises that big question about
how if we could be expanding robustly into
space like this, couldn’t other older civilizations
too?
And if so, where are all the giant beacons
shouting into the Great silence?
After all, there’s abundant power to run
beacons so titanic you could hear them galaxies
away.
In this month’s Nebula Exclusive, Galactic
Beacons, we’ll dive into ask if stellar
empires might create beacons and to ask how
those would work, what types there are, and
why you would or wouldn’t make them.
Galactic Beacons is out now exclusively on
Nebula, our streaming service, where you can
also see every regular episode of SFIA a few
days early and ad free, as well as our other
bonus content, including extended editions
of many episodes, and more Nebula Exclusives
like last month’s episode Crystal Aliens,
Topopolis: The Eternal River, January’s
Giant Space Monsters, December’s episode
The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis,
Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark Stars
at the Beginning of Time, Life As An Asteroid
Miner, Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters,
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will, and more.
Nebula has tons of great content from an ever-growing
community of creators.
Using my link and discount it’s available
now for just over $2.50 a month, less than
the price of the drink or snack you might
have been enjoying during the episode.
When you sign up at my link, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only
get access to all of the great stuff Nebula
offers, like Galactic Beacons, you’ll also
be directly supporting this show.
Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, and with
all the exclusive bonus content, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
So this weekend we’ll be having an extra
episode on Sunday April 7th on the Fermi Paradox
to ask if the reason why we don’t see expanding
alien civilizations is because they eat their
own colonies, in the Cronus Scenarios.
After that, we’ll have a look at Defending
Earth, be it from asteroids, aliens, AI, astronomical
explosions, or just mundane human threats,
possibly including rebellious space colonies.
Then it will be time for Sci Fi Sunday, where
we’ll be looking at the idea of Stargates
and parallel devices for bridging between
worlds and ask if there’s any theories bridging
between science and scifi there.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you’d like to donate or help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content
like Galactic Beacons, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
