This episode is brought to you by Fabulous!
Imagine the day a civilization discovers the  
starry night sky above contains billions of 
billions of worlds awaiting their arrival.  
Now imagine the day they realize 
those voyages will never be made.
 
So earlier this week we were talking about Kessler 
Syndrome, collision cascades around planets that  
might make spaceflight very dangerous or even 
impossible, and it is one of many things might  
make it very hard for them to leave their world 
to colonize space or potentially even be able to  
contemplate the possibility. Some of these might 
be natural causes, some might be self-inflicted  
or even from exterior sources like an older 
alien civilization quarantining a planet.
 
Now when we discuss the Fermi Paradox, the big 
question of where all the aliens are, we often  
emphasize that many solutions don’t work simply 
because we wouldn’t expect them to be universal.  
We call this Non-Exclusivity and it’s the idea 
that while we would expect the ability to build  
spaceships to be a trait exclusive to species 
with a knowledge of basic mathematics and  
physics, we would not expect the ability 
to go into space to be exclusive to,  
say, civilizations whose economic system was 
capitalist, communist, or socialist given that  
the space race was between the USSR and USA. 
Space launches and the science and engineering for  
them have been achieved and improved by nations 
subscribing to all three approaches. So while  
it might be that one of these systems was better 
than the others for colonizing space, we would say  
it was non-exclusive, any are capable, though not 
necessarily equally capable. The same would apply  
to various religious or ideological beliefs, and 
of course to more mundane stuff like hair color or  
how many arms or heads a given alien had. 
Often with a Fermi Paradox example,  
the proposed solution to the apparent paradox just 
doesn’t hold up to scrutiny for non-exclusivity.  
We just wouldn’t expect most planets life arose 
on to have thick dust clouds that obscured the sky  
so that the inhabitants never even 
considered star flight or some debris  
ring that made it a thing to contemplate 
but only as an expensive form of suicide. 
 
So while we will discuss the argument for some 
of our cases today, many are transparently not  
viable for a Fermi Paradox solution as they’d 
be exceptionally rare and with no clear link to  
inhabited worlds. And thus it is a pretty good 
topic for one of our Scifi Sunday episodes too  
as while each suggestion will be a 
situation that could plausible come about,  
they are probably more of interest as plots 
for scifi novels than approaches for SETI – the  
Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence.
As one such example, there are vast empty  
regions of the Universe called Cosmic Voids, 
and these spots are not empty of matter, indeed  
they have stars and sometimes even galaxies in 
them, but they are the rare oasis in the desert,  
so to speak. In such a place, life might develop 
on a world around a star that was so far from any  
other star that they would have to get to 
late 20th century astronomical technology  
and infrastructure to even be aware there 
was a Universe beyond their planet and sun.  
This is quite probably a case that’s already 
happened, if life is decently common enough,  
but it doesn’t really matter to SETI because 
we are nowhere near any of those voids, and  
looking for our first example of intelligent life 
there would be like a person dumped in the middle  
of New York City, trying to find an example of 
intelligent life, and opting to leave the Atlantic  
Seaboard entirely to hunt Antarctica on the off 
chance they found McMurdo or one of the other  
research stations there. There are vastly more 
galaxies to search near us than these voids are.
 
This isn’t universal though, we can make a decent 
case for Kessler Syndrome being very common or  
inevitable. As I said we discussed that more 
earlier this week and how civilizations might  
handle preventing or removing those cascade debris 
fields, but the basic concept works well for a  
Fermi Paradox Solution. Especially given we have 
only basic models of both those cascades and the  
solutions for managing them, they may be worse 
than expected and the solutions ineffective. 
 
So civilizations start exploring space and 
building up their orbital infrastructure,  
and eventually the amount of litter up there sets 
off the ruinous cascade we call Kessler Syndrome.  
The civilization, probably barely a century 
ahead of us in tech at best, likely doesn’t  
have any off world bases beside maybe their moon 
and some simple outposts on their equivalent of  
Mars or an asteroid mine. Space is already hard to 
build in and now everything else they build cost  
even more to armor and has a shorter lifespan and 
it just seems that the more they move into space  
the more resistance they face just getting 
into orbit and keeping a presence there. 
 
Such civilizations also have to 
worry about intentional cascades.  
Nutcases or lesser powers who want to 
wreck things for those operating up there.  
Blowing up satellites and orbital infrastructure 
is vastly easier than building them  
and the sad reality is that everyone who gets a 
successful foothold in space and nearby worlds,  
once exploited properly, become very powerful. 
Rival entities might feel this sort of asymmetric  
preemptive warfare was their only real 
chance to avoid being crushed later on.  
And there is an option for stealth, as an example 
a submarine with an antisatellite laser as a minor  
part of its armament and a secret part of its 
overall mission could be having its command staff  
firing that laser at a satellite every 
time it quietly surfaced in the ocean,  
unknown to most of its crew even. It would 
be very hard to prove anything happened.
 
Now again, we discussed managing Kessler Syndrome 
last episode, and I can think of ways to manage  
that submarine case too – I would not have 
even suggested it otherwise – but it is not  
hard to imagine ways in which Kessler Syndrome 
could become a major and unsolvable problem  
for civilizations, including it’s K2 version 
that changes us from debris orbiting Earth to  
debris orbiting the solar system in general. 
I wouldn’t call it a strong case as a Fermi  
Paradox Solution, however we have to keep in 
mind that none of our Fermi Paradox Solutions  
really has an overwhelming case for it, and my 
assumption these days is that at least one major  
scientific concept we take for granted is wrong 
or misunderstood so that we get a distorted view  
of the landscape. I have no idea which, mind you, 
or if it is any, but as an example, given that  
we do not have an orbital infrastructure right 
now even though we would like to and have spent  
hundreds of billions of dollars on space thus far, 
we do not want to rule out that all these problems  
facing us for developing space further do not have 
easy solutions that will make it practical and  
economically viable to colonize space. Kessler 
Syndrome might be one such example of that. 
 
Something like that could be self-perpetuating 
too. Planets can have naturally occurring rings,  
nothing is really stopping a world like 
Earth from having ones as thick as Saturn’s,  
but one theory for how such rings get maintained 
is by cryovolcanic eruptions of material from  
closer moons. And it is worth noting that many 
artificial processes might have a similar effect,  
pollution and smog equivalents from your 
orbital factories. We tend to assume once  
you get to space things snowball out into the 
galaxy but we might be jumping the gun on that.  
Some time back in our episode looking at how Space 
Colonization could save Earth, I pointed out that  
not only would most interest in space colonization 
need to focus on how Earth benefited directly from  
it, but also that tons of our proposed benefits 
from space colonization are a bit handwavey. 
 
You don’t really need to colonize the solar 
system, let alone the galaxy, to protect Earth  
from Asteroids for instance, you just need some 
big guns and tracking systems built in orbit.  
And with that case in mind, I often 
note that asteroids approaching space  
faring civilizations isn’t a crisis 
for them, it’s a free economic boon,  
as they can just lasso it and use it’s 
material for building infrastructure.
 
Something like that could produce a ton of orbital 
debris and pollution, but that doesn’t necessarily  
mean they’d view that as a deal breaker. Sending 
out wave after wave of tiny and expendable robots  
to mine asteroids and bring the material back 
into the cloud for dropping down to Earth is a  
very viable approach. They might not care about 
a satellite grid then either, potentially using  
the cheap expendable robot eyes approach or simply 
have improved storage for helium or hydrogen gas  
to replace their satellites with non-orbiting, 
geostationary pods floating a hundred kilometers  
up, protected from debris by the atmosphere. We 
don’t do that trick now because the tethers would  
be hard to make strong and the gas would leak 
through normal materials, but graphene appears to  
solve both problems, being more than strong enough 
and very good at storing hydrogen and helium. 
 
So a civilization might just be enjoying 
huge amounts of gold or uranium or whatever  
being returned to their world and otherwise having 
no orbital presence because the clouds of debris  
just make it impractical to have stations or 
manned ships being built and loaded there. 
 
This notion of self-sustaining junk could 
go further too, as civilizations constantly  
rising and falling on worlds could conceivably be 
building back up into space only to get crashed by  
a Kessler Syndrome event or something parallel 
like inevitable orbital weapon deployment.  
A few centuries later they get their civilization 
glued back together and start launching ships and  
hunting through the ruins of various old space 
stations and habitats and eventually crash again,  
and so on. This is also very plausible for a 
full on K2 Dyson Swarm civilization as well,  
with the system undergoing periodic cascade 
collisions and disruptions and lots of big  
megastructures left dead but repairable. Many 
habitats survive but the debris kills trade and  
disrupts communication and power collection. 
They can't get enough sunlight because their  
thin and fragile solar collectors get trashed 
by debris, and it results in a literal dark age.  
We’re mostly focused on the idea of being stuck 
on your homeworld but home system works too.  
For that matter, there’s often concern 
about how long artificial biospheres  
and ecologies can last on space stations 
that amount to being a small island. 
 
That left alone, without trade between them or 
the homeworld, various habitats would undergo  
extinctions. Possibly all the way down to being 
lifeless, but probably just to the most simple  
microbes and such, absent big critters, some very 
simple biome. I don’t think it likely because  
of how many methods a civilization could counter 
such die-offs with, but one might imagine chaotic  
periods in a dyson swarm causing such die-offs and 
leaving only scattered pockets of civilization on  
the homeworld and more isolated and self-sustained 
habitats, from which the pre-built and mostly  
intact dyson swarm needed re-pollinating 
from every ten thousand years or such.
 
It is a good reminder that there may 
be all sort of hurdles and roadblocks,  
technological or psychological, to colonizing 
space that we haven’t even encountered yet.  
We won’t really know how clear the sailing is, 
once we launch into space, until we’ve actually  
made it to those new shores and established 
long-lasting new communities on them that grow  
big enough to launch more colonies and choose 
to do so. Until then we just assume a lack of  
known obstacles means there are none. Those might 
tend to build up with each successive failure too,  
like you might try to head back out to space in 
the 40th century AD only to find all the very  
easy asteroid prospects have already been 
mined and the mutated descendants of the  
robots you used for that, while nowhere near 
human-intelligent, still represented a large  
scale and dangerous threat to those 40th century 
ships. Or mutant human miners for that matter,  
as you might have a million asteroid mines, 
each with its own enclosed cylinder habitat,  
all left in isolation for centuries 
of biological and cultural mutation.
 
Now while the cyclic civilization collapse 
notion is very popular in scifi, most wonderfully  
discussed in Niven and Pournelle’s novel “The 
Mote in God’s Eye” I feel obliged to say that’s  
such cycles are mostly poetic, and often in 
regard to collapsed civilizations that never  
actually collapsed, but which still would only 
matter if the whole planet had collapsed and  
not managed to leave records of why. We explored 
this more in our episode Cyclic Apocalypses. 
 
Now on that subject, a very common suggestion 
for worlds’ getting trapped is that if we did  
burn out in some nuclear war or mega plague that 
took our descendants centuries to dig out from,  
then they would have to try to repeat what we did 
but with smaller amounts of available resources. 
 
On the one hand, yes you are going to exhaust 
pockets of easily mined fissile materials like  
uranium. On the other hand, no you won’t exhaust 
your supplies of iron or aluminum. They make up a  
sizable percentage of Earth’s surface, and while 
dense pockets of ore might be gone, they mostly  
just reassembled themselves into other things. A 
big steel skyscraper is a perfectly good mine for  
steel a millenia later. Landfills and graveyards 
become the new places to get mineral wealth from.
 
The Dying Earth Genre of science fiction often 
shows us this, indeed in one of the best book  
series from that Genre, the Book of the New 
Sun, the author’s legendary knack for slipping  
things in you don’t notice to future reads has the 
protagonist encountering ‘miners’ on his travels  
only for the reader to realize later 
that they are graverobbers and the  
concepts have become synonymous.
You will not have exhausted all  
your fissile materials, there’s just too 
much uranium and thorium lying around,  
and I doubt you will have managed to reassemble 
your civilization enough to use them without  
also having rediscovered the concept of a 
breeder reactor. Then we’re talking about  
millions of years of supply, though to be fair 
the planet is expected to live billions of years.  
My personal hunch would be that any cyclic drop 
in civilizations would have a period on recovery  
directly tied to their population regrowth, 
as they would probably be able to rediscover  
knowledge from ruins without any real effort, 
and even absent a diagram of a nuclear reactor,  
or a single text on nuclear theory, simply knowing 
your ancestors had such a thing would tend to  
expedite rediscovery. Plus you would have examples 
to engineer off of, we build reactors tough,  
so their ruins would still be around for a very 
long time. Possibly a plague that made people  
dumber and required a hundred generations to 
rebreed potential scientists and inventors might  
have this effect, or some long-lasting anti-tech 
culture burning books, but otherwise knowledge  
should be lost minimally and easily rediscovered.
Now usually folks focus on fossil fuels as the  
missing quantity during a second cycle or third 
or beyond. That’s legitimate but only to a point,  
and not simply in that many millions of 
years later these might be refreshed.  
Ethanol is ancient, as a reminder it is simply the 
chemical name for alcohol, and it is easy to make,  
as our ancestors found. It is unlikely any 
civilization, no matter how crushed down,  
is going to forget the antiseptic properties of 
booze, and I really have difficulty picturing a  
dystopian ruin of civilization where alcohol 
was not considered a valued commodity.  
You probably have to be a pretty determined 
teetotaler not to see a mushroom cloud rising  
and not want a stiff drink, and for your 
descendants running around the wrecked  
remains of your civilization catching rats to eat, 
I’d imagine those taste better with moonshine.
 
Now alcohol’s effect on humans might not be 
pertinent to aliens with different biologies  
and thus might not be easily invented and kept, 
but parallels might exist and other things burn  
besides booze anyway, like wood. Other than that, 
we may assume they know how to make ethanol,  
that they have several million rusting ruins of 
combustion engines to remind them why it's handy  
as a fuel, and the thing about a half-wrecked 
planet is that there’s probably lots of growing  
space per person, especially for any crop you 
won’t be personally eating and need to worry about  
toxins, heavy metals, or radioisotopes getting 
into. Corn may be a very edible ethanol feedstock,  
but there’s tons of other crops that can grow in 
absolutely dreadful soil that are medium-decent  
feedstocks, not too mention options like oceanic 
algae, and when you’ve got a whole planet and  
only a few million survivors, you really have 
no problem retooling for a ethanol economy.  
Or a solar one for that matter, if for 
some reason the soil is ultra-dead.  
That’s common to show in post-apocalyptic 
settings after the bomb but there’s nothing about  
nukes that cause soil to be dead for protracted 
times, its just artistic license. And critically,  
they already know it's possible to do ethanol, 
nuclear, and solar, and should be able to get  
at least one working, honestly all three. 
They don’t have to reinvent the wheel, they  
see semi-intact bits of them everywhere. And while 
I tend to think of large populations as a boon,  
a recovering civilization with a low population 
but tons of modern technology is quite capable of  
saying “Hey, we can only support a billion people 
on this planet, wrecked as it is, and needing half  
the land for fuel production”. And a billion 
people is more than enough to support modern  
technology and infrastructure, probably you only 
need 10 million if you’ve already got the tech  
and need only minor innovation. Now even that’s 
probably high but beneath that I think things  
might get a bit dicey, especially given how many 
technological edges have to do with massive scales  
to be advantageous, like trains for freight. 
One problem though is that ethanol isn’t very  
energy dense, thus isn’t great for planes let 
alone rockets. However, while we like kerosene  
as a rocket fuel, hydrogen is actually better 
overall, and no civilization is likely to exist  
where there is a hydrogen shortage. Water can 
be broken down for its hydrogen as long as you  
have an electric supply, as we were discussing 
last week in the future of Solar Power, using  
your peak solar in summer noon time conditions 
to make hydrogen or hydrocarbon fuels is one  
possible pathway solar technology might open, and 
would be available to such civilizations too.
 
Now another case is where life evolved on 
a world that’s a clone of earth but just  
doesn’t have these resources. Maybe their world 
is a billion years older and their supplies of  
radioactive isotopes is much lower. Maybe they 
didn’t have fossil fuels, because they formed  
but their world is more tectonically active 
and pockets tended to spill out and be lost.  
Indeed a world with more tectonic activity has 
plenty of other hurdles in creating civilizations.  
As does one with very little such activity, 
since their geological cycles bringing new land  
and metals and minerals to the surface would be 
hampered. Earth may occupy a very narrow window  
tectonically, a geological goldilocks zone. 
This one is a bit harder to justify because  
internal combustion engines would just tend 
to be a technology you would expect to see  
developed some place a civilization was already 
pretty close to agriculturally maxed out. Indeed  
part of the attraction of coal as a fuel back in 
the day was that it didn’t require devoting any  
precious wood or edible biomaterials to burn. When 
you’re a ruined civilization of a fraction your  
former number, space is not at a premium, when 
you’re already cultivating every acre, devoting  
lots of your land to growing biofuels means you 
need to lower your population, and it's hard for  
me to imagine many civilizations being willing 
and able to do that in order to have cars. 
 
Maybe for horses though. We usually say a critter 
like a horse or cow needs about an acre of  
pasture, though you can do way better by growing 
a crop on that field than feeding that crop to  
the critter instead, even if the crop is hay. 
Biofuels tend to be in the low hundreds of gallons  
per acre, varying wildly by crop and location, and 
without going into depth, my educated guess would  
be that there would be a strong advantage 
in doing biofuels for tractors and freight  
over dray animals like horses and oxen. So I think 
even on such worlds you would still see that full  
advancement on engine technology, it might be 
slower but centuries are nothing in the grand  
scheme of the galaxy and there’s no clock running 
in regards to emptying fossil fuel reserves  
or greenhouse gas issues. Technologies like 
computers and aeronautics are unrelated to fuel,  
beyond simply benefiting from the strength 
energy abundance lends a civilization.
 
There are other possible shortage too though, 
phosphorus being a potentially huge one as we  
discussed in our episode on that, so we should not 
rule out a lot of civilizations lagging because of  
such things. The issue here is that I’m not sure 
space colonization needs a take off velocity.  
You can’t get an airplane in the 
air until you hit a certain speed  
and if you run out of fuel or runway 
first, it never gets off the ground,  
but I’m not seeing that analogy 
applying to technology as well.  
A civilization that makes minimal improvements 
over the centuries might need a million years to  
get to space, but they have got it unless they 
self-destruct. Which of course they might and  
if it does turn out that there are events that 
amount to half-lives on developed civilizations,  
like a 50% chance of nuclear war per millennia 
or 10% chance per decade of someone releasing an  
artificial super-pandemic, then a civilization 
cannot twiddle its thumbs getting to space.
 
And that does seem decently probable in 
some sort of grand galactic actuarial table,  
that left on a single world long enough some 
sort of doomsday event will be engineered beyond  
a certain technological point. In the absence 
of such things though, they should have plenty  
of time. If the cataclysms are small odds per 
century or not severe enough to kill folks off  
so that they can record the problem and pass 
it on to future generations after a recovery,  
then the odds will drop off as they 
prepare to deal with it in the future.
 
Otherwise, most things which slow 
you down getting into space are not  
insurmountable given time, and thus should be 
surmounted. Let’s discuss some of those now.
 
In Douglas Adams’ epic Hitchhiker’s Guide to 
the Galaxy series we encounter a planet, called  
Krikit, where the inhabitants live in a dust 
cloud around their world that hid all the stars.  
Once that cloud was penetrated and they saw the 
rest of the Universe they turned genocidal toward  
it, but critically, much like my earlier example 
of a star in the middle of a cosmic void, while  
their interest in space and even technology might 
be very hampered by an ignorance of astronomy,  
they would still presumably invent radio at 
some point and suddenly see that Universe. 
 
We can definitely imagine scenarios where 
worlds might have that dust layer obscuring  
their vision too. Moreover, worlds with thick 
atmospheres have this same potential problem.  
Worse for them, they are likely to be worlds with 
more gravity than Earth, and more gravity plus a  
thicker atmosphere to escape through makes that 
initial effort into space a much bigger hurdle. 
 
High Gravity worlds and space 
flight don’t seem to mix well,  
and this gets worse when one contemplates that 
there would seem to be a disproportionate rate  
increase of oceans and atmosphere volumes with 
an increase in planet mass or surface gravity.  
We’ll be taking a look at Super-Earths next 
week, and will explain that in more detail there,  
but for today’s purpose we can imagine worlds 
with more gravity and thicker atmosphere,  
ones furthering obscuring the stars as things of 
interest to a rising civilization, having a harder  
time getting into space. Indeed they might have a 
lot less land to build launch pads or cities on,  
with more water on such a world.
Fundamentally though, even worlds  
with twice Earth’s orbital velocity and escape 
velocity can be escaped from by chemical rockets,  
and that’s as high as those get on any plausible 
scenario for a rocky planet with water and air.  
And even past that, our Upward Bound series here 
on SFIA catalogs tons of different ways to get  
around the Rocket Equation and limitations of 
chemical rocket fuels. It might take them a few  
extra centuries to develop useful spacecraft, 
but again, what is a century? Admittedly,  
possibly a lot if the doomsday half-life issue 
is in play, but otherwise not and such worlds  
have no limitations on normal aircraft so much 
aerospace technology would still be developed.
 
Truth be told that concern about planets 
being covered almost entirely in oceans,  
or even entirely in oceans, is a 
bigger restriction. Life developing  
technology on an entirely water-covered planet is 
potentially a hurdle unlikely to ever be broken,  
see our episode about the hurdles of 
Technology Without Fire for details.
 
There may be a very narrow window of conditions 
that allow a planet to be at just the right mass  
and temperature to have significant amounts 
of land and sea and atmosphere without it all  
evaporating away on lower gravity planets before 
intelligent life arises and also without every  
inch of surface being covered in water and ice. 
Beyond that though, I would not say gravity was a  
strong bar to spaceflight on bigger planets.
With some big exceptions,  
some very big exceptions. In his classic 
novel Dragon’s Egg, physicist Robert L.  
Forward proposes the possibility of life 
arising on the surface of a Neutron Star,  
where gravity is 67 billion times stronger than 
here on Earth. Now nothing running on biochemistry  
is emerging on life on a neutron star, there’s not 
going to be any fossil fuels there, so it does not  
matter that no chemical rocket is ever getting 
you off a neutron star’s surface if life does  
emerge on one somehow. A neutron star packs nearly 
a million times Earth’s mass into a volume about  
20 kilometers across, and even light can’t pass 
near one without being heavily bent as they have  
escape velocities of about one third to one half 
of light speed. Only antimatter offers a rocket  
fuel that could escape one, though we shouldn’t 
rule out that a lifeform somehow evolving at the  
nuclear scale of neutron stars might have access 
to that substance, potentially even naturally.
 
But outside of nature, such deep gravity wells 
are an option, as worlds with virtually no  
gravity well where space flight should be easy but 
might turn out not to be. I keep mentioning cyclic  
civilizations and it is possible to imagine 
primitive civilizations existing inside giant  
space habitats like O’Neill or McKendree Cylinders 
without even knowing there was a Universe outside,  
that’s a common theme for science fiction 
about using such space habitats as spaceships,  
generation ships or arks, and indeed is explored 
as an idea in the twin series to Gene Wolfe’s Book  
of the New Sun, the Book of the Long Sun. Folks 
living in giant spaceships and not realizing there  
is a universe outside, or beneath their feet in a 
rotating habitat drum, is a fun idea to play with  
but also a plausible one. Imagine a group, akin to 
the Amish, who are often fine with the existence  
of technology but don’t want it in their daily 
life, and commissioned a large cylinder space  
habitat with a benign AI to maintain it. 
A hundred generations later they forget what  
it is, and a hundred after that they forget they 
disliked technology and pursue it again. Not easy  
to develop technology on a world that’s artificial 
and which was built to hide its technology too.  
Hard to see an outside Universe when outside is 
Down and your world is a giant cylinder or egg.
 
And there may be whole galaxy’s worth of 
civilizations all around you, possibly peopled  
by nigh-immortal folks or superintelligences 
who were alive when your world was made  
but consider it illegal or rude to poke inside 
when you asked them not to when you built it. 
 
I mentioned giant gravity wells 
as a thing we might build though,  
and one alternative for artificial worlds is 
building big spherical shellworlds, and we have  
contemplated building these around juggernauts 
like neutron stars and black holes before. Huge  
hollow worlds whose surface looks like Earth but 
with a neutron star or black hole in its center  
for gravity and power generation. We call these 
Mega-Earths, things which not only dwarf normal  
planets but dwarf most stars, and which would have 
surface areas a million times bigger than Earth’s.  
On such worlds the surface gravity is the same as 
on Earth, or the species homeworld, as they simply  
build the shell that far from the central mass. 
However, the escape velocity of such an artificial  
behemoth is vastly higher, one a million times 
Earth’s mass, with a million times our surface  
area, would have a radius 1000 times Earth’s and 
an escape velocity the square root of 1000 higher,  
or 32 times our escape velocity. That is not 
plausibly within the realm of a chemical rocket,  
but it is within the realm of various active 
support structures we have discussed, and  
whose technology they must have mastered to have 
built that shell in the first place. Though future  
generations might have lost that knowledge I 
suppose. Still, much like with a Niven Ringworld,  
it is hard to imagine a structure with a million 
times Earth’s living area not being able to  
solve the problem of spaceflight with presumably a 
million times as many people to do their science.
 
Now of course that is another way a 
species could be bound to their world,  
if their brain architecture just didn’t 
produce those outlier science minds.  
We don’t know that intelligence like ours evolves 
much, as we discussed in our Rare Intelligence  
episode, but even if it does, our world is not 
technological because the average IQ is 100,  
it’s technological because of that tiny fraction 
who are 150+, which is less than one percent, but  
if your brain architecture makes that degree of 
outlier much rarer, that might basically leave an  
entire world of very smart folks but none who were 
STEM geniuses. We should not make many assumptions  
about how brains are structured on other 
worlds, they may not have any variation in IQ  
between people, or a range a lot tighter than 
we have, like our ranges for height or visual  
spectrum range. Or their exceptionalism might be 
in other areas of intelligence than what results  
in rocket science, or worlds of master poets that 
when it comes to science just don’t know it. 
 
They also might never leave their world in favor 
of importing material in by robot explorers,  
and it's worth noting you can build way bigger 
than even those Mega-Earths if you want. Many  
galaxies have giant black holes massing millions 
of stars in their central region, and artificial  
worlds in this class, shells or even multiple 
layers of concentric shells was suggested by Paul  
Birch for these galactic core worlds. These could 
potentially be built even up to a trillion solar  
masses, and in that Mega-Earth’s episode I coined 
the term “Birch Planet” for those Mega-Earths in  
this millions to trillion solar mass range. 
I’m rather glad to see the term seems to have  
caught on and spread inside scifi circles, as Paul 
Birch is horribly underrecognized for his ideas.  
What’s neat about these titanic galaxies 
in a planet is that they might contain many  
quadrillions of times the living area Earth has, 
especially the kind we might build around late  
Universe juggernaut black holes that ate their 
whole galaxy up. On those, time would run a good  
deal slower, especially on the lowest levels 
closer to the black hole in the basement.
 
Unfortunately these worlds are 
easier to get to then to leave,  
and civilizations opting to live on one are 
making fairly permanent travel arrangements,  
because even the smaller Birch Planets of just 
a few million solar masses would have a trillion  
times the Mass Earth does, a million times its 
radius, and a thousand times its escape velocity,  
11,000 kilometers per second or almost 4% light 
speed. For one the mass of our whole galaxy,  
that would be more like 40% light speed, in 
the zone of those hypothetical civilizations  
living on Neutron Star surfaces in Dragon’s 
Egg. Easy to reach, nigh impossible to leave.  
Mass Driver’s on a scale as big to those we 
contemplate as Birch Planet’s are to our own world  
might be needed to make flight off 
such a world economically viable. 
 
Now I mentioned how black holes of many billions 
of solar masses might become common in the Late  
Universe and it is worth noting that all our 
galaxies are slowly flying apart. Those galaxies  
close enough to stay together will eventually 
merge over the next hundred billion years, as in  
truth they have been doing for billions already, 
our galaxy is quite the cannibal, while all those  
galaxies which aren’t close enough will have 
disappeared over the cosmological event horizon.
 
Star formation will be about as common and 
plentiful as now even then, it doesn’t really  
start to seriously dip till well after the 
trillion year mark. If we were in some galaxy  
that was the leftover of such mergers, and which 
the first civilizations only arise then, then  
they could look around a hundred billion light 
years and more and see no other galaxies, they  
might feel pretty isolated and assume that was all 
the Universe was, one lone island of a trillion  
stars not even a million light years across 
surrounded by billions of light years of nothing.
 
Of course that’s still a trillion stars. But 
between galaxies there are a lot of stars too,  
ones ejected into intergalactic space and which 
might not have any neighboring stars for thousands  
of light years, currently. They wouldn’t really 
see stars, they’d see the hazy blur of a galaxy  
and maybe notice individual stars after 
they invented really nice binoculars.  
Still we could imagine them eventually realizing 
there was a galaxy nearby and other stars even  
nearer and deciding to send generation ships 
off to claim those. They have a much higher  
hurdle than we do to contemplate interstellar 
colonization, but I suspect they would still try.
 
However, those intergalactic ejects can find 
themselves lost forever, one lone star not  
gravitationally bound to neighboring galaxies, 
and a red dwarf with a planet might easily find  
itself stuck a trillion light years from its 
nearest neighbor before it ran out of fuel,  
with life arising on it and reaching 
intelligence long after any real trace of  
other stars and galaxies was erased. They might 
never realize there had been a bigger Universe,  
and travel to it is out of the question at 
that point. Of course if such worlds exist,  
they do so only in a future sense, a 
thing to arise a trillion years from now.
 
Let us imagine one other case though for the day. 
One very popular solution to the Fermi Paradox is  
that we might be in a zoo or quarantine, where we 
simply don’t know about the galaxy around us. In  
practice this approach is better done by something 
like an obscuring layer around that world to hide  
the real Universe, as was the case for that world 
of Kriket I mentioned earlier, someone hid the  
Universe from them originally. This can be taken 
to many degrees, like placing a minefield around  
a world that seemed natural, or even placing an 
actual black shell around a world or an entire  
solar system to hide the outside galaxy, indeed 
you might put little fake suns on that sphere  
like some of our ancestors envisioned might 
really be the case for the celestial sphere. 
 
Or you might upload their minds and 
place them into a simulated world,  
or if your technology permits it, you might place 
them into a pocket universe you created. You might  
even be kind and give them some artificial giant 
world, McKendree Cylinder, Ringworld, Rungworld,  
or a Mega Earth all their own, with another layer 
or black shell above in their sky, as a very nice  
zoo but a zoo nonetheless. Those are certainly 
good ways to keep a civilization bound to its  
homeworld, or its new world anyway, if that’s your 
goal, quarantine or containment or entertainment.
 
I don’t think such options offer a very good 
solution to the Fermi Paradox, unless we’re the  
ones in such a zoo, of course. One last thought 
to close on though. I began the episode by calling  
on everyone to contemplate civilizations that 
realized how big the Universe was, then realized  
it was denied to them, and it reminded me of scene 
from Isaac Asimov’s novel the End of Eternity,  
my favorite standalone novel by him and the best 
time travel novel since HG Wells Time Machine.  
In that scene we see people reacting 
to the constant trial and failure  
of their civilization of thousands of years 
to get to space and establish themselves,  
instead each time retreating. Trips to the 
distant future show humanity simply dying off  
because by the time they finally got out into 
the galaxy every planet was taken by aliens,  
not hostile but already occupying the real estate, 
and they just settle down onto Earth and give up  
and a million years later Earth is empty. 
It’s a depressing reality to face but if  
a civilization can fall apart or die off 
from seeing themselves trapped to one world  
or if they are prone to blowing themselves up, 
or if they just can’t be unified to a common goal  
because they only have themselves 
and their world to fight for or over,  
it's not too hard to imagine civilizations on 
imprisoned planets might be short lived ones. 
 
I don’t think it likely but that was Enrico 
Fermi’s original solution to the Fermi Paradox,  
intelligent life might be common but it’s all 
trapped on its homeworld or system till it kills  
itself off. The troubling thing is that it may 
turn out that space travel is harder then we often  
think and we won’t know till we have done it, but 
it might be we and every alien world just finds  
space colonization a path of constant setbacks and 
impractical hurdles, of demoralizing defeats, and  
even though there’s no dangerous debris around our 
world confining us, no bars on our prison door,  
we end up every bit as imprisoned, and doomed to 
this one world and that not for long. 
 
So we’re a little over a month into our new year 
and chances are pretty good you have some New  
Year’s Resolutions you made and often by February 
a lot of those are already on the scrap heap,  
or close to it, maybe yours or maybe a 
friend or loved one. And a lot of times  
that’s not because the goal is too hard so much 
as remembering to work on it each day is tricky. 
 
A lot of times the difference between success 
or failure on those or other life goals is just  
getting those reminders until the habit gets 
established, and that’s where our fabolous new  
Sponsor, Fabulous, can help out. There’s very real 
behavioral science behind how we develop habits  
and what sort of hurdles or assistance can 
stop or help you from forming new habits,  
and Fabulous has built their app around the 
science for building healthy habits that stick. 
 
As an example, we all hear about the 
importance of drinking enough water,  
it is probably one of the most critical and 
easy life changes to help with your health,  
physical and mental, but most folks just 
can’t get into the habit of drinking enough.  
I never did establish that habit until I was in 
the Army and getting ready to deploy to a desert,  
and we had reminders all over the place about 
its importance. It was very difficult for most  
of us to get into the habit even then and so 
I greatly appreciated that the first habit to  
work on that their app suggested to me to get used 
to the program was a water drinking challenge. 
 
So Fabulous focuses initially on simple and 
easy habits, and recommends many to you,  
but fundamentally it is about helping you 
achieve your goals without any gimmicks,  
it just focuses on setting up reminders and 
coaching. It’s 100% personalized and lets  
you go at your own pace, and it will help 
you get back on the horse if you need to. 
 
You’re investing in yourself, and 
that can be a hit and miss and rocky  
process as you build new and better habits, 
turn desired healthy behaviors into habits,  
or work toward new personal goals. It doesn’t 
just tell you to eat a healthy breakfast,  
it walks you through examples of them and 
scientific explanations of why that’s a good idea,  
and it helps you incorporate what you love and 
what’s good for you into your daily routine.  
Only you can achieve your personal goals and 
change your habits, but Fabulous has programs  
to help you reach your objectives, develop your 
motivation, and discover wellness best practices  
to help you become more Fabulous.
Start building your ideal daily routine!  
The first 100 people who click on the link 
will get 25% OFF a Fabulous subscription!
 
So this will wrap us up for another Scifi 
Sunday, and we’ll be back again next month  
for a look at Synthetic Life forms, what those are 
and what it might be like to be one, drawing on  
inspiration from the many science fiction stories 
examining the concept from different angles. 
 
Before then though, we have plenty of our regular 
Thursday episodes coming, starting this Thursday  
with a look at Super Earths, both in terms 
of life evolving on them and our options for  
colonizing them. And as we mentioned today, 
there’s a chance those might be entirely oceanic,  
and two weeks from now we will examine some 
megastures and space habitats built with marine  
habitation in mind, including a new ultra large 
megastructure option we have not examined before.
 
Now such megastructures take huge amounts of mass 
to build and sometimes more than an entire solar  
system might contain of a certain element, 
so we’ll go into March looking at Nuclear  
Transmutation options for civilizations that don’t 
want to wait on supernovae to get more materials,  
and of course such megastructures often assume 
lifespans similar to the planet’s they emulate, so  
on March 10th we will take a look at how you could 
build a machine designed to last a million years.
 
Now if you want alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to the  
Channel and hit the notifications bell, and if you 
enjoyed this episode, please hit the like button,  
share it with others, and leave a comment below. 
You can also join in the conversation on any  
of our social media forums, find our audio-only 
versions of the show, or donate to support future  
episodes, and all those options and more are 
listed in the links in the episode description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
