In order to forge new worlds under alien suns,  
we’ll need to be both patient and clever, 
but billions and billions of planets could  
be made into new homes for humanity if we 
can master our terraforming strategies.
We recently were looking at strategies we 
might use for interstellar colonization,  
and that was such a big topic we decided to 
save discussing what we did when we arrived  
in a solar system for a second installment, 
and today we’ll be talking about how an  
interstellar colony arriving in another solar 
system might go about making it a new home. 
As of today we know of no life on other planets, 
and while there may well be many habitable worlds  
out there in the galaxy, the odds aren’t 
good any of them will be fully compatible  
with us and our own terrestrial flora and fauna. 
Even if the perfect new planet were out there,  
it might not be wise or ethical to colonize 
such a world, just considering how damaging  
invasive species can be here on Earth, 
just from one continent to another. 
Terraforming a rocky planet to be like Earth 
is not the only option our colonists will have,  
as we’ll discuss today, indeed doing something 
like this will likely be a later operation. 
Once your ship or fleet has arrived in a new 
solar system, your first goal must be resupply.  
You’ve probably been traveling through space for 
decades or even centuries without a pit stop and,  
while in theory you could have carried all 
you need to establish your colony and more,  
I think we have to assume no interstellar colony 
mission would ever be sent unless we were already  
pretty experienced with in situ production of 
equipment from locally available raw materials.  
I feel like that’s a safe bet considering it would 
be tantamount to cruel experimentation to send  
colonists out except in grave desperation 
without the ability to manufacture things  
from local materials when they arrive.
Barring some desperate attempt at a first  
interstellar colony in the next century or two 
because of some solar system wide catastrophe  
like an inbound rogue black hole, I just can’t 
imagine anyone sending out interstellar colony  
fleets until we have had some practice on the 
various planets, moons, and asteroids of our  
own solar system. Furthermore there are billions 
of stars in the galaxy awaiting to be colonized,  
so we might imagine a handful of first attempts 
being done with limited knowledge and skill,  
but this episode isn’t on our first interstellar 
colony, but rather general strategies.  
And even if we send a colony ship out 
tomorrow, we still have a long time  
before it arrives to figure out how to do some 
in situ mining and manufacturing on arrival. 
This assumes no FTL, faster than light travel, and 
we will keep this assumption for the rest of the  
episode, but as an example, if tomorrow someone 
knocks out a portal device in their garage like we  
see in Peter Hamilton’s Commonwealth Saga, so we 
can just step onto new planets right from Earth,  
Stargate style, then we can expect to see a lot 
of reckless, half-baked colonies get attempted.  
However, from there they can just ship you what 
you need through a portal right from Earth,  
possibly even a perpetual portal with 
railroads, cables, and pipelines running  
through it, so things get easier.
Indeed much easier, instantaneous  
transfer of material doesn’t just make shipping 
in gear cheaper and at-need, but it also opens  
doors to options like terraforming a desert 
planet by opening wormholes up to some water  
planet or frozen moon and draining it onto that 
other planet. Or warming a planet by opening a  
wormhole directly next to a star on one end and in 
a 24-hour orbital period above the target planet  
so that it had a sun and normal Earth-like day. 
Even merging two planets together for added mass,  
or the targeted addition of matter with high 
momentum to increase or decrease a planet’s  
angular momentum to change its day length 
or year length become viable with portals. 
Options like this, often overlooked in sci fi, 
are reasons why I always say the Fermi Paradox,  
the big question of where all the aliens are, 
is only exacerbated by faster than light travel  
options, as they just make endless space 
colonization so much easier and faster that  
it’s hard to imagine why someone doesn’t 
do it, let alone why everyone doesn’t. 
Those sort of options are cool to contemplate but 
I just don’t see FTL being in the cards. However,  
there are other technologies which would 
seem outside the realm of known physics now,  
but which might not be and which might be 
very handy for terraforming. As an example,  
we tend to assume gravity manipulation options 
are limited to either ignoring real gravity and  
simply replicating it with spin or creating the 
sort of gravity we want with lots of dense mass.  
Instead, we may get artificial gravity of 
the sort ubiquitous in science fiction on  
board space ships that just “pulls you down” 
as if you were on the surface of the Earth.  
And while we have no idea how to do it, it 
would seem like stimulating the emission of a  
graviton should be in the realm of the possible, 
much as it is for photons or other particles. 
But even without that option, we might be able 
to make a micro-black hole and place it in a  
hollowed out chamber inside an asteroid, and to 
give it Earth-like gravity we could feed it on  
some cheaper source of matter like ultra-abundant 
hydrogen or helium. Or maybe even dark matter,  
which at the moment appears to have little use as 
a material except for generating gravity. Indeed  
given that what little we know about dark matter 
implies it doesn’t even interact with itself,  
it’s a material that should be able to be made 
ultra-dense if you learn any way to manipulate it,  
making it ideal for adding mass to smaller bodies 
like Moons or Asteroids to raise the gravity.  
Such tricks can also be employed to raise 
or lower gravity in a local area, as we  
discussed more in our episode Moon: Mega City.
The degree of the technology available to a  
civilization definitely controls what sort of 
colonization strategies they will be using. For  
instance if they can open wormholes to entirely 
separate Universes and suck matter and energy  
out of them, they might mass manufacture 
planets and stars, simply because they have  
infinite access to matter and energy, even if 
seemingly more economical options like rotating  
space habitats apparently made more sense.
There’s also a lot of question marks on what  
humans, and our various plants, microbes, and 
critters, actually need in terms of a planet. We  
tend to assume life will do well on planets that 
are decently like Earth in Gravity, Temperature,  
and Day Length. This assumption is partially 
justified since our Sun was a good deal dimmer  
when life began on Earth and the atmosphere and 
day length was a lot different too. We believe the  
Earth used to have a day that might have been as 
little as 4 hours long, until being smashed into  
by another smaller planet and the Moon forming 
from part of the scattered debris. As the Moon  
coalesced and slowly tidally locked to always show 
Earth the same side, Earth’s own day slowed too.  
One of the better models I’ve seen suggests that 
when basic life emerged, earth’s day was 12 hours  
long, 18 hours long when photosynthesis emerged 
and allowed life to directly use sunlight to  
fuel itself, and only 21 hours long 2 billion 
years later when eukaryotic cells emerged. 
All of this implies that life can handle 
different day lengths, since it used to,  
and we already know some lifeforms can thrive in 
low pressure or zero gravity. But we should take  
this all with a grain of salt, or maybe an entire 
ocean of saltwater, because most ecologies are a  
fragile balance constantly at risk of sliding out 
of that balance from minor changes. A specific  
lifeform - and therefore life at all - might be 
able to handle a slight change in ocean salinity  
but an entire ecosystem where that happened 
might rapidly crash as this or that organism  
inside it gains an advantage -- or hindrance 
-- that allows it to become a super-predator  
eating all its food supply and killing it off, 
removing a feeding base for other life forms. 
This is another reason why you need to resupply on 
day 1 as you enter a new system, because in order  
to start getting ecosystems going, you’re going 
to need large spaces to start generating rotating  
habitats precisely calibrated to mimic Earth where 
you can put those ecosystems. Rotating habitats  
are going to be way better than trying to spawn 
new ecosystems under domes on some planet you’re  
in the process of terraforming. Terraforming is 
inherently destructive to the local planet, even  
modest terraforming efforts on the typical planet 
would make a nuclear war, dino-killer asteroid, or  
CO2 rises look rather embarrassingly minimalist. 
You can do some serious terraforming using atomic  
explosions or redirected asteroids and comets but 
those aren’t trivial uses of materials either. 
As we discussed in Nuking Mars, where we 
looked at using nukes to terraform the planet,  
that would require far more megatons worth of 
explosions than the peak warhead supplies of  
the Cold War. Redirecting mountain-sized blocks 
of rock or ice isn’t easy either. Nor are options  
like producing a few billion square kilometers 
of solar mirrors or shades to adjust a planet’s  
temperature to a higher or lower level. Though 
in that case there are some simpler options. You  
might only need a lens or dish at a Lagrange point 
as you may already have deployed some vast amount  
of solar mirrors or collectors as part of your 
slow down maneuver on entering the solar system,  
and to allow follow up manned missions or 
robotic supply ships to come at far higher  
speeds than your ship came in, cruising 
along vast interstellar laser highways.  
The power supply from that could be redirected in 
whole or part, or part-time, to warming up your  
planet or powering your initial industries.
Everything is very dependent on your goals,  
your technology, and the specific star system 
you are in, but by and large the most probable  
strategy tends to converge toward deploying a 
large laser and power beaming array near your  
sun and selecting a gas giant or ice giant with 
a large numbers of moons as your initial landing  
point for your colony fleet. An outer moon with 
plenty of ice and rock which is safely outside  
any radiation belts of the planet and most of 
that planet’s own gravity well. Such moons,  
even bigger ones, really don’t have much of 
a gravity well to worry about, especially for  
anyone able to make interstellar spaceships, 
so it would also be quick and cheap to ship  
materials back and forth from those neighboring 
moons, or to any Trojan Asteroids that planet had. 
Our solar system is the only one we can really 
speak to in terms of asteroids and moon masses,  
the normal may range by whole orders of magnitude 
different from this, to moons as big as Earth that  
are habitable themselves, to systems almost devoid 
of any asteroids we could use for raw materials.  
Our own asteroid belt combined wouldn’t add 
up in mass to any of our ten largest moons,  
and all ten of those combined wouldn’t come 
close to the mass of Earth. Or close to  
the mass needed to make a planet like Mars 
have Earth-like gravity by adding them in.  
So on the one hand, even a star system with 
a very modest supply of moons and asteroid  
is more than sufficient for some extreme levels 
of industry that will let you tackle colonizing  
a solar system, while on the other hand 
it is still limiting for options like  
copying Earth when there’s no planet already 
present that’s pretty close to begin with. 
What you need early on is energy and cheap sources 
of raw materials, and smaller moons and asteroids  
are optimal for the latter. Energy is trickier as 
it depends on what your best technology for energy  
is. Your best energy source might not be your 
cheapest or most technologically advanced. You  
might have excellent artificial fusion reactors 
yet opt for solar collectors anyway simply as  
being easier to mass produce and maintain per watt 
of energy. Or you have fusion but the reactors are  
so big that for most applications you often prefer 
small modular fission reactors running on uranium,  
plutonium, or thorium. Or you might have black 
hole generators, ones you can feed mass into,  
and that might make it preferable to park that 
generator in orbit of a gas giant and just slowly  
siphon matter off to generate power as it falls 
in and beam that out to the nearby moon as needed. 
Indeed in those sorts of cases of massive power 
abundance, you might even decide the best way  
to get an Earth-like Planet is to make some, by 
stripping the gasses of a gas giant until only  
the core remained to be cooled and turned into 
a rocky planet, or creating black holes to just  
under Earth mass and building a shell world around 
each, using the methods discussed in our episodes  
Mega-Earths and Colonizing Black Holes. Abundant 
cheap energy offers some impressive avenues,  
and should never be ignored for discussing 
interstellar colonization, as opposed to early  
interplanetary efforts in our native solar system, 
since interstellar colony ships are potentially  
so insanely energy intensive themselves. The 
arrival of a colony fleet around a distant  
star strongly implies they’ve not got a problem 
generating lots of energy when they want to,  
so we definitely want to contemplate it in today’s 
discussions, whereas other technologies are less  
strongly implied. The same will hold true of 
a great knowledge of genetics and biology, and  
advanced automation. In all probability, they’ve 
got all of the above, or wouldn’t be colonizing  
space, though we examined the slow and low tech 
option in our episode Crawlonizing the Galaxy. 
Once you start mining up the local asteroids and 
moons, which likely relies on advanced automation  
to help build and run the machines your colonists 
use for this, you can start building the shells  
for rotating habitats and preparing them to be 
your incubators for local ecosystems. You may or  
may not have had vast zoos and ecologies on your 
ship during the trip but odds are even if you did  
it was still kept as small as viable and relied 
on lots of frozen or digitally stored DNA and  
samples. We often talk about how nice rotating 
habitats are for mimicking Earth, places where  
the gravity and day and temperature can be made 
exactly like Earth’s, but they can also mimic a  
planet that might be a candidate for terraforming. 
For instance, if you had one with a 26 hour day  
and 81% of Earth’s gravity, you could use a 
rotating habitat to test how a specific ecosystem  
from Earth might handle those conditions, and 
potentially do hundreds of isolated experiments  
at once, each on a cylinder habitat of its own, 
to test combinations of terrestrial organisms or  
those we’ve slightly modified genetically. 
They then become a great place to serve as  
nurseries for you to bring in organisms from 
as your terraforming of that planet progresses. 
Since your telescopes likely told you what 
that planet’s mass, day and year length,  
and temperature were before you even boarded the 
ship to leave Earth, it’s possible we might run  
simulations on rotating habitats back here too, 
and have good results before the ship arrived  
at its destination, or that you might have 
additional habitation drums on your colonial  
spaceships set to mimic those conditions.
You could also mimic its forecasted future  
conditions, when you add in a large array of solar 
shades at the L1 to cool the planet down a bit,  
and begin beaming gigatons of hydrogen at the 
planet from the star to combine with local oxygen  
liberated from its own rocks to form oceans, which 
is probably how we’ll handle terraforming Venus. 
None of these is a fast process either, and little 
with terraforming moves quickly. Creating an  
Earth-like planet, even with the aid of energy 
ultra-abundance and smart self-replicating  
machines is likely to be a process of millennia. 
So a colony that arrived with ten thousand members  
in the year 2400 AD, after leaving with 
just five thousand from earth in 2300 AD,  
might number a hundred million by the time 
that planet was really suitable for humans  
to live on as a New Earth in the year 4400 AD.
In the meantime those cylinder habitats were a  
great place to live too, and not a hard adjustment 
considering their ancestors were probably living  
in similar habitation drums on board their colony 
ship for the decades or centuries of flight time  
there, and indeed for most future interstellar 
colonies beyond our initial first hundred or so,  
it would be very likely most immigrants out 
from our solar system weren’t coming directly  
from Earth but had come from some rotating habitat 
built into an asteroid or moon or orbiting Earth. 
Which begs the question of whether terraforming 
copies of Earth is really going to be the normal  
strategy even in systems which have pretty 
good basic copies of Earth to work from,  
which most probably don’t. We also shouldn’t 
ignore that while we keep talking about  
making artificial gravity by spin, many future 
humans might be adjusted to far lower gravity,  
or even micro-gravity, and indeed settlers out 
from Earth might not be human. I don’t just  
mean options like post-human cyborgs 
or artificial intelligence either. 
Consider, it is entirely possible we will 
experiment with, and succeed, in making  
human-intelligent dogs, dolphins, chimps, cats, 
whichever. Or hybrids of, like a werewolf, or  
something more arcane like a brilliant jellyfish 
or squid. What then? I won’t say genocide would be  
off the table, or sterilizing them or controlling 
their numbers and rights, but I’d like to think  
more ethical options would be pursued instead. 
Albeit it’s rather debatable if an ethical society  
would even perform such experiments in the first 
place, but if we did, would not that eventually  
result in colony ships not just containing humans 
but such uplifted animal or abhuman members? Or  
entirely composed of them? Indeed they might be 
fleeing us if we turned out to be cruel to them  
and thus not able to draw on vast supplies of 
knowledge, technology, and resources when they  
reached their unpopulated new haven as refugees
The colonization strategies pursued by a race  
of smart dolphins or a race of humanoids with 
wings who can fly in a low gravity atmosphere  
like our Moon might one day offer would vary from 
what you or I would like, and the same for a race  
of uploaded humans whose colony is really just a 
lot of construction and maintenance drones tending  
to the computers and power collectors that run 
their vast virtual worlds orbiting some new star. 
There would be a different style of 
terraforming too, because it’s all simulated,  
which doesn’t imply easy either. Being a world 
designer, be it virtual or classic terraforming,  
is going to be a job where the Devil is in 
the details and untold millions of positive  
and negative feedbacks can wreck your system. 
And in reality it’s never really a lone planet  
you’re focused on forging here, but an entire 
star system. Whatever your colonists wanted  
when they left Earth, odds are good it mutated by 
arrival time, and if not, a few dozen generations  
of birth and growth is likely to see you get 
arranged into number of different cultures and  
emerging civilizations with different interests, 
and a fairly obvious way of avoiding conflict is  
to avoid conflicting interests by spreading out.
An entire planet is pretty spacious for a growing  
space colony, but a solar system makes that 
look tiny. Remember that our own solar system,  
for all that we talk of having 8 planets, actually 
contains millions of minor planets and sufficient  
resources and options for energy production 
to support many millions of times our current  
population. Which will be the case for most other 
star systems too. The dimmest red dwarf may only  
be able to support a million times our current 
numbers, several quadrillion people, while the  
larger giants may be able to support trillions of 
trillions of people, especially with improvements  
to efficiency. We often consider such new planets 
as the birthplace of such greater K2 civilizations  
once seeded around new stars, but it is entirely 
possible that the civilization will have grown  
to trillions living around all those moons 
and asteroids and other minor planets long  
before the planet they were planning on 
terraforming is ready for habitation. 
With that in mind, there are ways to expedite 
terraforming, though we need to be aware these  
will often have limits too. We can talk 
about grey-gooing a planet with smart  
self-replicating machines to just turn it into 
some instant-paradise, and we know that path  
is viable since that’s what already happened 
on Earth, and repeatedly considering how many  
extinction and replacement events happened. 
I often call that an example of green-gooing,  
though the first wave of life on Earth wasn’t 
photosynthetic and thus presumably wasn’t green,  
and later got itself wiped out by those, who 
in turn got wiped out by future iterations. 
We might think of mechanical machines as being 
better but evolution already works to minimalize  
things around the idea of spreading life quickly, 
so don’t assume anything we design is going to  
automatically be orders of magnitude better 
in terms of speed of replication and action  
or durability. Even super-duper nanotech still 
has heat issues, as we’ve discussed before,  
some little robot like that isn’t going to 
be very durable and a planet can only radiate  
away heat produced while changing it so fast. As 
we’ve noted in discussion of terraforming Mars,  
there’s limits to how fast you can even 
add water by dropping frozen comets as the  
gravity of the world will be superheating them 
as they drop so that the planet would boil if  
you tried to give it oceans in mere decades.
Such problems might have their own workarounds  
too, some easy way to remove heat from planets 
is a technology that an advanced civilization  
would certainly covet and pursue any plausible 
scientific leads to it. So if it can be done,  
they’ll figure out how, but wishing a thing true 
tends not to work and for the moment at least,  
science tells us the heat removal issue is 
a serious bottleneck on terraforming planets  
along with bottlenecking so many other things too.
Hence, no insta-planet. No insta-habitats either  
but the parameters involved on something like an 
O’Neil Cylinder or smaller habitat do let them  
move heat out a lot quicker than your typical 
planet. You also can minimize a lot of that  
heat with extensive use of space elevators, space 
towers, orbital rings, or tethered rings, as those  
let you recapture a lot of your energy entering a 
planet’s gravity well as opposed to shedding it as  
raw heat the way a spaceship aerobraking does, 
like during the shuttle or capsule re-entries. 
Again the advantage goes to those who set up their 
space-based infrastructure before their planet,  
rather than landing on some planet and 
then building your space infrastructure  
like we did. And we must remember, these 
colonists are principally coming from a  
spacefaring civilization, so even if they want 
a planet of their own as a daughter of Earth,  
they’re not going to just bypass all that 
orbital and solar infrastructure and industry,  
especially given how useful 
it would be for terraforming. 
As an example of that, while you can create a huge 
network of solar shades and mirrors down the road,  
at first, if you want a home on some frozen planet 
for instance, a handful of modest parabolic dishes  
and lenses in orbit targeting your early domes 
provides warmth and power. Not to mention mapping,  
after all this is a whole new planet, so an 
array of satellites providing imaging, mapping,  
communications, and GPS is certainly handy.
We noted earlier that since terraforming is  
so destructive you don’t really want to live 
on the planet while it’s going on, but you  
probably could have some permanent facilities. On 
an airless world, odds are an equatorial mountain  
is your preferred alpha site, and I think that 
will generally hold though I could imagine worlds  
with thinner existing atmospheres might opt 
for a valley where things could be sealed up  
and pressure could be maintained higher and air 
could be made of a composition we could breathe.  
You want a place that’s going to be resilient when 
the time comes to start overhauling the planet,  
so tectonically active spots aren’t a great pick 
nor places that might mudslide once you introduce  
oceans and atmosphere, long before you get to put 
in organic anti-erosion options, like grasses and  
tree roots. Though you may mass produce artificial 
erosion control barriers that emulated roots. 
Needless to say, our terraforming options also 
vary on our biology and culture. For instance,  
a space colony fleet might contain a faction 
of the Amish, or a parallel to a different set  
of technologies. Which can vary a lot. Many 
Amish families near my farm, for instance,  
have solar panel arrays to power lighting and 
will use a credit card at the store but will not  
use a computer, or car nor own a bicycle, but are 
also fine with riding in a van they do not own or  
drive themselves. Insofar as they generally 
make for polite and trustworthy neighbors,  
I could easily imagine them coming along as 
contingents on various colonial expeditions.  
It doesn’t matter if they can make technology, 
just if they’re comfortable with the products.  
My first thought was they’d prefer planets but 
they may be as happy as citizens on a O’Neill  
Cylinder someone else builds and maintains 
as on a planet, and as general case, it is  
very easy for me to imagine lots of culture or 
splinter factions migrating away from Earth with  
differing opinions on what technologies they 
were comfortable with and in what fashions. 
That said if you have a world that’s got an 
atmosphere at a pressure and mix that would  
kill you or I dead and half-again Earth’s 
gravity, it is entirely possible you’d have  
factions of humanity that were adapted to 
handle such conditions and just preferred  
to move in as-is and skip on terraforming. 
Saves on effort, money, and competition for  
the space. My guess is that by the time our first 
colony ships arrive around other solar systems,  
humanity will already include a lot of cyborg 
or transhuman clades and there’s a good chance  
they’ll be highly advantaged and proactive 
in space colonization of strange new worlds. 
So too, we might engineer humans to live on 
a planet without changing it, by changing  
them – what we call bioforming. Given that we 
would also need to do that to all the critters  
and plants we brought along, my guess is that we 
will tend to do terraforming more than bioforming,  
but also that each case will be a little bit of 
column A and a little of column B, and probably  
varying not just by the specific planet but 
amongst the various factions there. There would  
be those aiming to adapt the world while others 
focused more on adapting to the world. Which  
might lead to some interesting and not always 
peaceful conflicts as a planet was settled. 
In the end it is hard to say for sure how other 
solar systems and their planets will be colonized  
and what strategies will work best. For now, while 
we can speculate and make some informed guesses,  
the best way to find out what truly works is to 
get out there and explore and see what it takes  
to start new civilizations on all those 
strange new worlds out among the stars.
So today’s episode is a partial sequel both to 
our recent episodes on interstellar Colonization  
Strategies and Asteroid Ships, but also to our 
episode Planets versus Megastructures that we  
released as a bonus video last year exclusively 
on our subscription streaming service, Nebula,  
if you want to see that our any of our other 
bonus content. Episodes on Nebula come out 3  
to 4 days earlier than they premiere on youtube, 
but they also come out ad and sponsor read free,  
and around a quarter of them come 
out either with extended editions  
several minutes longer or with a companion 
episode, like Planets versus Megastructures  
was for our Megastructure Compendium last 
year, or Conformal Cyclic Cosmology was for  
last month’s episode, The Omega Point.
Nebula’s a great place for creators to  
experiment with content without getting penalized 
by Youtube’s algorithms. If you like the idea of  
seeing, or listening, to all that bonus content, 
by myself and many other creators, and of getting  
SFIA’s episodes a few days early and without ads, 
then you can join Nebula for just a few dollars  
a month, and gain access to all that ad-free, 
early, and bonus content, while supporting this  
channel and other independent creators. We also 
now have Nebula Classes, no additional charge,  
from many of your favorite educational shows.
If you’d like to join Nebula today, just click  
the link in the episode description, 
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
So that will wrap us up for today but we’re just 
getting started for February, and next Thursday,  
February 9th, we’ll discuss a surprising 
candidate for possibly hosting alien life,  
large oceanic worlds with massive hydrogen 
atmospheres, or Hycean Planets. And don’t forget  
to join us after that for the mid-month 
Scifi Sunday episode, on February 12th,  
where we’ll look at the concept of Super Soldiers. 
Then in two weeks will continue our discussion  
from last fall about Time Wars with a look at 
Multiversal Warfare and the implications of some  
of the crazier aspects of Quantum Mechanics.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting our website, 
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s  
episodes early and ad free on our streaming 
service, Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
