This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
The future of our civilization may make that
old phrase “Go big or go home”
 take on an entirely different meaning.
Something we discuss a lot on this show is
the sheer immensity of possible future civilizations,
those which might colonize billions of stars
each with untold billions of people around
them.
Indeed we’ve discussed how we might house
a billion-billion people in this solar system
alone and even trillions right here on Earth.
But something we never have addressed before
was how an individual can stand out in such
an immense civilization and at first I was
actually a bit surprised it did so well as
a potential episode topic in one of our recent
polls.
Upon reflection though, it makes sense.
Folks in past Civilizations could more easily
lie to themselves about their personal importance.
Frequently there were only a few thousand
to maybe a few millions folks in your whole
nation, most of whom did not even know what
a million was, and for the super-majority
of them, their existence was virtually exclusive
in a community of maybe a few hundred to a
few thousand.
Nowadays we’re quite aware our population
is nearing 8 billion and by last count over
half of them were active internet users.
This channel incidentally isn’t even in
the top 10,000 on Youtube in terms of views
or subscribers.
And while more and more folks in classic media
have added YouTube to their means of reaching
their audiences, there’s still a big difference
between a ‘famous Youtuber’ and pretty
much anybody in a movie or TV show or syndicated
radio program or a New York Times Best Seller.
And yet millions of folks have watched an
episode of this show and I would guess at
least a million folks recognize my name or
fairly characteristic voice and associate
it to space or science or robots or aliens
and so on.
That’s about a thousand times more folks
than I’d ever aspired to have recognize
me, and I won’t play false that I do not
enjoy having so many folks enjoy my work or
the respect I get from it.
On the other hand I never wanted to be a rock
star or athlete or actor growing up, and the
sort of adulation bordering on worship many
folks in those professions receive is not
something I have ever aspired to nor recommend
to others.
However, we’re not talking about how to
be worshipped in civilizations of trillions,
apotheosis, elevation to divine status, but
rather how to stand out, and that doesn’t
strike me as an ignoble goal.
That said, just in my own experience, folks
who pursue fame for its own sake do not fare
as well at that goal as folks who have something
they are passionate about and get well known
from seeking to share it.
I think some folks might assume ‘standing
out’ in civilization is synonymous with
‘making a difference’ or ‘mattering
as a person’, and as we’ll see today,
in the future, even in realms of trillions
of people, it is likely to be even easier
to find a way to excel and no one will be
forgotten or unknown.
Back to the fame angle, this differs from
standing out in my opinion because it’s
often more like a race for supremacy, being
the #1, which is obviously harder in a civilization
with vastly more people.
Again, in my personal experience seeking fame
for that reason tends to be not only a bad
motivation for doing things but also bad from
a practical approach.
Someone focused on being the best known for
something is presumably using a lot of their
energy and enthusiasm for that goal, not being
the best at that something, but being known
for it.
Of course that’s anecdotal and there are
a lot of folks who sought fame and adulation
above all things and got it, for better or
worse, by the truckload.
And we might as well start with that extreme
case, apotheosis, the elevation to divine
status.
There are a lot of folks even in modern times
who not only have a God Complex but convince
many others it's true, to one degree or another.
Jim Jones, known for being the leader of a
cult in Jonestown that famously committed
suicide by drinking Kool Aid, styled himself
a god-like figure, though also styled himself
an atheist and agnostic.
Just under a thousand people drank that cyanide-laced
drink – which was actually Flavor Aid not
Kool Aid but that is where that expression
about “Drinking the Kool Aid'' comes from,
with the context of folks believing crazy
ideas even to the point of self-destruction.
Jim Jones is hardly unique as having gotten
a big following of cult-like worship, even
including the mass murder-suicide epilogue,
but it is probably only fair to point out
that we have a lot of such groups around nowadays
with no history of violence, and several number
their memberships in the tens of thousands
or more.
Now when discussing things like the Kardashev
Scale, where we contemplate a civilization
that outnumbers us to such a degree that if
each of us were made rulers over an equal
portion of them, it would mean being monarch
over an entire planetary populace, we contemplate
just how extreme scale can get by looking
at things which are small in modern terms.
In a world of a few trillion people, the Jonestown
Massacre proportionally would have been more
like a million people.
Imagine if you woke up one day, turned on
the news, and saw that the entire population
of Trinidad or Estonia or Cyprus or Delaware
or Maine had just committed suicide.
Similarly, the principal figures of worship
for most folks these days are Jesus, Mohammed,
and Buddha in about that order, with a combined
5 billion followers.
In a population of a trillion, scaled exactly
as now, you’d have 300 Billion Christians,
240 Billion Muslims, 150 Billion Hindus, 70
Billion Buddhists, 30 Billion Sikhs, 20 Billions
Jews, and around a dozen others who would
scale up to our modern Earth population or
those largest modern religions of billions
if the human population rose over a trillion.
But it also means something like Raelinism
would have perhaps 12 million followers, the
population of Belgium, similar for Scientology,
and the Church of the Jedi.
Though it's often hard to accurately determine
numbers from those groups, it does mean we’d
generally be discussing a number of followers
parallel to the populations available to many
a great ancient empire.
We also currently have around a quarter of
million Youtube channels with over a hundred
thousand subscribers, which would also scale
up to Populations equal to or larger than
Belgium or Illinois or my own home state of
Ohio.
Scaled up, I’d presumably have just under
100 million subscribers, about what PewDiePie
has, and he’d have nearly 14 billion, almost
twice the current world population.
So a lot of today’s discussion depends a
bit on what we mean by ‘Stand Out”, because
the flip side to that is you could be ruler
of a nation larger than modern nations like
Germany or England, with as many folks in
your land as the greatest Roman Emperor or
some of the most famous kings, khans, and
caliphs, and yet be ‘standing out’ no
more than mayor of mid-sized city of tens
of thousands.
And honestly most folks either do not know
their mayor’s name or know it but little
else and care not.
Few would be recognized on sight by the typical
person a couple town’s over, only mayors
of famous cities like NYC or London tend to
be internationally known.
Heck my wife has been an elected state official
for around a decade and represents our district
in the legislature, had her face on a hundred
big signs and all over media ads for the elections,
and we rarely get recognized walking through
stores in the area, let alone outside the
district.
And I shouldn’t say ‘we’, I’m virtually
unknown and that’s not really unusual.
Until modern times with cheap photography
it would be fairly unusual people would recognize
any person of note outside that noteworthy
person’s immediate friends or minions, the
king might have some statues, coins, or paintings
of himself but even that is rare.
Only Hollywood and Primetime TV have traditionally
– for less than a century – allowed virtually
anyone to be known to everybody else on sight.
Even governors of states or the senators from
them are rarely recognized outside their own
state and honestly only in them from having
spent millions of dollars plastering their
face all over the media.
Now however, we have a paradigm shift.
There are still places where no one owns a
camera but those are increasingly rare, and
where they are common, everybody has tons
of photos of themselves.
That’s recent too, photographic cameras
have been around for 2 centuries now, but
didn’t become common household items till
the last 60 or 70 years.
Around a decade later photo IDs on Driver’s
License started getting common, though photos
on passports had been around even longer and
of course newspapers had been running photos
for the better part of a century by then.
Nonetheless there’s actually not that many
photos of folks from then, and I’d say a
lot of folks have more photographs taken of
them in any given month now than the average
person got in a decade prior to advancements
like polaroid photos, disposable cameras,
digital cameras, and of course the smartphones
and selfie.
Now though, with smartphones and selfies and
social media, we’ve got more visuals and
text from most people out there on the net
than would fit in the typical Wikipedia entry
on all but the most famous folks.
That’s not going anywhere either.
Computer Memory has been plateauing a bit
in recent years but it's been decades since
every bit of text a person might ever have
written would fit on a harddrive with room
to spare, and these days a terabyte of harddrive
costs about as much as dinner at a modest
restaurant.
We do more photos, and at higher resolution,
and videos too, but the reality is that we
could compress an individual persons whole
life down to a gigabyte of text and images
and still known them better in word and deed,
visually and by text description, than any
human who lived before the invention of the
camera.
If we assumed someone made a decent AI or
bot that crawled the web gathering and compressing
someone’s life down to a gigabyte, all their
text, a few photos from each year, some very
compressed audio and video, then even at modern
costs of about $25 a terabyte, and even if
we assumed backups and replacements made that
$100 dollars a decade to maintain that terabyte,
that means storing someone’s one gigabyte
compressed life history would cost a dollar
per century.
And that was with some extreme redundancy
in there and an assumption harddrives would
get no better or cheaper in terms of storage
per dollar.
Every single episode I’ve done, in full
1080 HD, takes up around a terabyte, and I’d
imagine most folks who’ve watched those
all know me better than all but my closest
friends and family in spite of them not being
videos about myself.
My weekly audio journals are probably more
informative and much smaller and I don’t
compress those, they’re wav files, because
memory is so cheap.
Most biographical Wikipedia entries don’t
even have a photo in them, mine doesn’t,
just a couple pages of text tops which is
still more than most great kings had written
about them in their time, and that level of
recording, at modern storage costs, would
let us store the whole current human population
at similar detail for maybe a hundred bucks
a century.
And who seriously believes we’ve maxed out
harddrive technology?
So yeah, you’re around forever.
Oh, maybe not forever, forever is a very long
time, but even without huge improvements in
storage tech, it would probably need to be
longer than human civilization had been around
before anyone started feeling like your data
needed to be compressed down to the kilobyte
region.
So where ‘standing out’ really means being
remembered, almost everybody alive today is
covered and if you’re watching this, then
you’re in that number.
Standing out in terms of being noteworthy
or respected, that is harder, or appears to
be at first glance.
However, consider the trend we have seen in
recent times.
It’s a bit sappy to say that everybody excels
at something but generally speaking almost
everyone has at least a few skills, hobbies,
interests, trivia, etc that they are really
into and good at.
Where this is not true, often the reason is
something correctable, with more technology,
for instance a person suffering a severe mental
handicap is probably not on the internet a
lot meeting the 300 people on this planet
who share their obscure interest in photographing
dragonflies but this is probably a temporary
problem.
Where intelligence is dependent on hardware,
which is to say your meat-brain, we will probably
be able to correct any deficiencies or shortcomings
this century, long before we get to a trillion
people.
That doesn’t imply everyone would be as
smart as everyone else, but I suspect we won’t
need massive genetic or cybernetic technology
improvements to get to the point that every
living human has an IQ of 130+.
If you’re in that zone, than you can pretty
much do anything you want in life that’s
intellect and skill focused if you want to
enough.
We have this whole civilization paradigm of
physical or mental excellence that assumes
you get born with those – neither is really
true but that initial genetic package definitely
matters and honestly I doubt it will by the
end of next century at the latest.
Your intelligence or height or so on, in genetic
terms, is an accident of birth, not the product
of scientific mastery.
Do not assume that will be true for anyone
born a century from now, or that they’d
be stuck to their initial genetics, natural
or tailored.
That would also make it seem even harder to
excel if everybody can be smart or tall or
strong or pretty, but it does mean that when
we say you can do anything you set your mind
to, that it won’t be quite as hyperbolic
of a statement.
Being motivated and driven is the most critical
part of succeeding at something or being well-known
for it, that’s not a feel-good formula either,
it's thoroughly researched that being driven
or obsessed is the most common shared trait
of the powerful and successful.
Nonetheless that initial genetic package or
some injury of youth or the good or bad fortune
of your early childhood education and development
just really impose some tough hurdles.
Now often those hurdles are exactly what bring
someone to a state of excellence, but I think
most of us would agree life has plenty enough
challenges in it that if someone loses an
arm, or is born without it, we probably shouldn’t
be holding off on offering them a prosthetic
or cloned replacement limb so they can ‘rise
to the challenge’ of living without it.
It is easy to stand out if you were born to
grow to 2 meters tall in a world where most
folks only get to 1.7, or 5’7”, and it
probably makes it much easier to excel at
basketball, but you’ll still work your butt
off if you want to get in the NBA.
If anyone can be born to grow to any height
their parents want, or have themselves modified
as an adult to the height of their choosing,
this is no longer an edge, though I’d be
curious if folks opted to keep getting taller
and taller or all be the same height or if
some other equilibrium came in.
Whichever the case, our general goal is to
try to give people the tools they need to
pursue their dreams, and even stuff like motivation
and drive or attention span are subject to
teaching or stimulation or treatment, so I
suspect a future of trillions of folks won’t
see folks unable to shine for the reasons
that tend to limit us now, or at least the
bar would be raised a lot.
Incidentally, it might seem like I’m handwaving
some technology in here but keep in mind the
topic is standing out in a civilization of
trillions, and for us to go from just under
8 billion souls to just a single trillion
would require our population double 7 times.
It’s been half a century since the population
was half its current size, and it doubled
twice in the 20th century.
Most forecasts show population growth slowing,
though population forecasts beyond a decade
out have a track record of accuracy parallel
to reading tea leaves.
If we keep doubling every 50 years though,
that would mean it would take us 350 years
to hit a trillion people, around the year
2371.
350 years ago the population was around half
a billion, and took more than a century to
double to a billion and was half that size
half a millennia earlier.
So growth rates are not steady and not easy
to predict.
For instance a technological advancement in
birth control can see a population growth
drop while one in extending healthy fertility
ages can make it rise, and if someone invents
true radical life extension, full health,
vigor, and fertility for centuries, population
growth might easily beat out doubling every
half a century.
So if it takes us 3 or 4 centuries, or longer,
to get to a trillion humans then we should
assume a lot of technological progress, especially
given all the extra scientists a population
that size has and their extended careers.
Such being the case I don’t think it is
much of a stretch to assume folks born to
that era would enjoy vastly better overall
health and resources, better technology and
techniques for learning and living, much as
we do now compared to ancient days.
If that life extension comes into play, as
it probably will, then you might see folks
alive today, maybe even watching this video,
sitting around with their ten-times-great
grandchildren who might easily number several
thousand in total.
That is one way to stand out, be patriarch
or matriarch to a clan of descendants so large
they could people a world.
And possibly a motivation for space colonization.
We can support a trillion folks on Earth with
certain technologies on the horizon, see that
episode for details, but we would like to
see a day when most folks do not live on or
around Earth.
Whether it's terraforming planets or building
artificial worlds, one way to stand out is
to go to some new and small place and help
forge it and grow it.
That’s the critical component though – not
space colonization in and of itself, but the
forging of tons of new communities.
We could be talking about seasteading artificial
islands on our own oceans or orbiting O’Neill
Cylinders home to ten thousand folks or some
asteroid mining colony of a few thousand or
some virtual world folks spend much of their
free time in or even effectively immigrated
to.
We already see this in motion, groups developing
in social media focused on very small things.
Our show has a couple facebook forums, one
has 25,000 members.
My wife and I took up beekeeping when we moved
this spring and she joined a facebook group
called women in beekeeping which I noticed
had tens of thousands of members, bigger than
our own facebook group.
But there’s another smaller group of the
same name and I also spotted forums for beekeepers
of Australia, Botswana, Kenya, and Ohio, each
with thousands of members.
Many a space or science discussion forum I’ve
joined over the years has broken up over ideological
reasons, driving out members who don’t agree
if Mars or the Moon should be first, or if
Space should be vegan, or if one political
party is clearly better than another.
That incidentally is part of why we restrict
political and ideological posting in the SFIA
forums, I’ve seen way too many space and
science forums break in half, and often in
half again, or turn into echo chambers, from
that.
However in a population of trillions, a group
as specialized as the Ohio Beekepers Facebook
Group, 7000 Members, would have several million
members, and presumably break into even smaller
groups with even bigger specializations, like
the Beekeepers of Megadome 1 of Shackleton
Crater on the Moon, who focus on genetic improvements
to bees for maximum low gravity yield, not
to be confused with the other group of the
same name, whose members believe in the use
of robotic bees, and are themselves a break
away of the Lunar Lavatube Pollination Cohort,
whose 100,000 members have a lobbying group
with the Lunar Congress.
Incidentally next week's episode is the Future
of Farming and Agriculture.
Among that group of 1000 people who share
a passionate love of building houses of cards
in low-gravity environments, you’re the
one known for most innovative designs.
The topic does not matter, I think folks will
gravitate to group sizes as focused as the
membership size permits them without being
too small.
What do we mean by too small?
Or the reverse, too big a group?
Well this is probably tied to something like
Dunbar’s Number, usually given at about
150-160 people, a concept from sociology that
is the estimated maximum number of close relationships
a person can have at a time.
We suspect this maximum number of close relations
is probably a factor in when tribes or communities
divide or new sub-groups tend to form, and
may be critical to successful interstellar
space colonies.
But that’s probably not a rigid number,
and I tend to suspect that one of the most
important but least discussed types of Mind
Augmentation we will see in the future are
those that allow us to have a higher Dunbar’s
Number or retain passion for activities or
personal relationships more easily and longer.
Or get bored less.
This is an interesting note as well, one thing
commonly suggested to folks who worry about
not being remembered or significant in life
is that everyone is equal in the eyes of their
Creator who knows all they’ve done as well
and better than even they do.
I can’t speak to that, but it is very likely
that a Superintelligence, such as a post-human
or Strong AI, really would be capable of maintaining
millions or even billions or trillions of
interpersonal relationships and tracking all
those little personal details we often don’t
know about even our closest friends and family,
like what their parent’s birthdays were
or their child’s middle name or their favorite
type of sandwich lunch meat.
One way to make everyone stand out more is
just to make it easier for us to know more
people and see how they shine.
Expanding and strengthening that network allows
a broader and stronger fabric of relationships
to be woven.
That might be even better than letting everyone
shine brighter, after all the Sun is far brighter
than any light humans have ever made, but
it's just one of hundred billion suns in a
galaxy that itself is but one of countless
billions.
In such an immensity, even an empire of a
trillion worlds is but a flyspeck, and really,
in all that vast space in the sky, who would
even notice if a star like ours just flickered
out one day?
Let alone care if one tiny person living in
one tiny town on one tiny world around that
sun disappeared?
Of course the answer to that is that a lot
of folks would notice if you disappeared and
as we grow in numbers and technology, toward
a trillion and even beyond, that will only
increase not decrease.
If you’re alive, hearing this now, then
in my opinion you’ve a better than 50/50
chance of having your name remembered and
recorded until long after this bright star
we live around burns out, and all you need
to do to stand out is find something you love
and pursue it, and in the future this will
only be easier.
And even though our star is but one in countless
trillions in a vast empty sea of the night,
that doesn’t mean it shines any less bright.
So we’ve a couple of announcements to get
to along with our upcoming schedule, but first,
I was talking today about how in the future
we would probably have gotten far better at
educating people by having learned more about
what’s critical to learning, but one eternal
truth about education is that hands-on interactive
learning is almost always vastly better than
trying to learn things by rote memorization
of dull facts or assertions.
This is something I keep in mind when writing
episodes and it's something our friends over
at Brilliant understand too, and is why they
are constantly seeking to improve the interactivity
of their content.
They are already the hands down best website
and app for learning math, science, and computer
science, but they’ve once again upped their
platform to a new level, with even more interactivity
on topics like their Geometry Fundamentals
and Calculus in a Nutshell courses.
They join the recently-updated courses Pre-Algebra,
Mathematical Fundamentals, Algorithm Fundamentals,
and Scientific Thinking.
On Brilliant, it's not about memorizing or
regurgitating facts for a test — you can
just pick a course you’re interested in
and get started.
Feeling stuck or made a mistake?
You can read the explanations to find out
more and learn at your own pace.
If you'd like to try out Brilliant for free
and get 20% off a year of STEM learning, click
the link in the description down below or
visit: brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
Also on today’s topic of Stranding Out in
a giant civilization, let me give a shout
out to my friend Brian Keating, on his new
book “Think Like a Nobel Prize Winner”
where he distills his interviews with several
noble prize winners.
Brian’s also one of the best Astrophysicists
out there, and he runs a Youtube channel that
delves into that topic and others with a fascinating
and informative style.
I will link that channel, it and his books
are definitely worth checking out.
Speaking of things worth checking out, a common
problem humanity has often faced is how to
feed itself, and we’ll check out that topic
next week and explore what advances are emerging
in the field of agriculture, as we look at
the future of farming.
Then We’ll have our October Sci-Fi Sunday
Episode, Sentient Planets & World Consciousnesses,
on October 17th to discuss the popular scifi
idea of living and thinking worlds, and if
they might occur naturally or be created by
high-tech civilizations.
Then we’ll take a look at the concept of
Convergent Evolution, aliens who look or act
like us, and then at artificial intelligence
who might also act like some of us, the misbehaving
ones, with a look at Criminal AI.
Now if you want to make sure you get notified
when those episodes come out, make sure subscribe
to the channel, and click the notifications
bell, and if you enjoyed the episode, don’t
forget to hit the like button and share it
with others.
If you’d like to help support future episodes,
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website,
IsaacArthur.net, and patreon and our website
are linked in the episode description below,
along with all of our various social media
forums where you can get updates and chat
with others about the concepts in the episodes
and many other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
