This Episode is brought to you by Morning
Brew
If the past is anything to judge by, one thing
humanity is sure to bring with us in our journey
to the stars are our arguments, interests,
and squabbles, so what else does the past
tell us about the future?
Welcome!
Today we have a two part episode looking at
the Geopolitics of Colonizing Space, and we’re
joined by Rudyard Lynch of the WhatIfAltHist
Channel to give us some historical insight
into how this might all play out.
The Second Half of the episode will be over
on his channel, and don’t forget to hit
the like and subscribe buttons while you’re
over there and check out some of his awesome
content.
If you are coming in from WhatIfAltHist to
watch the first half, welcome to Science & Futurism
with Isaac Arthur, or SFIA, and what we’ll
be doing in this half is trying to setup the
landscape and critical factors that will be
influencing the scene, than Rudyard will try
to overlay our existing geopolitical landscape
into those in the second part.
The first thing to acknowledge though is that
there isn’t a single scene or landscape.
Space is huge, and it's likely that even the
development of our own solar system will result
in a local population of many quadrillions
scattered around not just the well known major
planets, or even the dwarf planets and bigger
moons, but on the millions of minor planets
and asteroids, and potentially trillions of
artificial habitats.
That’s just this solar system too, and does
not include the half a trillion siblings it
has in this galaxy among the many billions
of galaxies in our Observable Universe.
It also doesn’t include potential Multiverse,
Parallel Realities, or potential Virtual Worlds
which might become far more popular and populated
than many a barren rock needing terraforming.
All of which means that we should not be assuming
any given ideological, economic, religious,
or political system would be Universal throughout
colonized space or time, but a broad and ever-changing
situation.
Indeed, in spite of the laziness of many a
scifi author, where entire colonized planets
seem to have a universal language and culture,
Earth has never had that and quite possibly
never will.
Indeed it would be hard to think of any nation
that had a monoculture and even the impression
of that occasionally from history derives
from there being many a nation that we have
less than a page of records from or because
we get our accounts from a single person who
is stereotyping their neighbor or even their
own civilization.
Conveniently for a lot of those minor planets
and artificial habitats, they could be small
enough that they really paralleled small nations
or possibly just small towns, but even then,
few would be very static or homogenous based
on our known examples here on Earth.
One minor caveat to that: There may actually
be some ideal way to run a civilization discoverable
by science, or one that believably appears
ideal anyway, in which case you could get
convergence of ideological, political, or
cultural beliefs and behaviors.
We still wouldn’t really expect that to
result in a homogenous civilization but it
might be fairly cookie cutter in many fashions,
basically uniform around all of colonized
space and not changing with time.
We might call that a stagnant culture but
would have to do so with a grain of salt.
If your civilization can demonstrate it’s
the best possible one mathematically, accusations
of being stagnant are a bit hard to make stick,
staying #1 isn’t stagnation.
For today’s purposes we will assume that
is either not the case or so far in the future
as to be beyond our scope, though if such
a thing existed it might be a thing of even
this century not a million or billion years
from now.
Now it's common to look at history as swinging
on certain critical factors and events, which
may or may not be a good approach in some
situations, but it would be hard to argue
against a major influence in the Age of Sail
was all the new commodities available for
trade or more easily and reliably available.
Be it precious metals or spices or new foods
indigenous to other areas, that trade impacted
those civilizations a lot and the folks who
forged those trade routes, established access
to the goods, and controlled the trade in
them, had a lot of wealth, power, and influence
as a result.
As we head up into space we expect something
parallel and while there are a host of potential
trade items the two we discuss most on SFIA
as potential kickstarters for space industry
and development are asteroid mining and power
satellites, and which one happened first and
started the snowball rolling for space development
would probably affect a lot what the character
and focus of early colonization was.
For instance, power satellites are all about
getting energy down to Earth, a multi-trillion
dollar economic sector and one with a lot
of knock-on effects if you have cheaper electricity.
It also helps with environmental issues related
to energy generation groundside, plus has
the cousin industry of solar mirrors and shades
for influencing the planet's weather and temperature.
Someone who got this working to the point
they were generating power even just slightly
cheaper than its going rate nowadays is in
a good position to be the world’s first
trillionaire and a rare example of an industrialist
popular with environmental groups.
They might start getting introduced as that
person who saved our planet while also opening
the door to a million other planets.
Not a bad position to be in, getting viewed
like that while having more money than most
entire nation states.
Asteroid Mining goes a different way.
The main initial interest is in precious metals
being brought back to Earth, which has no
real benefits to the economy or environment
in and of itself, compared to abundant cheap
clean energy for instance.
However while a power satellite grid probably
requires a huge investment to get running
and see profits, a trip to a metal rich asteroid
and home with a couple thousand tons of gold
or platinum is a big initial profit.
Now it takes a long time to get to an asteroid
even a near Earth Asteroid, of which there
are tens of thousands, and to mine the metals
out and send them home, but some of your money
comes when you prove to a reasonable degree
of certainty that the asteroid you have picked
has these metals and that you have a reasonably
reliably method of extracting them and shipping
them home at well under current commodity
value.
So we might wonder if Asteroid Mining has
an upper hand as a Kickstarter for space as
it seems to enjoy an advantage of providing
quick revenue compared to the other.
They also seem like very different approaches
attracting very different mentalities.
A group of pioneers going off to virgin land
to farm it is likely to be quite different
than one responding to a report of a river
with gold nuggets in it.
In a similar notion, the other advantage of
asteroid mining is for non-precious metals,
all those construction materials we want for
things like space habitats or power collectors
or solar shades or rocket fuel.
If you were doing all your processing out
at the asteroid and only sending refined materials
home, or if you were sending whole asteroids
back to Earth Orbit for protracted refining,
you get two very different looking colonization
plans.
One might see mining settlements on asteroids
growing into habitats embedded into the asteroid
and growing as communities far from Earth
while the other might feed a growing swarm
of habitats and infrastructure in Earth Orbit.
It's likely to see a very different growth
and evolution, in many remote colonies far
from Earth or each other, compared to those
which would be both literally and metaphorical
trapped in Earth’s orbit and dominion.
With all that in mind, we will be looking
at some future historical alternatives, what
if’s like what if the main push for space
is for asteroid mining or power satellites.
What if the push for space is a single nation,
and if so which one, or if it might be a private
group.
And if a private group, what if it was a for-profit
corporation, such as we would expect for an
asteroid mine, or more of an ideological or
religious focus for a group.
Those seeking their Promised Land or refuge
from persecution, or where they didn’t have
to live with everyone of the opinion, appearance,
or behavior that they loathed.
Now it's very hard to guess how the future
will roll out, but we can draw from our experiences
and our history, and maybe the biggest lesson
there is that the inevitable conflicts and
clear paths forward of today often are not
what materialize tomorrow or what seemed obvious
and inevitable yesterday.
Needless to say any project that involves
our global energy economy or playing around
with the lighting of the planet is inherently
a big issue for terrestrial governments and
politics, but whether you’re shipping home
gold and platinum by the megaton from asteroids
or beaming energy down by the gigawatt from
an orbital power grid, that’s a vast amount
of wealth and power.
It doesn’t stop there either, because a
power satellite grid also provides the infrastructure
for pushing lasers for shoving spaceships
up to high speeds and beaming power to them,
thus assisting in space colonization, needless
to say they are weapons too, and asteroid
mining also provides the raw materials for
constructing that space infrastructure, for
refining and supplying the fuels the ships
will use, and for creating all the space station,
habitats, and waypoints those ships could
dock to.
Indeed, we even have objects called Aldrin
Cyclers or Interplanetary Cyclers which convert
a small asteroid into a sort of hybrid space
port and ferry, moving the cycler castle,
as they are called, between worlds and having
the ships dock or undock with them.
So we can see some obvious sources of political
power in space to motivate existing nations
or groups to seek to acquire them, but it's
also a good example of how those directly
controlling an asset become powerful.
It's not just that a nation or corporation
that owns a big asteroid gold mine has a lot
of cash, the specific director of that installation
and the key engineers or administrators for
it start becoming personally influential either
inside their existing nation or group, or
as a new one entirely.
There is no nation named Facebook, Twitter,
Google, or Amazon anymore than there is one
for a host of powerful bureaucratic offices
or issue-oriented lobby groups that did not
exist a generation ago, or for TV personalities
or podcasters, news anchors or editors.
And yet these entities wield tremendous amounts
of political power.
This ironically is another thing to consider,
because a given entity is likely to be as
afraid of being usurped by internal rivals
or formerly junior allies and partners as
external enemies.
What might start as a competitive rush by
Country X to colonize the Moon, to show up
or keep up with Country Y, might later see
factions in X lobbying against the effort
when their governor or viceroy on the Moon
starts becoming too influential and powerful.
If you’ve followed American politics for
instance, it would not be hard to imagine
a President appointing someone from their
own party with charisma, skill, and ambition
to head up a moon colony, and that person
later running for President themselves and
being opposed by the candidate from the other
party who criticized or smeared the Moon development
project.
You could easily imagine a given space effort,
like that Moon base, becoming a party-line
issue as a result.
Things which can also involve what might have
seemed minor or tangential issues too.
We don’t tend to expect a sports game to
be political but we’ve certainly seen any
number of sporting contests act as proxies
for conflict down the years, or getting to
be more popular with one unrelated political
affiliation or another.
We see that nowadays and we see that way back
in the original Olympics, and it certainly
comes up in modern Olympics too.
So we acknowledge that there’s a lot of
un-anticipatable factors and a lot of black
swans in an emerging geopolitical environment
in space.
And yet there is a lot which is anticipatable,
again like the idea that given space programs
and efforts will spawn new powers.
I come from a state where the aerospace industry
is very influential, this industry did not
exist a century ago, and Ohio was home to
both Neil Armstrong and Senator John Glenn,
and it’s hard to argue that his service
with NASA was not a critical factor in him
getting elected or that Armstrong could likely
have won a seat had he chosen to run too.
Victorious generals, acclaimed adventurers,
titans of industry, and so on are an inevitable
feature of the political landscape but also
a wild card because a popular Moon Explorer
might have obvious views on Moon Expansion
that folks respected and more so because that
explorer spoke passionately about them, but
we have no idea what that person’s views
on guns, abortion, economics, crime and so
on were and yet they would likely influence
folks on those topics heavily.
We also want to beware false dichotomies.
As an example, we posed asteroid mining and
power satellites as an either-or, but that
was principally as to which would cause a
snowball of space development first.
It’s not a question of us having to do one
or the other, any more than if we asked if
settlement of the Americas in recent centuries
was driven by the supply of virgin farmland
or the mining of precious metals.
We could obviously debate their relative impact,
but the answer is that they both drove colonization
and indeed drove each other.
And yet if we were pushing for government
subsidy to space development and power satellites
and asteroid mining initiatives were being
proposed, we would almost certainly see either-or
arguments when in truth we specifically discuss
those two options as a way of kickstarting
all types of space development and that obviously
includes each other too.
At the same time while singular events or
personalities or opinions can have pivotal
impacts on events unfolding, we should keep
in mind there’s a bit of truth to the notion
of inertia too.
Our example of asteroid mining and power satellites
both hinge on the overwhelming desire for
resources, that does not inevitably lead to
either system occurring but we can nominate
them as candidates for getting things moving
in space simply because they offer strong
promise to satisfy that drive.
But never assume inevitability to such things
either.
Earth for instance has nearly as much raw
materials, including precious elements, as
all the other rocky planets, moons, and asteroids
combined.
Hence if someone invents a technique for mining
our planet’s mantle safely and without ecological
issues, suddenly asteroid mining is a thing
for longer down the road because there’s
no real market for what they have got down
on Earth.
So too, power satellites would have problems
if someone managed to get fusion reactors
working or even just made solar panels and
batteries vastly cheaper and better for use
on Earth.
One new technology can disrupt that which
seemed eternal and certain before, as history
has show us many times.
In that same vein of thought, I mentioned
Earth having more resources than all those
other worlds combined, major and minor, but
the Lion’s Share of those others is actually
in Venus, and as we discussed recently in
our episode looking at whether we should go
to the Moons or Mars first, Venus might be
a better option than either as might those
asteroids or the Moons of Jupiter.
Indeed if someone gets a functioning fusion
drive, even just a regular one not something
like the Epstein Drive from The Expanse, then
suddenly the outer solar system looks a lot
more inviting because you do not need the
Sun for light and heat, you can make ships
that can go very fast and cheap, and the outer
system has so many more of the resources handy
for a fusion-based economy, like hydrogen
and its isotope Deuterium, or Helium-3, not
to mention plenty of ice and water and nitrogen,
which while modestly plentiful on Earth, are
very rare in the inner solar system.
This offers a very different realm as well,
because while the many Moons of Jupiter are
all fairly close together and would permit
quick and easy inter-world trade even with
only modern spaceships, it offers something
of an in-between option relative to space
development in the relatively compact Earth
Orbital Space above an already fully-colonized
Earth and a scattered asteroid belt whose
millions of minor planets occupy a larger
volume than all that down from the Belt in
the inner system – Mercury, Venus, Earth,
and Mars.
Each of the gas giants also has these robust
collections of Moons and Trojan Asteroids
of their own, albeit to a less grand scale
than Mighty Jupiter, and each represents a
potentially compact collection of interconnected
lesser worlds.
Another thing to keep in mind though is that
while often discuss which nation or entity
might colonize Mars or the Moon first, this
is sometimes said as who will take control
of them, and a good point to remind ourselves
that even on a single planet, or large moon,
there is a huge amount of area and raw materials,
and a huge difference in climate too.
Indeed Earth is arguably more moderate in
climate, between Tundra, Desert, Swamp, and
Jungle, than any of these places.
A small base of a few dozen people, be it
on Shackleton Crater on the Moon or Olympus
Mons on Mars, while an accomplishment that
would be remembered in history for a long
time, does not offer any real capability to
occupy an entire planet or control who else
arrives.
These places are huge, as capable of holding
many nations as Earth is, and while science
fiction often shows colonists fighting each
other over bases and resources, you would
probably see those conflicts going on back
on Earth, where everyone’s political, economic,
and military might was actually at.
In part 2 we will be trying to look at those
current major players and ask how those situations
might unfold….
Much of what happens in the future is decided
by the present, so even though this show mostly
avoids discussing current events I try to
keep up on them and I’ve been a news junkie
since I was a kid.
Unfortunately in recent years a lot of the
news has turned into talking heads trying
to fill a 24/7 news channel by recycling the
topics or by doom-laden social media posts,
and both are an awful way to start the day.
That’s why I read Morning Brew, it’s a
daily Free Newsletter that gets you update
on tech, business, and finance news in just
five minutes, replacing dry, dense, and boring
news with witty, relevant, and informative
content and in a fast fashion that lets me
get up to date on the world in five minutes
over a cup of coffee.
So I can get updates on the current space
race or how Bitcoin and cryptocurrency are
doing, and again all the content is free,
it only takes about 15 seconds to subscribe.
To envision the future we need to stay up
to date on the present, and if you’re interested
in business, finance, or tech, there’s no
reason not to subscribe, just click the link
in the episode description and start waking
up with Morning Brew every morning.
Of course a healthy knowledge of history is
also vital to understanding both current events
and envisioning future ones, and Rudyard will
be walking us through how the emerging new
space race might get rolling.
And you can check out part two, also linked
below, or on the in-video card.
This isn’t our first Saturday episode but
they are pretty rare, with us normally doing
Thursdays and twice a month Sundays for the
end of the month Livestream Q&A and the mid-month
Scifi Sundays episode, and if you’re wondering,
yes that’s still on tomorrow, Sunday, July
11th, as we will return to our alien civilizations
series for a look at annoying aliens.
And this Thursday we will be discussing whether
we should go to Mars now or return to the
Moon and establish a base there first.
The Thursday after that we will jump into
the distant future - or maybe not too distant
future - to look at the End of Earth.
Two weeks from now we will have our Monthly
Livestream Q&A, don’t forget to join us
then to get your questions answered.
Also if you missed our most recent episode,
last Thursday’s Strip Mining the Galaxy,
you can still check that out, and it’s sequel,
the Galactic Laboratory, will finish us out
for July, on the 29th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
And don’t forget to check out part 2 of
this episode over at WhatifAltHist.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
