This episode is brought to you by Morning Brew.
Possibly the biggest difference between detecting 
a ship in space as opposed to on Earth is that  
there is no horizon to hide behind… except 
perhaps for a black hole’s event horizon.
Probably one of the most popular tropes in 
science fiction is the idea of the stealth  
or cloaked enemy vessel, station, 
or even planet. For today’s Scifi  
Sunday I thought we would explain why stealth 
in space is considered so difficult to achieve  
and discuss a few of the possible 
workarounds to each hurdle to hiding things.  
As always this will be a detailed discussion 
of the topic, so if you can slip past your  
housemates unnoticed, go discreetly grab a drink 
and a snack and settle in for a while with us. 
I want to emphasize though that under known 
science the burden is high for achieving stealth  
and a lot of our workarounds will qualify as what 
we call Clarketech, technologies so advanced they  
are Indistinguishable from Magic, and probably 
technologies that will be fictional for a very  
long time and maybe forever. With that in mind, 
it is a good choice for a Scifi Sunday since we  
tend to relax how stringently we stick to known 
physics compared to our regular Thursday episodes. 
We probably need to start by asking what we 
mean by stealth. We are talking about hiding a  
spaceship from physical detection from an opponent 
with roughly equal resources and technology.  
I feel this is a fair point to emphasize on 
the grounds that your biggest motivation for  
stealth in science fiction is usually trying to 
sneak to seize tactical or strategic advantages,  
and you do not need those if you are some advanced 
civilization going up against one much younger,  
smaller, and less technologically advanced. 
You can just go in and kick their butts,  
and sneaking up on your enemy can be reserved 
for when you don’t already have armadas orders  
of magnitude bigger, each composed of ships 
able to destroy their armadas single-handedly. 
So we are talking about stealth as hiding 
physically from a technologically equal watcher,  
but we’ll exclude trickery like getting an inside 
man in to shut off their detection grid or feed  
it shovelfuls of garbage data. Note that these 
are two exceptions to our no stealth in space  
rule already, and neither should be ignored. 
Anthropological surveying of primitive alien  
worlds might require hiding from the natives 
and certainly implies no parity of technology  
on their part. So too, an awful lot of sneaking 
and stealth in modern and historical contexts  
is achieved by trickery or bribery or so on.
Another option for sneaking in undetected is  
to be trying for a level of stealth deemed to have 
a prohibitive cost to benefit ratio for detection.  
In other words, your adversary could detect any 
vessel you send at them, if they’re willing to  
dedicate unlimited resources, technology, 
and manpower to watching for it. But there  
is always going to be a point at which the 
expense of bigger detectors, more detectors,  
better processing of data, and vast manpower 
exceeds their desire for it or their resources. 
As an example if the defense agency deems the 
most stealthy threat to your solar system to  
be a Relativistic Kill Missile, or RKM, and 
deems themselves able to safely destroy one  
a light day out without endangering those in the 
inner system, and the current grid already allows  
detection of them fully a light month out, it is 
hard to justify the need to expand that grid out  
to a light year. You might do it anyway, but 
if the junior Senator from Pluto rises to ask  
for quadrupling the defense budget to build a grid 
able to detect them a light year out--and maintain  
that extended network for decades or centuries-- 
some might argue that it is pointlessly expensive. 
The counter argument might be that the detection 
level necessary to see a RKM that far out was also  
what was needed to see some unknown but plausible 
new threat under development. Or perhaps even an  
indirect threat like a small probe that might 
latch onto an Oort Cloud object, where it could  
quietly hide and spy on the system, so a bigger 
grid was necessary for those, the unknown threat  
and the spy. However, that might be deemed the 
sort of thing that just wasn’t worth preventing,  
trying to stop unknown unknowns or keep them from 
spying on you. Especially given that enemy’s with  
little intel or bad intel on their neighbors 
often act dangerously erratically, as many  
argue often happened in the Cold War. Sometimes 
you want the enemy to know what you are doing,  
and not for the purpose of intimidation 
or misdirection, since having them think  
you are building a giant fleet when you are not 
might make them act desperately to counter that. 
There is also something to be said about openness 
as a policy as an alternative to stealth.  
In the Star Trek setting, at least in the Mid-90s 
TNG and DS9 eras, we see the Romulans and Klingons  
both possessing stealth technology, cloaking 
fields, but the Federation not having them.  
There are some contradictory reasons offered 
for this but the main presented reason  
is a treaty between the Federation and Romulans 
that the Federation won’t use cloaking technology. 
On the surface this sounds like the sort 
of negotiated deal that only happens when  
you just unconditionally surrendered after 
losing or your negotiators turn out to be  
taking bribes from the other team. However 
it is worth noting that we don’t know what  
the Federation might have gotten in exchange 
for that, and one also has to acknowledge that  
while cloaking technology very much fits the 
sneaky conniving Romulan civilization we see,  
with lots of intrigue and misdirection 
throughout their culture and government,  
it is the polar opposite to the way the 
Federation normally acts and idealizes. 
For long-time Trek fans, it's fair to say that 
a cloaking field doesn’t really benefit the  
Federation much, they already have holograms 
for hiding from low-tech civilizations they  
are studying, for obeying the Prime Directive, 
and that’s their only real desire for stealth.  
Examples like Section 31 aside, the presumption 
on the Federation is that it's pretty open  
about what Starfleet does and genuinely respects 
concepts like “the People have a right to know”. 
The Federation’s whole Modus Operandi is 
non-stealth, and they probably assumed with  
good reason that they could nullify the stealth 
edge when needed. Indeed, depending on the episode  
they seem to have a detection grid in place that 
at least alerts them when cloaked vessels enter  
the Neutral Zone. Alternatively their society 
isn’t well-configured for keeping secrets  
so stealthy bases on the enemy’s border, or 
those of prospective new members and allies,  
would probably be detected through espionage. 
Or even just reading the newspaper. 
The cloaking device tends to be pivotal to a lot 
of debates on how the Federation does things and  
acts as a proxy for how we ought to do things. 
Personally I’m opposed to the Prime Directive, and  
I don’t approve of spying on the natives because 
I wouldn’t approve of my neighbor spying on me,  
but the Federation at least offers a 
reasonably ethical reason for hiding  
themselves from primitive cultures.
I emphasize that because I mentioned  
how a civilization is bound to draw some sort 
of risk vs cost line on how big and omnipresent  
their detection grid needs to be, but they 
also might not like the idea of their own  
government being quite that omniscient since 
it might turn its eye on its own citizens too,  
and thus they might build internal blindspots in.
Indeed that same sort of acceptable or even  
intentional weakness is what enemy saboteurs can 
take advantage of. Such being the case you might  
even limit your external capabilities somewhat 
in acknowledgement that the new extended detector  
offers minimal advantage but the enemy could 
easily hire a mercenary strike force from  
your own population to go blow it up for a 
thousandth the price you pay to maintain it. 
Now those are some ways you can sneak 
around without needing to be stealthed,  
but we’re really interested in physically 
hiding right now, and that’s very difficult.  
To explain why, let’s start by pointing out that 
the light coming from the dimmest stars visible  
to the naked eye hits Earth with a brightness per 
unit area of about 20 nanowatts per square meter.  
In relative terms, we can see the star Vega 
very clearly even though it's 25 light years,  
or 240 trillion kilometers, away. It 
is the second brightest star in the sky  
and the one whose apparent magnitude 
is set at exactly 0 for that scale.  
It gives off roughly 16 x 10^27 Watts of power, 
40 times what our Sun emits. It would drop off  
the edge of naked-eye visible if moved about 20 
times farther away, where it would be 20-squared  
or 400 times dimmer. In other words, something 
400 times dimmer than Vega appears in our sky  
would be just barely visible to the naked eye.
Needless to say we can do a lot better than the  
naked eye, but as an example of the visibility of 
spacecraft, the old Shuttles on takeoff emitted  
around 12 gigawatts of heat and light as they 
launched. Vega is more than a billion, billion  
times brighter than that, but because light falls 
off with the inverse square of distance, the  
shuttle would be roughly as bright as Vega when it 
was about billionth as far away or about 277,000  
kilometers away, nearly as far as the Moon is. The 
shuttle should still be naked-eye visible over 5  
million kilometers away with main engines on. Keep 
that in mind when next reading a scifi story about  
a daring smuggler landing their ship undetected on 
a planet. Our best modern optical telescopes could  
see that shuttle-bright object about 10,000 times 
further away incidentally, out at distances we  
only discuss in terms of AU or light days, 360 AU 
or 2 light days, about ten times the distance to  
Pluto. We might assume more advanced civilizations 
have better telescopes than our current ones. 
Obviously you would have to be looking 
right at the object to see it, which is  
a distinct limitation with a telescope as it 
necessarily has a very limited range of view,  
but it illustrates a point that is probably as 
relevant as the claim that there is no stealth  
in space, and that is that any stealth you had is 
gone the moment the searcher has good reason to  
point their gear in your general direction.
It is also important to understand that the  
Shuttle’s drive is far too weak to do anything 
like the maneuvering the way we see on your  
typical stealthy scifi spaceship. They need 
more power than that, and a powerful engine  
emits either EM radiation or very hot gas that 
gives off EM radiation. But their only methods  
for stealth are either to find some way not to 
emit it at all, to direct most of it in a way that  
will miss the enemy’s detectors, or to have that 
power come out as something they cannot detect.  
Your eye for instance can’t see infrared light 
or radio waves, and while we can make instruments  
that can see those, we have a hard time seeing 
neutrinos and still can’t see dark matter. 
So if your thrust is coming out as neutrinos or 
dark matter, you would be quite stealthy to us,  
but it also implies you have a material 
for deflecting, reflecting, or absorbing  
neutrinos or dark matter and those are capable of 
interacting with those particles by definition,  
so you can also use them to build detectors for 
those particles. Which triggers our earlier caveat  
about how we aren’t discussing your ability to 
be stealthy to a searcher whose technology is  
way inferior to your own. In other words, if you 
can build a drive based on some exotic technology,  
assume your adversaries can build detectors 
based on it too. This is usually much easier. 
The thing is, even these seemingly invisible 
things as propellants, invisible to us anyway,  
still would not result in a ship we could 
not detect. Everything in known physics emits  
light – and truth be told even black holes are not 
really an exception to this, not in a practical  
sense. The frequency of that light can vary, ultra 
hot things can emit frequencies far higher than  
our eye can see, like ultraviolet or even X-rays 
or Gamma rays. Colder objects can emit frequencies  
far lower than we can see, like infrared and 
microwaves, but nothing can really stay as cold  
or colder than the ambient local temperature, 
and that is 2.7 Kelvin everywhere from the Cosmic  
Microwave Background Radiation, and in fact higher 
inside galaxies and higher yet in a solar system. 
We can detect microwaves and we could detect 
something that was somehow even cooler and gave  
off radio waves as its blackbody radiation. This 
is the light emitted simply by an object having a  
surface that is not at absolute zero. As a quick 
note though, this is not totally undetectable but  
it is pretty dark. An object at a mere 5 or 6 
Kelvin, double the CMB but probably as cold as  
you could plausibly get the hull of a spaceship 
to be for an extended period even with everything  
shut off including life support, would emit 
less than 100 microwatts per square meter,  
several million times less than the infrared 
emitted by a room temperature object per square  
meter of surface area. Very weak, but remember 
what we calculated with seeing a star or space  
shuttles. A cellphone or walkie talkie or 
wifi router is only broadcasting 10-10,000  
times stronger than a single square meter of that 
ship’s hull is emitting. That ship is probably  
a lot bigger than a square meter. Remember that 
we could hear the voyager space probe even after  
it went past Pluto and its radio transmitter 
was only a bit stronger than your cellphone. 
So everything emits light, in some frequency 
or another and the frequencies and spectrum it  
emits tells us a lot, indeed you can calculate 
speed off the redshift or blue shift of the  
light off from what you would anticipate from 
other characteristics of the ship or object. 
Not only does everything emit light, everything 
also has specific amounts it reflects, absorbs,  
or transmits light through itself, and for 
any given frequency of incoming light too.  
This means it's very hard to be stealthy against 
someone engaging in an active scan, which is where  
you emit light at an object and see what bounces 
back rather than just what hits it naturally. 
A couple things folks forget when 
discussing this topic a lot. First,  
they are not limited to detecting return signals 
from the emitter, which is how we can outfox a  
lot of terrestrial radar systems with clever 
bouncing of radar signals hitting an aircraft.  
Especially if it's their home system, they 
probably have millions of satellites scattered all  
over the place that can pick up scattered signals.
You have to remember the plausible scale of such  
civilizations, they really ought not be 
tiny little villages on a single planet  
in an otherwise empty solar system, they 
probably have billions of space habitats on, in,  
or around every hunk of rock in that system home 
to quadrillions of people all living on an economy  
powered by cheap energy and smart automation. 
They don’t have a starship or two out patrolling  
deep space and a few defense satellites, 
they’ve got scouts, vanguards, and picket  
ship squadrons that probably would dwarf the 
typical high-budget scifi films displayed armadas. 
And you have to remember that scale, when they 
send out an active signal, if they want to,  
they can be ‘pinging’ a pocket of space with 
thermonuclear warheads, not flashlights,  
and probably have directional detection beams 
that can turn gigawatts of power on some tiny  
volume of suspect space whole light years away.
But suppose your ship has a magic ultra-black  
hull that can absorb any frequency 
of light it encounters. That’s great,  
now it gets warmed up by that light and emits 
blackbody radiation. Your ship was already  
emitting blackbody radiation, so the increase and 
frequency tells your enemy even more about you. 
Okay, instead your ship can scatter light, 
perfectly reflect it and away. That is also great,  
your enemy probably has probes and detectors 
all over the place, especially in their home  
turf. They probably also know about the trick of 
using a signal as their active detection emission.  
So you’re not just bouncing some random light off, 
you’re bouncing a specific frequency with some  
pattern in it too, like the time the signal 
was sent at and the ID code of the sender.  
Now two other detectors at different angles 
pick that up and between the two of them  
they know exactly where you were 
when that signal bounced off you. 
That does still leave being transparent to 
the light, but we will come back to that. 
You also have to worry about blocking ambient 
light, all those stars behind you, and while  
you can simulate those by having lights on your 
hull of the right wavelengths, mimicking the  
spectrum of the star you would be blocking, that 
obviously only works on one single line of sight.  
Folks off to the side wouldn’t expect you to 
block that star and would think it weird to  
pickup that frequency. That said, that is a good 
way to sneak toward a star system. You come in  
from the direction of a very distant and bright 
star, or a galaxy or Nebula that’s a bit of blob,  
and because solar systems are huge but still tiny 
compared to interstellar distances, this means you  
have to be pretty close – in interstellar terms – 
before the folks on Mars or Ganymede will notice  
that there’s a dot in front or just to the edge of 
that distant Hypergiant or galaxy that isn’t quite  
reading what it should or is not reading what 
the folks over at Venus or Neptune are getting. 
Indeed this is one reason we suggested colonizing 
the Oort Cloud, in the episode of that name.  
You would put detectors way out at light 
months of distance from each other,  
and vastly extend your parallax or how far out you 
could be seeing reflected and scattered emissions.  
Using absorbed emissions, would allow you to 
detect a ship passing through a beam of light  
between two places, and you could also detect a 
break in that light beam if you had a signal in it  
and were spinning it around and reading 
its scatter or lack thereof from drops  
when something absorbed it for a brief instant.
Though as a caveat and speaking of light beams,  
a ship mounting several beam or laser arrays each 
capable of emitting a picked spectrum could aim  
one at Earth, one at Mars, one at Venus and 
so on so that each got a tailored spectrum.  
In this way each can be fed a different beam 
mimicking a different direction tailored to  
what you want them to see. This trick would only 
work if you knew where their detectors were all  
at and would be hard to pull off, but 
same as you can't hide from them normally,  
their detectors are likely to be known to you too.
So everything emits light and everything reflects,  
scatters, and absorbs light.
Everything moving through space  
also has to move through everything in space 
too. By and large a spaceship while coasting is  
pretty stealthy, especially compared to when it 
does anything to change its speed or direction.  
Any use of thrust is going to be a big 
signal flare and will be hard to hide  
by imposing something between you and the other 
folks, like an asteroid, for three big reasons. 
First, Let’s say you’re using an asteroid for 
cover. Light from your exhaust may not be visible,  
but you still have a big stream of hot gas blowing 
backwards. Hot gas gives off light, and gas  
scatters and absorbs light in a characteristic 
fashion. So your rocket plume is still very  
visible and this would probably apply to most 
other drives we might imagine in some way too.  
Second, you’re only invisible to folks 
on the opposite side of that asteroid,  
so same as with trying to ride a star in as cover 
like we just discussed, by mimicking its signal,  
anybody at a different angle is going to see you.
And third, the faster you are going relative to  
that object, the less time you 
have for pulling any maneuvers.  
A rapid course change at interplanetary 
speeds will kill everyone in that ship,  
and if you’re going much faster than the tens of 
kilometers per second we consider interplanetary,  
less than a thousandth of light speed, 
you would even manage to kill cyborgs,  
posthumans, androids, or AI with such a tight 
turn. If you don’t complete the turn that fast,  
they still see you. Turning behind something 
big and distant like a star helps, so fleets  
might alter course when they thought they 
had a star between them and their enemy,  
but their enemy probably would be aware that 
blind spot was coming up and pay close attention. 
Don’t rely on trying to turn behind a black 
hole either, they are actually smaller than such  
asteroids and they won’t hide your turn unless you 
make it inside the event horizon, in which case  
you are successfully stealthed but you would never 
get a chance to brag about the accomplishment. 
Conversations about stealth in space tend to often 
bring in black holes and I would warn folks off  
assuming they offer any advantages for that. Black 
holes are not invisible, you would never have a  
shot of getting a normal black hole undetected 
anywhere near a star system. And beyond being  
very visible in terms of their gravitational pull, 
in the electromagnetic sense they are just much  
darker than stars, except for when there’s lots of 
gas and dust nearby them, in which case they can  
be much brighter than stars. And that brings 
up interstellar gas because it is everywhere  
and denser in some spots and it reacts to being 
hit by fast moving objects. Space may be pretty  
empty but when you are moving at a decent fraction 
of light speed you are hitting a lot of gas and  
dust particles and each is going off with energies 
comparable to atomic bombs, or even antimatter,  
in terms of energy released per unit of mass.
This is not something that is terribly stealthy,  
and the faster you want to go, the 
bigger this signature is going to be,  
rising loosely with the cube of speed even before 
factoring in relativistic effects. If you go ten  
times faster each collision carries ten-squared 
more energy, and collisions with gas and dust  
are happening ten times as often since you plow 
through ten times as much space every moment.  
10 times the speed, 10-cubed means 1000 times 
the power signature of plowing through space.  
On the alternate side of this, the slower you go, 
the more time the enemy has to detect you and the  
more time they have to act once you are detected.
This does bring up one other example of effective  
stealth though, because same as you often have to 
uncloak in fiction to fire your weapons, there is  
a point at which you are going to get detected 
and there is a point at which that no longer  
matters, especially if you don’t have a crew on 
board that needs to survive. It is hard to throw  
a black hole at a star system without someone 
noticing, not just the gravity but the accretion  
disc it will pick up as it travels and all the 
light and gas it will bend or accelerate and  
all the signals passing by it that it will warp.
Still it’s a lot stealthier than a star of equal  
mass and it has an advantage going for it: 
It is really hard to do anything to stop a  
black hole rolling into your solar system 
even with light years of advanced notice. 
See our episode Weaponizing Black Holes for 
a lot of the uses as well as the counters  
and counter-counters of various natural 
and artificial black holes as weapons. 
So that’s the basic of why we 
say there is no stealth in space,  
in one sense it is hyperbole, we 
gave plenty of ways you can hide,  
but in another it’s one of those really 
ironclad statements approaching a law,  
like thermodynamics, entropy, and no free lunches, 
or faster than light travel. You need a perpetual  
motion machine or warp drive or time machine, 
various bits of Clarketech, to violate those. 
To close for the day, those also offer 
some possible modes of stealth but often  
the technology offers a means of detection too, 
which is why I put that caveat near the beginning  
about stealth only counting for opponents of 
similar technological prowess. A time machine can  
obviously let you avoid detection, you just jump 
back before their detector grid existed and blowup  
the folks who designed it, or the amoeba they 
evolved from. Same some material that lets you  
turn into a phantom or ghost who doesn’t interact 
with outside particles, be it interstellar gas or  
photons, might permit stealth but makes navigation 
difficult for you too. The tech that might permit  
you to navigate while in phantom mode probably 
can be used to detect ships in phantom mode too. 
A FTL drive, or Faster than Light drive, lets you 
arrive before the light you are emitting arrives,  
or the light they bounced 
off you as you approached.  
Some sort of perpetual motion 
machine, violating entropy as it does,  
might offer true cooling, even down to near 
absolute zero temperatures of nanokelvin,  
rather than our normal method of just moving heat 
around. A ship propelled by selected matter to  
energy conversion might be able to convert matter 
into beams of neutrinos to shoot out the back,  
and further aim them off in directions so 
no one directly behind them and pursuing  
them could detect. Or directly in front 
of them as they slowed to attack a planet. 
But beware assuming these offer no counter. If 
your ship runs by shooting some faster than light  
particle out the back, or communicates to home 
with such particles, then the enemy sensors can  
detect those particles. If you’ve got perpetual 
motion machines for keeping your ship eternally  
supercool, then the enemy has them for generating 
constant and powerful active detectors and more  
importantly maybe, for running their economy and 
factories to churn out endless armies of probes.  
We also need to keep that in mind for 
quasi-stealth options like slipping your  
ship in as a mundane natural object or as one 
tiny ship with a fake transponder code around  
a busy planet’s orbital space. This might 
work but do need to be kept in context,  
that such civilizations probably 
do have those swarms of probes  
and detectors and countless humans or AI checking 
for anomalies in the data, but such pathways  
probably do offer a better chance for success.
We never know what new science and technology  
might emerge to shatter this apparent rule about 
stealth in space, but hopefully by now it's  
clearer why this is so hard. Feel free to suggest 
and debate some scenarios for stealth in space  
with hypothetical technologies in the comments 
below, or for ways to do stealth under known  
science too of course, if you can think of one.
I’ve heard a lot of them suggested over the years,  
but if there’s a way to be unseen under 
known science, I have yet to see it. 
So we were talking about stealth spaceships 
today sneaking up on us and I suspect I’m  
not the only one who often checks my social 
media only to find out some new crisis or  
talking point has snuck up on me that 
everyone seems to be talking about. On  
the other hand it’s just plain unhealthy 
to tune into the 24/7 doom-and-gloom news  
cycle. You need to keep up with the news 
though and that’s why I read Morning Brew. 
It’s a daily Free Newsletter that gets you update 
on tech, business, and finance news in just five  
minutes, replacing dry, dense, and boring news 
with witty, relevant, and informative content  
and in a fast fashion that lets me get up to date 
on the world in five minutes over a cup of coffee.  
So I can get updates on the current space race 
or how Bitcoin and cryptocurrency are doing,  
and again all the content is free, it 
only takes about 15 seconds to subscribe. 
To envision the future we need to 
stay up to date on the present,  
and if you’re interested in business, finance, 
or tech, there’s no reason not to subscribe,  
just click the link in the episode description and 
start waking up with Morning Brew every morning.
So we looked at hiding spaceships today 
and on September 23rd we’ll continue  
that discussion by looking at not just at 
hiding spaceships but entire civilizations,  
as we return to the Fermi 
Paradox for Hidden Civilizations.  
Before that though, next week we will celebrate 
the 7th anniversary of our first episode,  
Megastructures in Science and Science Fiction, by 
looking at Megastructure Death, on September 16th.  
Then we’ll have our Monthly Livestream Q&A 
on Sunday, September 26th at 4pm Eastern  
Time before closing the month out by asking 
if it’s possible for future civilizations  
to exist without money, on Sept 30th.
Now if you want to make sure you get notified  
when those episodes come out, make sure subscribe 
to the channel, and if you enjoyed the episode,  
don’t forget to hit the like button and share it 
with others. If you’d like to help support future  
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon, or our 
website, IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the  
episode description below, along with all of our 
various social media forums where you can get  
updates and chat with others about the concepts 
in the episodes and many other futuristic ideas. 
Until next time thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
