This episode is sponsored by Curiosity Stream
The first sport ever played in space was golf,
what comes next?
So today’s topic, Space Sports and sports
in the future, has been one requested over
and over again for years now and it seemed
past time to cover it.
We’ll mostly be looking at sports in low
or no gravity, but we’ll spend a bit of
time considering how future technology might
impact sports, both in altering how they are
played and inventing new games.
To look at the future of sports it helps to
look at the past and how that’s birthed
our games, to give an insight into what might
shape those in the future.
One thing that sticks out right away is that
many games serve to hone combat and survival
skills or serve as a type of proxy for them
and our competitive drives.
This is rather overt with something like archery
or fencing or martial arts or board games
like chess, and less obvious with things like
marathons or decathlons.
Another key point is that they often arise
out of a work environment, for our very distant
ancestors sports that arose from hunting would
be an example, but contests like log tossing
or sailing or rowing or weightlifting or even
bricklaying are examples of work becoming
a sport.
One might imagine that in space, something
like competitive EVA races to get suited up,
outside into the vacuum, and finding and welding
shut air leaks would be a job from which a
sport might arise.
It’s very easy to imagine zero-g gymnastics
and low-grav aerobatics becoming popular,
not just because it offers new levels to these
sports, but because the ability to maneuver
in lower gravity is so important a skill to
master if you’re living and working there.
A third point is that a lot of games have
arisen around what was available, we have
a desire to play around, and will typically
do that with whatever is on hand, even if
it involves a lot of improvising.
As an example of that, I mentioned in the
intro that the first space sport was golf,
when Alan Shepard used a makeshift six-iron
by combining a rock-collector’s shaft with
a six-iron head he’d brought on board with
a couple golf balls.
Later during Apollo 16 they did some rover
racing, the first Lunar Grand Prix.
We don’t need much reason to want to play
sports and games in space, but we’ve good
motivations for it too.
Exercise is good for us, and very important
to maintaining our health in low gravity.
Sports are also better at maintaining mental
health than just mindlessly running on a treadmill.
We’re not hamsters, so especially when using
a machine like a treadmill or stationary bike,
we usually like to have some music or something
to watch to help with the monotony, but sports
are generally even better and even on the
cramped confines of the International Space
Station we’ve seen a lot of experimentation
by the crews with playing this or that sport.
Maintaining and improving body and mind is
not only easier when it’s fun but usually
more effective too, which is why even with
non-physical skills like logic or reasoning
or reading we often introduce a game format
for instruction, like a crossword or interactive
puzzle, and why we try to make our episodes
fun, not simply lectures, and it’s not even
vaguely coincidental that virtually every
sponsor of this educational channel is focused
on improving knowledge and skills in fun and
interesting ways.
There may come a time when keeping the body
in shape doesn’t require exercise, and that’s
something to think about, a time when you
can just step into the Muscletron 3000 and
step out looking like a Greek God, but training
and practice would presumably still be necessary
for both mind and muscle memory, though of
course we can’t rule out one day being able
to augment the mind or even upload skills
complete with all those reflexes.
Such augmentations, mental and physical, might
really mess up professional sports in the
future and of course are already a constant
concern, be it doping or gear which grants
an unfair advantage, for a given and debatable
definition of the term ‘unfair’.
Cybernetic or genetic enhancement might wreck
a lot of professional games but I honestly
rather doubt it, we regulate or adapt as needed,
and ultimately that’s up to what the audiences
find acceptable anyway.
Fair matters for amateur team sports too of
course, whether or not it’s okay to use
a wooden bat or aluminum or maybe a few decades
from now a pair of goggles that track the
ball in flight and let you know where to swing
or run to for a catch.
And along with looking at low gravity, zero
gravity, and unearthly environments, things
like that are of interest to us in discussing
future sports today, along with looking at
what might alter modern sports.
Of course, one has to define what a sport
is.
I remember seeing a game of chess once on
ESPN and being a bit surprised that was on
a sports network and my own personal definition
was always that it’s not a sport if you
don’t get sweaty and tired playing it.
Of course there are plenty of games everyone
calls sports like NASCAR that are more about
reflexes and endurance than physical exertion,
and many sports involve a large measure of
physical and mental exertion and practiced
reflexes, any one of which can be tiring or
make you sweaty, plus I suspect most folks
who play water sports would argue that being
sweat-drenched is hardly relevant anyway.
I suspect most folks in this audience could
corroborate me when I say mental activity
can be quite exhausting too.
Usually when I’m done with a script for
the show, which is typically a single sit
down writing marathon, I emerge a bit drained
and tired and hungry and wondering why the
clock reads several hours later.
To get into low gravity sports, we should
probably puncture the mistaken impression
many have that working in lower or no gravity
is easier.
Obviously in some ways it is, but there’s
weight and then there’s mass, and while
exerting force against something’s gravitational
pull is obviously hard, it still has its own
inertial mass even in the middle of empty
space.
Even ignoring that wearing a spacesuit is
very tiring, moving around in low or no gravity
is hardly a freebie.
Throwing a ball has very little to do with
fighting gravity, even if it has a big effect
on its trajectory.
That’s probably the first thing most folks
think about with low gravity, playing baseball
or golf on the Moon or Mars is going to result
in a much longer flight for the same speed,
and a golf ball or baseball or bullet on a
place with half of Earth’s gravity is going
to stick in the air twice as long.
Earth’s gravity is 2.6 times stronger than
Mars, and 6 times stronger than the Moon,
so a projectile will stay up 2.6 and 6 times
as long respectively and cover correspondingly
more distance.
If you’re playing someplace where the gravity
is twice as strong, expect it to fall down
twice as fast and cover half the distance.
Obviously this all ignores air resistance
and lift, but we’ll get to that in a bit.
This means your baseball outfield needs to
be proportionally bigger or smaller, but maybe
not entirely proportionally, since your outfielders
have to try to catch that ball or grab it
after its hit and throw it back, and a larger
or smaller field to account for gravity isn’t
changing their running time much.
Of course they can jump a lot higher to catch
it too, and games like volleyball or long
jump or high jump are changed.
Even track and field hurdles not only need
to be higher but spaced farther apart, as
you’ll cover more distance even when jumping
the same height of barrier before you can
land and start running again.
That also means in game like billiards or
snooker you probably need a glass plate over
the balls or some thick liquid it all bounces
around in so they don’t fly off the table
constantly.
It totally wrecks American Football too, as
unless you make the field much longer, which
would really wreck the normal ground game,
even a fairly weak kicker is going to be able
to nail a field goal from his own endzone,
at least for distance, and almost any fourth
down that would end with a punt is going to
be a try for a field goal instead.
For that matter, when tackles turn into dogpiles
in low gravity they might end up floating
in a tangle of bouncing bodies, so the game
might need major overhaul.
That’s not the first time that’s happened
either, around a century ago the sheer number
of injuries and deaths in American Football,
which was a particularly vicious style of
rugby, resulted in President Teddy Roosevelt
advocating for new rules to allow forward
passing and that had some obvious direct and
secondary results on changing gameplay.
I pick that example because some of these
games wouldn’t seem able to survive the
effect of way different gravity without being
so changed it wouldn’t seem like the same
game anymore, but American Football, which
involves a foot hitting a ball pretty rarely,
basically only to begin and end which team’s
turn it is, is an example of dubious names
and divergent sports.
Of course dubious names are probably going
to be common enough in space anyway, as folks
are likely to still refer to the air as being
part of their ‘atmosphere’ even though
inside a dome or a rotating cylinder habitat,
there’s obviously no sphere of air involved.
Speaking of air, that can have a big effect
on games too, and not every game in space
is going to be played in air, and in many
sports, carrying around your air supply is
likely to be a big deal.
Hiking or climbing up a mountain on Mars is
way easier than on Earth, except on Earth
you don’t have to carry your air with you
and air is actually fairly heavy as our tanks
will need to be sturdy enough to hold the
stuff compressed and not be easily punctured
either.
That might make an amusing modification to
dueling games too.
We don’t dual much anymore, and certainly
not to the death, but even when we did, we
usually only went to first blood, and I could
imagine that returning as our medical technology
improves so that there was very little risk
of permanent harm in a knife or sword fight,
but I could imagine fights in space going
not to first blood but to first leak, a puncture
to someone else’s suit.
That’s a little more probable to me because
I can imagine that contests to patch a leak
would be one of those new sports we’d see
develop anyway.
As I mentioned earlier, a lot of sports derive
from survival skills and in space or hostile
planets, the ability to keep your suit unpunctured
or seal leaks to it or other objects is likely
to be a major survival skill.
You could get some sports very unique to specific
planets or moons too.
On Earth, depending on your latitude, the
day-night terminator comes over very quickly
and in a blur from the air, you never really
see a line of day and night pass over you,
but on places like the moon, with no air to
blur light and a day a month long, even on
the equator where it’s fastest the terminator
only moves 4.6 meters per second or 10 miles
per hour, meaning you could sprint ahead of
it for a while.
On places like Mercury, where it’s even
longer, you could walk at a light stroll ahead
of it and even set up camp.
Of course if it caught you, you’d burn up,
but one might imagine folks out surveying
the place in rovers with gear might make contests
out of staying barely ahead of the boiling
day or freezing night and setting up camp
shelters or digging down in the ground.
You might do that on Venus too, which has
a very long day as well, but the surface is
a boiling hot high-pressure death trap buried
far beneath a thick and poisonous atmosphere,
though at higher levels you might go hang-gliding
around and I suspect hang-gliding would be
a popular sport there.
Of course if space suits, or Venus Suits,
were good enough, really high tech about pressure
and heat, you might have folks who made a
business and eventually a sport of flying
down to that deadly surface.
Suicidal drops are already a popular sport
here, be it bungee jumping and skydiving to
cliff diving, a sport which presumably only
has the ranks of ‘grandmaster’ or ‘stuff
on a rock’.
Diving off orbital rings onto Earth is certainly
plausible, and suits able to handle re-entry
and high-pressure might result in folks not
only diving down from orbit into the sea,
but aiming to drop all the way down to the
bottom of an ocean trench and back up again.
Felix Baumgartner’s world-record skydive
was as high in altitude as many orbital ring
systems would be.
It’s not just Earth, though, folks could
dive from orbit into gas giants and aiming
to land on platforms deeper in the atmosphere.
Considering that emergency and search and
rescue crews for gas refining facilities on
those gas giants might actually have to be
trained to do something like that, I could
well imagine it becoming a major sport.
Now it should be noted that just because gravity
is lower or zero in places doesn’t mean
they’ll have to adapt their sports to that.
We know how to make artificial gravity by
rotation and are likely to employ that in
human habitations any place where there isn’t
already decent gravity.
Not all sections of space habitats might be
under spin-gravity or full Earth levels even
if it were, but the gym would tend to be the
place you’d most want that, especially for
maintaining a typical human physique.
It sounds awesome to be able to lift a few
thousands kilos over your head in low gravity
but weight lifting competitions in low or
no gravity are likely to be about speed of
repetitions as much as mass being moved, how
quickly you can deadlift a weight, fighting
it’s inertial mass, not the sheer mass you
can get over your head eventually since that
becomes as meaningless as doing a handstand
on Earth and saying you’re Atlas, able to
lift up the world.
But on planets where the gravity is rather
low, we do have the option of merging spin
gravity with normal gravity though that requires
you spin a rather large and deep bowl shape.
Of course that happens to be what a good arena
or stadium looks like anyway and odds are
any interplanetary sports league is likely
to have an agreed upon gravity and air composition
used for the sports.
I suspect that would be Earth Standard gravity
too, except for games developed uniquely for
low gravity or microgravity, rather than adapted.
Now you could get some interesting version
of existing games too.
In soccer or basketball, for instance, it’s
about aiming a ball for a specific target
more than a sheer range, same for darts, and
other than adapting around a longer parabolic
curve you’re not really changing things
much, indeed for stuff like darts or archery
the flight time to target is sufficiently
short that much of your lift and drop is from
air as much as gravity.
It won’t fly the same in zero gravity but
it’s not the same huge game-changer it would
be in something like baseball.
One interesting variation we might see is
folks on very low gravity asteroids or small
moons, which make up 99% of the objects kicking
around the solar system, setting the ‘target’
as launching an item at just the right speed
to orbit the body, not too fast, not to slow,
and “orbit-ball” might score points by
how many times the ball went around the object
before crashing into the ground or spiraling
out to escape.
Some games like racquetball might adapt to
zero gravity by using a pressurized sphere
you bounced the ball around, kind of like
how Bashir and O’Brien did in Deep Space
9, and you might wear finned or winged suits
to help you maneuver around.
For that matter we don’t normally think
of catching a ball or throwing it as moving
us, as we tend to be planted on the ground
rather firmly, but even if you’re not in
a vacuum so your experience air drag, you’ll
notice how you absorb or counter momentum
of anything you catch a lot more and can use
that for bouncing around off walls to change
your position.
There’s some really great descriptions of
maneuvering for games in zero gravity in Orson’s
Scott Card’s classic scifi novel “Ender’s
Game”, which is well worth a read.
Keeping inertia and momentum in mind, games
with heavier balls and no gravity like zero-g
dodgeball might turn into something where
the objective wasn’t to get the ball in
some goal but to get your opponent or yourself
into one, by bouncing or throwing balls to
exchange momentum.
You might get some very coordinated passing
between teams to achieve such goals.
I could envision folks playing darts in inflated
spacesuits trying to puncture bubbles or segments
on it to shove their opponent around, as that’s
decent training for trying to deal with a
spacesuit leak in EVA.
You jump from one airlock to another while
everyone tries to pop your balloons and knock
you off course, and you try to steer to the
goal with those leaks providing thrust.
Also considering that most of the solar system’s
bodies are covered in ice, and low on gravity,
you might get some very interesting versions
of ice skating or skiing too, especially considering
the kind of maneuvers you can pull off when
you’re on some icy rock whose escape velocity
might not be much higher than how fast you
can jump.
I could well imagine a Winter Olympics sports
where we melted a curved path up and down
all the way around the equator of a body and
folks aimed to circumnavigate on skis or skates
as fast as they could and could use their
air supply for additional thrust to speed
up.
Gases escaping from a suit can be used for
thrust and while it’s a little low brow,
us being humans, I would not even be a little
surprised if a normal zero-g pub game was
for contests to see who could belch across
the room fastest.
And given that belching is not the only way
for humans to generate propulsive gases I’d
imagine we’d have a parallel contest where
folks were eating all the beans they could
stomach beforehand too.
I’d imagine neither version would be something
you’d invite a date along for, unless you
were planning to break up.
Something you might bring a partner along
for is dancing though, and given all the awesome
options available for moves in low gravity,
I imagine this would be popular, and you might
get some very interesting costumes for that
too, as we already often tailor dresses or
skirts with whirling around in mind, and I
suspect folks would cheerfully deck themselves
out with wings and feathers if they were in
a low enough gravity environment that they
could use those to alter their motion a lot.
Of course a date isn’t the only partner
you might have.
Our furry friends shall surely accompany us
off our home world to every rock we settle
or habitat we assemble, and they need exercise
too, and playing Frisbee with your dog in
low gravity is bound to be rather amusing.
Keeping in mind all those icy bodies, I can
also imagine dog sledding being popular, either
under pressurized domes or with spacesuits
for dogs.
While sleds would presumably be powered by
motors not canines, there are plenty of motorsports
too, and if you’re using an electric motor
you can use rovers, motorbikes, dunebuggies,
and so on.
I don’t think I’ve ever seen a fictional
portrayal of somebody riding a dirt bike on
Mars or the Moon, but a well-made spacesuit
might be no more encumbering than the normal
protective gear for dirt bikes and you could
get away with riding one around in the vacuum
over all those mile-high crater walls and
down those massive canyons and lavatubes.
Maybe add a bit of rocketry in there or even
some wings for partial-pressure environments
like an early-phase terraformed Mars, our
topic for next week, but you could pull off
some bike jumps on those worlds that would
terrify Evel Knievel.
Something you could also be doing with skates,
skateboards, skis, or even your own two feet
in some places.
Pedal-powered aircraft might become a popular
adaptation to both flying and bicycling on
many places too, under a pressurized dome
of course.
Needless to say spaceship races might be popular,
seeing who could slingshot closest and fastest
to a planet, we see something like that in
“The Expanse”, and solar sails and sun
diving might get very popular too.
Spaceships always having to worry about debris,
either dodging it or vaporizing it, and while
you’d expect that to be automated I’d
imagine there’d be a lot of manual training
to do that as a backup, and as we said, survival
skills make for good sports, so trying to
shoot down debris manually or work through
obstacle courses might be popular too.
We might also see stuff like asteroid hopping
or scavenger hunts, arising out of asteroid
mining cultures.
Besides outer space we also have cyberspace,
and while we don’t think of video games
as sports normally, they can be turned into
them easily enough and also many do already
focus on reflexes which we’ve already noted
was a major or dominant aspect of many traditional
sports anyway.
That also offers all sorts of cool options
like racing your dragon around a virtual world,
but of course with genetic engineering and
cybernetics, you might easily be able to have
dragons on low gravity worlds, or be one yourself.
So many options, for continuing or adapting
existing sports or making entirely new ones,
so that I’m pretty sure we’ll never get
bored or run out of sports to play or watch
in the future.
It does bring up that competitive drive to
excel though which for professional sports
often leads to some fairly extreme efforts,
which I imagine will only be amplified by
options like genetic engineering, cybernetics,
and neural and cognitive enhancement.
There’s a great documentary on that topic
and things like psycho-cognitive training
for athletes called “Quest for the Perfect
Athlete” that you can watch on Curiosity
Stream.
One of many excellent documentaries you can
watch there on all sorts of fascinating topics.
Curiosity Stream is a subscription streaming
service that offers over 2400 documentaries
and nonfiction titles from some of the world’s
best filmmakers, including exclusive originals,
and from some our top thinkers, like Stephen
Hawking and Michio Kaku.
You can get unlimited access starting at just
$2.99 a month, and for our audience, the first
30-days are completely free if you sign up
at curiositystream.com/isaacarthur during
the sign-up process.
As I mentioned, next week we’ll be visiting
Mars again and we’ll be looking at how we
can go about terraforming as close to Earth
conditions as we can and what our options
would be, from the restrained to the extravagant,
from the low-tech to the very high-tech, as
we take that lifeless red ball and try to
turn it green, in Springtime on Mars.
The week after that we’ll celebrate SFIA’s
5th Anniversary by returning one of our favorite
Topics, the Fermi Paradox, in “Fermi Paradox:
Extinction”.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to support the channel,
visit our website to donate or look at some
of the SFIA merchandise you can get.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
