This Episode is sponsored by Audible.
Carl Sagan famously said the Universe and
Cosmos
is all that is or ever was or ever will be,
but what if it’s just the tip of the iceberg?
When we look at the night sky we can see several
thousands stars, as we reached the modern
era we learned there were millions of times
more stars in our galaxy, itself one of trillions
we can see.
Our Universe was not a few thousands stars,
but billions and billions of them.
But this is probably not the sum of the Universe,
which expands outward in all directions equally
until we see a wall of ancient light, the
cosmic microwave background radiation left
over from when the Universe was rather young
and hot, and red-shifted from it’s journey
through nearly 14 billion years.
This we call the Observable Universe, and
we suspect it goes on beyond that, probably
far beyond that, and possibly even infinitely
so.
And yet that’s just this Universe, in this
iteration and timeline.
We don’t know if anything preceded this
Universe or if our Big Bang was merely a relatively
local affair in some other older larger Universe.
Or if every possible timeline of our own Universe
has happened, or both.
We don’t know if other places with other
rules might exist, extra dimensions or different
physical constants.
We’re going to be exploring these concepts
today and one of the first problems we have
is simply naming them.
The word ‘Universe’ derives from the Latin
‘universum’, which variously means “all
together, all in one, whole, entire, and relating
to all”.
It’s meant to be the whole world and cosmos,
the totality of existing things and this usage
long predates our even knowing what galaxies
were.
When we started realizing that other options
might be on the table besides just this region
of space originating from the Big Bang, we
probably should have come up with another
word for it and kept Universe more broad,
but instead we got terms like parallel Universes,
Multiverse, Alternate Realities, Higher Dimensions,
the Ultimate Ensemble, and even the Grand
Shebang, a personal favorite.
Let me just add that none of this is anything
more than theory at the moment.
There’s not a drop of evidence to support
anything beyond our Observable Universe at
this time, an arguable exception being the
idea that the Universe continues on beyond
the Observable Universe since we can see space
expanding inside the Observable Universe and
we wouldn’t expect we were at the exact
center of the Universe here on Earth, and
that the ‘edge’ is just a fairly uniform
blob of photons as we’d expect from something
that used to be hotter and denser but has
been expanding.
So the most obvious conclusion is that the
Universe keeps on going beyond the Observable
Universe for at least a considerable way as
if Earth is randomly located in that Universe,
it would need to be decently bigger than the
part we can observe for us to be able to see
equally in all directions.
If you’re standing in a random spot in a
dark empty warehouse with a lantern, but there’s
no wall visible in your circle of light, that
warehouse is probably far larger than the
area you can see.
Same concept.
We can logically say then that the Universe
probably extends a good distance farther than
what we can see, but whether that’s just
a little bit bigger or outright infinite,
we can’t prove at this time and probably
could only prove with some new physics.
That’s even more the case with all these
other places, multiverses, higher dimensions,
alternate timelines and so on.
We can see a mathematical basis for their
existence but that doesn’t mean that they
do exist, or that all the variations we might
imagine do if some do, and we have no way
at this time of testing them, and quite possibly
never will.
Indeed one might argue that if we can’t
ever see or reach these places, even if they
do exist, they might as well not exist, and
that would even be true of the area outside
of our Observable Universe.
Indeed we believe large sections of the Observable
Universe have already left the volume we could
ever send a signal too, let alone a ship,
and we just are seeing their ghostly after-image
as they fell over that cosmological event
horizon, our lantern as it were, and more
and more galaxies will as time goes on.
We use the term “Hubble Volume” as this
region of space we could actually send a signal
to or receive one from if they sent it today,
rather than the entirety of the Observable
Universe which would include those regions
we can only see the ghosts of.
If anyone lives in those spots, they presumably
have their own Observable Universe and Hubble
Volume centered on them.
It is entirely possible that even a hundred
trillion years from now, as our last natural
stars burn out, that we still won’t know
if there’s actually anything beyond this
Universe, since unless you can actually look
at or visit such places, you can’t really
be sure they exist, and we have no avenue
for doing either under known science.
However, some have fairly compelling arguments
as a result of this or that cosmological theory,
regardless of evidence to back them, so I
don’t want to imply they just got made up
at some point, rather they would appear likely
consequences of known or hypothetical physics.
You have to be careful with stuff like that,
and can’t just assume they exist as a result,
but again they’re more solid than just daydream’s
of science fiction authors.
On the theoretical side we can speculate though
and there’s been quite a few classification
systems that have emerged, and we’ll discuss
a couple today.
Cosmologist Max Tegmark proposes 4 possible
levels of Multiverse.
The first is the extension of our own Universe,
out beyond the Observable, and specifically
the case that it is infinite or effectively
so, rather than just significantly larger
than what we can see.
Incidentally when I say ‘effectively infinite’,
this is because in a truly infinite system
things will repeat, and since you’d always
have a maximum volume of space you could look
at and compare, the Hubble Volume.
As huge as such a place is, it is finite and
has a huge but also finite number of configurations
all the various atoms could be in, so you’d
expect in an infinite system to come across
repeats and you couldn’t tell those identical
places apart, and it arguably doesn’t matter.
If everything is literally exactly the same,
it’s maybe no more a different place than
a circular timeline is a new era.
That’s arguably a semantic point, but we
can calculate the average distance you’d
have to travel in such an infinite system
to reach a repeat Hubble Volume and it’s
about 10^10^115 meters away.
That’s the distance that’s the effective
edge of infinity, because even if it kept
going, you’re not finding anything new or
unique.
A quick note on exponents of exponents, since
those come up a lot in discussion of multiverses
and can be confusing in scale.
When you see 10^10, it means a 1 followed
by 10 zeroes, or 10 billion, but 10^10^10
would be one followed by 10^10 zeroes, or
ten billion zeroes, enough to fill a library
if we wrote them down on paper.
When we start talking about numbers like 10^10^115
or how many permutations of a Universe might
exist in the Multiverse, we have to use that
notation because if we wrote the number out
on paper it would be so big and long it would
undergo gravitational collapse into a black
hole.
Level 2 is one in which we have Universes
with different physical constants, like if
gravity or the Hubble Constant for expansion
were a bit different.
This is a consequence of the Eternal Inflation
Theory, a variation of Cosmic Inflation Theory,
which Alan Guth came up with back in 1979
to explain some problems with matter distribution
in the normal Big Bang model, or why the Universe
could be flat and homogeneously distributed.
Cosmic Inflation Theory often gets misunderstood
as referring to the normal cosmic expansion
we always talk about with galaxies getting
further away, but actually refers to a very
brief moment of time the barest instant after
the big bang.
You’ll hear it said that the Universe expanded
by a factor of a hundred-trillion-trillion
in this brief instant lasting only about a
billionth of a trillionth of a trillionth
second, and I always feel obliged to point
out that post-inflation size was probably
only about a meter across or less.
Not to say that pre-inflation size was insignificant,
in such a short time, the universe expanded
by a factor greater than all the expansion
since.
That’s only our Observable portion incidentally,
the rest of the Universe might have been a
good deal bigger or even infinite, we only
know about that chunk.
Prior to that it was subatomic, so inflation
was just a rapid brief burst.
We have no evidence of this, we can’t see
further back in time prior to the event of
Last Scattering when the Universe was about
300,000 years old, and inflation is thought
to have happened in the first micro-pico-picosecond.
So why do we think it happened?
Well because the Universe is not homogenous,
it has a large scale structure and we can’t
see how that could have happened without such
a fast expansion period and accompanying quantum
fluctuations causing variations.
It’s essentially the theory for why the
Universe isn’t evenly spread at the galactic
supercluster scale, so we hypothesize a quick
burst of inflation back when the Observable
Universe was smaller than an atomic nuclei
that jumped it to handheld size.
Very tiny and random distributions in that
subatomic thing could then have expanded to
bigger gaps rather than an even spread of
matter and energy.
Now that’s regular Cosmic Inflation Theory,
but as mentioned we have another called Eternal
Inflation.
A problem with regular inflation is why it
should actually stop after an instant, exiting
this rapid expansion phase, something others
have sought to address, called the “Graceful
Exit Problem” and a topic for another time.
Eternal Inflation says it didn’t stop, or
didn’t stop everywhere, that some places
stop stretching to form distinct bubbles,
like our universe, and that you could get
a lot of mini-universes popping up.
There’s quite a few variations on this general
notion but Level 2 encompasses this and others
like the option that each black hole might
spawn a new Universe, though it's mass and
specific physical constants might vary, a
new one might be a bit less massive than ours
or have its electromagnetic or gravitational
force be a bit higher or lower or so on.
Again, no evidence for such a theory – or
theories as it includes more than one that
would result in similar extra universes - but
they dp come about as a reasonable consequence
of another theory.
Level 3 is a consequence of the Many Worlds
Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics.
There are a bunch of interpretations of quantum
and Schrodinger’s Cat.
For instance in the Copenhagen Interpretation
the cat can be simultaneously alive and dead
and you just don’t know which till you observe
it.
Many Worlds says it is two separate Universes,
one where the cat is alive in the box and
another where it’s dead, and you just don’t
know which you are in until you observe it.
They are contradictory, it’s not both, it’s
one or the other - or neither, there are quite
a few other lesser known interpretations.
But there’s no multiverse in Copenhagen,
at least of this type, where you have a separate
Universe for each possible timeline, that’s
the result of the Many Worlds Interpretation.
Many Worlds holds that every possible scenario
for events to have played out has done so
in some parallel universe, as opposed to Copenhagen
which says all can happen but only one did
once we observe it.
Many Worlds has some very bizarre possible
implications that tend to get overlooked in
fictional treatments in sci-fi, where it tends
to just be a ‘what if X event in history
happened differently’ and we explored those
in our Infinite Improbability Issues episode,
though I think most of the audience remembers
that as the Quantum Cheeseburger episode.
This is probably the most well-known parallel
reality case, again from it’s popularity
in science fiction, and as quick aside it’s
rather overlapping with Level 1 conceptually.
As you might recall, in level 1 I mentioned
how it was infinite or effectively so, as
bits would repeat in an infinite one.
This is basically the same concept and scale
for Many-Worlds too, every possible configuration
of the Observable Universe has to exist in
both Level 1 and Level 3.
I should note that the levels don’t actually
require the other levels to exist.
Incidentally multiple futures branching off
from a single moment and event or decision
is not the entirety of this notion, you can
also have multiple pasts whose sequence of
events led to the same outcome.
This also doesn’t necessarily imply new
Universes are being spawned each time an event
happens, alternatively you can just have a
vast number of multiverses in which every
configuration of matter and energy existed
and your timeline was essentially the path
you navigated through them.
Level 4, the last in Tegmark’s classification
system, the Ultimate Ensemble, which is essentially
the one for every possible universe we can
mathematically envision, and does encompass
levels 1, 2, and 3.
It’s got no specifics beyond basically ‘everything
we can think of and describe mathematically’
so is basically the miscellaneous and all-of-the-above
level.
It is technically limited to only stuff we
could mathematically represent but beyond
that is basically ‘whatever you can dream
up’, and would include examples like a two-dimensional
Universe, like George Gamow’s Flatland,
or those with a fourth physical dimension
or a second temporal one or ones that are
circular or all sorts of other dimensions
having nothing to do with time and space,
and not just like in String Theory where we
suggest extra dimensions that are just very
small.
Speaking of String Theory, String Theorist
Brian Greene discusses 9 types of Multiverse.
The first is the Quilted Multiverse, and is
very similar to Tegmark’s level 1, in an
infinitely large universe in which vision
and travel is limited by the speed of light,
you effectively have a ton of smaller Observable
Universes or Hubble Volumes in which every
possible scenario has occurred, the patches
on our quilt.
He also Gives us type 2, the Inflationary
Multiverse, which is very like Level 2 of
Tegmark’s and the Eternal Inflation Theory
we discussed.
Then we get Type 3, the Brane Multiverse.
That’s Brane, B-R-A-N-E, like membrane,
not B-R-A-I-N, the thing on top of your shoulders
probably getting a headache from trying to
absorb all this information at the moment.
Branes is an aspect of String Theory in which
Universes like ours are essentially membranes
floating around a higher dimension, often
called “The Bulk”, and occasionally colliding
or interacting with each other and setting
off big bangs.
They are thought to be gravitationally attracted
to each other and this is suggested for why
gravity is so weak compared to the other 3
fundamental physical forces, Electromagnetism
and the Strong and Weak Nuclear Forces, which
are fairly equal in strength to each other
but trillions of trillions of trillions of
times stronger than Gravity.
The notion being that gravity is weak because
it isn’t confined to one single brane or
Universe but is spread over them all and thus
more diluted, though some versions of Brane
Theory offer other unknown forces as the cause.
This potentially results in them pulling toward
each other and colliding occasionally with
explosive results.
This is thought to tend to happen every few
trillion years or so to a given brane or Universe,
and arguably results in a cyclic process,
which is Greene’s Type 4, Cyclic Multiverses.
Branes collide and create the Universes.
They eventually bounce back in time and pull
back together again and collide and rinse
and repeat.
This is one of many Cyclic models so we keep
it distinct as Cyclic Multiverses as opposed
to things like the Big Crunch, where a universe
Bangs, expands, stop, contracts back down
to a dot, and Big Bangs again.
Incidentally you will often hear of M-Theory
in regard to Branes rather than String Theory,
similar area but for those wondering the M
usually is treated as short for Membrane,
in terms of the branes, but Edward Witten,
who came up with the notion, has said the
M could also stand for Mystery or Magic too.
Green’s Type 5 is Landscape Multiverse,
and would also parallel our Tegmark Level
2.
It develops the notion that quantum fluctuations
in all these expanding extra universes often
drop them to their lowest energy levels creating
pockets of space with sets of laws different
than surrounding space.
It’s oversimplifying it a bit, but the big
over-universe is constantly expanding and
regions of it coalesce into distinct universes
with distinct rules while others pop out of
existence, in keeping with false vacuum catastrophe
concepts.
Type 6 is the Quantum Multiverse, and is the
Many Worlds Multiverse version we already
discussed.
Type 7 is the Holographic Multiverse and comes
from the Holographic Principle, that a surface
area of space, like the surface of a black
hole, has encoded on it the contents of its
volume and mostly is about thermodynamics
and entropy but also delves into the nature
of our 3 dimensional reality, though folks
often confuse this notion with Simulated Universes,
which is Type 8, a Simulated Multiverse in
which every possible universe you can simulate
is being done so by some computer or equivalent
at a higher level of reality.
If you recall Tegmark’s Level 4, for containing
any Universe we can mathematically describe,
this would be one way to produce them.
If I can mathematically model a place I can
simulate it with a big enough computer.
Type 9 is fairly similar, the Ultimate Multiverse,
and like Tegmark’s Ultimate Ensemble is
every mathematically possible Universe.
I always feel it appropriate to add an extra
type or layer for all the others ones we couldn’t
mathematically describe, or describe in any
fashion, but that’s just from my habit of
wanting to include all the stuff we couldn’t
imagine, not just the stuff we can imagine
but can’t actually see.
That again is part of the problem with Multiverses
of any type, if you can’t see them, detect
them, visit them, make them, or somehow interact
with them it’s not just that I tend to feel
that they may as well not exist, but should
by Occam’s Razor simply be assumed not to
exist.
Again though, these aren’t being pulled
out of thin air but derive from possibilities
of the various physical theories we’ve developed,
though not proven either, but shouldn’t
be regarded as just random contemplation.
That said, I don’t like the common habit
of folks acting as though this is hard science,
or that if one is true than they all are,
when it’s more like some might be or they
might all be wrong.
The game changes if we can find a way to detect
them.
For instance Faster than Light travel, at
least those types that let you go to new places
faster than light, as opposed to setting up
a wormhole network between places you originally
traveled to slower than light, would let us
find out if the Universe was bigger than the
Observable Universe, though it would be impossible
to prove it was infinite in size.
You can’t ever prove something is actually
infinite, since it would take infinitely long
to check, but you could check if the Level
1 or Quilted Multiverse, the infinite or effectively
infinite Universe was right, or at least satisfy
yourself that it was as close to infinite
as you cared to check.
Similarly, as we discussed in our Wormholes
episode, those aren’t necessarily limited
to in-Universe travel, indeed it’s quite
likely if they exist or can be created they
specifically only can go between Universes,
not inside the same Universe.
And the Many Worlds example, as I mentioned
earlier, we explored in detail in the Infinite
Improbability Issues episode.
For things like the Simulated Universe or
Multiverse, you could find out but only if
the simulator lets you, essentially the programmers
or creators or God – take your pick as it
amounts to the same thing in this context
- either leaves you proof, intentionally or
accidentally, or informs you at some point.
Another big aspect of this is that those hypothetical
multiverses with different physical laws might
often be effectively dead, even ignoring the
ones that might cease to exist from a collapse
of the false vacuum.
Indeed it’s quite possible that most would
be lifeless, and possibly that finding one
capable of evolving life might be rarer than
winning the lotto, or even winning it every
week in row for several months when you only
bought one ticket each week.
We explored that more in our Anthropic Principle
and Boltzmann Brain episodes.
If you can move to, or exist in them, or create
them, whether it’s a one way trip or not,
they’d be a very tempting option for migration,
and that is a popular notion in science fiction
that we explored more in our episode “Aloof
Aliens”, but that’s where we’ll finish
up for today.
We don’t know which if any of these notions
for parallel Universes and Alternate Realities
is true, or if it really matters if we can’t
in someway interact with them, but if we can,
it means the Universe, or the sum total of
reality at least, is far, far, far grander
than even the vast and ancient cosmos we’ve
come to discover this last century, an infinity
of places with an infinity of people and events,
and possibly even those beyond our imagining.
So we were mentioning today alternate universes
that might have totally different rules, potentially
anything we can imagine, which fits the notion
of science fiction and space opera in particular,
many of which involve travel to alternate
universes with different rules on top of seeming
to operate under different scientific rules
themselves.
As a lot of folks have had some extra time
on their hands of late I’ve been getting
asked for reading and watching suggestions
and I’ve been recommending a lot of the
space opera expanded universes since they
often feature dozens or even hundreds of books
and decades of setting development to create
very rich universes you can delve into.
I’m also of the opinion that a lot of the
authors for these shared settings tend to
get overlooked and under-rated and one of
my personal favorites is Dan Abnett, who is
best known for his work in the Warhammer 40,000
setting, often just known as 40k. 40k’s
novels published from the Black Library span
hundreds of novels set amongst possibly the
most dystopian and outright crazy fictional
setting I know of, yet often have surprisingly
realism to them too, as I’ve mentioned before
I don’t know any sci fi setting that really
manages to convey the sheer immensity of a
giant and ancient galactic empire better than
40k does.
There are many other great writers for the
setting, some honorable mentions go to Chris
Wraight, Aaron Dembski-Bowden, John French,
and Graham MacNeill - but Dan Abnett is my
favorite and his Eisenhorn series - which
was recently turned into a video game and
is being developed into TV show, is usually
considered one of the best introductions to
the 40k setting.
The Black Library does a great job with their
audiobook adaptations and if you’re looking
for a fun setting to escape to for endless
hours, you can find all their audiobooks over
at Audible.
Audible has an amazing catalog of audiobooks
and Audible members can choose 3 titles every
month: 1 audiobook and 2 exclusive Audible
Originals you can’t hear anywhere else,
including access to news, original audio shows,
and guided fitness programs, and since you
can listen to your audiobooks anywhere on
any device, and seamlessly pick up where you
left off, they’re great for commuting, running
errands, or going to the gym.
You can start listening today with a 30-day
Audible trial.
Choose 1 Audiobook and 2 Audible Originals
absolutely free.
Just visit the link in the episode description,
Audible.com/Isaac, or text “Isaac” to
500-500.
Speaking of science fiction, there was a big
tendency in a lot of scifi to discuss the
concept of antimatter as being from alternate,
opposite universes… antimatter tends to
carry a lot of misconceptions and next week
we’ll dig into those, explain what it really
is besides explosive, how we might manufacture
and store it, and some of its other uses besides
blowing stuff, in Antimatter Factories & Uses.
The week after that we’ll return to the
Alien Civilizations series to consider the
idea of genuinely Benevolent aliens, then
close the month of May out with our monthly
Livestream Q&A, Sunday afternoon May 31st,
which will also be our first livestream in
the new SFIA studio.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to support future episodes,
you can donate to us at Patreon or our website,
IsaacArthur.net, linked in the episode description.
Until then, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
