This episode is sponsored by Audible.
It seems like in most alien invasions of Earth  
in scifi the invaders have pretty dumb reasons 
for invading, but does that mean Earth is safe  
because there are no good reasons to invade us, or 
just that we’re not being sufficiently creative?
 
Welcome back to our Alien Civilizations 
series here on Science & Futurism with  
Isaac Arthur for another Sci-fi Sunday on 
SFIA, and I am your aforementioned host,  
Isaac Arthur. On our Scifi Sunday episodes, we 
try to relax our scientific rigor and try to  
look at concepts in science fiction and see 
how realistic they are, or for that matter,  
how unrealistic they are, and when it comes to 
alien invasions of Earth, there are sort of a  
champion of unrealistic sci-fi, right up there 
with fighting giant monstrous Kaiju in equally  
giant robot mecha or fighting off zombie hoards, 
both of which are often alien invasion scenarios  
too. The invasions often seem dumb. Both how they 
happen and why they are done in the first place.  
The motivations and goals for the aliens to invade 
often seem incredibly stupid and when it comes to  
tactics and strategy during the invasion they 
often seem to ignore the First Rule of Warfare,  
and indeed, so too do the defenders.
So, I thought we’d spend today discussing  
the dumbest alien invasions of fiction, and why 
they’re strategically and scientifically flawed,  
as well as some examples of better reasons 
and methods. So, grab a drink and a snack,  
smash thoses like and subscribe 
buttons, and let’s get started!
 
Now we need to acknowledge from the outset that 
the reasons for most alien invasions are actually  
just to set up the plot of a film and frequently 
the writers care about the motivations for the  
invasions only to the degree needed to allow 
the audience to suspend disbelief for the story.  
And there are tons of excellent movies that are 
guilty of this, for instance my own favorite film,  
Blade Runner, is all about a man chasing after 
rogue android equivalents and it rather ignores  
that there’s no reason you wouldn’t have 
installed a tracking chip into them in  
the first place to avoid this and contemplate 
obvious contingencies for how that might fail. 
 
This applies to artificial intelligence films too, 
machine rebellions, which are often near-identical  
to alien invasion films. We don’t really 
worry too much about why the AI rebelled,  
why that wasn’t foreseen in advance, or why it 
wants us all dead now. Of course those stories  
often are designed to show a failing in mankind, 
how we brought it on our own heads and must learn  
to do better in the future. Which takes us to 
our first example of stupid reasons to invade: 
 
#1 Divine Judgment
At least as far back as the film the Day  
the Earth Stood Still we get examples of aliens 
appearing to chastise us for our violent ways.  
Or even threatening to invade if we don’t learn to 
be more peaceful. Humanity is warlike and a threat  
to itself and eventually a peaceful galaxy, so 
we’re going to invade Earth preemptively. Now this  
isn’t really a dumb reason to invade, just kinda 
hypocritical, which doesn’t make it implausible.  
The flaw is that it is assuming any species is 
likely to claw its way up Darwin’s Ladder without  
being fairly good at violence and that we would 
be exceptional in this regard. It would seem more  
reasonable to assume nearly every civilization 
that invents rockets to get to space also thought  
about how handy they were for dropping bombs on 
their enemies, and peaceful civilizaitons come  
about with reason and experience because war 
is expensive on resources, lives, and sanity,  
civilizations that value those will tend to 
prefer to avoid wars when reasonably possible. 
 
So the aliens might show up to make us more 
peaceful, but probably just by saying “Hey, it’s  
great to meet you guys, welcome to the galactic 
stage. Our philosophy is that it’s good to own  
enormous space cannons and be experts in their 
use, but basically never need to use them in favor  
of peaceful reasoned arbitration and friendship. 
We figured you might want some help at achieving  
the latter before you achieved the former, 
rather than the other way around.” And we’d  
probably reply that we were open to that though 
promise nothing since we don't really know these  
strangers from afar yet. And the same pretty much 
applies to the reboot version of that film with  
Keanu Reeves where it's all about our environment 
and how badly we treat it, only there the aliens  
wreck our power grid rather than just offering 
us the technologies and techniques they have for  
cleaner power production and overall living.
This is because these stories are just using  
the aliens as Divine Judgment, and the plot isn’t 
about them fixing the problem it's about humanity  
getting what its got coming to it - in the 
writer’s opinion anyway - or narrowly avoiding  
that doom as the entity is merciful and grants 
a stay of execution or outright forgiveness.  
Obviously if a real civilization acted that way 
they’d be open to getting called out for that  
sort of behavior but they might not care. We 
also need to keep in mind that clever players  
don’t show all their cards or pieces and display 
the ones they do with the intent of having you  
draw a false conclusion. That is the first rule of 
Warfare after all, “If the Enemy appears to being  
doing something incredibly stupid or illogical, 
assume there is a good chance they aren’t”.  
An invader has no requirement to explain 
their motivations nor to be honest if they do,  
and blaming the folks you’re invading 
is a common approach historically.
 
Nonetheless, invading another world for the 
purpose of punishing or reforming its citizens  
might seem like a dumb reason for doing it, but 
unlike most of examples today, it is one that’s  
in the eye of the beholder as opposed to simply 
illogical as a strategy. The galaxy isn’t likely  
to offer us black and white cases of morality 
either, they may invade other worlds to eliminate  
competition because they are morally opposed 
to genocide of intelligent entities or wiping  
out unique ecosystems or both. So they conquer 
or quarantine rather than eliminate. They might  
have ethics, just not enough of them in certain 
regards, humanity’s history certainly shows the  
frequency of that too. Or it might be seen as 
a lesser evil in the pursuit of a nobler goal,  
maybe they need our world as a strategic 
outpost or burn it to deny it to a voracious  
galaxy wide threat. They have reasons that make 
sense, but amount to us as collateral damage.
 
Admittedly, many of the individual 
reasons in scifi aren’t that great,  
like Thanos in the MCU wanting to eliminate 
half the population of the Universe to  
deal with overpopulation. In the original 
comics he’s just a death-obsessed nihilist,  
and maybe in future films this will turnout to be 
some strategy for dealing with Celestials hatching  
out of inhabited planets. However, just killing 
half the people to deal with overpopulation then  
blowing up the stones so no one can undo it, or 
redo it a couple generations later if the problem  
reoccurs, is rather dumb, as tons of videos 
on youtube have explained in detail already. 
 
What isn’t dumb though was Thanos invading 
Earth. Virtually every Infinity Stone was  
either on Earth or had some Earth-involved or 
originated character handling it, so out of all  
the trillions of planets out there, conquering 
or pulverizing Earth was definitely a good idea,  
even if it was to advance a goal that made 
precious little sense. You invade Earth because  
Earth seems to have some precious resource 
unique to it, or atypically abundant to it,  
which takes us to our next category. 
#2 - There’s gold in them there Earth Hills!
 
Picking on L. Ron Hubbard’s Battlefield Earth, 
either the 1982 novel or the 2000 film starring  
John Travolta, is like shooting fish out of a 
cannon barrel, as both provide a lot of cannon  
fodder for criticism, but in that film, we see an 
alien race that invades Earth because they want  
our gold. Unfortunately for them, they come from 
a world whose atmospheric content is so volatile  
to radiation that it explodes when exposed to 
even elevated Earth Background radiation and  
eventually, they are defeated when a nuclear 
bomb is teleported to their homeworld and the  
whole planet explodes from the radiation released 
from the explosion. The book handles this better  
than the film but both have this plot point.
There’s a lot of criticism to make against  
the plot and details in Battlefield Earth. 
For one thing, there should be no planets  
without background radiation, so even if 
there was a chemical that could explode  
that violently when exposed to radiation, it 
shouldn’t be naturally occurring in quantity  
on any world. That ending would have worked 
a lot better if they instead wanted uranium,  
which is even more rare than gold in our solar 
system, especially enriched uranium, and if  
someone slipped a nuclear bomb into the uranium 
mining shipments back to their vaults on their  
homeworld it would be a little more plausible that 
it might have blown up their whole planet. Uranium  
is actually a lot more abundant in Earth’s crust 
than gold too, and decays on geological timelines,  
so we might plausibly imagine aliens having 
little left on their ancient homeworld, and  
they therefore view Earth as a nice source of it.
However, my objection isn’t to them wanting gold  
rather than uranium or any other material. There 
are a number of materials that are scarce and  
valuable, and there’s nothing implausible about 
aliens willing to go to war for them. Many might  
be more valuable than gold to a technological 
civilization, or at least as valuable,  
but gold has more value than simply as jewelry 
or shiny coins. It just wouldn’t seem Earth  
would contain something unique, like those 
Infinity Stones from the MCU, natural elements  
and minerals should be fairly universal 
if not necessarily homogeneously spread.
 
Still, there’s nothing implausible 
about aliens seizing resources by force,  
or us losing that fight against some ancient 
interstellar empire, able to draw on vast  
resources and technologies. That’s the first rule 
of warfare after all: Might doesn’t make right,  
but it sure is handy for winning arguments.
Rather, my objection is to the notion that you  
would invade Earth, or any other populated planet, 
in order to harvest those materials, and that  
this would involve any need for ground warfare. 
Earth has one of the largest stockpiles of gold  
in the solar system, probably coming in sixth 
place after the Sun and the various gas giants,  
who collectively, probably have tens of thousands 
of times more of everything that Earth has,  
but even if harvesting it on solid ground is 
preferable, why would anyone come to Earth first.  
In all the arguments over whether or 
not Pluto is a planet or not, or rather,  
whether it should be counted as an equal to one 
of the 8 major planets of our solar system. People  
tend to forget that there are millions of actual 
minor planets in the solar system, not 8 or 9. 
 
When we discovered a ton of other smaller 
and distant icy dwarfs, we had to add another  
category: Dwarf Planets; and of those, Pluto is 
not the largest, and whether or not we should  
have kept things classified they way they were, 
and just added another dozen or so planets to the  
major category, or not, it doesn’t change that 
there are still a lot of minor planets, be they  
in the asteroid belt or moons or trojans or comets 
or scattered disc objects, or in the Kuiper Belt  
or Oort Cloud. And if you’ve got interplanetary 
or interstellar travel, every single one of  
them is a lot cheaper to mine than Earth is. 
So, it isn’t that Earth doesn’t have resources,  
it's that it is one the last places you would 
come to get them. It would just be so much  
easier to mine an asteroid, as opposed to hauling 
matter up through Earth’s atmosphere and enormous  
gravity well, even ignoring that most of those 
resources are deep down in our crust and mantle.  
Still, rocky inner planets will tend to 
be higher in density of heavier elements,  
as the closer to your Sun you are, the more 
likely that a lot of the hydrogen and helium,  
and even oxygen - the three most abundant elements 
in the Universe - will have been blown away.
 
Of course, another mistake the aliens of 
Battlefield Earth made - in the film at  
least - was using humans as slave labor for mining 
our remaining gold, and using a high-tech teaching  
device to dump knowledge directly into the head 
of one of those humans. This violates the First  
Rule of Warfare: Keep your secrets secret. 
Never give your enemy an all-access pass or  
library card to your vaults and technologies.
And we’ll give the book version of Battlefield  
Earth a point for having the alien invaders 
be from an empire whose chief species guard  
their core mathematics and science of 
teleportation so vigorously that they  
even have brain implants to make them homicidally 
attack anyone who inquires, in order to maintain  
their monopoly on that technology.
#3 - There’s water in them there oceans
 
Now, gold might be an iffy resource for an alien 
empire to give preeminence over all others, but it  
sure has a claim on being rare and will generally 
be more abundant in rocky inner planets than, say,  
icy comets. One material that certainly isn’t 
more common on Earth than in icy comets is ice  
and water. Earth certainly has a lot of it, and 
conveniently, it’s up on the surface for easy  
access too, compared to all those heavy 
metals in the core, it’s much easier to  
harvest. Nonetheless, the only places in our solar 
system where water is rare are The Sun, our Moon,  
Mercury, and Venus. Even Mars has a decent amount, 
and while water is probably hard to come by in the  
Inner regions of our Asteroid Belt, out past 
that, ice is incredibly common. Indeed, water,  
being composed of hydrogen and oxygen, the first 
and third most abundant elements in the Universe,  
is all over the place. Proportionally, 
Earth is actually rather low on it compared  
to most other bodies in the solar system.
So, if there’s any substance you wouldn’t  
bother invading Earth for, it’s water, yet this is 
what happens in the 2013 Film Oblivion, where the  
alien invaders are mining Earth for its oceans. 
Somewhat amusingly, they were first encountered  
near Saturn, whose famous rings are made of 
giant floating icebergs, but more importantly,  
they want the water for fusion reactors, and 
only about 10% of water is made of hydrogen,  
the easiest element for fusion, which is also one 
of the most abundant materials in the Universe and  
on the Planet of Saturn, which has many thousands 
of times more hydrogen than Earth does. It is a  
reminder though, that even fiction that messes 
up its science can still be fun to watch or read,  
and critical failures in science are common in 
even the greatest science fiction classics.
 
Indeed, we even see it with scarcity of water 
in Frank Herbert’s legendary Dune series, where,  
for some reason, a civilization with casual access 
to cheap orbital spaceflight and levitation,  
seems to be unable to supply water 
to the planet Dune and nobody seems  
to really grasp how to make water-efficient 
greenhouses or concrete-lined reservoirs. 
 
This isn’t as bad as the alien invaders of 
the 2002 film: Signs, starring Mel Gibson,  
where it turns out the aliens are as water-soluble 
as the Wicked Witch of the West from the Wizard  
of Oz. That’s another example of how films 
often lack key things that the books have,  
as in L. Frank Baum’s original novel: The Wizard 
of Oz, the Wicked Witch carries an umbrella,  
rather than a broomstick, far more indicative and 
appropriate given her hydrophobic nature. Now that  
book was written in the year 1900, long before 
we knew water was hyperabundant in the Universe,  
and it was written as a children's novel, so 
it's a lot easier to forgive the enemy being  
deadly allergic to something as common as water. 
Granted, The Wizard of Oz was never meant to be  
a tale of space travel anyway. We also see 
it in the film: Day of the Triffids, where  
carnivorous plants invade Earth but are killed 
by seawater. Though to be fair, many plants are.
 
Deciding to invade a planet that is literally 
covered in vast, deep pools of a substance that  
kills you is still a violation of the First 
Rule of Warfare: Avoid fighting battles in  
places where your enemy has a decisive advantage. 
This means you don’t invade planets that are toxic  
to you unless you have to, and even then, you 
make darned sure your troops are well-equipped  
for it. You don’t get in a fist fight with a 
fully-equipped fireman inside a burning house,  
and you don’t invade the Planet of the Lava 
People if your species has gasoline for blood.
 
You also probably don’t want to be 
keeping them for personal slaves  
either. Which takes us to our next one.
#4 - There’s value in them there humans
 
A reason sometimes given in fiction for why an 
alien armada bothers sending in grounds troops for  
us to have firefights with or air-capable vessels 
for our fighter jets to dogfight with, rather than  
just bombarding us from orbit, is that they want 
the planet intact so they can enslave humanity.  
Now, many might imagine an alien would be as 
afraid of using robots and artificial intelligence  
as we are, however, we are afraid of that because 
we think AI might rebel and kill us. It would  
seem that if an alien wanted to avoid using robots 
because they feared they might one day break their  
programming and violently rebel, then enslaving a 
naturally intelligent, rebellious, and aggressive  
species that rose to the top of its planetary 
ecosystem by being inventive and ruthless, and  
often inventively ruthless, would not be a smart 
strategy. At least the robots don’t start off  
wanting you dead and practiced at killing things.
Also, the only reason you would ever want  
intelligent slaves, as opposed to dumb automated 
factory robots, is for their inventinveness and  
adaptability, and for handling technology 
themselves, with training. Which presumably  
means your technology, which violates the first 
rule of warfare: Never hand someone a loaded gun  
unless you’re sure who they’ll point at it, and 
this is even more true if you do know who they  
will point it at and that’s you. 
We don’t want to fool ourselves,  
an interstellar civilization capable of reaching 
our planet with military force is one that could  
easily obliterate us, currently. The sorts of 
weapons that would qualify as entry-level on  
any ship able to obtain interstellar speeds for 
a large vessel and protect it from relativistic  
collisions with space debris are very potent. 
Imagine a machine gun that fired nuclear bombs.  
That’s essentially the weak end of the spectrum. 
And not for some goliath mothership that shadows  
cities below, let alone entire planets. Rather, 
we would imagine that sort of armament on  
something more modest like a lone frigate or 
destroyer, or even a non-military freighter. 
 
The dynamic shifts if, for some reason, they want 
to conquer us, because it's sort of inevitable  
you get a two-way flow of technology. Folks 
tend to wildly over-estimate how mysterious  
advanced technology is to those who don’t 
know its inner workings, even just seeing  
how a piece of technology functions will tend 
to lay an easy path to replicating it. So, some  
alien occupation force hanging around here for 
generations would likely see us mastering their  
technology before long. Defending or revolting 
forces can often do unexpectedly well, and it’s  
often because the other side is constrained with 
where and when it feels it can use overwhelming  
force. If the answer is everywhere and always, 
then there is no reason not to scorch the whole  
planet and avoid the whole invasion. They may have 
practical or ethical reasons for doing otherwise,  
and again conquest oriented doesn’t necessarily 
mean universally unethical or casually genocidal.
 
So, conquest to use humans, or some other smart 
alien critters, is a lot more likely to fail in  
the long term, compared to just nuking the planet 
till it glows, or sending in wave after wave of  
self-replicating murder bots. Alternatively, much 
dumber bots will do virtually every task you could  
need, and would represent a much smaller rebellion 
risk. And if you need talented minds, you can just  
breed and raise more of your own, though your own 
kids might be just as likely to be rebellious as  
aliens. Indeed aliens might be more cooperative 
and respectful in some cases. Heck, you can set  
up shop in orbit and start a recruiting campaign, 
why enslave people if you can just hire them.
 
Aliens may not view converting a 
civilization as all that tricky,  
they may view converting a more primitive 
civilization to be staunch allies a desirable  
goal, and they may be masters of psychology and 
brainwashing too. Of course enormous space guns  
can make a great sales pitch. That’s the First 
Rule of Warfare after all, the persuasiveness of  
your argument is directly proportional to how 
much firepower you have to argue your case.
 
The nature of interstellar travel and non-FTL 
time lags tend to ensure that any interstellar  
empire is likely to be used-to huge genetic and 
cultural divergence between its own colonies and  
might not particularly view a conquered 
alien race any differently. That’s often  
been true of human conquest, and historically, 
big empires, for all their many other failings,  
frequently are a lot more cosmopolitan. They don’t 
need to keep us around as slaves for labor, but  
they might be prone to conquering civilizations 
and absorbing them, as opposed to wiping them  
out. The invading admiral or general might be 
from a conquered world themself and yet a true  
believer in their cause. Neighbors in the long 
term can be threats, as can vassals, obviously,  
but while the latter has more reason to become an 
enemy if you mistreat them, they’re easy to keep  
an eye on and intervene early with. If you think 
you’re good rulers, a well-treated vassal might  
seem a safer bet then a sovereign neighbor.
They also might value our perspectives. It's a  
weird idea for us at the moment, but there 
probably is a real limit on technological  
progress. We are predisposed to think of science 
as some ever-expanding art with new mysteries all  
the time, but this is mostly poetic. There’s no 
real indication that the Universe has infinite  
rules, quite to the contrary, and speaking as a 
physicist, while we make new discoveries all the  
time, our understanding of the core fundamental 
physical laws haven’t changed much in nearly a  
century. It is entirely plausible that we’ll 
have finished figuring out the core physical  
laws of the Universe in another century or two 
and be hitting a point of diminishing returns  
on scientific progress within a millenia, which, 
barring faster than light/FTL travel, is about  
as soon as we could plausibly expect to reach 
any planets with other past or present native  
civilizations even under the most optimistic 
models for how often intelligent life may occur.  
It seems almost heretical to predict an end to 
new science but if there is one it’s probably  
not too far off in the future, in galactic 
timelines. Odds are good aliens have basically  
maxed out their physics and production technology 
before ever meeting another alien civilization.
 
So, you’re probably not looking for new worlds 
for new core physical science - but for biology,  
geology, psychology, and so on, there’s likely 
to be a lot of new material for those fields,  
which we’ll return to in a minute. Rather, if 
science is fairly maxed-out in your civilization,  
that strongly implies you are very skilled 
with automation and very good at generating  
power and using resources efficiently. So to your 
civilization a worker is probably someone in the  
arts and entertainment, robots do the rest 
and very well, and so that’s the workforce  
you’re seeking to enslave or convert when you 
invade an alien world. The rich hoard you want  
from them is likely to be all their literature, 
films and games, and the folks who make them,  
and that doesn’t really imply a need for 
conquest, let alone hyper-violent conquest,  
and is certainly not benefited by wiping new 
aliens out. Though it raises the question why you  
don’t just trade for those resources, given that 
you can make copies of great works, especially  
digital ones. Though a bullet is cheaper than a 
gold coin, especially given that you might not  
need to fire the bullet, just threaten to do so.
One of the key things that aliens probably would  
value about new planets is their native biology, 
intelligent or dumb, animal, vegetable, fungi,  
whatever. Probably not for cuisine though. 
As another example of awesome classic sci-fi  
that also has a very flawed premise, the 1959 
Twilight Zone episode “To Serve Man” is one of  
many stories where it turns out that aliens like 
to dine on humans. This can overlap a lot with  
the vampire genre of fiction, especially the more 
consumptive style of vampires who eat people, not  
just look pretty and drink blood without much mess 
or lethality. Or it can be more of a Matrix-style  
predation where the conquerors use humans as 
batteries. Though, the 2009 sci fi horror film:  
Daybreakers, does both, with vampires who keep 
humanity in matrix-style farms for their blood. 
 
As a genre, aliens eating humans is usually sci-fi 
horror or comedy. Peter Jackson, who gave us the  
Lord of the Rings movie adaptations, actually had 
his directorial debut in a low-budget film “Bad  
Taste” in 1987 where aliens massacre a New Zealand 
town for an intergalactic fast food company.  
It’s definitely a popular topic for sci-fi but 
realistically, this an awful reason to invade.  
Even if aliens didn’t have ethical issues eating 
intelligent critters - raising them for food is  
insanely uneconomical. You want fast-maturing 
animals for livestock, because a pig you feed  
grain to every day for half a year to slaughter 
at around 100 kilograms is going to be preferable  
to a human you have to feed dozens of times 
more food over many years for the same meat.  
That also leaves out cloning, synthetic meat, 
the whole issue of alien biocompatibility,  
and any presumption of ethics 
inside your own civilization. 
 
That’s a lot of ifs in order to achieve a 
goal that is essentially evil for evil’s own  
mustache-twirling sake. It also ignores fear of 
your neighbors attacking you for pointlessly evil  
behavior, space is big and three-dimensional, 
so, the longer you’re around and the wider you  
spread your tentacles, the more likely 
you are to encounter someone who finds  
your behavior loathsome and has the guns and 
willpower to encourage you to change your mind.  
That’s the first rule of warfare, avoid recruiting 
for the enemy. It is much easier to imagine  
civilizations hurling vast armadas across the 
galaxy, even at absurd cost, in order to wipe  
out a civilization that enjoys farming intelligent 
creatures to eat, even at absurd cost, than it is  
to imagine such a civilization actually existing. 
With that in mind, it is much easier to imagine  
that if by some quirk, a civilization found 
itself literally preying on another out of need,  
like the Wraith from Stargate Atlantis, that such 
a civilization would expend vast efforts to curing  
that need and hiding that they ever had it. For 
the ethical, it is a cause for war and invasion,  
for the unethical, it is a jugular vein 
to exploit, one they can use to drain  
you of life just as a vampire would and as 
your vampiric species does to its prey.
 
For the Wraith, or for examples like Galactus, 
Eater of Worlds, from Marvel comics, it is usually  
said or implied that there’s some quantity of life 
energy or even, if they need to eat humans only,  
that they’re eating souls. Science doesn’t seem 
to indicate those quantities are physically  
available but we don’t know, and we can’t rule 
out an alien race believing that was true,  
whether it was or wasn’t. So, similarly, we can’t 
rule out something preying on us for that. I  
don’t recall seeing anyone doing a story on it, 
but you could probably explicitly write up an  
alien AI race that was able to measure and harvest 
souls but be unable to produce them artificially,  
so they basically had to prey on civilizations 
that way to reproduce. That’s definitely something  
I’d think of more as a plot device in fiction than 
something realistic or plausible, but the Universe  
might surprise us that way, and we examined those 
concepts more in our episode: Gods & Monsters. 
 
And for that matter, the invasion of the 
Earth’s territory in the Babylon 5 Franchise  
by the ancient and powerful Minbari only came 
to a halt when they realized that they were  
killing themselves. They believe there are only 
so many souls being reborn to repopulate their  
species when one of them dies, and that 
they had seen a drop off in recent years,  
and discovered they were being reborn as 
humans and stopped the war. Stealing souls  
is scientifically based in that setting too. I 
could see that going the other way around, where  
you wipe out a world because you think they’re 
stealing your souls or maybe you’ve become so  
unnatural in your advanced technology you aren't 
born with them properly and need to harvest them  
from primitive worlds. I’d doubt it but we should 
be mindful that there may be unknown aspects  
to reality we have yet to discover that would 
seriously alter our equations for invasions.
 
A recurring theme in a lot of alien invasion 
sci-fi is that it is really just a plot device  
to have humans fighting aliens, and usually, 
they’re pretty thin on contemplation. Like  
with the Minbari, they ran into an Earth 
Scout Fleet, crippled them with scanning  
technology and appeared hostile, and when that 
scout fleet fired on them and fled, killing a  
great leader of theirs, they declared a war of 
genocide. The prequel film, In the Beginning,  
which sought to put some light on that war, really 
did the franchise disservice in my opinion. Before  
that film the war was always portrayed as an 
unfortunate but reasonable mistake by a mostly  
noble if sometimes overly proud civilization, 
which described the Minbari and humans alike,  
but the film makes it seem like the 
Minbari are vicious, unreasonable lunatics.  
Often it’s better to leave some stories 
untold as they crumble on examination. 
 
That’s maybe why we haven’t been conquered, 
there really aren’t any good reasons to do  
so. Of course, sometimes it’s on accident, like 
the original portrayal of the Earth-Minbari War.  
Orson Scott Card’s classic: Ender’s Game, and 
its various sequels and prequels, introduce us  
to an alien hive mind race that unintentionally 
invades and murders millions of humans because  
it doesn’t realize we’re individuals, as opposed 
to minor components of a hive mind. Great story,  
but it really falls apart on examination because, 
even if you accept the notion that they didn’t  
view killing humans as any bigger deal than 
trimming our hair or nails, which I should point  
out are themselves dead cells already, you don’t 
encounter obvious signs of technology - including  
spaceships and clearly visible cities with 
light and power and just start poking around,  
disassembling stuff assuming it has no value, 
or no one who values it. And you certainly don’t  
send a second follow-up invasion, like they 
did, and pretend your space fleet dueling with  
another space fleet leaves you any reason to think 
you’re not attacking another intelligent agency,  
and hurting it, and trying to take its stuff. 
And if that really is something you think is  
unethical and don’t want to do, some more planning 
and foresight is probably a good idea in your  
exploration efforts, in order to avoid engaging 
in atrocities and starting wars with people who  
now are passionately devoted to wanting you dead.
After all, that’s the first rule of warfare: Pick  
your Battles wisely. Be smart enough not to start 
stupid fights, which neither side really wants. 
 
We also have to keep in mind that while we 
think of space as dark, it isn’t. There’s no  
night in space, not many shadows, it isn’t 
easy to hide. Stealth in space is hard,  
maybe even impossible, especially for conducting 
entire wars, not just hiding one ship or missile.  
Folks who’ve been around for millions of years 
in our galaxy, which was itself billions of  
years old before our planet even formed, did not 
just find out humanity existed. Our biosignatures  
as an inhabited planet were astronomically visible 
long before humanity discovered fire, let alone  
radio waves, and signs of intelligence like fire, 
are visible from orbit and have been for a long  
time. Nobody is just showing up now, because they 
just found out we exist, unless they are new too,  
and if they are, they have every reason to suspect 
that the simple fact, both they and we exist alive  
and unconquered in such an ancient galaxy, means 
somebody else predates us both and doesn’t approve  
of conquest, as they haven’t done it themselves. 
And even if not in this galaxy, the Universe is  
a big place and eventually you are going to be 
seen acting hostile to your neighbors, and unless  
you want to gamble that there was no one else 
before you, which is really unlikely if you’ve  
got primitive neighbors close enough to want to 
conquer, then you have to assume you are being  
watched by others who both don’t approve of your 
activities and could be in a position to swing by  
to tell you so. And you really, really don’t want 
that. That’s the first rule of warfare after all,  
don’t start fights with anyone bigger than 
you, or even the same size if you can help it.
 
So the reality is, I’ve just never heard a 
convincing reason for invading an alien planet,  
and hopefully that means that there isn’t one,  
rather than us just not having thought one 
up yet. I’d hate to find out that there is  
a good one by having an alien armada 
showing up to explain it in person.
 
So it's time again for our Audible Audiobook of 
the Month and on the topic of Alien Invasions  
we have no shortage of excellent books, but 
our winner this month is “Shards of Earth”  
by Adrian Tchailovksy, the first book in 
his scifi series the Final Architecture,  
that contemplates the aftermath and mystery 
of an invasion of Earth in an action packed,  
immersive, and epic space opera setting that 
is all we come to expect from one of scifi and  
fantasy’s emerging new leaders. It’s an amazing 
space opera and Shards of Earth and all of his  
other novels are available on Audible, as are 
the other authors we mentioned today. Audible has  
thousands of audiobooks available and literally 
centuries worth of content for you to pick from,  
and more being added every day faster 
than you could listen to all of it.
 
But they don’t just have audiobooks, 
they also have many excellent podcasts,  
such as Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur, 
where we have every single episode on Youtube,  
plus several audio-only exclusives I’ve made 
over the years. That’s just some of the great  
content in the Audible Plus Catalog, which 
also has sleep & meditation tracks available,  
as well as guided fitness programs, and Audible 
Original’s like Space: 1969, a retro sci-fi comedy  
adventure that has to be heard to be believed.
The whole Audible Plus Catalog full of free books  
and other content, comes as a bonus when you 
join Audible, in addition to your usual 1 free  
audiobook each month and big member discounts on 
additional ones, and as always, new members can  
try Audible for free for the first month, just go 
to Audible.com/isaac, or text isaac to 500-500.
 
So we were talking about possible doomsday 
technologies in our regular Thursday episode  
The Fermi Paradox: Technological Timebombs, 
and one example of that would be a technology  
that literally wipes your civilization out 
backwards in time, and we will be exploring  
that and other dangerous and weaponized uses of 
Time Travel in this week’s episode, and how those  
function inside of various temporal models like 
alternate timelines. The week after that we’ll  
ask what humanity’s first space settlement will be 
like, and where it will be: in orbit, on the Moon  
or Mars or somewhere else. Then we’ll close the 
month out with our Livestream Q&A on Sunday August  
28th at 4pm Eastern time, where we take your 
questions from the chat and answer them live. 
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social  
media forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!I
