This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
They say a journey of a thousand miles starts
with a single step.
But a journey of a billion miles, according
to the National Space Society,
will require 31 steps.
So today we are continuing our look at becoming
an interplanetary species.
We’re using the National Space Society’s
Roadmap to Space Settlement as a loose guide,
and I’ve linked the complete document in
the episode description.
In part one we took a look at the first steps
on the Roadmap, developing some spaced based
resources and commerce, lowering launch costs,
and establishing a permanent foothold in orbit.
Today we’ll discuss Part 2 of the Roadmap,
Utilization and Development of Cislunar Space,
though we’ll not hold to it too rigidly.
Some of these milestones are projects we’ve
looked at before, so I’ll mention and link
those episodes as we go if you want to dive
in a bit deeper.
Cislunar Space means between the Earth and
the Moon, but I frequently use it to refer
to Earth’s entire Hill Sphere.
This is the volume that Earth gravitationally
dominates, which is about 3 million kilometers
wide.
It is the region in which objects could stably
orbit Earth and includes all Earth’s Lagrange
points with the Moon and also Earth’s L-1
and L-2 Lagrange points with the Sun, and
we’ll discuss what those are very shortly.
Essentially all the space that moves with
Earth and is reasonably close to Earth, the
places where we’ll develop the space infrastructure
that needs to be in the vicinity of Earth.
That is an immense volume, over ten million
times the volume of Earth.
It is of course mostly empty space, at least
for now, but it is valuable space.
Essentially, this episode and Part 2 of the
Roadmap are about establishing permanent inhabited
development in the space around Earth, as
a preliminary to Part 3, establishing that
same sort of presence on the Moon.
Though we’ll also contemplate the further
development of the Cislunar region after the
Moon has been settled.
You might ask why this is all so inextricably
linked to the Moon, and the reason is it’s
where we need to source our materials for
heavier cislunar colonization.
Indeed, as we will see today, and looked at
in Industrializing the Moon and Battle for
the Moon, it’s not just the Moon and a few
space stations we want to colonize.
A future interplanetary humanity will see
a trillion habitats and space farms and power
collectors dwarfing the Earth and Moon in
prominence and population, a massive cislunar
constellation of which the Earth and the Moon
are just the brightest stars.
And it's from the rocks and dust of the Moon
that we can build that Cislunar Empire, including
our staging points to other planets.
I should mention that there is always something
of a chicken-and-egg situation when you’re
planning infrastructure.
You need some basic infrastructure in place,
in order to get to the resources, out of which
you’ll build more serious higher-capacity
infrastructure.
That’s true whether you’re building roads
to mines in Ancient Sumer or building the
equivalent of roads to mines on other moons
and planets.
So it might seem sometimes like this roadmap
is going back and forth, back and forth.
But we need to get material from the Moon
to build the space infrastructure that will
let us get even more material from the Moon
so we can venture even farther outward, and
so on.
And that is what the NSS roadmap is laying
out.
To start, we have to industrialize cislunar
space though, and that brings us to NSS Milestone
13, our first milestone for today, the Use
of Space Technology and Resource on and for
Earth.
Right now our presence in space is mostly
about science and curiosity, though we do
have some of the space based economy and utilization
we looked at in previous episodes.
But to create our space-based civilization,
we need to first use space resources to benefit
ours.
Only in this way are we likely to see the
funds and drive to really hit space in a big
way.
Early forms of this include satellites for
communication and weather monitoring, not
to mention other remote detection for everything
from military surveillance to tracking agriculture,
finding mineral deposits and archaeological
spots, and possibly better earthquake detection.
We also have the biology and medicine sides
of things.
Living in space requires skill at recycling,
which can obviously benefit us here at home,
and it requires advances in understanding
ecology to maintain small biomes in future
space stations, also benefiting us here, but
it could open us up for all sorts of biomedical
micro-gravity improvements and breakthroughs
too.
There is also a lot of industry which can
work better in micro-gravity or even only
work in micro-gravity and we detailed those
in our Episode “Kickstarting Space Industry”.
We also have space-based solar power, both
power transmission and orbital mirrors, which
we will return to in a bit.
Key notion, while we are looking up into space
for our future, that future relies on us looking
down from space to Earth, making that space
development useful to Earth.
Before we proceed with the NSS roadmap, let’s
take a look at the physical map of Cislunar
space and where we’ll be building the key
pieces of infrastructure.
Working our way upward and outward, first
we have Earth’s own primary orbital Zones,
Low, Medium, Geosynchronous, and High.
Low Earth orbit is where we currently do most
of our efforts in space and is anywhere from
a couple hundred to a couple thousand kilometers
above Earth.
It is essentially inside Earth’s atmosphere
but just high enough that the air is too thin
to create a lot of drag.
Medium orbit is a vastly larger space, everywhere
from a couple thousand kilometers to 36,000
kilometers up, an ideal place for large space
based enterprises as it is close to Earth
but not in the cluttered low orbit region.
Geosynchronous is the narrow spot between
Medium and High Orbits where objects orbit
Earth at the same speed the planet spins,
so is of great interest to anyone who needs
to watch over or communicate with a particular
spot on the ground..
And High Orbit is everything beyond that.
If you go high enough in orbit, you begin
to interact more with the gravity of the Moon.
Some other important places to develop and
utilize in CisLunar space colonization are
the Earth-Moon Lagrange points.
Any pair of planetary-sized bodies orbiting
each other--which really means orbiting around
their mutual center of mass--set up five points
labeled L1 through L5 where the gravity and
centrifugal force on an object orbiting along
in time with the two bodies will be balanced.
It’s not as stable as an object in orbit
around a single body, but you can park something
there—like a waystation, habitat, factory,
or relay satellite—and keep it there.
The Earth-Moon L1 point is between the two
bodies, about 5/6 of the way to the Moon.
This Lagrange point is unstable, meaning something
could orbit on exactly that spot indefinitely,
but any tiny deviation from the orbit will
increase exponentially with time.
And it’s fairly easy to see why this point
is unstable.
The Earth’s gravity, Moon’s gravity, and
centrifugal force balance out there, but clearly
if you drift slightly closer to the Moon,
the Moon’s gravity will now be slightly
stronger while the Earth’s is weaker, so
you’ll be pulled even closer to the Moon.
So a satellite parked there would have to
perform what’s called orbital station-keeping,
monitoring and periodically adjusting its
position with thrusters.
But this actually takes very little fuel if
it’s done precisely and when you’ve only
drifted a short distance.
And this same instability makes L1 the ideal
place for a transit station for personnel
and cargo, where transferring into Earth orbit
or into lunar orbit is so easy, requiring
so little change in velocity, that you have
to be careful you don’t do it accidentally.
The Earth-Moon L2 point is about 1/6 of the
way out past the Moon.
This will be an important place for relay
stations communicating with the far side of
the Moon, which never faces Earth.
And in fact, the Chinese Lunar Exploration
Program currently has a relay satellite up
there, not directly on the L2 point but in
what’s called a “halo” orbit around
it, in a plane perpendicular to the Earth-Moon
axis, which gives the relay satellite unobstructed
continuous line-of-sight to Earth and to the
landing site of their lunar rovers so the
signal is never interrupted.
Someday, L2 satellites will provide the same
service to far side colonies.
We might imagine that in the future, a populated,
developed Moon would want satellites that
remain over a certain spot just like the geo-stationary
satellites orbiting Earth.
But unfortunately, such a luna-stationary
satellite would orbit so far from the Moon
(1/4 of the way back to Earth) that the Earth
would just capture it.
So the L1 and L2 points and the manageably
unstable orbits around them will also be crucial
infrastructure points as the only place to
put luna-stationary satellites.
The Earth-Moon L3 point is perhaps not so
interesting, because something parked there
is really just orbiting the Earth at lunar
distance but on the opposite side of Earth
from the Moon, and the Moon is so far away
it barely affects the orbit at all.
The L4 and L5 points each from equilateral
triangles with the two orbiting bodies, and
they are different from the others in that
they are stable, as long as the larger body
in the two-body system is at least 25 times
more massive than the smaller, which is the
case by a wide margin for the Earth-Moon system,
Earth being 81 times as massive, and easily
applies to the Earth-Sun system since the
Earth is only 3 millionths as massive as the
Sun.
This stability means that satellites can simply
be parked there and not drift away—in fact
rocks and dust tend to naturally accumulate
at L4 and L5, and these are often called Trojan
Points as we found large groups of asteroids
at Jupiter’s L4 and L5 points with the Sun
and named them after characters from the Trojan
War.
Earth’s own L4 and L5 points might one day
be convenient places to live far enough away
from the Earth and Moon to have your privacy
but still close enough to visit or get supplies.
There was in fact an L5 Society founded in
1975 that advocated building an O’Neill
cylinder habitat at the Earth-Moon L5 point.
But in 1987 the L5 Society merged with the
National Space Institute to form the National
Space Society.
And incidentally, that’s why it felt appropriate
to explain Lagrange Points at such length
in the course of discussing the NSS Roadmap,
because it hints at how important Lagrange
Points are to the folks with the most active
interest in colonizing space.
But the Earth is also part of the Sun-Earth
two-body system, which has its own five Lagrange
points.
The two of greatest interest to near-Earth
infrastructure will be the two closest to
Earth, L1 and L2, which are both about 1.5
million km or .01 AU from Earth, four times
farther than the Moon, respectively in the
sunward and anti-sunward directions.
And both are already homes to important space
science missions.
L1 is also an ideal place to put things like
solar shades to cut down on infrared light
hitting Earth or just power production, as
things like solar panels, mirrors, or shades
are thin and thus all can be used as minor
solar sails to help with stationkeeping around
the L1, and this solar pressure allows the
shades to get closer to the sun, increasing
their effectiveness.
Thin solar shades with radiant pressure on
them from the Sun are not limited to the orbits
stable for large dense bodies, and thus can
be placed in atypical orbits such as the statite,
which can hang directly over the Sun, or the
Laggite, which can orbit at periods slower
than their distance from the sun would normally
indicate.
For this reason a solar shade at the L1 point
is not actually at the L1 point, as its point
of stability would be closer to the sun than
L1, depending on its thickness.
The L1 and L2 points also mark the edge of
Earth’s Hill Sphere.
Three solar physics missions have been orbiting
the Sun-Earth L1 since the early 2000’s,
the Advanced Composition Explorer (ACE), Solar
Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), and the Global
Geoscience WIND satellite.
The Deep Space Climate Observatory joined
them in 2015, to serve as an Earth early warning
system for coronal mass ejections and further
study of space-weather.
Coronal mass ejections are a potential hazard
to space infrastructure and they are not the
only space-based damage we have to worry about
either.
One critical issue for developing Cislunar
space is all the space junk that accumulates
there, especially if you’re building it
up in a big way.
While actually safer from asteroids than Earth
is, since space stations can easily move aside
to avoid being hit, things in cislunar orbits
are not protected from the far more numerous
but tiny objects that our atmosphere burns
up, protecting us and to a lesser degree objects
in low Earth orbits.
The Sun-Earth L2 point is a fine place for
space-based observatories and is the future
home of the long-awaited James Webb Space
telescope.
The Earth doesn’t fully shade L2 from the
sun, because at that distance the Earth is
actually slightly smaller than the sun, but
having the Earth and Sun always close together
and in the same direction make shielding experiments
much easier.
A simple large reflective sunshade will allow
a telescope to cool to around 50 Kelvin, which
is especially helpful for infrared astronomy
and observing the faint, ultra-cold cosmic
microwave background radiation.
Now as you start getting more and more objects
up in space you need to be able to move people
and cargo between them, not just back and
forth to Earth, and this is where Milestone
14 comes in, an Integrated Cislunar Space
Transportation and Logistics System, one able
to move folks between all those orbital zones
and Lagrange points we mentioned.
That takes fuel and is where we again turn
our eyes toward the Moon.
It actually takes far less fuel to get off
the Moon’s surface and back to Low Earth
Orbit than to get from Earth to low orbit,
even though the distance is a thousand times
farther.
It can seem counterintuitive, but remember,
it’s accelerating and lifting mass out of
a gravity well that consumes fuel.
Coasting vast distances is free.
And the Moon’s gravity well is much shallower
than Earth’s.
The payload of a rocket coming from Earth
is usually less than 1/20th of the mass of
the fuel to get that rocket to low orbit,
meaning for every liter of fuel you send to
a fuel depot in low orbit, you’ll burn at
least 20 liters getting there.
But coming from the Moon’s surface only
takes about as much fuel as payload.
Needless to say, it makes producing spaceship
fuel on the Moon as opposed to Earth very
attractive.
And while we’re talking about fuel I’d
be remiss if I didn’t mention that travel
around Cislunar Space isn’t limited to using
rockets, even without getting into some of
the launch-focused megastructures like orbital
rings we discuss in the Upward Bound series.
Once you are out of an atmosphere, everything
about motion is about Newton’s 3 Laws and
the conservation of momentum, for one thing
to move in one direction, something else has
to move in another.
In terms of rockets that counter push is provided
by trillions of high speed particles in the
rocket flame but you can use any mass.
You can kick off the side of a space station
in a spacesuit, and it lacks the gravity to
pull you back, especially as it moves backward
with the same momentum, mass times velocity.
Much larger space stations won’t move much
from such an exchange.
Kalpana One, the beautiful mid-sized habitat
whose animation by my friend Bryan Versteeg
of Spacehabs.com we so often show here, is
usually estimated to mass on an order of 10
megatons, or about 10 billion kilograms – which
would cost something on an order of the entire
US annual GDP to get up into space with current
launch costs, for all that its only around
a billion dollars worth of steel.
Being so heavy, we can launch ships from it
with mass drives or other types of space catapults
without moving it much, and regenerate its
momentum over time with other techniques than
classic chemical rockets, like ion drives
or electromagnetic tethering or even radiation
pressure from light.
Kalpana, incidentally, is a great example
of Milestone 16, the Development of the First
Equatorial Low-Earth Orbit Settlement.
The International Space Station can’t really
be called a settlement, no matter how large
it grows, because it doesn’t have its own
gravity for long-term habitation.
Sure you can spend a year or so at the ISS
in microgravity, with all the problems that
entails, but to truly be a settlement it should
allow continuous occupation, or at least long-term
residency without significant deleterious
effects.
The case could also be made that a settlement
should be somewhat self-sufficient.
This means a rotating station with artificial
gravity and some kind of biosphere and crops,
recycling systems, and presumably an economy
or at least a long-term business case.
Staying in low Earth orbit means shielding
can be minimal by relying on Earth’s magnetic
field for protection.
This significantly reduces the mass required
for construction while we’re still learning
to build space habitats.
Most of the station’s advanced construction
material would be launched from Earth with
on-orbit robotic and telepresence assembly.
Construction of the settlement will take years
and the first long-term residents will be
construction workers, engineers, and robot
operators and maintenance personnel.
For a small sense of the project, imagine
not just building houses on land, but rather
building those houses on a suspension bridge
you must design and construct first, in Antarctica.
The first permanent residents won’t move
in, or even start packing, until the entire
infrastructure construction is complete, inspected,
tested, and all contingency and safety systems
are operational.
During construction raw, bulkier materials,
such as oxygen, water, components for engineered
soil, materials for concrete or other on-site
fabrication, such as 3D printing stock, raw
metals, etc, can be launched from early lunar
mining operations.
Lunar materials will likely end up representing
a large portion of the station’s finished
mass and so a lunar mass driver, to keep costs
down on bulk materials, would have a ready
customer.
Catching all that lunar mass at your station,
though, will require significant stationkeeping
efforts, you may end up using some of those
lunar bulk materials, presumably waste, in
a cheap mass driver Reaction Engine to balance
out the momentum exchanges rather than burn
precious oxidizing fuel.
There is however, another slow but fuel-free
way to get momentum and that takes us to Milestone
17, Space Solar Power Systems.
We discussed using solar power satellites
in our episode Power Satellites to beam energy
down to Earth, and it remains my favorite
potential Kickstarter for space industry since
energy is a multi-trillion dollar sector of
the global economy, and you can see that episode
for the details of the economics and engineering
and safety of power-beaming, but it is easy
to forget its utility in space too.
Obviously a solar panel on a space station
can run your electricity, and that can be
handy for things like ion drives, which are
very slow but ultra-efficient engines, spitting
out electromagnetically accelerated ions far
faster than a rocket flame does and thus giving
you more momentum for less mass used.
But light itself has momentum, albeit it not
a lot.
A square kilometer of solar panels or sail
or mirrors provides a mere 8 newtons of thrust
this far out from the Sun, or about a quarter
of a billion kilogram meters per second of
momentum a year.
This is not a lot, enough to let you chuck
a single 100 ton spacecraft 2.5 kilometers
per second once a year, but it’s basically
free for the cost of maybe one ton of solar
sail or mirror, as we can make those very
thin and light, and can be used in tandem
with power generation without too much loss
of power or momentum.
Needless to say you would need a lot more
than one ton of chemical rocket fuel to push
a ship up to 2.5 kilometers per second.
That station masses around 10 million tons
so giving it 10,000 tons of sail, or a 100
by 100 kilometer square, costs only 0.1% more
mass but offers 10,000 such shuttle launches
per year, not 1.
You can also just be using it for power generation
and running a slow ion drive, which again
uses fuel but vastly more efficiently than
a rocket does, so you might electromagnetically
catapult ships around orbital space from big
space stations and run the stations on ion
drive to slowly but efficiently recover the
momentum.
Or simply by that radiant pressure of light.
Again Solar sails and mirrors are dirt cheap,
especially if the dirt you’re sourcing them
from is Lunar Regolith, and if you have a
large collection of mirrors and power-beaming
stations up there for use on Earth, diverting
some of that energy to things like pushing
spaceships or blasting space debris is a handy
use for surplus and you always want some surplus
generation.
We’re also not just talking power here,
a big space lens and mirror might be hundreds
of kilometers in area while weighing merely
hundred of tons and able to direct that light
into a nice diffuse spread out beam of sunlight
to places we’d like to warm up, or just
light up.
Even ignoring potentially using them for weather
control or warming arctic locales – see
the Weather Control or Colonizing the Arctic
episodes for details – being able to shine
some extra light on some crops after they
lost daylight to a storm passing by could
result in disproportionately huge gains in
agricultural output with minimal climatic
effects.
Of course shipping a hundreds tons of aluminum
foil to orbit to make a sail several kilometers
a side is hardly free, that might run you
hundreds of millions of dollars in modern
fuel costs.
A month or so back my friend Joe Scott from
Answers with Joe did a fun look at Solar Shades
for possible Climate Control and pointed that
problem out.
On the other hand, firing one out of an electromagnetic
rail gun or mass driver on the moon and letting
it unfold itself as a light sail to slow and
maneuver into the right orbit is fuel-free,
all powered by the Sun.
So we’re seeing a value in getting to the
Moon now, even without considering it for
fuel production, which is a somewhat controversial
topic as the preferred fuel from the moon
is usually finding ice and turning it into
Liquid Hydrogen and Oxygen as a rocket fuel
and that might work very well early on but
we don’t know how much ice will be there
and probably don’t want to rely on using
the precious stuff as a fuel for very long.
Especially given that water ice is so much
more common in the deeper solar system.
It is a great one for early days though, as
are some others like Aluminum, which makes
for a pretty decent rocket fuel with just
oxygen alone, and they make up the fifth and
first most abundant elements on the moon respectively.
Silicon, Iron, and Calcium come in at second,
third, and fourth with Calcium narrowly edging
out aluminum.
This is where we get to mining the moon and
specifically by doing it with robots, which
we’ll look at more next time in the Moon
episode, as Milestone 18 is using robots for
confirming Lunar Resources, and you may have
noted I skipped Milestone 15 earlier, a Robust
Space Infrastructure for Human and Robotic
Operations, though it’s essentially the
main topic for today in an overall sense,
getting not just that human space infrastructure
in place, but that robotic infrastructure
too, as so much of what we want to do in space
is greatly helped by robotics, especially
in the early days.
A little rover with a sensor package that
we could mill out by the thousands for hundreds
of bucks a piece – plus shipping and handling
which is obviously way more - and which could
be operated remotely by folks at home, is
basically ideal for scuttling around the moon
poking for concentrations of resources.
Same, a little robot with a welding torch
and fuel tank for maneuver and welding, and
an antenna is a lot easier to use than pushing
someone out of an airlock in a bulky space
suit to go patch the hull.
In most ways, robot drones are easier to use
in space and on the Moon than on Earth, and
we see how far drones have come in the last
couple decades.
But finding ore and processing it are both
pretty simple tasks.
If you’re some land crawler on the moon
with a battery engine and some solar panels,
you can scoop up some regolith and bring it
home for processing or even just do it there.
Solar Kilns work quite well when there’s
no air conducting heat or convection heat
loss off the kiln.
There’s a cost to building such a probe
and getting to the Moon – unless you can
make it there, but that comes later – and
that cost is going to be way higher than producing
metals on the Earth for the Earth initially.
However, the moment you can make a drone that
can refine aluminum or iron or oxygen off
the Moon, and cost less getting there and
doing so, than the material it’s making
would cost to ferry up from Earth, you are
now in business.
If it cost me a trillion dollars to ship a
million tons of aluminum or steel or oxygen
or water up from Earth’s surface, at thousands
of times their Earthly production cost, my
robot only needs to basically produce a few
times its own weight in those items off the
Moon, before breaking, to be turning a profit,
just because of all the launch savings.
And not just in fuel, a lot of rocketry cost
is in the rockets themselves, most of it,
and they are way easier to build when you’re
launching from a low-gravity airless rock
like the moon, assuming you aren’t using
a mass driver anyway.
Now we can probably do way better than sending
a one ton miner to the moon and getting a
few tons of fuel or metal out of it, but it's
an important paradigm to remember.
I mentioned it costing tens of trillions of
dollars to put up all the metal you’d need
to build a modest space habitat like Kalpana
in orbit, but ten megatons of steel doesn’t
cost trillions of dollars to produce on Earth,
just low billions and we do build skyscrapers
and aircraft carriers with those kind of price
tags and most of that cost isn’t the steel
in the building or ship either.
Some robot miner, whether its processing as
it goes or just scooping or dragging material
back to some facility, may still cost dozens
of times more per ton of product produced
than terrestrial operations but would still
be dirt cheap compared to launching from Earth.
If we achieve viable resource extraction from
the Moon and at less cost than supplying it
from Earth, we begin the true space boom and
the colonization of Cislunar Space in earnest.
We could launch from the Moon to Mars, a direct
stepping stone, but the moon’s real role
as a stepping stone to places like Mars and
Venus and the asteroid belt and beyond is
really as a source of raw materials and fuel.
More likely we’d launch from Earth Orbit
directly, maybe even low orbit itself or maybe
way out past the Moon at the edge of our Hill
Sphere, but fundamentally all our resources
at this point are still on Earth or very near
Earth, in that bubble up to geosynchronous
orbit that’s only a tenth of the way to
the Moon and not even a thousandth of the
way to Mars.
In truth it doesn’t matter because things
get so much easier as we develop our infrastructure.
As an example, if you’ve been mass producing
solar sails, mirrors, and power satellites
near Earth, even though a Mars-bound ship
needs a lot more energy to escape from Low
Orbit than from High Orbit, you can just be
pouring light or energy into some sail on
the back of a spaceship and getting it up
to interplanetary speeds, then let it use
conventional engines to slow down at its destination.
It will need the same slow down fuel whether
you launched from deep in Earth’s gravity
well or the very edge of it.
With a large and robust cislunar infrastructure
going to other planets is vastly cheaper and
simpler.
Indeed you could just send some of those beaming
stations and mirrors by robot to Mars to help
the ship slow down, allowing very rapid transit
that conventional rocket fuel could never
allow.
Here’s the other key thing to realize though,
for many centuries to come, even if we are
wildly successful in our space ventures beyond
Earth, likely even long after we’ve settled
our first planets under alien Suns, the majority
of folks who live in space will live closer
to Earth than the Moon is.
We may well be an interstellar empire with
a thousand colonized systems under our belt
before all the population living outside of
Cislunar space equals that of what lives in
Cislunar Space.
You could put a billion of those Kalpana Space
Habitats into Cislunar Space, or their big
brother, the O’Neill Cylinder, without putting
a scratch into the Moon’s resources or even
vaguely packing the orbital volume of Earth’s
Hill Sphere, each home to thousands of folks
living and working there who could still carry
on phone conversations with everyone in that
volume including Earth, and with addition
of bigger throughput launch mechanisms like
orbital rings and space towers, could move
back and forth to Earth for costs no different
than flying to another continent, be it people
or trade goods.
That time, when we have a fully colonized
Cislunar region, is long off of course, not
because its high tech, but because we just
lack the population to make it needful, as
we’re talking billions of stations with
thousands of people or even more, and there’s
not quite 8 billion of us yet.
As we head out to the Moon and Mars and beyond,
we’ll keep building up in Cislunar, and
likely do more and more build up there the
more we head out to worlds beyond.
More folks will live there then every other
world beyond not because we won’t be able
to get people to those places or will fail
to find volunteers, but because it will be
cheaper to live in Cislunar Space and still
so close to home.
To become an interplanetary species then may
be a task of millennium, if we define it as
when most humans do not live on or about Earth,
simply because we’ll keep growing at home
till it fills up, a quadrillion humans later.
Fundamentally though, it won’t stop expansion
and to other worlds, as once we’re up in
space in a big way, out of earth’s gravity
well, everything becomes easier for heading
out to those other worlds and becoming an
Interplanetary Species.
We talked about a lot of orbital mechanics
today, everything from the Rocket Equation
and Lagrange Points to Halo Orbits and Station
Keeping.
If you’d like to learn more about these
concepts, I’d recommend trying out Brilliant.
Brilliant is an online learning sight with
fun and interactive courses in Science, Math,
and Computer Science, and they make a great
addition to educational videos like these,
as they let you get hands-on learning and
practice with the concepts to help you truly
master them, and learn more about how our
world and our Universe work.
If you are naturally curious, want to build
your problem-solving skills, or need to develop
confidence in your analytical abilities, then
get Brilliant Premium to learn something new.
Brilliant’s interactive content helps guide
you to mastery by taking complex concepts
and breaking them up into bite-sized understandable
chunks.
You’ll also have fun while you’re doing
it.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, and want to do it at
your own pace and from the comfort of your
own home, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and try it out for free.
We talked about the threat of space debris
today to orbital infrastructure, and there’s
always the concern of a large impact on Earth
like what we think might have killed the dinosaurs,
and this weekend we have a bonus episode out
on the matter, looking at Asteroid Defense.
Then next week we’ll be taking a look at
the Future of Fission, before returning to
the Fermi Paradox series in 2 week to contemplate
the Phosphorus Problem, and the idea that
a scarcity of Phosphorus or other elements
might be the solution to the big question
of where all the aliens are.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
