This episode is brought to you by World Anvil!
 
Ancient Alchemists dreamed of turning lead into  
gold, potentially creating tons of it, massive 
riches. But here on SFIA we would say that’s lack  
ambition. Why settle for tons of gold when 
you can make whole planets out of it?
 
So today’s topic, Nuclear Transmutation, is 
continuing our informal trilogy on useful  
things you can do with nuclear explosions, that we 
began back in January with our look at the Orion  
Project – a spaceship, propelled by nuclear 
bombs – and then with Nuclear Terraforming,  
seeing how bombs could be used to make places 
like Mars or Venus, habitable to humanity. 
 
It’s weird to think of Nuclear weapons as 
useful tools, but just as anything might be  
used as a weapon, any weapon tends to be useful 
in some other fashion too. As it says in Isiah,  
“they shall beat their swords into plowshares, 
and their spears into pruning hooks” and while the  
usual post-Cold War notion is to dismantle nukes 
to use the fissile material for power generation,  
or maybe to keep some back for emergency 
use against an asteroid or alien mothership,  
the notion here is more that you might start 
mass-producing them for peaceful ends instead.
 
If you’re new to the show, welcome to SFIA; Where 
nuclear bombs get the overdue praise they deserve  
and we regularly talk about devices that 
make them look like mere firecrackers,  
and don’t forget your drink and 
snack, we’ll be here for a bit.
 
Now while we will be talking about how a 
nuclear bomb might make cool new elements,  
our main focus today is really more on the entire 
concept of nuclear transmutation, how it happens  
in nature and how we can do it artificially and 
potentially make materials rarely found in nature.  
Or for that matter, simply not found in nature 
at all, such as the Transuranic Elements,  
those elements heavier than uranium but so 
short lived, they aren’t found naturally;  
many measuring their lives in tiny fractions of 
a second. Indeed virtually all elemental isotopes  
would consider a second long lifespan 
generous compared to what they got. 
 
We will also be contemplating the topic of the 
Island of Stability, the hypothetical region of  
superheavy elements that are not short-lived, 
as well as some exotic materials like stuff  
made out strange quarks, and we will throw in some 
discussion of using black holes and neutron stars  
to forge materials, as well as building things out 
of them, proton decay, iron stars, and why iron is  
so critical in discussion of nuclear alchemy.
And that last, might be a good place to begin,  
because iron is essentially part of the problem. 
To the best of our knowledge the Universe began  
as a small hot soup that cooled into a lot of 
dark matter, of which we still understand little,  
and a little bit of stuff made of up and down 
quarks and electrons. This little bit of stuff  
is what we call regular matter and most of it 
is protons, by mass. A distant second by mass  
is neutrons, and far behind in mass but roughly 
equal to protons in number are electrons. Protons,  
like neutrons, are made of up and down quarks, 
which are only 2 of the 6 known quark types,  
and the proton’s anti-particle is strangely rare, 
as is the positron; the electron’s antiparticle.  
The two bigger cousins of the electron, 
the muon and Tau particle, are also  
pretty rare and their anti-particles too. 
So most of the original universe was dark matter,  
and we are pretty sure dark matter is not made 
of those other types of quarks incidentally,  
though it has been considered and can’t yet be 
ruled out either. While most of the universe was  
dark matter, a decent bit of it was protons, and 
much of those paired up with electrons to form  
basic hydrogen, with a decent bit more pairing 
with one neutron and electron to form deuterium  
or two protons, two neutrons, and two 
electrons to form helium. And a lot is  
ionized and floating around, occasionally getting 
an electron partner and losing it again. This,  
plus dark matter made up very nearly 
everything in the universe when it began,  
and this is mostly still the case but the 
misconception is that a lot of stars formed,  
burned out, went supernova, and gave 
us everything heavier than helium.
 
This is not really true though. First, most 
of the stars that have ever formed since the  
Universe began are still alive and kicking. Only 
bigger ones have died thus far, and even then  
most of the dead stars weren’t big enough to go 
supernova, they’re just larger than our own Sun,  
which is bigger than 95% of other stars itself. 
The bigger the star the shorter the lifespan.  
Of those stars that died and didn’t go supernova, 
most just turned into red giants then blew a lot  
of their outer layers off, which included 
some elements besides hydrogen and helium,  
then contracted into white dwarfs. Sometimes 
these semi-dead stars absorb a fresh intake of  
new hydrogen, often acquired from a binary 
neighbor, and turn into a Nova, which also  
releases some interesting new elements.
Very occasionally this kind of explosion will  
be very big, a Type 1a Supernova, and unlike Type 
II – the giant exploding stars – these Supernovae  
produce a very tight range of energy when they 
happen and thus make really good distance markers  
for other galaxies, by comparing how bright we 
perceive it to be, to how bright it would be  
expected to be at its origin and calculating the 
distance, like if you knew a candle flame seen at  
a distance was a certain brightness, and thus you 
could tell how far away it was. Hence why we call  
Type 1a Supernova Standard Candles for measuring 
distances to ancient galaxies far, far away.
 
A big chunk of the iron in our Universe comes from 
these old white dwarfs reigniting and exploding,  
as do many other materials. Additionally, after 
a supernova you get a neutron star left behind,  
usually, a very hot and fast spinning one we call 
a pulsar. Very rarely you will get a black hole  
formed from this, and in both cases these Type 
II supernovae produce a ton of stuff heavier than  
helium; but often these big stars are binaries too 
and either they eat their neighbor and explode,  
or their neighbor dies and becomes a 
remnant white dwarf or neutron star too.  
They can also collide, and those explosions also 
produce a lot of the elements we have and indeed  
most of what we have that’s heavier than iron.
Iron, Iron, Iron… what’s the big deal here?  
Well the simple answer is that fusion in stars is 
always about trying to cram ever-more protons and  
neutrons into a single nucleus, as those require 
less energy – or glue – to hold them together  
per particle, and the more it takes to tear it 
apart. Protons and neutrons are collectively  
called nucleons and initially the more of them you 
pack into a nuclei the more stable it is with less  
energy binding it together. Energy which can be 
released outside the nuclei as heat, what drives  
stars to be hot and radiant and what we hope will 
one day power fusion reactors here on Earth.
 
However, once you get to about 50 to 70 nucleons, 
stability peaks out and generally starts to drop  
as you add more. Now there are many combinations 
of protons and neutrons in this range,  
some of which are not even vaguely stable, like 
Iron-50, which like all iron atoms, has 26 protons  
but only 24 neutrons in this case, for a total 
of 50, and it only lasts an eyeblink, literally,  
it has a half-life of just 150 milliseconds. 
This is still longer than most possible isotopes,  
which are so hard to make and short lived once 
made that we don’t have them all catalogued. 
 
An important term when discussing this subject 
is “isotope”. It simply means a specific number  
of protons and neutrons for a given element. 
For example, I just mentioned iron-50. Fifty  
is the number of nucleons, and the “iron” part 
tells you that 26 of those nucleons are protons,  
as it’s the 26th element on the periodic 
table, and the remaining 24 nucleons are  
the number of neutrons in that isotope. 
Now that 150-millisecond half-life I mentioned  
is actually fairly long-lived compared 
to many isotopes we’ll discuss today,  
and as mentioned is longer than many of the 
possible combinations of protons and neutrons  
that would add up to 50-70, but the most stable 
one with 26 protons is Iron-56, which is about  
92% of all iron we find in our ore samples.
Nickel-62, which is actually rather rare,  
has the highest binding energy 
per nucleon of any known nuclide,  
just a little higher than Iron-56, but just 
doesn’t form as much in these stellar engines.
 
As a result, Iron-56 and other elements 
with very high binding energies per nucleon  
are basically an end state for fusion, they 
poison the process because any further fusion  
would require more energy in than out, and that’s 
what causes that explosion, or rather implosion.  
No fusion occurring anymore in a stellar core 
results in a rapid collapse of that core,  
followed by a detonation.
Now during that explosion we have  
astronomical amounts of energy released, and some 
of it gets absorbed by elements in that explosion.  
It doesn’t matter if these absorptions are 
net positive energy states. Think of a wave  
hitting a sea wall. In the impact, some water 
will be given enough energy to send it much  
higher than the crest of the wave even when 
most of the water remains below crest height.  
Folks on the other side of the wall get splashed. 
And this is how the heavier elements are created,  
ones that don’t provide an energy advantage 
when fusing. As a result they are generally  
created far less frequently in the Universe 
than those on the smaller side of iron.
 
The thing is, the heavier those atoms are, the 
more nucleons per atom. Once we get past this  
stable-plateau of Iron-56 and a few cousins, the 
more unstable those atoms tend to be, such that  
nothing heavier than Uranium-238 sticks around 
for very long in stellar and galactic terms,  
and there are precious few combinations of protons 
and neutrons between Iron and Uranium that stay  
stable for long either, usually only a few for 
each element, or specific number of protons,  
even though there’s dozens of possible numbers 
of neutrons any given number of protons might be  
shoved together with. This is called the Valley of 
Stability and it’s a slightly upward curving river  
on a map of protons versus neutrons in an atom. 
That river is an increasingly wide and bumpy one  
though, full of lots of boulders of instability. 
Generally, the more nucleons you try to cram  
together, the more of them need to be 
neutrons too. For instance, most of the  
oxygen we breathe is 8 protons and 8 neutrons, 
but oxygen with 9 or 10 neutrons is stable too,  
if rare; Oxygen-17 and Oxygen-18. Similarly most 
of the carbon in us is 6 protons and 6 neutrons,  
Carbon-12, but Carbon-14, 6 protons and 8 
neutrons, is not stable but lasts thousands  
of years, making it great for dating objects by 
measuring the decay of Carbon-14 in them, as its  
created by events in our atmosphere. Stars are 
not the only places where atomic alchemy occurs.
 
Down in this range you can have semi-stable 
isotopes with fewer neutrons than protons too,  
Carbon-11 has a half-life of 20 
minutes, Nitrogen-13 is 10 minutes,  
Oxygen-15 is about 2 minutes, and 
Helium-3, two protons and one neutron,  
is stable; as is a single-proton hydrogen. 
Calcium-40 is the last known stable isotope  
with an equal number of protons and neutrons, 
at 20 protons and neutrons, and it has  
26 known isotopes, ranging from Calcium-35 with 
a half-life of 26 milliseconds to Calcium-60,  
and 5 of those, Calcium-40, 42, 43, 44, and 46 are 
thought to be stable, with Calcium-41, 45, and 47  
having half-lives of days or years, and everything 
else in minutes or fractions of seconds.
 
After Calcium, nothing is stable without more 
neutrons than protons, and by the time you get  
up to Uranium-238; the most stable Uranium atom, 
and the last we think of as naturally occurring,  
we have 90 protons and 148 neutrons, 64% more 
neutrons than protons. Though Plutonium-244, with  
94 protons and fully 150 neutrons, probably should 
count as natural, as it does have a half-life of  
81 million years and it can be found in nature on 
Earth, albeit in trace amounts. We traditionally  
refer to every element bigger than Uranium as 
Transuranic and consider that synonymous with  
artificial elements usually only found in a lab 
but some argue we should be saying Transplutonian,  
and I recall someone saying that Pluto, lord 
of the underworld, was doubly snubbed for this  
and having his namesake-planet demoted. In any 
event there’s 80 elements with some known stable  
nuclide, a few with more than one for a total 
of 252 nuclides that are not known to decay. 
 
Tin, incidentally, has the most: 10 stable 
nuclides, and 26 of those 80 only have 1 stable  
nuclide, being called monoisotopic. Technetium, 
43 protons, and promethium, 61 protons,  
are the only stable elements until you get up 
to lead, 82 protons, with no stable isotopes,  
and Lead-208 is the last known stable isotope. 
There are also just under a thousand known  
isotopes that are at least meta-stable; defined 
as a half-life of more than an hour, and some like  
Uranium-238 last billions of years. Emphasis on 
known because there’s many combinations that might  
exist and just don’t get made much in nature. 
We tend to assume, with some justification,  
that stuff which is most stable not only 
persists longest but tends to be synthesized  
easiest, but that may only be a loose trend and 
again Nickel-62 is more stable than Iron-56,  
and everything else, but way less common. 
Incidentally you will hear the terms nuclide  
and an isotope used pretty interchangeably, but 
isotope is always talking about the same element,  
same number of protons but varying neutrons, 
Uranium-238 and Uranium-235 for instance,  
whereas while those are nuclides too, 
Neptunium-238 or Protactinium-235  
would be other nuclides. More unstable versions of 
either are called radionuclides or radioisotopes  
as they emit radiation when decaying and 
are pretty critical to nuclear energy.
 
This is also where the notion of the Island of 
Stability comes in because while we have made  
atoms in a lab all the way up to 118 protons – an 
atomic number of 118, there’s some reason to think  
that Valley of Stability that ends at the big 
Lead dam might see itself remerge down the line.  
Incidentally that Atomic number element 118 
– called Oganesson after the physicist who  
helped discover it, with 294 nucleons in it, was 
first synthesized in 2002 and only five or six  
atoms of it have ever been made, and it has a 
half-life of about a millisecond. It itself has  
no particularly interesting properties of those 
we have been able to observe or estimate thus  
far, it's not super strong or thought to be a 
superconductor or ultra-awesome spaceship fuel. 
 
The Island of Stability is a notion that’s been 
kicked around for about a century now; practically  
since we figured out what protons and neutrons 
were, and that atoms had nuclei, and we didn’t  
have anything but uranium and before we even 
successfully synthesized the first transuranic  
elements in the 1940s. So the concept has 
undergone a lot of variations and speculations,  
scientific and science fiction, from fairly hard 
scifi to comic book soft to the point of being  
as handwavey as magic, what we usually call 
Clarketech, if we discuss it seriously at all;  
technologies so advanced they’re indistinguishable 
from magic. It probably doesn’t help that most of  
it revolves around what are called Magic Numbers, 
the number of nucleons needed to completely fill  
a given shell as you make a nucleus bigger. Those 
are 2, 8, 20, 28, 50, 82, and 126, with 184 being  
the next predicted one, at the time, but 126 was 
later re-predicted as maybe being 114 instead, in  
the 1960s, by the same two physicists who appear 
to have coined the term “Island of Stability”. 
 
Anyway, for protons, those magic numbers 
would correspond to helium at 2, oxygen at 8,  
calcium at 20, nickel at 28, tin at 50, and lead 
at 82. I’ve mentioned all those thus far today  
as being significant, helium and oxygen for 
instance, are the two most abundant elements after  
hydrogen itself, calcium, the last stable one, 
with equal protons and neutrons, Nickel-62 has the  
highest binding energy per nucleon of any known 
nuclide, tin has the most stable isotopes at 10,  
and lead is the last known stable element. So the 
assumption was that anything that has that next  
magic number in protons, be it 126 or 114, might 
be stable, or less unstable than their neighbors,  
and the same for one with 184 protons.  
Now we also have the notion of doubly magic atoms,  
which are those who have what is termed a magic 
number of protons and also of neutrons, Helium-4,  
Oxygen-16 and Calcium-40 would both be 
examples of that, having 2 or 8 or 20 of each,  
but calcium-48, 20 protons and 28 neutrons, also 
would count and is indeed stable, or very nearly,  
with a currently estimated lifetime of nearly 
a billion times the age of the Universe,  
which is pretty impressive for such 
an imbalance of neutrons to protons  
so low in atomic number, 29 to 20. 
Lead-208 is also a doubly magic number,  
82 protons and 126 neutrons and again 
lead is the heaviest known stable element  
and Lead-208 its heaviest of 4 stable isotopes, 
making it the heaviest known stable isotope.  
That said, a few of the other doubly magic 
nuclides have half-lives of less than a second  
and we can make element 114 now, albeit not 126, 
and haven’t observed any special stability to it.  
154 is another popular possible magic number 
that might offer an island of stability  
and folks sometimes suggest we might have a 
whole continent of stability above 300 nucleons,  
and we are up to 294 these days so we might get 
to see that tested sooner rather than later. 
 
I don’t want to dip any further into 
why these are thought to be stable,  
it's not just numerology though, there 
are various models that hint at it,  
but there’s no special reason to think they would 
have awesome properties if we did make them.  
No reason not to either, odds are good any 
stable element is going to have some handy uses,  
though mass-producing them would generally 
be necessary, trillions of trillions of  
atoms of them, not one or two. We’ll 
get to methods for doing that shortly.
 
Now as a reminder, things don’t magically die 
after their half-life, it’s the time in which  
a sample of them will have half-decayed into 
something else, and if you came back after  
twice that time it would cut in half again, rather 
than all being gone. Whether by decay or by being  
hit by something, like a neutron, many 
nuclei then become some other nuclide,  
many of which are not stable either, indeed 
often not as stable as what they decayed from,  
things upon the higher sides of that 
valley of stability, waiting to roll down.
 
This is essentially how we get energy from nuclear 
fission or radioisotope generators, by instigating  
such a change via fission or waiting for a passive 
decay. Stuff can happen real quick at this scale  
though and sometimes these decay products can 
cause other decays in a chain reaction and that’s  
a nuclear fission bomb. One of our problems with 
whacking things with neutrons or alpha particles  
or so on is that we really can’t do a lot of 
this, we absolutely can make gold by bombarding  
the next lowest element with neutrons, it’s just 
that next lowest atom happens to be platinum  
and the process of that particular bit of alchemy 
is way more expensive than either is worth,  
at the moment anyway. The next biggest atom after 
gold is Mercury, which is in second place to tin  
for having the most number of stable isotopes 
whereas gold only has the one; Gold-197. 
 
Platinum has 5 stable isotopes itself, one being 
platinum-196, which if you add a neutron to  
become Platinum-197 which beta decays into 
Gold-197 after about a day. So not hard to  
do with a neutron source, and Platinum-196 is 
about a quarter of natural platinum isotopes,  
but platinum is generally about as valuable 
as gold so it’s not seen as really useful,  
like turning lead into gold would be, especially 
as neutrons are a pain to generate and aim.
 
A Neutron Bomb – a fusion bomb set off 
in space basically, wrapped in a wide  
thin shell of Platinum-196, big enough not to be 
ripped apart by the fusion device, would produce  
a lot of gold. And I should point out that 
Gold doesn’t come principally from supernovae,  
rather the current theory is that we get it from 
neutron star collisions, which are hardly super  
common, and of course, neither is gold. It is 
possible to make Gold from Lead, or even Bismuth,  
which is both naturally occurring and a decay 
product of the Thorium-Uranium Fuel Cycle.  
Usually though, this is where someone points 
out that it would just never be profitable  
because of how much energy it takes.
This of course is why nuclear bombs  
are potentially useful because they 
are fast cheap energy and neutrons.  
Regardless, the problem with discussing nuclear 
transmutation, be it by nuke or supercollider,  
is that it is assuming you are short 
on energy. Which is fair as our own  
civilization is definitely energy poor and raw 
materials rich. In a genuine nuclear economy,  
especially a fusion one, or a quasi-fusion 
one like space-based solar power dialed up  
onto the Kardashev Scale, this completely 
breaks down. I want a pound of material and  
I need to pay 1% of its mass energy, E=mc², 
to transmute it from something more abundant.  
That seems absurd in modern context because a one 
kilogram conversion would be running us about a  
quadrillion joules of energy, a petajoule, about 
16 Hiroshima A-Bombs worth of energy release,  
or enough fuel to fill up 160 Boeing 747s. 
Roughly 20 Million dollars in Jet Fuel
 
However, it is also the amount of energy incident 
on a square solar panel 150 meters or 500 feet on  
a side up in space above our atmosphere over 
the course of just one year. Which mind you,  
could just be a shiny sheet of aluminum foil 
that big, bouncing that light into a more compact  
power converter, and now we’re talking about 
a few thousand dollars worth of aluminum foil  
able to convert a kilogram a year of something, 
and looking at the spot price for gold today,  
it’s $57,000 a kilogram. And of course the other 
thing about Aluminum – a material ridiculously  
abundant on Earth, the Moon, and many other places 
– is that almost all its cost is electricity or  
energy for separating it from ore. Making 
it even cheaper in an energy rich society.
 
So we picture folks going to mine asteroids 
for Platinum and Gold and other rare elements  
but they might do that a different way, mine it 
for abundant aluminum and silicon and such for  
building giant energy farms and huge colliders and 
making the stuff from other abundant feedstocks.  
Phosphorus comes to mind since it's 
pretty rare, as we looked at in our  
Fermi Paradox episode on Phosphorus Scarcity and 
is thought to be made in supernova from Silicon.  
We don’t need to replicate a supernova, we 
just need to whack silicon with neutrons. 
 
That’s not our only alchemical option either, we 
can pound on things with alpha particles – helium  
atoms without their electrons – which are very 
easy to make and move electromagnetically,  
and through gamma or beta bombardments. 
Potentially all at combinations,  
patterns, and energies of our choosing, maybe 
even beams instead of big undirected explosions,  
like a particle laser. Lasers, particularly X-ray 
and gamma ray lasers can be useful in such alchemy  
too - if we can ever make them or feel comfortable 
employing one-time-use nuclear-bomb-bumped lasers.  
If you have a lot of energy and not a 
lot of material, cost gets relative. 
 
We can mine the asteroids, we can outright 
disassemble moons and planets, we can even drink  
matter off our own Sun via Starlifting. We can 
also go fetch it from around or in other stars,  
and there will be a cost for each of these 
options based on the various technologies  
and abundances. In the end though, if you 
need a gajillion tons of something rare,  
or which does not even occur in 
nature, you need to go make it. 
 
And possibly sustain it too. We often discuss 
using active support as an alternative for  
superstrong materials, basically where you hold 
something up electromagnetically or by shoving  
on it mechanically or with a light-beam, and there 
may be materials that can only exist under extreme  
conditions, much as many minerals only can form 
in the nightmares of heat and pressure found deep  
underground. Neutron Stars, and the neutronium 
they are thought to be made of, essentially  
one big clump of neutrons, is such an example, 
held together by the immense force of gravity.  
We may find some materials can be fabricated 
and forced to remain together by artificial and  
careful use of the other known physical forces. We 
may also find out how to make artificial gravity.
 
Nor should we rule out that we might figure out 
ways to play with the basic physical constants of  
the Universe. This might let you start doing weird 
things like making matter out of the other quarks  
beside up and down, the strange, charm, 
top, and bottom quarks, or with muons in  
place of electrons. Or even making particles 
which don’t naturally exist; period, like an  
electron with twice its normal mass. That’s 
definitely in the Clarketech zone of things.
 
Alternatively, as huge as they sound, physically 
or conceptually, building a giant supercollider  
around the sun, fueled by the Sun’s light, and 
sucking particles off the sun for refining and  
transmutation, is merely unbelievable in scale, 
not physics. The science involved is pretty simple  
and old school, and it is probably faster and 
cheaper to convert locally-abundant materials  
into scarcer elemental neighbors this way 
than to go mine them from around distant stars  
where you either need to spend mass-energy levels 
of energy to get them here in decades or wait  
millennia for the slow and cheap shipments. And 
eventually you would need to move further afield  
to find those and wait longer and pay more.
So for Dyson building civilizations,  
this is probably something they eventually need 
to contemplate, which is what we usually expect  
civilizations to turn into, Dyson Swarms 
around stars, Kardashev-2 civilizations,  
be they classically biological like us or 
something synthetic, iron or silicon based  
not carbon. If you need X amount of material 
Y per person, and you got a lot of excess of  
something else you can make into Y, then you 
need to get or make X more of that to make  
another person or keep them alive or in comfort. 
Odds are, that’s what you are going to do.
 
Now if these are galaxy-wide problems of 
shortages, you might opt for something potentially  
grander and more efficient, like running a 
beam of matter at ultra-high speed, skimming  
real close to a neutron star or black hole to let 
gravity do your crunching for you, or use them as  
abundant sources of gamma rays for bombardment 
of nuclei. There’s some potentially dangerous  
ways to suck the matter of a neutron star cheaply, 
relatively speaking, by having it in close binary  
with another one, but that strikes me as a really 
good way to accidentally end up with a merger or  
detonation, also known as a Supernova. To be fair 
that will get you plenty of heavier-than-iron  
elements, if it happens, it's one of the 
principal ways they get made after all.
 
Now folks often talk about harvesting 
natural supernovae for heavy elements,  
and folks often talk about how nuclear bombs – 
the fusion kind anyway - are like the power of  
the Sun, but it bares mentioning that 
H-bombs are not very sunlike at all.  
Our Sun is a very slow converter of hydrogen into 
helium, our attempts at controlled fusion are not  
about replicating the conditions in our Sun’s 
core, because that produces very little energy  
gram for gram. Indeed it takes 5000 kilograms 
of solar matter to generate a single watt of  
energy. It’s just that it will generate that 
single watt for billions of years. Indeed even  
the ultra-fast burning supergiants are generally 
only producing in the watt per kilogram range.  
H-bombs are way better, they convert matter to 
energy in mere instants and with ratio parallel  
to supernovae rather than supergiants, let 
alone our own sun, which itself is on the fast  
and high-powered side of things as stars go, 
most being cool and slow-burning red dwarfs.
 
I want to emphasize that Supernova point 
because we can make H-bombs of any size we want,  
they scale up pretty well, and doing that trick 
where you surround them with some big material  
shell that is to be transmuted makes a lot 
more sense in terms of time, energy, and safety  
than waiting on a supernova, or intentionally 
inducing one through iron poisoning or some of  
the other tricks we looked at in Killing Stars. 
Indeed, given that we talk about using nukes  
with pusher plates for running spaceships, this 
might be a trick used for metal production. Plate  
the back of your ship’s pusher with a material 
you want to transmute and fire your nukes off,  
scrape the valuable layer off, and repeat, all 
the while gaining the normal benefit of ship  
propulsion too. I could imagine some automated 
extra-solar mining operation bringing back  
feedstock for transmutation and using their ship’s 
drive to do a lot of that transmutation en route.
 
For that matter, one problem with ships needing 
to run on radioisotopes is running out of the  
material part-way through the journey because 
the half life of that element was shorter than  
the trip was, and a transmuting pusher plate 
might be an alternative for some materials,  
especially ones you didn’t need till you were 
nearing your destination, like radioisotopes  
for powering small probes or communication 
satellites for your early colonial efforts.
 
One final note on all of this, I mentioned 
early, one non-stable element that still had  
a half-life millions of times longer than the 
current Age of the Universe and there’s quite a  
few in that zone. Indeed we don’t really know for 
sure that any element is totally stable and it has  
long been hypothesized that protons might decay 
given long enough, neutrons do in mere minutes  
left to themselves. The Proton decay number 
is way longer, usually more than a trillion,  
trillion, trillion years. If protons don’t 
decay, we tend to assume slow quantum effects  
would transmute every dead bit of matter not in 
a black hole, into iron, what we call iron stars,  
so far into the future that time can only be 
usefully discussed in scientific notation. 
 
And maybe they should be called Iron-56 stars 
because the assumption is that by quantum  
randomness fusion and fission and decay are slowly 
shifting everything to this ultra-stable isotope.  
But we do contemplate civilizations lasting that 
long, trillions of trillions of trillions of years  
and long beyond – see our civilizations at the end 
of Time series for more on those - and these folks  
might need to be worrying about seemingly stable 
materials decaying on them or replacing things  
with half-lives so long we today would think of 
them as near-eternal but those civilizations at  
the end of time, would think of them as short 
term and as spoilable as we do bananas. 
 
Indeed as we point out in our episodes discussing 
freezing people for long interstellar journeys,  
just the tiny amounts of Potassium-40 in bananas 
and other foods, the modestly rare radioisotope  
of potassium, half life 1.25 billions years, 
that decays into Calcium-40, will eventually  
give a frozen human lethal radiation poisoning if 
they’re frozen for a few thousand years. Killed  
by the trace amounts of that potassium 
isotope in their own bones and tissues.
 
Personally I would not be surprised if in the 
future we started centrifuging radioisotopes out  
of anything we’re using to grow food or clothes 
for people. It would be very energy intensive to  
centrifuge potassium to use only stable isotopes 
of it in hydroponics or house construction,  
but cost is relative especially in 
energy abundant, post-scarcity societies.  
And this sort of nuclear alchemy might be 
very much on their minds, if they find their  
post-scarce situation is being endangered 
by a critical shortage of some element.
 
So civilizations might very well turn to 
killing stars or mimicking their death  
throes to run themselves, if they needed to, or 
using nukes for elemental alchemical production,  
it just depends on how explosive 
the rise in demand is.
 
So we’ve got quite a few announcements today along 
with our upcoming schedule, but first, while I was  
working on today’s video I kept thinking of 
Alchemy and Transmutation and it reminded me  
of various character in RPGs I’ve played down 
the years who specialized in those occupations,  
and who varied from Jekyll & Hyde style characters 
to those pursuing coveted alchemical secrets.  
If our episode comments and social media 
forums are any indicator then an awful lot  
of our audience has played their fair share of 
D&D and similar games. I’ve been gaming for over  
a quarter of a century now, and playing in or 
designing all those worlds has been some of the  
best and most mental stimulating fun of my life.
Over the years and as its transitioned from  
strictly pen and paper to the modern digital age, 
our options for connecting with other folks to  
play with has only risen, as have the tools for 
forging new worlds to set your games and stories  
in, and the unrivaled leader of the pack when 
it comes to worldbuilding tools is World Anvil.
 
World Anvil, the award-winning worldbuilding 
toolset, has tons of tools for enhancing your  
game or building your setting, it is intuitive to 
learn, and has a giant stockpile of free tutorial  
videos that not only show how to use those tools 
but suggest ways to improve your worldbuilding in  
general, to make it easy, appealing, and 
informative to your players or audience.  
Whether you’re managing a campaign or writing a 
novel, whether you’re making city or dungeon maps,  
or connecting them to each other and a wider 
world map, or crafting family genealogies for  
your heroes, villains, and NPCs, World Anvil lets 
you forge your setting better and easier than  
anything I’ve ever worked with before, and it has 
a free version so you can share it with others,  
and selectively, so they’re not seeing secret 
content and spoiling the game. And you can  
also incorporate ways to monetize your content, 
such as Patreon or Kofi or your own storefront.  
World Anvil gives you the tools to build and 
share your dreams and tales with others.
 
World Anvil offers wikipedia-like 
articles for your world setting,  
interactive maps, timelines, an RPG Campaign 
Manager and a full Novel-Writing Software,  
all the tools you’ll need to run your RPG Campaign 
or write your novel, and never lose your notes  
again! If you’d like to give World Anvil a try 
and let it help you forge new worlds, just click  
the link in this episode’s description!
For anyone who still wants to register,  
I’ll be giving closing remarks for the conference 
on the Future of Space Cooperation between the US  
and Japan on March 7th and 8th hosted by the 
Rand Corporation. And there’s going to be some  
great speakers there, starting with David 
Kipping from Cool Worlds and Pete Worden,  
the Director of the Breakthrough Starshot 
Initiative. I’ll attach a link for the event  
and registration to see it in-person or online 
in the episode description. I’ll be getting back  
home just in time to release next week’s episode, 
the Million Year Machine, so apologies in advance  
if there’s a delay releasing that or if I’m 
less active in the comments of the video.
 
I mentioned last week that the conference will be 
my first in-person talk I’ve given since Covid hit  
and I’ll also be giving the keynote for 
the Biocene conference on Biomimicry and in  
addition will finally be speaking at the National 
Space Society’s International Space Development  
Conference this year, I’d been scheduled to give 
a talk and accept my 2020 Pioneer Award from them  
right before the pandemic hit, so it's nice to 
finally get to do that talk. Those are both open  
to the public too but will be in May so we’ll 
give details and updates in a month or so.
 
It’s been a pretty crazy last couple 
years, with Covid, they seem a lot longer,  
ironically the nearly eight years since our 
first episode sometimes seem like just yesterday,  
and it's a good remember, just how short such 
times are compared to even most of the short  
term projects we discuss on this show. Next week 
we’ll be examining those longer projects, many of  
which need to encapsulate a million years or more 
to accomplish, in our episode The Million Year  
Machine. Then we’ll have our March Scifi Sunday 
episode to look at the concept of Synthetic Life.  
And we’ll keep to the scifi theme as we return to 
our Alien Civilizations series to contemplate the  
concept of clandestine extraterrestrial operations 
and Covert Aliens. After that we’ll jump forward  
to the distant future and look at a time when 
the Moon has become an enormous Mega City.
 
Now if you want alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to the  
Channel and hit the notifications bell, and if you 
enjoyed this episode, please hit the like button,  
share it with others, and leave a comment below. 
You can also join in the conversation on any  
of our social media forums, find our audio-only 
versions of the show, or donate to support future  
episodes, and all those options and more are 
listed in the links in the episode description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
