This Episode is sponsored by Audible.
We often discuss colonizing planets around
distant alien suns, or building artificial
habitats around our own sun, but building
suns might be a stellar idea.
We’ve spent a lot of time talking about
making artificial habitats or entire worlds
for humanity to live on in the future, and
I thought it was past time we talked about
the suns that would light them and how we
can go about making those.
Now a point we often make about megastructures
and artificial planets is that they hold three
critical advantages over planets.
First, they use vastly less mass and material
than a planet does for the same total living
area, because for the most part there’s
no need to have your ground go more than several
meters deep, rather than several thousand
kilometers like on a planet.
You can get a million times the living area
out of a planet by turning it into tons of
rotating habitats rather than a big sphere,
or by using something vastly more abundant
than rocks and metals to fill that sphere,
like compressed hydrogen or helium, or black
holes made of those, or maybe even dark matter.
Second, you can build them wherever you want
and to a customizable size and gravity, there’s
only a fairly narrow window of both location
and composition that’s going to produce
a planet people can make reasonably habitable
and Earth-like.
And Third, you can get very exact with replicating
certain Earth-like conditions on a megastructure.
It would be almost impossible to find a planet
with an exactly 1g surface gravity, 24 hour
day and 365 day year, without blowing huge
amounts of energy trucking in or removing
mass, altering rotational and orbital rates,
and so on, but when we build them ourselves
we can tailor gravity, day, and year length
very easily.
So we use the analogy of comparing planets
to mountains with caves in them, a primitive
civilization hunts for good caves on a mountain,
a more advanced one just quarries rock and
builds its own caves wherever it pleases,
and can make a lot more artificial caves,
or houses, out of mountain than it will naturally
have.
Instead of maybe half a dozen caves on one,
you can cover a whole continent in millions
of tailor-made homes instead.
This is our basic concept for habitation megastructures.
However, you can’t really put these wherever
you want, you’re still fairly limited to
where the Sun shines comfortably, its habitable
or goldilocks zone, not too hot, not too cold.
We can expand that a lot by using solar shades
to block some sunlight where it’s too hot
and mirrors to add sunlight where it’s too
cold, but while this immensely expands your
zone, it’s still tiny compared to space.
It would be quite challenging and resource
intensive to keep a planet warm by sunlight
all the way out at Neptune or Pluto, as light
falls off in strength by inverse-square of
distance and is a thousand times weaker there.
You could do it with a lot of mirrors or by
sending light out in focused beams, but that’s
quite an effort.
Habitable zones are light minutes from their
stars, whereas stars are light years from
each other, and that means that each solar
domain, stretching over light years, has a
habitable zone consisting of only about a
quadrillionth of that volume.
Even using tricks with light beams and mirrors
is only expanding that maybe a trillionth.
This is about how many stars we have in our
galaxy, so it’s worth noting that even if
you’ve colonized the whole galaxy and even
gone the full blown Kardashev-3 route of constructing
a swarm of habitats to englobe every star,
not just the planets, your whole civilization
could still fit in a single solar system by
volume.
This starts us thinking about why we might
want to make an artificial sun, and while
we start with basically the same logic and
reasoning as with megastructures, in fact
it’s actually worse.
Planets have a very narrow range of habitable
sizes, especially if you’re looking for
close analogues to Earth, but stars are even
worse.
You could probably terraform a planet fairly
easily that was a tenth heavier or lighter
than Earth, since composition affects density,
which affects surface gravity, but if that
density is pretty similar, and it often is,
surface gravity is proportional to radius,
10% wider, 10% more surface gravity, but 33%
more volume and thus mass.
One only 10% more massive of the same density
would only be 3.2% wider and have 3.2% more
gravity, one with 90% of our mass would have
96.6% of our normal gravity.
Based on how heavy you felt you’d have a
hard time noticing you weren’t on Earth
on either planet, but stars are a lot more
sensitive about mass.
Composition matters for them too, they’re
not entirely hydrogen and not all the remainder
is helium either, but as a loose rule of thumb,
star lifetime and brightness are directly
related to mass.
Even a 10% increase in mass is increasing
a star’s brightness by 40%, that means its
habitable zone just moved 18% further away,
and orbital periods are much less sensitive
to mass, so even with this minor change of
mass you aren’t getting any 365 day years
in your habitable zone, at least not without
artificially extending your day.
On the extremes of this, around the smallest
of stars you have planets whose year is measured
in days, as is its day since it will probably
be tidally locked that close to its sun.
On the more massive end, where luminosity
can be a million times brighter than our own
sun even though the star is maybe only 20
or 30 times more massive than our Sun, your
habitable zone is so far off your years might
take thousands of Earth years, and your star
would be so short lived you’d barely have
time to get your civilization going before
it blew up.
This extreme highlights a third issue too,
which is how wasteful sunlight is.
Our planet absorbs less than a billionth of
the sunlight emitted, around those big ones
that would be a quadrillionth.
That’s the whole reason we like the concept
of a Dyson Swarm, because a planet’s civilization
isn’t like a tribe sitting around a campfire
to warm itself at nights, it’s like a tribe
living next to a forest fire to stay warm.
It’s very wasteful, because stars are omnidirectional
in their emissions.
That’s not as bad with the cooler and dimmer
stars where a Habitable Zone planet might
be getting thousandths rather than billionths
of the light released, but for those giant
suns it’s ludicrously wasteful, and they’re
so short lived there’s not much point to
trying to englobe them to tap that power before
they explode.
So we’re interested in artificial suns today
and we might as well start off with the conceptually
simplest method, which is to mimic nature,
this has limited customization options but
at least has some, since we at least get to
pick location.
Let’s review the natural method of star
formation then, since we’ll basically mimic
it, and it often begins when big stars go
boom.
The galaxy may contain a lot of stars but
most of the galaxy’s mass is not in stars,
even ignoring that most of it is dark matter
– which will be of interest to us later
today – only a fraction of the ordinary
matter in the galaxy is bound up in existing
stars, including dead degenerate ones like
white dwarfs, neutron stars, and black holes.
Most is floating around in giant clouds and
left to its own devices those would all slowly
clump up and form stars, but they often get
an assist when a star goes supernova, and
the shockwave perturbs that cloud and sets
off a lot of matter clumping up and forming
stars, usually a large pack of them will be
born about the same time and move around the
galaxy together as small cluster, something
that is very handy for astronomers.
Many other things can prod stellar formation,
like a cluster of stars passing through a
cloud of gas or a galaxy eating a neighboring
galaxy, which has happened a lot down the
eons.
Typically a dense cloud of gas is what we
call a nebula, which are where many stars
form, though that’s a fairly hazy term.
The first nebulae we saw were essentially
hazy dense clouds lit by lots of new stars.
In terms of astronomical timelines, this process
is fairly fast, but still takes millions of
years.
It would not be too tricky to guide this process
to arrange the new stars to be at sizes and
locations of your choosing and even speed
it up a bit, but we’d probably want to go
a lot faster.
As to how fast this process can go, that’s
really a question how much brute force your
willing and able to expend.
There’s nothing stopping you from building
freighter after freighter to just gather up
hydrogen and dump it at some spot of your
choosing.
You could also build huge quantities of ultra-thin
panels in a huge sphere that you gave a shove
with light beams, so they pushed gas along
the way to eventually collide at the place
of your choosing.
Emphasis on ‘ultra-thin’ because the interstellar
medium is so low density that you’d need
to sweep out a volume on an order of a light
year across to get enough mass for a star;
That is, after all, why they would tend to
be several light years apart from each other.
Such a big shell, even when thin, would be
very massive.
You wouldn’t likely do this direct scooping
approach, in favor of pushing gas with light
or magnetic fields, but it illustrates the
basic concept.
Similarly we have the option of moving failed
stars, like brown dwarfs or super-jupiters,
so as to collide with each other to gain enough
mass, which saves you a lot of the work and
effort of collecting your own mass, though
you still have to shove them together which
is no small feat.
Before we proceed, though, I just want to
emphasize that as huge as the energies are
when you’re talking about shoving gas giants
and brown dwarfs around, it’s still tiny
compared to what a star will give off.
Shoving a planet up to a thousandth of the
speed of light so it will collide with various
others you’ve found in the region a few
thousand years later requires the kind of
energies only available to K2 civilizations,
but that’s not a catch-22 since any given
civilization already has at least one star
to become K2 around in the first place.
You’re also not shoving them too fast because
you don’t want them colliding at speeds
higher than their own escape velocity or they’ll
just explode and blow your mass all over the
place, with most escaping rather than falling
back together.
This saves you on energy but not on time.
Again, though, it is a lot of energy because
it is a lot of mass, making Jupiter into a
second binary sun is a popular idea in fiction
but it’s nowhere near heavy enough to become
a star on its own.
The Universe is pretty old though and has
a fair number of big dead stars lying around,
and some could be rekindled by dumping a gas
giant on them, not for long, in astronomical
terms, but quite long in human civilization
terms, so some might opt to do this.
You’d have to do it very carefully though,
feeding gas in small amounts to that star
not in big chunks, since that’s basically
what causes Supernovae to occur.
The old big star blowing up, what most folks
think of as a supernova, is a Type II Supernova,
type one is when an old white dwarf star absorbs
enough new mass to light off, Type II are
thought to be a bit more common but are less
bright than Type I.
That’s something to keep in mind when thinking
about stellar engineering with degenerate
stars, ‘oops’ is not something you want
to hear from your chief engineer, as moments
later you’ll both be getting your atoms
scattered by an explosion bright enough to
outshine the whole galaxy for a while.
Of course, as we mentioned, supernova shockwaves
are often what cause the formation of stars,
and also release the heavier matter we need
for planets; So intentionally detonating some
white dwarfs by slamming a brown dwarf or
jovian planet into them might be a very low
cost method of making a lot of stars, especially
since you could be pre-positioning other brown
dwarfs or jovians in the places you’d like
your new stars so they can act as the clumping
agents they’d form around.
So that’s one way to make a large gas giant
into a star, feed it into an existing one,
however brown dwarfs already fuse deuterium,
the easiest hydrogen isotope to cause fusion,
and if we’re making artificial suns, we
can also control composition.
With naturally occurring stars you have a
very fixed set of parameters for its mass,
lifetime, size, and luminosity.
You can’t find a star the mass of our Sun
but twice as bright, or half as bright, because
they’re all made of pretty much the same
thing.
They all begin as mostly regular hydrogen,
with a decent amount of helium and deuterium
in them, and many of the younger Suns also
have a ton of heavier metals in them too,
what we call population one stars like our
own Sun, ones with a higher metallicity, metals
in this case referring to elements heavier
than Hydrogen and Helium.
Metallicity increases with each generation
of star formation.
This is still a pretty small fraction, usually
around a percent or two even in high metallicity
population one stars, but irritatingly that
still means there is more gold and other valuable
metals in our Sun than in the rest of our
solar system combined, it’s just very hard
to get at it, if you’re curious on how we
could do this, see the Starlifting episode.
But most of that non-hydrogen is helium, and
you get more as stars age and transmute that
hydrogen into helium.
In many stars this slowly poisons them till
they turn into red giant or type II Supernova,
long before they use up all their fuel, but
in the smallest stars this will never happen,
instead resulting in what we call a blue dwarf;
A smaller red dwarf who has burned up most
of its fuel but does not expand into a red
giant, though it grows hotter and more luminous.
Or I should say what we will call a blue dwarf,
as none exist yet because the Universe is
quite young and all the stars small enough
to become blue dwarves won’t for many hundreds
of billions of years to come; If they’re
natural ones anyway.
Nothing is stopping us from making a star
that’s half hydrogen and half helium, burning
brighter than it should for its mass, and
still living much longer than our own sun
would, even though it could be set to the
same temperature and spectra as our Sun.
It would be much less massive and dimmer,
though still brighter than a normal red dwarf
of its mass, and that could be quite handy.
Metallicity also plays a big role in star
brightness and lifetime too, for instance
we have a third type of star, Population III,
ultra-low in metallicity, which are thought
to have been the earliest stars, and it is
believed these could potentially get far bigger
than modern stars because of their low metallicity.
Normally a star can’t get much more than
a couple dozen times the mass of our own Sun
without hitting the limit for stellar mass,
the Eddington Limit.
Star fusion rates climb very quickly with
mass so they get hot and try to expand, while
gravity holds them together, and stars achieve
a size based on hydrostatic equilibrium, where
the pressure from the rate of fusion and gravity
balance.
Metallicity play a big role in that since
heavier elements won’t fuse but still add
gravity, pushing the star together to create
faster rates of fusion.
High metallicity stars are hotter, so are
older stars which have more helium since that
won’t fuse normally either.
In a basic main sequence star, if you get
over a certain mass the outer layers tend
to blow off, limiting size.
The Population III stars of the early Universe,
super low on metals and Helium, could get
bigger, and could also die in black holes
in a somewhat atypical fashion, via photo
disintegration and a pair-instability Supernova.
We’ll bypass discussing how this happens,
since it probably no longer happens today,
just in the Early Universe, and if you’d
like to know more about those stars consider
watching PBS Spacetime’s episode “Fate
of the First Stars”, but one interesting
note: It’s thought this type of stellar
death results in a black hole and a supernova
that shoots out as a pair of relativistic
jets rather than big omnidirectional explosions.
That’s a pretty handy way to rapidly produce
and capture a lot of heavy elements, so same
as you might build stars intentionally heavy
on helium or metals, or straight out of deuterium,
you might build a star of pure hydrogen just
to use it as a massive transmutation star
forge… or stellar cannon, since it comes
out as a jet you can probably aim, but there
are much easier and faster ways to obliterate
planets as we’ve discussed before.
Those black holes are interesting to us though
because fundamentally a star is just a convenient
natural way to make a lot of light, it need
not be done by fusion anymore than the photons
leaving your screen to let you watch this
episode were made that way.
The brightest things in this Universe are
Quasars, or were quasars anyway, like Population
III stars they were much more common in the
early days of the Universe, that’s the only
reason we can’t see them with the naked
eye, they’re almost all gone or weakened
nowadays so you have to look really far away
in distance and time, to find one.
They are black holes, usually giant ones at
the center of galaxies, active galactic nuclei,
and the power they give off is from the accretion
disks of mass falling into them and getting
superhot as they collect.
Indeed without accretion disks black holes,
infamous in science fiction for sucking things
in, would almost never suck anything in.
They have no more gravity than the star that
bore them, indeed a good deal less, and they
are very small.
An object passing by them would just be pulled
into an orbit around it, there’s a maximum
to how eccentric such an orbit can be with
a planet or normal star because if it’s
too eccentric the orbiting body will just
slam into it or be roasted by its sunlight
or atmosphere.
And once in orbit there’s usually enough
trace gas in the lower orbit to slowly de-orbit
an object so it falls down, a black hole accretion
disk serves this role too, only much hotter
as there’s much more gravitational energy
involved.
Let me note though that this does not work
on dark matter, it doesn’t interact with
anything but gravity, so it can fall right
through planets and won’t get random collisions
in orbit to change its momentum, but it can’t
escape from a black hole if it actually intercepts
that event horizon, but that would be a very
rare event unless the black hole was moving
rather fast relative to the local medium,
so that the very small cross-section it has
hits more material head on.
We currently have no way to manipulate dark
matter beyond gravity but we might figure
one out some day.
We’ve discussed using it as cheap filler
mass for artificial planets but you could
also use it for stars.
Gravity drives rates of fusion and dark matter
produces that normally, it also won’t collide
or pick up heat from sitting in a star, so
if you’ve collected a lot of dark matter
at some spot, and reduced it’s speed to
less than the escape velocity of that spot,
it’s sort of like an artificial gravity
field.
You could use it to dope stars so they’d
have different mass and brightness than normal,
one way you could produce a 365 day year on
a planet orbiting a star with a smaller habitable
zone than our own Sun, which is most stars.
You can use this same trick to add gravity
to smaller planets too.
Getting back to black holes, without the accretion
disk, it’s virtually impossible to actually
end up in a black hole.
This wrecks many science fiction stories about
accidentally encountering one because they’re
invisible till it’s too late, you’d actually
have to work very hard to fall into one that
lacked a large accretion disk.
But matter and gas slowly collect up around
them and bang into each other and decay to
fall in and speed up and so on until you get
that disk which is much bigger and which can
intercept matter easier and trap it to eventually
fall in.
Getting hotter and hotter and giving off a
lot of light, and since this is outside the
black hole’s event horizon, that light can
just wander off, if a little red shifted from
leaving the gravity well.
Needless to say, you can drop matter into
a black hole in a controlled fashion to produce
power, like slowly feeding it a gas giant.
And if you wrap it in a substance good at
absorbing gamma radiation and X-rays and with
a very high melting point, you can make yourself
a colossal light bulb.
Of course there aren’t a lot of black holes
conveniently lying around, the stars that
make them are quite uncommon, but again, that’s
relying on natural processes.
There are a lot more neutron stars out there,
and even more white dwarfs, and they could
be pushed over the line into black holes,
especially if you instead were feeding them
something like iron which is massive and useless
as a fuel.
But you need not use a star, if you have enough
iron or something dense that won’t fuse,
you can just pile tons of it up till you get
enough that it falls inside its own event
horizon, but this would result in a very large
black hole, so you’d probably make a big
dense object then implode it by making a shell
of hydrogen bombs or antimatter around it
and detonating it.
This should allow you make one much smaller
than the ones that naturally form, and you
can now tap it for power by dumping mass down
inside.
Of course we have the other option, for even
smaller black holes, which emit Hawking Radiation,
at higher rates the smaller they are.
Black holes in the Megaton range are perfect
for small stars, though you need to convert
the light from gamma radiation to something
safer, these can also be nigh impossible to
feed as they are smaller than atoms and also
gushing out power.
Another approach is to find a sweet spot for
a modest sized black hole whose hawking radiation
or accretion energy from dragging matter down
is just powerful enough to heat a gas around
it to push it away and only let a trickle
fall in.
That heated gas feeds the black hole and emits
light like a normal sun, only much smaller
and dimmer.
This particular version wouldn’t be too
customizable, but should have a set size based
on what gas you’re feeding it, one that
absorbs gamma and emits it as normal light.
So you could customize a bit by using hydrogen
and helium mixes instead of raw hydrogen,
or other gasses, and this would let you play
with your visible spectrum to match it to
normal sunlight too.
These would be quite massive compared to a
kugelblitz blackhole, but still far smaller
than a natural star.
When you start going smaller you can also
play with day and year length more.
We orbit stars, but we can make artificial
stars orbit us, like in the geocentric model,
and we can also put dishes around them to
bounce light in the direction we want so the
super majority of it isn’t wasting itself
into the void.
For simplicity, we would call these Sun-Moons,
where they orbit a planet.
They can be many things, big dishes reflecting
a beam of light from a star further off, a
giant light bulb powered by fusion, a black
hole, and so on.
Now if you’re going the straight kugelblitz
black hole and Hawking Radiation approach
you probably aren’t using a single one for
a single planet, but likely a small swarm
of them orbiting each other fairly tightly
but not so tight they’d be able to merge,
they don’t have much gravity though and
you can push them; Pushing black holes is
simple enough just don’t use anything you’re
attached to since you won’t get it back.
Using many small ones lets you add their power,
again the more massive a black hole the less
Hawking radiation it gives off, but the longer
it lives and the easier it is to feed or push
on, you have to push harder to move it, but
the small ones are so small you’d have problems
hitting them.
It’s hard to aim a pushing laser at something
smaller than an atom that’s giving off huge
amounts of radiation.
Using multiple ones to form a single artificial
sun opens up the door for some alternatives.
First, we aren’t necessarily bound to make
one spherical sun anymore, we can string them
together as needed, which is handy for a lot
of habitats which are cylinders or rings.
And you can do this with light bulbs powered
by electricity or mirrors which are shaped
appropriately too.
But I wanted to finish out here because it’s
kind of the ultimate upgrade for making your
own stars, be they classic stars you just
made or functioning on different principles.
We always talk about making Dyson Spheres,
or rather dyson swarms around a star to get
all of its power, tons of objects orbiting
that star, and we’ve talked about moving
stars and today about making them.
But you could make a dyson swarm of stars
themselves.
Moving them to near your own system or building
them there.
We often say red dwarfs are the most efficient
of stars, the smaller ones use up all their
hydrogen and even the bigger ones most of
it, and you could create a very large swarm
of stars of a mass and brightness of your
choosing, to make a super-solar system or
mega-dyson.
Or a more loose cluster where each star was
far enough away that its light didn’t impact
its neighbors much, but still far closer than
neighboring stars.
Lots of bunched together little solar systems.
For our own sun to be only as bright as the
full moon is on Earth, it would have to be
a bit over 600 times further away from us
than it is now, but that’s only a few light
days away, not light years.
And a fully convective red dwarf could be
about ten times closer, mere light hours away,
only a little further than our outermost planets.
You could go smaller and closer too, but dimmer
and cooler stars also waste more of their
light in the infrared range so as massive
as you can go and still be full convective,
around a quarter of our Sun’s mass, is probably
preferable.
They are only 1% as bright as the Sun, but
that just moves your habitable zone to a tenth
the distance of ours.
They’ll live a really long time too, a trillion
years or more.
Imagine for the moment you built a hundred
such stars maybe 100 AU away, each with its
own smaller solar system or dyson swarm.
This is called a Klemperer Rosette though
we typically envision this as a ring of planets
around a star, not a ring of stars.
Each of the solar systems is only 50,000 light
seconds, or just over half a light day away,
so you can message them and get a reply back
the next day.
Many an empire of history operated fine with
such communication lag times or bigger, so
they don’t have the problem of interstellar
empires who have years of lag time and probably
can’t be a very unified civilizations as
a result.
You could travel out there on a fusion drive
or light beam, pushing the whole way at 1g
and flip over and slow, and make it in just
29 days, achieving a maximum speed of 4% light
speed.
Amusingly, since these planets would tend
be tidally locked to their small suns, though
you could probably make it so they weren’t,
their dark sides would still be decently lit
by their neighbors, who would be just over
6 AU away, a little too dim for photosynthesis,
but we could actually pack more suns into
such a ring, or bring the ring in tighter
and closer to home.
We could also add other rings, cocked at different
angles, same as we’d do with habitats around
our own Sun in making a Dyson sun-swarm.
How many can you pack in?
Your limitation isn’t really about mass,
but waste heat, as it so often is in our discussion
of these kinds of topics.
Build a sphere around the Sun 100 AU out,
instead of the normal 1 AU, and you can have
10,000 times the brightness, and since those
red dwarves are only 1% as bright, you need
a million of them to have 10,000 times the
brightness.
An Empire of a million stars, all a day away
to talk to and a month away to travel to,
and you hardly have to stop there, if you
don’t mind a little more signal lag and
travel time.
A billion stars if you don’t mind a month
getting a reply back and about half a year
to travel there.
You could pack a trillion of these stars,
a whole galaxy, into a region just 100,000
AU in radius, not even half the distance to
Proxima Centauri, though by this size mass
does begin to matter and you’d notice time
was running a bit slower in your galactic
empire.
Go much bigger and your empire would turn
into a massive black hole.
It does give us a nice alternative to interstellar
empires without needing faster than light
travel.
Such things are a long way off in our future
but do not violate any laws of science or
require any super-technology to build, and
like a normal dyson swarm, can be made bigger
incrementally, as you need them.
So, such empires are allowed in reality, not
just in science fiction, this is no surprise,
reality is often much more interesting and
stranger than fiction.
We always try to look at the bright side of
the future on this channel, and in this case
I suppose that’s very literal, our future
is doubtless out among the stars, and we might
be making them ourselves.
Since someone is bound to ask, while definitions
in astronomy can be fairly loose, yes suns
is a plural term and it’s not our Sun and
the other stars, we say now a sun is a star
that we’ve confirmed the existence of planets
around, which is probably going to be almost
all of them.
This distinction matters because it’s suns
that are seen as offering us new lands to
visit and make our homes.
But of course that’s not the only way, we’ve
often discussed building our worlds, and megastructures
and Dyson Spheres.
Some would argue that name isn’t actually
appropriate, and that we should call them
Stapledon Spheres or Swarms in honor of Olaf
Stapledon, the philosopher and writer who
first suggested the concept in his 1937 novel
“Star Maker”, which along with earlier
novel, “Last and First Men”, were the
source of inspiration for so many of our classic
science fiction novels written in the decades
that follow.
It’s a bit of standing joke that Star Maker
is a very long book, not because it has many
pages or is a tough read, but because you
have to stop every few pages to think over
some concept he laid out, and many ended up
becoming their own entire novels written by
another.
The sheer depth and scale of Stapledon’s
works, in terms of concept and astronomical
distances and times, is unmatched by any other
writer, especially of his era.
You can pick up a free copy of Star Maker
today, just use my link in this episode’s
description, Audible.com/Isaac or text Isaac
to 500-500 to get a free book and 30 day free
trial, and that book is yours to keep, whether
you stay on with Audible or not.
And if you don’t enjoy Star Maker, you can
exchange it for another book, no questions
asked.
So today, as is often the case, we had our
contemplations turned upward at the heavens,
next week we’ll go the opposite direction,
and explore the notion of civilizations going
underground, to ask why you might do it and
how you could, in Subterranean Cities
The week after that we’ll start our first
look at some of the more peculiar or Rogue
Civilizations the future might produce, as
we explore the classic science fiction concept
of Space Prison Colonies.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button
and share the episode with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
