This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
The Solar System is full of wonders we’re
only beginning to discover and explore.
But what will we do in the future,
when all that stuff is just getting in our
way?
Humanity mostly lives, works, and plays on
only a small fraction of Earth’s surface,
and virtually all activity here is limited
to maybe the first ten meters of dirt, rock,
water, and air on that surface.
But the ground goes down nearly a million
times deeper than that.
Similarly, the Earth receives less than a
billionth of the light the Sun puts off, and
even when we add in all the other planets,
moons, and asteroids in our solar system,
it’s still only a tiny fraction of the Sun’s
light that falls on these worlds and mostly
goes to waste there.
For scale context, as sunlight is essentially
the ultimate fuel all life runs on, it is
as if we produced enough food for a vast empire
but only had one single person eating.
Indeed it is even worse than that as Earth,
the only place known to host life, is quite
wasteful with the light it gets, especially
from an Anthropocentric perspective.
The Sun produces around 4 Trillion-Trillion
times the power a human actual runs on.
From the center of the Sun, where fusion takes
place and makes the power that runs all life,
to the final endpoint of running a human,
only about 1 watt out of every 50 quadrillion
produced actually is running a human, with
the rest all being sucked up by middleman
processes or outright waste.
To give a better perspective, it would be
like producing enough food to feed every person,
past and present, of which only one single
bite from one single meal would be eaten by
one single person, with an entire mountain
worth of leftovers.
This then is the reason why we might consider
dismantling our solar system, not with destructive
intent but out of the recognition that the
default setup doesn’t lend itself to being
efficient for life.
It’s essentially the notion that while a
cave in a mountain is a very handy and easy
place to shelter, that mountain has a lot
more living potential contained within its
raw resources than as a mountain itself.
Using that analogy, terraforming other planets
to live on would be like finding a dozen or
so other caves that weren’t really ideal
homes and chiseling them into better ones,
getting you a dozen times more living space,
while dismantling that mountain to build stone
houses, or in this case artificial megastructures
in solar orbit, would get you many millions
or even billions of times more living space.
Of course space is hardly our bottleneck in
our solar system, because we’ve got a ridiculous
amount of empty space.
Indeed if you scattered every human around
the solar system roughly evenly over a sphere
that enclosed the Solar System out to Pluto
you’d have over a million kilometers between
you and your nearest neighbor, and a volume
to yourself not only bigger than Earth but
bigger than the entire Earth-Moon system.
So space is not at a premium in Outer Space,
rather it’s stuff like raw materials to
build with, energy to run on, plus all the
biological, mechanical, or electronic problems
we tend not to think of normally like getting
rid of waste heat or avoiding gravitational
collapse.
That’s probably a good place to begin on
the dismantling concept, because heat and
gravity are two very big constraints when
it comes to disassembling existing worlds
or building new ones.
If you’re a channel regular you already
know what we mean by building new worlds,
but if not, see our Megastructures series
where we talk about building things like artificial
planets – Shellworlds being the main example
– or artificial Earth-like habitats, typically
the O’Neill Cylinder, though we covered
a bunch of more grand designs a couple weeks
back in our episode “Continent Scale Rotating
Space Habitats”.
And that’s essentially what we’re looking
to build that will require whole planets worth
of raw material, not to build a single vast
habitat but to build many of them, so many
that they take up and use most or all of the
Sun’s light, rather than letting it go to
waste by radiating off in to empty space.
This is the notion behind a Dyson Swarm, often
called a Dyson Sphere, a cloud of constructs,
be they space habitats or solar panels or
whatever else we desire, that engulfs a star
to use up most of its energy.
This is generally assumed to be the end-state
of any solar system that technologically advanced
life dwells in long enough.
We call these Kardashev-2 or K2 Civilizations,
one using all the energy of a solar system,
with K1 using all the energy of a planet or
the K3 utilizing the entire energy production
of a galaxy.
At its beginning, a solar system is a big
cloud of gas, mostly hydrogen and helium but
with lesser amounts of other materials, where
we see some clumps begin forming.
As those small clumps form, they develop enough
gravity to pull in more material.
Eventually one or more of these clumps will
gain so much mass that it can ignite as a
star.
Other clumps either get swallowed by it, clump
together to form smaller stars or planets
around it and thus you get a solar system.
When we think about a star we think of all
that fusion going on and think that’s where
all the heat comes from but in truth a big
part of it comes from gravity while it formed,
and you have to pay in all that energy to
pull that matter back away from that planet
or star.
We call this energy the gravitational binding
energy and it’s what makes freshly formed
planets hot, as every particle coming to join
that world picks up speed as it falls in and
that turns into heat as it starts colliding
with other material and slowing down.
Doubling the mass of an object does a lot
more than double its gravitational binding
energy though.
Most objects aren’t uniform in density,
as the heavier elements tend to sink to the
center, but as a simple approximation a sphere
of uniform density will have its gravitational
binding energy rise with the square of mass
and fall off with its radius.
However, mass generally rises with the cube
of radius, so that a planet twice the radius
or width would generally have two-cubed or
eight times more mass.
So our twice-as-wide planet would have mass-squared,
or 8-squared or 64 times more gravitational
energy, divided by 2 for having twice the
radius, or 32 times more energy, for only
having 8 times the mass, meaning it has 4
times more energy per unit of mass.
As a result of this, a planet with a thousand
times the mass of another, but the same density,
would be expected to be 10 times wider, but
have a hundred thousand times more gravitational
binding energy, and a hundred times as much
energy would be needed to lift away a single
unit of mass off that world as from its much
less massive counterpart.
This is a large part of what makes the Asteroid
Belt and smaller moons so attractive as sources
of raw material.
Not only do they lack any atmosphere your
mining spaceship would need to plow through
to get off them, or you mass drivers need
to shoot through to extract material from
them, but it simply takes way less energy
to fight off the gravity or pay that gravitational
bill.
We do not have a completely accurate picture
of Earth’s density in terms of its layers,
so calculations of Earth’s Gravitational
Binding Energy vary a bit from model to model
but are generally around 2x10^32 Joules of
energy.
That’s a lot of energy, something like a
trillion times the annual energy consumption
of humanity and half a million times what
the Sun’ total output in a given second
is.
So when you see planets getting blown up in
science fiction, most memorably by the Death
Star in Star Wars, keep in mind for them to
blow a planet to smithereens in one quick
blast a second long means whatever the power
source was for that weapon, it was half a
million times more powerful than our Sun,
and that a Dyson Swarm built specifically
for turning our Sun into a big laser beam
weapon – what we call a Nicoll-Dyson Beam
– would need to focus all it energy in on
an Earth-sized planet for around a week to
evaporate or explode it.
That’s a thing to keep in mind for your
extraction processes too, unless you’re
vaporizing a planet this way, all the heat
produced by your lifting engines, be they
spaceships or mass drivers, also has to radiate
away so it doesn’t melt your equipment surface-side,
or your citizens if they are still there.
As Earth only gets about a two-billionth of
the Sun’s Light to maintain its current
temperature, you’d need about two billion
weeks to radiate that much heat away as you
disassembled the planet without it raising
the temperature significantly or requiring
special cooling efforts like those we discussed
in Matrioshka Shellworlds.
Or around 40 million years.
You could go much faster but there’s always
going to be waste heat in the extraction process
you need to deal with if you are not vaporizing
the planet outright.
Alternatively, to take apart Jupiter, 300
times the mass of Earth though also less dense
and proportionally wider, would take about
10,000 times as much energy, 200 year’s
worth of solar output, and cost about 30 times
as much energy per kilogram removed as it
does on Earth.
Keep in mind that we spend thousands of dollars
to get a kilogram off Earth right now too.
On the flipside, the Moon, still in the top
20 most massive objects in the solar system
which contains millions of large rocks, is
almost the reverse of Jupiter, at a little
less than a twentieth the energy cost per
kilogram off Earth, and something like 700
times cheaper than Jupiter per kilogram.
In the most extreme cases, the Sun’s own
gravitational Binding Energy is around a billion
times that of Earth and would take about a
five-hundredth of all the energy the Sun will
produce in its existence to pull it apart.
Things like white dwarf stars and neutrons
stars are far worse, while black holes are
impossible to dismantle.
While a modest asteroid about 6 or 7 kilometers
in radius, containing maybe a billionth the
mass of Earth, would only take about one millionth
of a billionth the energy to disassemble as
Earth would and cost a mere millionth as much
energy as on Earth to take a kilogram of mass
from.
Needless to say this is why mining asteroids
for raw material for space habitat construction,
not just precious metals, is so appealing.
Unfortunately the mass of the entire Asteroid
Belt is less than a thousandth of what the
Earth’s is and most of that mass is tied
up in Ceres and a dozen other major asteroids,
while the other million or so asteroids of
noteworthy size share only the remainder between
them.
You start with the low-hanging fruit as you
build up your solar system, mining these less
massive and much cheaper to dismantle places,
and moving up as you run out, potentially
all the way up to the Sun itself using a method
called Starlifting that we’ll discuss in
a bit.
Two caveats though.
First, we shouldn’t assume raw energy is
the same as actual cost.
Even limited just to dismantling a planet,
your energy bill isn’t likely to be your
only or even necessarily your principal cost,
even if you’re using robots not paying salaries.
Then you have got all the transport and construction
considerations to factor in.
There’s also the availability of energy
too, Starlifting mass right off the Sun may
be the most energy intensive place to do it
from, but you also have a massive power supply
right on hand to fuel that.
As an example, it does take more energy to
build a rocket and launch it carrying a payload
to Earth’s orbit than it does to smelt that
payload, if it were raw ore.
When you get down to even large moons though,
that’s no longer the case and the general
smelting, refining, and manufacturing energy
budget is going to be much larger than the
dismantling energy involved.
Even Ceres, the biggest and most expensive
asteroid to mine off of, only has an escape
velocity of half a kilometer per second, which
would be a kinetic energy of 125,000 Joules
per kilogram.
That is 500 times less than the kinetic energy
of Earth’s escape velocity, but more relatably,
that’s about how much energy your microwave
puts into food if you have it running for
about two minutes, the same amount of time
and energy as my own microwave just spent
reheating my coffee which I let go cold and
untouched while distracted working on this
script.
Obviously that is way less energy than you’d
need to smelt some bit of metal ore into something
useful.
It's also worth keeping in mind that dismantling
the entire solar system, minus the Sun, would
only take the Sun’s energy output for a
couple centuries and virtually all of that
would be spent on Jupiter, which makes up
about half of the non-solar mass in our solar
system but nearly all the binding energy.
Indeed, if we ignore the gas giants, we’d
only need about a month of solar output for
dismantling every last rocky planet, moon,
asteroid, and comet orbiting out our Sun.
Considering the scale of such an endeavor
on the construction side – we are after
all not dismantling the solar system for idle
entertainment but rather raw materials for
building stuff – a couple centuries isn’t
much, or even 10 times that long if you're
not being super-efficient or rushed, and you’re
not using any significant part of that total
solar energy till you start building tons
of megastructures out of these raw materials.
As for our second caveat, and on the topic
of megastructures, the Asteroid Belt seems
tiny when compared to Earth, which is nearly
3000 times more massive.
However we only inhabit a tiny thin layer
of Earth’s Crust, and if you went one three-thousandth
of the way to Earth’s center, you’d already
be around as deep as our deepest mines tend
to go.
If you ground up the whole asteroid belt and
laid it down on a thin sheet about ten meters
deep, that sheet would be about 100 billion
square kilometers, a square 310,000 kilometers
or 200,000 miles a side, and containing 200
times the surface area of Earth, land and
sea combined.
That’s maybe a little thin on the ground,
and we’d still need 10,000,000 times the
mass to fully use the Sun’s light, but it’s
nothing to sneeze at and certainly seems a
far more productive use of those asteroids
than mining them for precious metals – which
you could do anyway – let alone letting
them sit there mindlessly and fruitlessly
banging into each other in the Asteroid Belt.
Earth on the other hand, being about 3000
times more massive, could be dismantled and
built into the equivalent of 60,000 times
as much habitable land as Earth’s surface,
though that would only take us up to a few
hundred-thousandths of the area the Sun could
comfortably light.
Still, it is 60,000 times the room we have
now, and you could stretch that out quite
a lot thinner if you needed to.
This the core concept though, fundamentally
the same as our mountain cave analogy at the
beginning.
We can be content with our one cave here on
Earth, or we can put a lot of effort into
making a handful of other caves reasonably
comfortable too, by terraforming those other
planets.
Or we can dismantle that mountain and make
a billion artificial caves with much nicer
and roomier interiors, in the form of stone
houses.
We dismantle our solar system to build something
far grander, and far friendlier to life.
I often get asked by folks if we actually
have enough mass in our solar system to build
a Dyson Sphere or Swarm and the answer is
“yes, but…”.
It depends a lot on what you’re making that
swarm out of, and critically we always call
it a Swarm because that is what the late great
Freeman Dyson had in mind when he discussed
the concept of a Dyson Sphere originally,
not its common portrayal as a big hollow inverted
planet around a star.
A Dyson Swarm isn’t really a megastructure
in of itself, anymore than a city or a nation
is, rather it’s a collection of tons of
different structures, which can be standard
and uniform but would probably vary wildly
in size, design, and purpose.
It would also likely change with time.
As an example, your phase 1 Dyson Swarm is
probably going to be composed mostly of big
solar collectors, and them mostly thin metal
foil mirrors reflecting and concentrating
light.
A classic Dyson Sphere, that big metal shell,
with just ten-meter deep soil, would take
more than the entire mass of Jupiter to build
and of course Jupiter is mostly hydrogen and
helium, not rock, and while its core contains
a could deal more metals than Earth does,
it wouldn’t be enough to do a full solar
englobement, at least of that type.
Alternatively, tiny little Mercury, a mere
twentieth of Earth’s mass, is actually more
than capable of englobing our Sun, just much
more thinly.
If we’re talking about mostly mirrors, and
floating in space, then even a density of
a single kilogram per square meter would be
lavishly abundant.
Mercury is a lot closer to the Sun, which
makes it hotter but makes a sphere of that
radius around the Sun much smaller than one
out at Earth’s orbital distance, about a
tenth the total surface area and thus construction
material.
Also such heat isn’t a big consideration
for swarm objects that are basically big sheets
of shiny aluminum foil bouncing sunlight around.
Such a swarm of solar collectors would be
many thousands of times less massive than
their rotating habitat equivalents, in terms
of surface area, even if we’re assuming
fairly thick reflective sheets in contrast
to rather thin habitat interiors and hull.
You could probably build a good and complete
solar collector sphere around our Sun using
only the mass of a single decent sized metallic
asteroid.
Or a carbon-heavy asteroid for that matter,
as the carbon allotrope of graphene might
be far more useful for much of these building
projects, see the episode the Impact of Graphene.
You could also do this around any other star
too, brighter and bigger ones would need more
mass, smaller and dimmer ones less, but as
a loose rule of thumb the needed material
would be proportional to the brightness.
A Dyson around a star a tenth as bright needs
a tenth as much construction material, one
ten times as bright would need ten times the
material, and stars range from tiny Red Dwarfs
giving off only about a ten-thousandth the
light of our sun to behemoths giving off a
millions times as much.
Key notion though being that any solar system
should have enough raw material for this most
basic of Dysons, the solar collector, and
you could use the excess material for habitats
and other constructs of more compact nature
than a thin solar collector foil.
Also, again these are not actually solid spheres.
They are just a cloud of orbiting objects.
So, there’s no downside to building a partial
one or building in steps incrementally.
If for some reason you only have enough material
for space habitats using a mere thousandth
of the available sunlight for people, farms,
forests and so forth, that’s still many
thousands of times the living area of what
you’d find available in any natural solar
system’s collection of terraformable planets.
I would imagine that even extra-galactic stars
ejected from their native galaxies that left
most of their planets behind while being ejected
would still tend to have enough objects around
them to get a partial solar collector going.
And partial is enough because the biggest
source of heavy metals in our solar system
or any other is actually inside that star,
and they can be removed.
It’s rather energy intensive but so long
as you’ve got enough raw material to build
the apparatus you can lift materials off a
star, which of course provides the power you
need for the process.
Essentially we use magnetics and mirrors to
enhance solar wind output and capture what
blows off.
We call this Starlifting and have detailed
the various methods and how they work in our
episode on that topic, but in a nutshell,
your typical star is mostly hydrogen and helium
but is around 1% of other materials, or metals.
Metals in astronomical terms means anything
that isn’t hydrogen or helium, so includes
stuff like carbon and oxygen not just iron,
and the metallicity of stars varies a lot
but our own has a metallicity of about 1.2%
of its mass, and loosely speaking this about
the content of metals you’d expect in gas
giants in a solar system too, whatever it’s
star’s metallicity was, as barring those
very close to their sun, their gravity would
have held onto all their mass, whereas hotter
or smaller worlds, like our own rocky inner
planets, would have originally had more hydrogen
and helium when forming and lost them down
the eons.
If we think of that metallicity as our construction
material, than our Sun has thousands of times
Earth’s mass in various construction materials
and is enough for creating an entire dyson
swarm of rotating habitats.
Of course as you extract mass from a star,
you can either dump the hydrogen back down
onto it to burn or use it for other purposes,
and by removing the helium and other metals
you actually lengthen that stars lifetime,
almost indefinitely.
Remove enough material and you dim that star
too, meaning you need less material for a
full Dyson englobement.
You can also get metals the hard way via artificial
fusion or using your power surplus to run
massive supercolliders.
Any way you put it, any star you find will
always be convertible to a Dyson Sphere of
the kind you want with enough time and effort,
even if you have to spend a million years
sucking metals and mass out of it while using
your power surplus to run particle colliders
to make heavy elements for construction.
Fundamentally, this is why the Dyson Dilemma
of the Fermi Paradox is always so compelling.
The notion that there can’t be a ton of
alien civilizations around because if there
were, they’d build such constructs not just
around their own star but every one they colonized,
and that the Universe would be visually dark
by now, with no stars in the night sky, because
all that light would be absorbed by the Dyson’s
Swarms around them and re-emitted as infrared
waste heat, see the Dyson Dilemma episode
for more discussion of the notion.
There are other pathways than building Dyson
Swarms for civilizations as they grow - assuming
they do grow - but those pathways tend to
resemble Dyson Swarms, particularly in the
astronomical sense of being visually absent.
For instance you could make artificial black
holes for your power source and dump hydrogen
into them for power generation – see Colonizing
Black Holes – but you get a similar astronomical
detection on that because a swarm can only
be as dense as the waste heat it generates
permits it to be, and you’d always want
to build you swarm rather dense since even
a very dense one is still going to have large
travel and communication time lag issues compared
to folks living on a planet, even in super-rural
areas.
That gives it the typical infrared waste heat
blob appearance a Dyson would have, regardless
of its power source, be it a star or artificial
fusion or a black hole or energy beamed in
from elsewhere or whatever else we might use
that doesn’t violate the Laws of Thermodynamics.
Should we do this?
Should we dismantle our solar system?
Well it would seem the logical thing to do
but folks often object for many reasons.
Some of these I don’t find very reasonable,
like notions that we’d have too many people.
I understand the notion of having too many
people for your available resources, but that’s
too many people to support, not objecting
to the simple notion of higher quantity itself,
if you can support it.
Nor is it just people, if you dismantle your
solar system you can use a tiny fraction of
that mass to build wildlife-focused habitation
cylinders and still have thousands of times
the wildlife environments and ecosystems that
a pristine Earth had.
Of course some folks object to the notion
of dismantling those other pristine worlds,
but I don’t really think of big dead rocks
in space as having much intrinsic value in
just sitting there.
A ton of random rock doesn’t strike me as
being as cool and neat as a ton of humans
or a ton of kittens and puppies.
Of course as we saw, the Sun has most of our
building material anyway so we could bypass
those planets and leave them be, and we could
at least do that for Earth itself.
The solar system has plenty of construction
material nor are we limited to just our solar
system.
Those great big solar collectors make a nifty
way of moving materials between stars as we
looked at in our episodes Interstellar Laser
Highways and Exodus Fleet.
It is a bit of pain trying to maintain stable
orbits of billions or even trillions space
habitats when you’ve great big gravity wells
like planets orbiting around with them, but
it is manageable and if you’re going dismantle
an entire solar system, well most of that
mass is hydrogen and helium and they do actually
have some construction value.
You can use them for outer hull shielding
against accidental collision or attack on
a rotating habitat or as filler material on
shell worlds for making mass and gravity.
If the latter, you can put your planets in
a ring around a star, what we call a Kemplerer
Rosette, and that helps a lot with the gravitational
perturbations such planets cause a Dyson Swarm,
letting you keep Earth and have some additional
classic spherical worlds, or even weird shaped
ones like Hoopworlds or Flat Disc Worlds or
Sombrero Planets.
Needless to say you can also fuse that hydrogen
and helium into heavier elements, which if
done right produces energy rather than uses
it.
In that light, while it’s a lot of work,
many thousands of years’ worth at least,
and not without some downsides, the upsides
seem far greater.
So for my part, I say it’s a great idea,
Let’s Dismantle our Solar System!
We were discussing a lot of astronomy and
physics today, like calculating the gravitational
binding energy of planets, moons, and stars,
and if you’re interested in learning more
astronomical concepts or the math and physics
behind them, I’d recommend Brilliant.
The Universe is an immense and amazing place,
and knowing the math and science behind it
only makes it seem more amazing, and Brilliant’s
thought-provoking, fun, and interactive courses
makes them a great choice for learning, whether
you’re a student, a parent trying to enhance
your kid’s education, a professional brushing
up on cutting-edge topics, or someone who
just wants to use this time to understand
the world better, you should check out Brilliant.
Try adding some learning structure to your
day by setting a goal to improve yourself,
and then work at that goal just a little bit
every day.
Brilliant makes that possible with interactive
explorations and a mobile app that you can
take with you wherever you are.
If you are naturally curious, want to build
your problem-solving skills, or need to develop
confidence in your analytical abilities, then
get Brilliant Premium to learn something new.
Brilliant’s thought-provoking math, science,
and computer science content helps guide you
to mastery by taking complex concepts and
breaking them up into bite-sized understandable
chunks.
You'll start by having fun with their interactive
explorations, over time you'll be amazed at
what you can accomplish.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, and want to do it at
your own pace and from the comfort of your
own home, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and try it out for free.
So next week we’ll be back to the Fermi
Paradox series to consider disappearing stars
and cosmic voids, to consider if such things
are natural or might be signs of an older
alien civilization dismantling their own solar
systems or even entire galaxies.
The week after that we’ll be taking a look
at the popular science fiction trope of Techno-Barbarians,
civilizations existing in a post-apocalyptic
time using an anachronistic combination of
primitive and advanced technology.
But before that we’ll have our monthly livestream
Q&A, on Sunday, July 26th, 4 pm Eastern US
Time.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
