One of the non-intuitive aspects of space is 
that things in it don’t really have locations,  
they are constantly shifting where they 
are relative to Earth, and usually at  
very high speed. Lagrange Points are the 
rare oases, stationary islands in space.  
As a result, they are invaluable real estate.
Space is huge, but only a couple places are  
static in relation to the Earth. One is any object 
in Geostationary orbit, a ring of space 22,000  
miles above the equator, where the orbital period 
is exactly once every 24 hours. Objects there  
orbit at the same rate our planet spins, thus 
appearing as if they hang right overhead. This is  
a tiny little ring around our planet, compared to 
Earth's total orbital space. It's currently pretty  
full (and getting fuller) of geostationary 
satellites, so that space is very valuable. 
But there’s another region of interest to us 
today, indeed 10 of them, called our Lagrange  
points, and these points are unique for being 
stable places that don’t move relative to the  
bodies they’re connected to. Today we’ll 
be discussing them, how they function,  
and what value they have. They've already 
proven themselves useful – the James Webb  
Telescope is at the Earth-Sun L2 Lagrange 
Point, or in orbit of it to be more precise,  
because that keeps the Earth between the telescope 
and the overwhelming glare and noise of the Sun. 
The Lagrange points of any two-body system 
orbiting each other, like Earth with the Sun  
or Earth with the Moon, are the spots where the 
gravity of the two bodies causes a pocket that  
will move with them. Normally an object closer to 
the Sun will orbit it faster, indeed not just by  
having a smaller circumference to orbit by virtue 
of being closer but actually moving faster too.  
Venus orbits at 35 kilometers per second, 
compared to Earth’s orbital velocity of 30  
kilometers per second, or 18.5 miles per second, 
and it orbits at 0.7 AU, 70% of Earth’s distance,  
so it moves 17% faster than Earth and has only 
70% of the distance to cover. As a result,  
its own year is 225 of our days, instead of 365.
Amusingly that’s actually longer than its own  
day length, which is super long, and as a 
result Venus’s equivalent to Geostationary,  
Venostationary, would be around a million 
miles from it, much too far for a stable orbit,  
and further from it than it’s L1 or L2 points. We 
will dip into Lagrange Point Mechanics as we go,  
but the L1 Lagrange point is the one directly 
between two bodies where another object  
might be placed and stay in that same spot 
between them, while the L2 is on the outside,  
just beyond the second body, and the L3 is 
way on the other side of the other body,  
with the L4 and L5 points forming equilateral 
triangles with the two orbiting bodies. 
Stuff can be put in Lagrange points and expected 
to remain there with only a miniscule amount of  
station keeping. You can think of Lagrange 
Points as where things can essentially hang  
out at the edge of the two bodies and 
their competing gravitational influence,  
rather than specifically orbiting the smaller 
body, even though L1 and L2 are much closer  
to that smaller body than the larger one.
Indeed, the distance to the L1 or L2 point of a  
smaller body that is orbiting something much more 
massive is essentially the end of where anything  
can orbit it without losing that satellite to 
its own parent, also called the Hill Sphere.  
For anything tidally locked and slow turning 
like most moons would be, the L1 and L2 are  
great places to put a terminus station for a space 
elevator, as they don’t have proper geostationary  
spots themselves due to their slow rotation and 
the proximity to the bigger body they orbit. 
Now your necessary orbital velocity is related 
to how strong the gravity is that is pulling you,  
so that outer body pulling on you is going to 
slow your necessary speed, and indeed it needs  
to be lower than what that body itself orbits 
at because you still have a shorter orbital  
path or circumference by being closer to the Sun, 
something at our L1 Point has the same orbital  
period as Earth, but moves slower in velocity than 
Earth does, as it has a smaller orbital path. The  
reverse happens at L2, where Earth is in the 
same direction as the Sun and adds its gravity,  
so that the orbiting body needs to move faster 
to counteract it, normally it would orbit  
slower than Earth by being further from the Sun.
This isn’t very stable and tiny perturbations,  
like the orbit you’re on being an ellipse not 
a circle – which it is – or having neighboring  
planets yank on things – which they do – 
can destabilize these spots. But what it  
means is that there is a spot about 1% 
of the distance from Earth to the Sun,  
and 1% further from the Earth out from the Sun, 
were you can mostly-stably orbit along with the  
Earth, every 365.25 days, and where your orbital 
speed is about 1% lower or higher than Earth's. 
L1 is not where gravity is zero between the Earth 
and Sun, even though people tend to assume that’s  
the case. That spot is much closer to Earth, 
around 156,000 miles or 250,000 kilometers from  
Earth, and closer to us than the Moon, whereas 
L1 is almost 6 times further away and 4 times  
further away than the Moon. That zero-g spot 
would be calculated by taking the square root  
of the Sun’s Mass relative to Earth's, and that 
is the fraction of the distance from Earth to the  
Sun. Only when the two bodies are identical 
in mass is the L1 also a zero-gravity spot. 
I don’t want to dip into the math but if 
you’re curious, in cases where one of the  
two bodies is way, way more massive, like the 
Sun is to Earth, by a factor of 330,000 to one,  
the L1 is the fraction of the distance between 
them equal to the cube root of a third of their  
relative mass, rather than going with the square 
root, and again for Earth and the Sun it’s about  
1%. For a body about 3000 times more massive 
than its satellite, like the Sun is to Saturn,  
it would be about 10%, so the Sun-Saturn L1 and 
L2 are 90% and 110% the distance out to Saturn,  
roughly one AU, or Astronomical Unit, as big 
as Earth’s own distance from the Sun. The  
approximation breaks down as they get closer 
in mass and the Moon’s L1 and L2 are about  
16% of the distance to Earth out from the Moon.
Two obvious uses of L1 and L2 are solar shades  
and mirrors. If I want to limit the light hitting 
Earth, to cool the planet, I can put some mirrors  
or even debris up there to filter some light out 
at L1. That wouldn’t even be noticeable on Earth,  
even ignoring that you can’t stare at the Sun to 
see them, and indeed you might simply pick some  
material that was transparent to visible light 
but absorptive or reflective to near-infrared,  
which is a lot of the light we get from 
the Sun, and which has no real use in  
photosynthesis. It’s also still so far from 
Earth that only a miniscule fraction of the  
radiation inbound to Earth that they intercept 
would go on to hit Earth once they re-emitted it  
omnidirectionally as blackbody thermal radiation.
It's a decent place to build power collectors or  
space farms potentially too, but I think 
any civilization with our basic orbital  
mechanics is going to eventually put up a 
number of devices at L1 to help to protect  
them from irregularities in sunlight.
You could potentially mitigate damage  
from a solar flare or even a full-on Coronal Mass 
Ejection with a system in place at L1. You could  
even stabilize the light you have coming in and 
filter frequencies, to eliminate changes over  
the year for a planet with a more eccentric orbit 
or to remove a lot of infrared light and replace  
it with more visible light, or photosynthetic 
light – very handy for terraforming planets. 
Scale can be deceptive in cases like this. You 
might be thinking of some huge L1 megastructure  
and you might indeed build that one day - but 
you really don't need to. Instead imagine a  
bunch of simple satellites with a lot of 
reflective paneling no thicker than tin  
foil,with just a bit of wire and computers for 
turning themselves and a small solar panel. That  
might mean a control module weighing tens of 
kilograms for a panel massing maybe ten times  
that and a few kilometers across.
A million tons worth of those,  
or 10 aircraft carriers worth of material, would 
easily affect 1 or 2% of the sunlight coming in to  
get to Earth. That’s just not much mass, and 
nothing sophisticated either, it’s way less  
than a single modest O’Neill Cylinder would take 
to build, and would be comparable to a Kalpana  
One Space Habitat, and you might have several of 
those habitats stationed out there by then tending  
to them and receiving the occasional kinetic 
shove from them for station keeping of its own. 
These devices are effectively lagites, a mix of 
a normal satellite and a solar sail style static  
satellite, or statite, that can hover directly 
over any spot of a star without needing to orbit.  
See our recent episode on Statites, Lagites, 
and Quasites for more discussion. Instead  
they have a very tiny power supply and they twist 
themselves to bounce light in a given direction,  
or if opaque on one side, absorb it instead of 
reflecting it, and maneuver themselves around  
for station-keeping. They could rotate 
like a piece of paper to expose a maximum  
cross-section or a minimum one, and through this 
you could control how much light came through,  
and again in the frequencies of your choosing.
That application alone makes L1 some very valuable  
real estate for Earth, but it’s even better 
for a place like Mars where some solar-powered  
electromagnets at the L1 can mimic a powerful 
magnetosphere for Mars, preventing incoming  
solar wind and ionized particles from stripping 
off any atmosphere we add to the Red Planet. At  
the same time, it can basically make the Sun a bit 
bigger and brighter there, by having some mirrors  
just to the side of the light coming to Mars to 
bounce some more adjacent light on the planet to  
warm things up in a visually natural way.
Now on tidally locked planets, like those  
around a red dwarf star that would be eternally 
lit on one side of the planet and eternally dark  
on the other side of the planet, we can have a 
big eye open and close to permit day and night  
cycles on the sunny side and we can stick a 
big mirror behind that planet at its L2 to  
collect light and blast the dark side with it. In 
practice I would imagine this would be millions of  
smaller satellites and I would also imagine they’d 
spend their ‘night cycles’ bouncing that light to  
various power collectors or space facilities.
And again, any celestial body has Lagrange  
points. Thin panels can function as solar sails 
or lagites to provide station keeping and even  
fairly heavy maneuvering, so we need not worry 
about L1 stability as much. That means you could  
put a huge parabolic dish array behind a planet 
and bounce light down onto it, to thaw it out. 
As we already noted, solar L2 is a good place 
to shield something from sunlight, when it’s  
a planet’s L2 with its own star, and again a 
place we like to put telescopes. A Planetary L2,  
like the Earth-Moon L2, is a way to shield against 
planetary noise, and in a place that will almost  
always have sunlight so that it can consistently 
generate power. Planetary L2’s are also a good  
place to hide spy craft, particularly those in 
an L2 orbit who just peek out from around that  
moon to look at you and then send a tight beam 
signal off when you’re in the shadow of that moon. 
That’s probably only useful for spying on early 
civilizations before they get to the Apollo  
Program level, and truthfully only valuable 
for maybe one or two centuries while they’ve  
got real telescopes but still aren’t into space.
Another place that is like that is the Solar L3  
point, or the Counter-Earth position. L3 actually 
isn’t quite a counter-Earth spot unless the object  
at it was also Earth-mass exactly. It’s on 
the exact opposite side of the Sun as we are,  
and you might wonder why we even need to concern 
ourselves with Earth’s own gravity at this point,  
since it’s so tiny compared to the sun’s. 
And if we’re talking about anything other  
than long timescales, astronomical ones, 
we really do not need to care. Here,  
the Earth is pulling in the same direction as the 
Sun, same as with the L2, but it’s way further  
away. The Earth-Moon L3 is a bit different, the 
Moon is much closer to Earth’s mass and thus the  
Earth Moon L3 is 99.3% of the distance the Moon 
itself is, in the opposite direction of course. 
Why it isn’t stable is exactly because of that 
slight pull of Earth, or the smaller orbital body,  
and explains why anything off axis, say 170 
degrees instead of 180, is even less stable.  
As we’ll see, in a perfect 2 body system 
where the big ones are in a circular orbit,  
you only have 3 points of stability on 
that orbital path, the L3, L4, and L5,  
at 180 degrees, and then 60 before and after, 
the Trojan Points, which we’ll get to shortly. 
Our L3 with the Moon has no special 
value that I’ve ever heard or thought of,  
short of a Klemperer Rosette scenario where 
multiple celestial bodies are placed so  
their gravitational pull effectively cancels 
out. I think it would be a stretch to argue  
for two Moons in their mutual L3 spot, but 
with lower mass moons it’s semi-plausible.  
For our worldbuilders and sci-fi writers out 
there, there’s a lot of interesting multi-moon  
scenarios involving orbital resonances or L3.
For Counter-earths, that is an idea that goes back  
to the dawn of science and maybe even predates 
Socrates, and showed up in a fair amount of  
fiction before we started sending probes off to 
deep space. In truth, I don’t know if we’ve ever  
actually trained a telescope on the counter-earth 
spot to see if there wasn’t a planet there but it  
doesn’t matter if we actually looked or not -- we 
could already have detected it gravitationally. 
The High-Evolutionary from Marvel Comics, best 
known from the Adam Warlock plotlines, is often  
situated on a Counter-Earth, and in the old days, 
Superman’s homeworld of Krypton was located there,  
making the idea of him being desperately 
crammed into an escape pod by his parents a  
bit more plausible. The fictional planet of Gor 
is also set there, from John Norman’s Gor Saga,  
though I don’t recommend the novels. We also have 
the planet Mondas in Doctor Who, the homeworld of  
the cybermen, and that’s a counter Earth, and 
they also show up in the Godzilla franchise. 
It makes some interesting fictional scenarios, 
but at the end of the day, there’s not much real  
value there. It is the one place you can plausibly 
park something of reasonable size where a modern  
civilization like ours still isn’t likely to see 
it, you’re not likely to see a mile long spaceship  
or even a larger station there if you just happen 
to be glancing in that direction with a probe  
halfway to Mars. And it wouldn’t be a bad place 
to try to sneak up or spy on a new colony planet  
in another star system, except it also wouldn’t 
be likely they didn’t have any space capability  
themselves or wouldn’t think monitoring that 
spot was a good idea. Usually best not to hide  
in the place everyone would expect you to.
Indeed, to move on to the Trojan Points,  
the L4 and L5 Lagrange Points, you are almost 
bound to have relays or telescopes at those  
spots and they could very easily glance at the L3.
Back when we were first getting decent at spotting  
asteroids too small to qualify as a dwarf 
planet, we noted there were a ton of them  
orbiting about 60 degrees before and after 
Jupiter in its orbit of the Sun, and those  
got named for various characters from the Trojan 
war, with a Greek Camp and a Trojan Camp. The  
L4 point is the Greek camp, orbiting ahead, 
and the L5 Trojan camp behind. These points,  
L4 and L5 and around other planets too, have 
come to be generically called Trojan points,  
probably since there’s no existing country of that 
name we might get confused with in conversation. 
The National Space Society, the organization I 
currently have the honor of serving as President  
of, was made from combining two separate space 
advocacy groups back in the 1980s, Wernher von  
Braun’s National Space Institute and the Gerard 
K. O’Neill-inspired L5 Society, and while I’ve  
not found anyone who knows for sure why L5 was 
picked over L4 for a name, both are equally handy,  
it is specifically the Earth-Moon L5 that 
the L5 Society and the NSS are referring too. 
Now if you draw an equilateral triangle – one 
where each corner is 60 degrees and each side  
the same length, and put your two bodies at 
each corner – the Earth and Moon in this case,  
the other corner is your Trojan Point, and if 
you flip it around you’ll get your other Trojan. 
These are fairly stable spots, and indeed 
represent a fairly large region where things  
can orbit without too much perturbation 
by the two bodies. Logically speaking,  
the distance separating them from those two 
bodies is very large, the same as by which  
they separate from each other, and the Moon 
doesn’t exert much force on us. The Moon is  
around 60 times further from Earth than we are 
from Earth’s center and masses an 80th as much,  
so the force it exerts on us or on some Trojan 
object is about 3 parts per million of what a  
falling object on Earth’s surface experiences.
But that’s not trivial either, it means over  
the course of an entire day, with 86,400 
seconds, the object would have gained nearly  
3 meters per second of speed toward the Moon, and 
after a year gained fully a kilometer per second  
of speed. And as it gets closer, it experiences 
considerably more force. At 30 degrees ahead,  
instead of 60, being half the distance it then 
experiences 4 times the force and acceleration. 
That force isn’t directly backward along the 
orbital path though so an object being dragged  
this way doesn’t necessarily crash into the 
smaller of the two bodies. It could crash into it,  
it could end up as a small Moon in orbit of 
it, and yes Moons can have moons of their own,  
or it could get ejected into a different orbit. 
Eventually that object will cease being there,  
though at the larger solar scale, those planetary 
trojans like Jupiter have are pretty stable,  
especially as its gravity is so large compared 
to other planets nearby that have the potential  
to cause perturbation. You wouldn’t get 
many naturally occurring Trojan asteroid  
collections in inner systems with Rocky planets 
like ours, they’d perturb each other too much,  
and this effect is why we tend to refer to 
Jupiter as the solar system’s vacuum cleaner,  
sucking debris up in its wake.
This is why things can’t share  
an orbit with us around the Sun or the Moon 
around us, they get yanked out of the path  
by the mass of the other body. Our Lagrange 
Points are the stable points, marginally,  
because a balance of forces occurs there. 
At Solar L4 for instance, that body is being  
pulled backward by Earth while the Sun pulls 
it inward, but it’s not actually backwards,  
it’s forming not a right triangle between Earth 
and the Sun, it’s 60 degrees, so Earth is giving  
it some push in toward the Sun too. For the L5 
point, Earth would be increasing the gravity  
pull inward to the Sun by a bit, raising the 
needed orbital velocity, while also yanking on  
it to drag it along. It can be hard to get 
an intuitive feel for why this is stable,  
but if it were a bit closer than 60 degrees, there 
would be a small force pulling it toward Earth and  
also outward from the Sun, and the reverse if it 
were more than 60 degrees, and similar effects  
for if the object at the Trojan point were 
closer or further from the Sun than Earth was. 
And again the same applies around the Earth-Moon 
system, which is also way smaller and way more  
evenly balanced in mass, the Moon being a bit 
over a percent of Earth’s mass while the Earth  
is only a few millionths of the Sun’s mass. So 
this means that if you’re seeking any stable  
arrangements of space stations or facilities that 
aren’t very close to either Earth or the Moon,  
you have huge perturbative forces to deal with, 
and those Lagrange Points come in very handy as  
places where those are reduced to nearly zero.
It is where Lagites also come in as very handy  
options and why I often talk about space stations 
being larger facilities with one or more rotating  
habitats at their center and larger collections of 
lighter facilities in a constellation around them,  
and the bigger solar collectors and mirrors being 
on the outskirts of that. They not only serve as  
some shielding for the inner region, paper-thin 
though they are, but they can function as lagites  
and one’s with fuel-free maneuvering ability. At 
Lagrange points though, the mass to cross-section  
ratio can be a lot more generous than normal.
Sunlight exerts force via radiant pressure but  
it’s very minimal compared to what we normally 
need for rockets. It is on an order of about 1  
newton for every 10 Hectares or 25 acres 
of sail, or about 10 Newtons for a square  
kilometer. That’s about how much force 
a single kilogram of matter experiences  
from gravity on Earth’s surface. We can make 
materials thin enough that they would be a  
square kilometer wide and weigh just one kilogram.
That’s the key aspect of solar sails and statites,  
but if I have an object as far from Earth as it is 
from the Sun, then it’s only experiencing about 2  
billionths of the normal force of gravity 
from Earth that it would on our surface,  
and it doesn’t take much surface area per 
kilogram to counteract that force now,  
enough that a regular sized object might just 
need to be shiny and able to rotate itself to  
manage station keeping anywhere along that Earth 
Orbit, especially closer to the Lagrange points,  
and you could mimic Lagrange points in a 
much wider volume with that Lagite approach. 
This is our reasoning when we discuss 
what we call a Terran Ring on this show,  
a huge collection of space habitats and facilities 
in a wide torus around Earth’s orbital path,  
such that it would look like a ring with Earth 
as its gemstone. Simple high-strength tethers  
running between all those facilities would allow 
easy station keeping, in conjunction with some  
other tricks we’ve discussed over the years 
for moving momentum around in a careful and  
calculated fashion. Some like telescoping or 
tethering bits together we examined recently  
in our episode Orbital Defense Platforms.
As another example, if I have three objects,  
one at a Lagrange point and one a bit further 
from the Lagrange Point and one a bit nearer,  
I can connect a physical tether to those, with a 
winch, and just pull things a bit one direction or  
another to counteract any perturbative drift, 
especially if one of those anchor objects had  
a big solar panel or unfoldable sail it could 
expand when needed. I suspect you would often  
fold those up too, as they are going to take 
a lot of wear and tear from micro-meteors and  
space dust while expanded or inflated.
Closer in for the Earth-Moon Trojan’s,  
that is a higher bar, as while the Moon’s surface 
gravity might only be a sixth of Earth’s it’s  
Trojan Lagrange Points are only about 200 times 
further from its center than its surface is, so  
gravity is about 300,000 times weaker there 
than earth’s surface, around 33 micronewtons,  
as opposed to the Earth-Sun Trojans, 
500,000,000 times weaker, about 20 nanonewtons. 
That very much alters the size we can contemplate 
for Lagites and makes those Lunar Lagrange points  
pretty important to future development, 
though again we shouldn’t think of them  
as points but rather regions. The difference in 
lunar gravity from being at the L4 or L5 point,  
and being 4000 miles away, is a few percent weaker 
or stronger and on an order of a micronewton per  
kilogram of whatever it’s pulling on. Again, in 
space where there’s no air drag or resistance  
that can build up pretty quick, but it could 
still be counteracted by the equivalent of  
one square foot of solar sail, and that’s 
such a tiny force that even a cable made on  
relative mundane and weak materials, thousands 
of miles long, would not snap under the load. 
In other words that means you have a region at 
least as big as Earth, if not bigger, in which  
to be putting facilities, and this is 3D not 2D 
like our planet’s surface, and they’re not moving  
at huge speeds relative to each other like stuff 
in low Earth orbit is moving, where objects moving  
in opposite directions would collide at as much as 
16 kilometers per second or 10 miles per second.  
Indeed the Moon’s orbital speed around Earth is 
just 1 kilometer per second, so even a maximum  
speed collision of two objects counter-orbiting 
Earth out there – which there’s no real reason  
to do incidentally – would involve 64 times 
less energy in such a collision. This volume  
once full of megastructures might also expand by 
them having some amount of gravity themselves. 
And again there’s no reason to counter-orbit or be 
orbiting at steep angles compared to each other,  
and this gives us another reason the Lagrange 
points are appealing. There’s no Kessler Syndrome  
scenarios there. Cascade Debris situations 
involve the idea that an object gets hit and  
blows more material off, and that material 
is moving slower now than whatever hit it,  
relative to the body that shed it, but it’s still 
moving superfast to anything else in that orbital  
region. It might leave at just a few meters per 
second but something orbiting at a different  
angle might still plow into it at several thousand 
meters per second, and the subsequent debris of  
that collision hit yet more things, shedding more 
debris, and so on. But in a big Lagrange Point  
volume, nothing is keeping any debris in, it will 
fly or meander out without effort to keep it in,  
while nothing inside that volume is moving. 
Except for ships or transports, which can  
operate at much lower speed and which might 
simply pull along tethers inside that volume,  
saving fuel and giving you momentum you might 
use for station keeping larger facilities there. 
Indeed, moving cargo around on tethers in 
general is a good way to do station-keeping.  
On that topic, since the moon’s gravity is so 
weak that we can make Lunar Space Elevators to  
it’s L1 and L2 points with Earth out of mundane 
materials, you could do a large diamond running  
between the Lunar L1, L2, L4, and L5 points, and 
with the Moon at the center and with tethers to  
each place from the Moon and each other, and 
it would be very easy to do station keeping  
simply by running mass off the Moon as you 
exported material to those Lagrange hubs to  
build space habitats, or refill fuel depots, or 
to move people and cargo around too, of course. 
So these gigantic extended LaGrange Points 
each have more volume to stably develop in  
than planets, and indeed are a good deal larger 
when we’re looking at bodies where their moon  
is smaller or where the distances are greater, 
like with Solar Lagrange Points with planets.  
But we also get this wider diamond, which I will 
go ahead and name a Lagrange Diamond. Places where  
you can interconnect things and not need to worry 
about all the problems of the tight and high speed  
orbits close to a planet or larger moon. This 
is also a place where you can be running very  
long launch ramps, tethers, mass driver, and 
rotavators out of to assist in launch and in  
capture. Though as a minor note, these Lagrange 
Diamonds would not have exactly flat edges. 
One trick you can do with a rotavator or rotating 
skyhook in deep space is to have a tether whirling  
around out from a large space station, which can 
be spun out to have desired tangential velocity a  
passing spaceship could be matched with, and then 
the tether can link up and begin winching them in  
on a decreasing spiral. The space station loses 
some angular momentum spinning that tether out,  
and may gain or lose momentum on connecting 
to that ship, or cargo pod, winching in that  
tether after it hooks up, but should have no 
problem balancing those out between captures  
and even if it needed to occasionally burn 
some fuel to correct a growing imbalance,  
it would be trivial compared to total 
savings. It can also launch ships this way. 
Fundamentally what’s neat about Lagrange points in 
this context is that it allows you to build huge  
conglomerations of structures near a gravity well, 
like Earth or some planet or moon we’re mining,  
and yet without the problems associated 
to low or medium orbit where everything is  
crowded and high speed, where its causing light 
pollution or wrecking the view of the night sky,  
and where there’s no threat of Kessler 
Syndrome and no construction problem  
associated to very large megastructures 
where they have a lot of different gravity’s  
pulling strongly in different directions.
That means we can build very large megastructures,  
like the O’Neill Cylinder or even bigger, and 
in multiples, without the problems of gravity  
or debris cascades, while not being far from the 
Earth, indeed just 1.3 seconds for signals to go  
either way. Which makes real time communication 
possible to both Earth and the Moon, if a touch  
irritating for casual chat. The upside is there’s 
so much room for development there, and reasons  
to develop there, that you would have plenty of 
people to chat with. Indeed, in many ways, these  
Lagrange points and our Lagrange Diamond, are in 
a position to house far more people than Earth  
itself, and around other planets in a more distant 
future might tend to be where a large portion  
of a given planet-moon system people lived, 
especially if neither body was all that appealing  
for terraforming but very good for mining.
Ultimately our future in space is a big and spread  
out one, but there are places that will be highly 
valued, like planets and moons and the Lagrange  
Points or Geostationary orbits around them, and 
they are essentially the fertile river valleys  
or deep water coves for space, where settlement 
will begin and where mighty new realms will arise.
We were talking about how to build lots of 
adjacent space habitats today at Lagrange points,  
and an alternative approach to that is to 
build a very long and skinny megastructure  
known as a Topopolis, and one neat feature 
of that is how they would tend to have one  
very long river running down them which might 
run thousands or even billions of miles long.  
We’ll be exploring that in our upcoming February 
Nebula Exclusive, Topopolis: The Eternal River,  
and if you haven’t already caught January’s Nebula 
Exclusive, Giant Space Monsters, that’s out now  
exclusively on Nebula, our streaming service, 
where we’ll discuss what science tells us about  
all the crazy space monsters we might see on alien 
planets, or even in the void of space itself. 
On Nebula you can see every regular episode of 
SFIA a few days early and ad free, and all our  
other bonus content, including extended editions 
of many episodes, and more of our Monthly Nebula  
Exclusives like, The Fermi Paradox: Hermit 
Shoplifter Hypothesis, Ultra-Relativistic  
Spaceships, Dark Stars at the Beginning of Time, 
Life As An Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners on the  
Moon, Space Freighters, Retrocausality, Orch Or 
& Free Will, Colonizing Binary Stars, and more. 
Nebula has tons of great content 
from an ever-growing community of  
creators. Using my link and discount it’s 
available now for just over $2.50 a month,  
less than the price of the drink or snack you 
might have been enjoying during the episode. 
When you sign up at my link, 
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and  
use my code, isaacarthur, you not only get 
access to all of the great stuff Nebula offers,  
like Giant Space Monsters and Topopolis: 
The Eternal River, you’ll also be directly  
supporting this show. Again, to see SFIA early, 
ad free, and with all the exclusive bonus content,  
go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
This weekend we’ll explore  
Conformal Cyclic Cosmology and the possibility 
that a previous universe may have existed over  
which ours is layered on top, before we head into 
February to look at Death Worlds and surviving on  
ultra-dangerous planets. Then on February 
8th we’ll examine homesteading in space,  
and what might draw pioneers to new colonies 
and what sorts of life and challenges they’d  
face. Then on February 11th’s Sci-Fi Sunday, we’ll 
ask what might make a civilization quarantine an  
entire planet and how that might be enforced.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Giant 
Space Monsters, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
