We spent a lot of time figuring out how to
get into orbit, but what do you do
and where do you go once you’re up there?
Welcome back to the Upward Bound series, and
I am your host, Isaac Arthur.
We started this series almost a year ago and
have discussed many different ways of getting
into space cheaper and safer, and it’s fairly
impressive how much launch costs have dropped
just in this last year alone.
We, and lots of other folks, have long predicted
there’d be a point where technology dropped
launch costs while increasing what we could
do up there that would result in a snowball
effect and I feel pretty confident at this
point saying that I think we are seeing the
beginning of that now.
As it gets cheaper to get off Earth, we also
have more things we can do up there, starting
up a real economy and infrastructure in orbit,
and I thought we’d spend a couple episodes
discussing those options.
For today we will be looking not just at an
improved space station to replace the ISS,
but a genuine spaceport.
Designs for those go a long way back, at least
to von Braun’s inflatable space wheel, and
we started seeing the first realistic ones
hit the silver screen in Stanley Kubrick and
Arthur C. Clarke’s class film, “2001:
A Space Odyssey”.
Many more have been dreamed up since, and
we have discussed some very large ones we
can build down the road, but I was curious
what folks had come up with in recent years,
tailored to the current and emerging technologies.
As I investigated those I ran across the Gateway
Foundation’s Orbital Assembly Project, and
got to talking to one of their engineers,
Kit Carson, and their President, John Blincow.
One of the cool things about running this
channel is getting to chat with all the aerospace
companies working to bring the future about,
and a lot of them tend to be big believers
in a lot of the ideas we discuss here, and
it is fun to pick their brains and bounce
ideas around.
There are a ton of options for our first spaceport,
but it’s easier to focus primarily on one
design.
Since Gateway has a kickstarter coming up
for drone assembly robots to be used in orbit,
and was kind enough to lend me their top notch
animations of some of their designs, I thought
we’d use theirs, though I’ll admit, their
option to go big for that first spaceport
also swayed me.
Most plans lying around amount to a space
station upgrade not much bigger than a house.
They’re thinking gas station or maybe freeway
truck stop, not airport, and a lot of times
they’re not including all the ancillary
stuff we tend to see near such facilities,
convenience stores, motels, hotels, restaurants,
entertainment, and so on.
We’ve discussed a lot of systems that might
get launch costs down to under $100 a kilogram,
indeed for some just a couple bucks a kilogram,
and SpaceX is set to bring that cost down
to under $1000 in the very near future with
their BFR, a skyscraper-sized rocket.
$1000 a kilogram has been a fairly common
figure to use as the snowball point, probably
because it’s about the zone where transporting
a person into space is about the same as the
GDP per capita in a developed nation, at which
point going up to orbit is obviously still
a serious luxury, but no longer restricted
to billionaires.
As of today, with nearly sixty years of missions
to space, we still haven’t even sent 1000
people up there.
We have a lot of airports that process that
many people through every hour, and even the
little airport near me mostly for recreational
flying does that many in a week.
If we want to be able to say we have a genuine
foothold in space, we need to be thinking
about spaceports that can welcome a thousand
people a week.
It’s worth noting that even at that rate,
that’s only about 50,000 people a year,
while still being nearly a hundred times as
many folks as we’ve ever sent up there so
far.
50,000 a year would mean only a million people
out of each generation of humanity got to
go into space just one time.
If we wanted everybody to get a chance to
spend a week up there it would mean sending
not 50,000 people a year, but 100 Million.
That’s three people every second, rather
than about every month as now.
Needless to say, that’s a long way off,
but if launch costs drop to the point where
a person, and little bit of luggage and supplies,
call it 200 kilograms a person, could be sent
there for $1000 a kilogram, or $200,000 each,
ten billion dollars would provide 50,000 people
access to space.
That’s actually a very plausible annual
figure for tourism alone, and there are a
lot more than 50,000 folks who could afford
that ticket.
More to the point, it starts opening options
for private sector spending we tend not to
think about.
If you want to rent out the Vomit Comet for
a flight, it cost about as much as one of
those tickets we just mentioned, and that
gets a film crew a couple dozen zero-gravity
intervals of about half a minute, spread over
a few hours of flight.
Not really ideal filming circumstances, alternatively
a spaceport could easily have several bays
just given over to filming, where a cast and
crew of 50 could spend weeks shooting up there
unrushed for a price tag of around ten million,
a sizable but hardly murderous cost for a
big-budget film.
That’s also a pretty good draw for other
folks and publicity, since a lot of folks
would enjoy getting to meet celebrities up
there filming or get cast as an extra in a
film, since it makes sense to grab those from
folks already up there, and I’m sure you’d
have a lot of video blogging going on by those
celebrities while they were up there too.
That’s just one example of something that
has nothing to do with science that you could
use a spaceport for in the near future.
If we want others, we really only need to
consider what we tend to find at more conventional
transportation ports.
Hotels, restaurants, and casinos would be
some examples.
I was joking with John and Kit that someone
might make a fortune patenting the first zero-gravity
roulette wheel or magnetic table and dice
for gaming.
And for the same reason lavish charity gambling
or dinner events tend to do well, these probably
would too, since those doing it can point
out that they are helping fund a good cause.
That was actually one of John’s more interesting
ideas for funding too, a lottery where the
winner gets an all-expense paid trip to the
spaceport.
Launch costs may be getting a lot cheaper,
but we’d still be talking tickets priced
at a decent fraction of a million bucks, which
is more than most of us will ever have to
spend.
But if you can buy a ticket, like with most
state lotteries where a big chunk goes to
education or similar, you’ve got a plausible
shot at winning and know all that money is
either going to fund making it cheaper and
better or sending someone up there.
Don’t think of this as a small additional
source of potential funding either, lotteries
alone bring in over 70 billion dollars a year
in the US, about double America’s total
space program spending, not just NASA, and
300 billion globally, about 5 times what the
whole planet spends on space programs.
It would let us get a lot more science done,
to the point where Universities can afford
to send a scientist or two up there for months,
and rent out a lab all to themselves.
Right now it can take years just to get a
small box up there that an astronaut might
tinker with for a few minutes a day for you,
this is not ideal for a lot of experiments.
The thing is a spaceport that can handle several
hundred people on board at once is not a small
thing, and proportionally even bigger than
the ISS because folks will want more elbow
room.
The Gateway Spaceport design is modular, designed
to be built in chunks and mostly automatically,
and also expandable, and begin with the Gateway
Segment Assembly Line or GSAL.
The GSAL is an automated assembly system designed
to create segments of a structure.
The segments are then welded together to form
the whole structure.
This method of construction is called permanent
modular construction.
The GSAL will consist of a number of workstations,
each with a different assignment.
Each will assemble semi complete segments
much like aircraft manufacturers and shipyards
do.
You ship up the raw materials and it takes
them in and spits out segments, like trusses.
An interesting advantage of space construction
is your trusses don’t have to be all that
massive, as there’s no gravity to fight.
You construct modularly, in blocks.
The GSAL makes square sections for the station
hub or wedge segments for the ring sections.
Beams go into the GSAL and modules come out
to be welded into place.
They estimate each block would take just under
half an hour to make.
The GSAL itself is roughly 12 by 12 by 120
meters and the modules themselves can be a
maximum 7.6 meters wide and tall or 25 feet,
and can actually be of any length but the
default construction of the Spaceport Hub
called for a length of 76 meters or 250 feet.
You can make segments skinnier, shorter, longer,
or have them vary in width so as to produce
wedge shaped sections for a ring.
Each one of these, using the default length
for the Spaceport Hub sections would be 7.6
by 7.6 by 76 meters with a volume of 4400
cubic meters, almost five times the pressurized
volume of the International Space Station,
at just 916 cubic meters.
The Gateway Hub section is a disc with a large
rectangular docking bay cut into it, composed
of a couple of hundred of these modules.
Its own pressurized volume is 1.1 million
cubic meters, fully 1200 times that of the
ISS.
And that’s pretty darn big, true, but it’s
peanuts compared to some of the structures
we talk about, even the modest ones like an
O’Neill Cylinder, but it would dwarf every
object we’ve sent into space so far combined.
Now, with a radius and depth of 76 meters,
and 1.4 million cubic meters of volume, both
the pressurized section and vacuum-exposed
bay, you could stop here and have a very complete
and useful spaceport.
There’s plenty of room for ships in that
bay too, it’s a good deal larger than a
football field and it is designed to operate
stand-alone from additional segments.
Of course as big as it is, we will want to
add some components on to the Hub.
Now by default a space station has no gravity,
and as we’ve discussed before you can simulate
gravity by spinning the object.
How fast you spin it and how far you are from
the center of spin, controls the apparent
gravity inside.
This apparent gravity is linear to the radius
or diameter, so if you double the ring size
you’d double the apparent gravity, alternatively
if you climb halfway toward the middle you
would halve the gravity and it would be zero
at the center.
This is not the case for the speed the object
is spinning at though.
You can calculate this either as the tangential
velocity, the specific speed the outside edge
is spinning at, in which case apparent gravity
rises with the square, or with its angular
velocity, the rate at which it is rotating.
As an example the Earth spins at the equator
at about 460 meters per second, its tangential
velocity, while it spins one revolution per
day, its angular velocity.
RPMs or revolutions per minute tends to be
the default value spin-gravity stations are
given in and it also causes a rise in spin-gravity
with the square of angular velocity.
Hypothetically you can simulate any level
of gravity this way but it puts a huge strain
on the station to hold together the larger
you make it and the faster you spin it.
On top of this, people don’t handle being
spun around rapidly in circles too well, it
makes us nauseous and disoriented.
It’s generally accepted that anything less
than 2 RPM won’t bother people, and we’ve
some indications that with training we could
get used to a good deal more.
Now one of the reasons we don’t have such
a spinning section on the ISS is that we’ve
got plenty of places to do gravity-based experiments
but just that one small station for zero-gravity,
plus the place is small enough that any rotating
section would either have very little gravity
or be nausea-inducing.
The Gateway Spaceport aims for something much
larger, multiple rings with much larger diameters
spinning will be slower.
The first to be built and innermost of these
would be the Lunar Gravity Area or LGA, with
a radius of 152 meters, by rotating once per
minute it would generate 17% of normal gravity,
the same as on the Moon.
Needless to say this would be handy for folks
training for moon missions which is why that
was selected, for a Mars Gravity Area, a ring
with a larger radius would simulate Martian
gravity, or lower, to simulate a place like
Jupiter’s moon Callisto, which has only
13% Earth gravity and as we discussed in the
Outward Bound series, is one of the best potential
first bases for humanity out past the Asteroid
Belt.
However, besides training its real advantage
is allowing us to do long term studies of
the effects of low gravity on people.
We actually have no idea what that is, the
twelve folks who have ever experienced low
gravity only experienced the Moon’s specific
value and only for a few days.
For all we know, even the Moon’s small surface
gravity might be entirely enough for healthy
people to live years at a time, or it could
be that even Venus’s near-Earth gravity
isn’t enough.
Best to find out in orbit, now, not in the
middle of a mission millions of kilometers
from help.
This is important too, as for instance we
have no idea how much gravity is needed to
safely carry an infant to term, and we’ve
good cause to think that is a gravitationally
sensitive process.
You’ve got serious issues colonizing other
planets if you can’t, well, manufacture
colonists in-situ.
And if there are any complications in pregnancies
from gravity, it behooves us to identify them
on some large and well-equipped space station
close enough to Earth for real-time communication,
not on some cramped moon base or Martian colony.
So the LGA lets us investigate the long term
effects of lunar gravity and train and prep
crews for missions to the Moon.
It also allows folks to enjoy the fun of low
gravity while still having the intuitive sense
of up and down work.
The plans call for 300 guest rooms, which
would have the advantage of allowing you to
sleep without needing to strap in and drink
from normal cups rather than bulbs and avoid
the unpleasantness involved with using the
restroom in zero-gravity.
I suspect a lot of folks would want to try
out the full zero-gravity experience but after
a day or so might be glad to have a room with
some gravity in it.
And the LGA has plenty of rooms in it.
At 3.2 million cubic meters of volume, it
would be 3400 times as spacious as the International
Space Station.
The next ring to be built would be the MGA
– Mars Gravity Area.
With a radius of 244 meters it would only
simulate 27% gravity at 1 RPM, Mars is actually
at 38% so we would have to adjust spin to
1.18 RPM, again well beneath the 2 RPM value
we think is safe against disorientation.
Spun to 1.9 RPM it would match normal Earth
gravity and a bit less could simulate Venus.
At 30 meters width, which would be several
floors or decks, and 45 meters depth, the
LGA itself would have a volume of 2.2 million
cubic meters, about 2400 times the volume
of the ISS.
It would also include 46 Megawatts of solar
power generation.
This ring is expected to house about a thousand
people spread over 550 guest cabins and is
viewed as more of a long-term residence area,
a mission to Mars calls for 18 months on the
ground in Martian gravity so we need long
term tests to begin with, so it is anticipated
this area would also include apartments or
facilities for rent or lease.
Probably fairly expensive, after all even
if you are only including launch costs for
supplies and totally recycling air and water,
supplies for one person for a year might easily
still run a million dollars, but that is viable
for crew or long term researchers or folks
who are quite wealthy and simply want to live
in space.
Space in space is actually fairly cheap and
made cheaper by the square-cube law, as we’ve
discussed with larger spaceships, if you simply
double something in size its surface area
rises by the square, or 4, but its volume
rises with the cube, or 8.
You need 4 times the shielding and hull material,
but you get 8 times the space inside it, or
need only half the shielding per unit of space.
As mentioned the Hub is over a thousand times
bigger than ISS, in volume, so essentially
it only needs about a tenth the shielding
material per unit of space as ISS does.
You wouldn’t want to be lavish with room
design but your bottleneck is on the mass
of furniture and equipment in a room more
than the size of the room.
You could have a couple thousand people living,
working, or visiting the full Gateway Spaceport
at any given time with shuttles carrying 30-40
people arriving and departing several times
a day.
And that’s just the default size of the
station, you could make it skinnier or wider,
the GSAL is basically printing those modules
like pasta, you can cut the module noodle
at any length.
You could also build a whole other spaceport
instead if you need room, in a different orbit
or right next door and connect them.
Now a big aspect of construction is going
to be drones, and you basically have two types,
the flying kind and the crawling kind.
The latter zip around welding things, welding
in a vacuum is tricky but we’ve had some
practice, and the other kind mostly zips around
grabbing things, we really don’t want tools
or construction material wandering off, both
for the loss of material and because a hammer
that seems to spin away at a meter or two
a second is still actually moving several
thousand meters per second relative to Earth
and could eventually smash into something
on a different orbital path with a huge amount
of force.
Indeed, next time in this series we’ll be
examining how that can cause a runaway effect,
where objects get destroyed, their debris
scatters and destroys more things, and so
on, littering orbital space with millions
of hyper-velocity bullets and potentially
preventing any space travel.
This is known as Kessler Syndrome and we will
discuss it in more detail, along with ways
of handling it, in the next episode of the
series in a few weeks.
Those drones could be controlled by station
operators but in fact, seeing as how the station
is only hundreds of kilometers up, ground-based
pilots could control them, saving a lot of
money.
Indeed if our robotics get good enough you
could use humanoid shaped robots like NASAs
Robonaut piloted by folks in virtual reality
down on Earth, potentially allowing a much
bigger crew who also don’t need living space
or time off, as the next shift just takes
over the robot.
For manned construction we have something
usually called a pod, which is basically a
small pressurized vehicle, though the person
inside would likely wear a suit anyway, with
various jets to move it around and arms to
manipulate equipment and tools, and of course
we’d have classic spacesuits for EVA too.
Spacesuits remain a problem as they are bulky
and leak, and more the higher the pressure,
hence why we tend to use oxygen-only in spacesuits
and have to have the astronauts pre-breathe
to purge nitrogen from their blood.
One of the preferred ways to deal with this
is a rubberized suit that would push on the
wearer but we have problems at the neck and
helmet interface, partially because while
you can squeeze a body fairly hard, you can’t
really squeeze someone’s neck that much,
as it tends to make them pass out and die.
Hence pods and drones are going to be preferable
and our technology there is rapidly improving.
The thing about a spaceport of this size is
it allows you to have a crew big enough for
lots of specialization and redundancy while
also allowing lots of folks who have nothing
to do with spaceport operations, including
crewmembers just there to monitor those visitors
or residents so they don’t kill themselves
on accident, and provide hospitality of course.
You could easily have small teams from dozens
of universities or government labs conducting
experiments up there while movie crews film
and travelers come by just to enjoy zero-gravity
and all the various associated entertainments
we could come up with, like a zero-g racquetball
court or casino.
And since it does have gravity in segments,
you’ve got places for people to go if that
lack of gravity gets overwhelming.
Since you’d doubtless be screening everyone
medically before they went up and when they
got home, you would also build a very large
data pool on health effects of no gravity
and low gravity.
You’ve got room for entire hydroponic gardens
for botanists to work with to do large samples
of many plants and see how low or no gravity
affects them, instead of just small terrariums
like we are limited to now.
We can also do some zoology too, we haven’t
taken that many animals to space, especially
large ones, or done much research on how groups
of them behave in the long term, what changes
to hunting or breeding might occur in low
gravity.
How would a flying squirrel act in a forested
dome with lunar gravity?
Folks heading off to a moon base will have
had time to get used to the gravity and will
know there’s a platform with ships docked
to it and fuel that could resupply them rapidly,
no weather-fickle ground-based launch windows,
and come get them in an emergency.
We can train Mars crews safely for simulated
26 month missions, part in no gravity and
part in Martian, and see for sure if they
can handle it before sending them off where
we can’t help.
Asteroid mining companies could know they’ve
got a place to dock and unload, refuel, repair,
and get some relaxation before heading off
again.
You could have repair bays so that potentially
a satellite could be repaired, or even assembled
from parts, right there rather than needing
to design it for fitting in one rocket payload
and eventually being pushed up to a graveyard
orbit or down to burn up.
If your 3D printing is good enough you could
manufacture replacement parts or upgrades
right there, and if your robots are versatile
enough, the work could be done there with
them piloted by expert technicians who are
groundside controlling the robots.
Once you build your initial space construction
infrastructure, you could start assembling
truly huge space-based telescopes too, remember
Hubble is pretty big but there are many ground-based
ones that are larger, and you can actually
make bigger ones in space.
Tons of options, and more will emerge after
such a spaceport is created too.
If you build it, they will come.
And once the hub is overloaded you build the
LGA segments, then the MGA, then you can add
on more independent modules attached to it
or a whole new station connected to it or
serving a different orbital path.
The Gateway Foundation’s spaceport design
is not the only one, but it especially impressed
me as did their work on drones, which we will
be looking at more next time in the series.
More so because it’s not a design for just
one series, but a setup designed to able to
continue perpetual construction of new ones
so we can accommodate more and more people
and keep dropping the price tag to go up there,
until eventually the available space rises
and the costs drops so that anyone can go.
They do have a Kickstarter just opening up
for the drone design and I will attach a link
in the video description if you want to read
more and support them, and I know they are
also looking for crew members, and volunteers
to help out on the graphics side, much like
us here at SFIA, where I am also always looking
for folks with some computer graphics skills
and time to volunteer them, those animations
are not core to the technological development
but they are vital to explaining these concepts
to folks and helping gathering interest, enthusiasm,
and of course funding.
And again if you wanted to help them out in
either way, I’ll leave the link below, and
hopefully we’ll get some good space drones
out of it in the near future, which will be
vital to infrastructure in space.
And at this point, with even just the completed
Hub of the spaceport, you do have the beginnings
of a basic orbital infrastructure and the
perfect beachhead to expand that.
We will be looking at orbital infrastructure,
more on orbital construction, and as mentioned,
orbital debris and Kessler Syndrome in three
weeks.
Before that we will be heading back to the
Fermi Paradox series to examine the concept
of ancient hibernating civilizations in Fermi
Paradox Sleeping Giants, and then we will
launch off to Alpha Centauri to discuss colonizing
the system and look at the special difficulties
of binary and multiple star systems.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
You can also discuss these topics with like-minded
individuals in the comments below or at our
Facebook and Reddit groups, Science & Futurism
with Isaac Arthur.
Until next time, this is Isaac Arthur saying
thanks for watching, and have a great week!
