This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
We often wonder why the galaxy isn’t full
of alien civilizations.
But what if they’re out there, whispering
to us in the night,
but we just can’t hear them?
Our 
galaxy contains hundreds of billions of stars,
many far older than our own, and the galaxy
itself is but one of billions.
Likely most of those stars have planets and
at least a decent percent of them would probably
be big enough to hold an atmosphere and located
where their sun could keep liquid water on
their surface.
We don’t know that life would need that,
but even if it does, it should seem to imply
almost uncountable worlds that might harbor
life.
This is the basic notion of the Fermi Paradox,
that we’d expect that even if the odds of
life were much worse than we thought, and
even if it was fairly unlikely to develop
into complex and intelligent life, there should
just be tons of civilizations like ours out
there.
But if there is, we’re not hearing from
them.
If that life is out there, where is it?
Why aren’t the radio waves clogged with
intergalactic radio?
Regular watchers of the show know this problem
is probably far worse if we consider a capacity
for interstellar travel and colonization.
But when the Paradox first came out, before
we even landed on the Moon or sent probes
to other planets, that seemed to be half of
the answer.
We could only hear these folks if we were
close enough to their homeworld to pick up
their radio, because they probably had no
other worlds except maybe colonies on other
planets around their own native sun, their
Mars or Venus.
I thought for today we’d ask about that
scenario, of a non-interstellar galaxy, where
folks just couldn’t colonize the stars.
It turned out not to be practical or desirable.
We’ve considered such possibilities before,
most notably in Stay-at-Home Civilizations,
and while we’ll touch today on some reasons
for why this might be so, we’re mostly interested
in what the contact situation with us would
be, rather than why they are limited to their
world.
Those reasons do matter though.
For instance, a civilization that has found
that interstellar travel is not practical
after millennia of research and efforts, even
though they really want to do it, is one that
might have a strong desire to speak to others
and may have concluded that everyone else
found travel impractical too.
Such being the case, they probably aren’t
worried about being invaded.
If someone did crack the problem of practical
interstellar travel, they’d figure they
probably aren’t the types to go around colonizing
and conquering every last world, as they don’t
appear to be doing so.
If that is so, there’s no harm announcing
your presence and possibly much to gain.
So they have plenty of incentive to say hello
to the Universe at large.
We mostly hesitate to do that now simply because
we’re so new to things that we worry there
are unknown variables we should worry about,
but if you’ve been contemplating the problems
for many centuries, not a few decades, and
the situation hasn’t changed, your policy
probably will.
On the flip side, ‘practical’ interstellar
efforts isn’t necessarily talking about
the engineering and logistics.
A civilization might find that it’s impossible
to maintain any sort of cohesion if they get
big enough, in numbers or in distance, and
fear that without such cohesion they’d exist
in non-stop chaos and warfare.
All things being equal, if you value sentient
individuals, more of them is better, but they
rarely are equal.
We can only support so many folks in a given
area with a given level of technology and
keep them fed and provided for in other ways,
what we call a ‘carrying capacity’, but
this isn’t just necessarily food or energy
or material things.
They may find that past 10 billion people
their civilization doesn’t fare well, even
if they are amply provided for and abundant
of resources.
They may also feel any interstellar colony
amounts to planting a seed that will grow
into a rival or enemy, not an expansion of
their own civilization or a daughter civilization
they can call friend and ally.
And yet they too have a reason to reach out
and say hello to other worlds, as they would
be inclined to assume such alien civilizations
have the same limitation or have overcome
it in a way they might be able to copy or
adapt for their own use, or have other information
of value.
So again there is a motive to communicate.
But they also might be a civilization whose
leadership was opposed to expansion simply
because they didn’t feel they could maintain
control themselves, and enjoyed that supremacy,
or at least believed it necessary.
Such a civilization might be very hesitant
to reach out to others as new ideas and technology
might make their own efforts to keep their
own civilization together all the harder,
or even invite attack or interference from
someone who disapproved of their system.
Now that implies a rather nasty dictatorship
but would not necessarily be the case.
Technology is very dangerous and there are
some technological paths that might be so
dangerous you don’t dare let them be pursued,
or at least you believe they are.
No matter how good your controls and containment
are on your homeworld or home system, it only
takes one person with the blueprint for a
super-human artificial intelligence and self-replicating
machines to plant them around a distant star
in a clumsy fashion that can get out of control.
If that’s done, by the time you find out,
potentially decades after control was lost,
it might be unstoppable and result in some
armada of killer robots descending on your
homeworld to turn it and everyone on it into
more killer robots or paperclips or whatever
other thing that unchained AI feels furthers
its own end goals.
One can debate the idea if it is ever worth
sacrificing any freedom for security and survival,
but I suspect few civilizations are around
long that aren’t willing to sacrifice at
least some, and if the danger is great enough
many would likely be willing to take this
containment strategy.
Keeping all your eggs in one basket doesn’t
sound like a good survival strategy, hence
why we want to plant ourselves on many planets
around distant stars.
However, if each of your eggs has a good chance
of hatching a monster that wants to eat you
and knows where you live, scattering your
seed to a million worlds you can’t watch
and quickly intervene on isn’t necessarily
a good idea.
One single world is vulnerable to being destroyed,
but it’s still better than a million dead
worlds.
We don’t know if technology will go toward
such a scenario so we can’t say yet.
The thing is, when it comes to Fermi Paradox
solutions, any solution that some might do,
but not all, is not a good solution since
someone will presumably do it.
However if technology inevitably converges
to things so dangerous that only rigorous
oversight, regulation, or restriction permits
survival, then that is a good Fermi Paradox
solution.
Everybody either does that or dies.
This would be an example of what we call a
Late Filter.
Where Early Filters are the hurdles to an
alien species reaching something like our
level of intelligence and technological development,
Late Filters are those which might still lie
ahead of us.
Finding out that interstellar travel was far
less practical than we’d like to believe
would be one such example, as would being
killed off by your own technology, except
where it replaces you with some new species
or civilization with similar galactic ambitions.
A thousand worlds in the galaxy, home to a
thousand unique civilizations that never progressed
beyond where we are now would work for the
Fermi Paradox, because the galaxy is a big,
big place.
It would mean there was nearly a billion stars
for each one that was the cradle world of
a civilization.
You’d have thousands of light years between
each civilization on average.
Now it would seem strange that these would
all exist endlessly at our current technological
level, more or less, for millions of years
without either progressing further or dying
off, indeed I’d find that hard to believe,
but it gives us a scale of things.
We’d have a problem hearing a copy our own
current civilization even a few hundred light
years away, let alone a few thousand.
That said, folks discussing this matter often
err with that line of reasoning.
I’ve heard people say that it's impossible
to make out a radio signal sent from over
a 100 light years from us, and this is simply
wrong.
We won’t dig into the details of radio technology
and will instead offer a simple example as
a rebuttal.
There are stars we can see with our naked
eye hundreds or even thousands of light years
away.
Indeed V762 Cas in Cassiopeia is 16,000 light
years away, the most distant star you can
see with the naked eye, and there are others
all the away across the galaxy visible to
even fairly cheap and simple telescopes.
One could disassemble even a modest asteroid
to form thin sheets able to absorb or reflect
light and scatter them around a star to turn
it into a large signaling device, a semaphore
lighthouse of stellar scope and intergalactic
range.
This is not advanced technology in any regard.
There are far better ways to send a signal
easier and farther than that, but it illustrates
the point.
On the transmission side, if you want to be
heard, you can be, and without engaging in
anything nearly so big as the enclosing of
a star.
On the other end of things, receiving a transmission,
as we discussed in the episode Megatelescopes,
there is no real limit on how big you can
make your radio dishes in space.
Now our signals do start becoming rather unintelligible
over distance, not simply from attenuation
as they fall off as the inverse-square of
distance, but from all the dust and signal
noise around in space.
Think of it like a fog, it’s very hard to
see through and simply dumping more light
into the fog or getting a pair of binoculars
doesn’t help all that much.
But some frequencies of light will go through
that fog better, and some transmission methods
will blur less, as it were.
Flickering a star at a slow rate of once a
second as a method is a very high-energy and
low bandwidth approach, that’s one bit per
second transmission that would not even be
able to send plain-text at real time.
However it is pretty much guaranteed to let
you be seen by anyone in this region of the
Universe looking around long enough who doesn’t
have something directly between you and that
star obscuring the visual line of sight, which
most would not.
Of course it’s far easier to transmit on
a single frequency and very loudly.
An incandescent light bulb produces only a
fraction of its light in the visible range,
which is why an LED bulb can say it’s as
bright a 100 watt bulb while only using maybe
10 watts, it’s almost all in the visible
range, but if we assumed that a light source
gave it’s light evenly over a spectrum that
we could divide into 10,000 increments we
could build detectors for each increment of,
then a light source which emitted only on
one of those increments of frequency but 10,000
times more powerfully would use the same amount
of power as the wide-spectrum source.
However, we could see it 100 times further
away, as it will diminish in strength with
the inverse square of distance, and the square
root of 10,000 is 100.
To put that into perspective, the electromagnetic
peak of most stars is at a frequency of hundreds
of trillions of hertz, oscillations per second,
our earlier star-semaphore example pulsing
once a second would be a single hertz.
Our normal radio signals range from hundreds
of thousands to hundreds of a millions of
hertz and for AM radio we assign frequencies
in bands of 10,000 hertz.
You can’t have two channels closer than
that, which is why for AM radio every channel
ends with a zero, and is given in kilohertz,
760 AM, 770 AM, 780 AM, no 765 or 773.
If you divided that hundreds of terahertz
sunlight example into 10,000 hertz bands,
you’d be getting more than ten billion of
them, which means if you were broadcasting
evenly over that whole spectrum you’d need
to transmit 10 billion times as powerfully
to be heard or seen at the same distance as
by one transmitting in just one of those increments.
The square root of 10 billion is 100,000,
so something broadcasting in just one of those
bands could be picked up by a detector 100,000
times further away than one equally powerful
but broadcasting over them all.
That’s the basic notion and reason why a
walkie talkie running on a battery can be
heard kilometers away, it’s only spending
its power in a very discrete piece of the
spectrum.
Of course you need a good antenna to hear
it too, and incidentally if we choose to look
at an eyeball as a type of antenna, the human
eyeball is extremely sensitive.
There’s a lot of claims for how far away
you can see a candle flame on the internet,
but to compare a candle to a sixth-magnitude
star, the dimmest you can see with the naked
eye, it would be about 2 kilometers.
I don’t mention that simply as an odd note
of trivia but rather to note that if a civilization
wanted to get noticed by species long before
they even invented radio, they might make
an educated guess that eyeball’s are very
likely to evolve and evolve to see in the
visible spectrum.
A single pulsing red dot in the sky might
not be a bad approach and could still be done
cheaper than using an entire star’s solar
budget.
This is particularly true as you’re not
limited to omnidirectional signaling.
Space is mostly empty and anyone with the
tech to be contemplating interstellar transmission
will know both how to calculate stellar drift
for several thousand years in advance and
how to focus a beam pretty decently, so they
can opt to send beams out instead of a spherical
shell of signal.
Those do spread out over distance, even laser
beams are not cylinders but spread over long
distances which certainly describes the galaxy,
but it lets you dump a lot more power in a
given direction and you can move the thing
around.
I don’t need to broadcast continuously to
say hello, especially if that hello is merely
to draw attention so some other civilization
notices it and points they’re equipment
that way.
A single one-second pulse once every 10,000
seconds is going to get the job done and let
you broadcast on a beam whirling around, for
instance.
All of which lets us say rather conclusively
that if a civilization, even our current one,
really wanted to be heard by others, we could
be heard by almost anyone in the galaxy.
Now, there is an assumption you’re willing
to devote a lot of power for a lot of time
to such a project, but a civilization that
doesn’t have access to a large and renewable
power source isn’t going to be around long
enough to hear any return replies anyway.
If they’ve grown into a Kardashev-2 civilization,
one fully enclosing their own star in order
to absorb and use all its power, then they
can easily designate a handful of bands to
interstellar beacons and run them loud enough
to be heard galaxy-wide without even noticing
the power consumption.
On the other hand, we’d be pretty hard-pressed
to justify building and operating some gigawatt
transmitter in perpetuity with our current
energy issues and you do need to be considering
transmitting in that range if you’re trying
to be heard throughout a decent portion of
the galaxy even using focusing techniques
rather than omnidirectional signals.
You don’t really need that as a Fermi Paradox
solution though, civilizations that can’t
get to that level of long-term energy abundance
aren’t going to be around in the long term,
and if each civilization only was around for
a few centuries transmitting and listening,
then a galaxy could have spawned several million
of them over the last few billion years and
rarely had more than two active at a time
and probably never had two active at the same
time close enough to do even a single back
and forth transmission.
Of course another line of thought is that
all these folks are transmitting but just
not in a way that we can notice.
They might not use radio or electromagnetic
signals of course, having figured out some
sort of FTL communication, but then that rather
wrecks all the reasons not to settle and travel
the galaxy.
Faster Than Light travel or communication,
as we’ve noted before, only exacerbates
the Fermi Paradox because it means you have
such an easier time colonizing the galaxy
and maintaining your civilization’s cohesion
as you do it, plus vastly widens the regions
in which an alien civilization might have
emerged and be able to contact us.
You have to start worrying about contact from
civilizations arising in distant galaxies,
not just distant stars.
Alternatively they might only use focused
and low-powered communication, beaming signals,
which is obviously handy, but that only applies
to trying to overhear their day to day signals,
not them actually trying to contact us, and
we couldn’t hear their routine signals nowadays
anyway unless they were within relative spitting
distance of us in galactic terms.
We’d have to build much bigger telescopes
to do that.
The other concern is that they will tend to
compress or encrypt their signals, which we
already have started doing, and a good compressed
signal basically looks like noise.
That’s sort of the point since compression
is about taking repeat and patterns in data
and replacing them with something shorter
that says what that pattern is and when it
is repeated.
Compressed signals are also way more sensitive
to noise in general and transmission through
the interstellar medium is noisy.
Now, again if their purpose is saying hello
that’s a non-issue, you don’t compress
a hello signal beyond the point that the recipient
can recognize it’s still a signal and be
able to guess at the compression method.
But it’s quite likely an interplanetary
civilization would have most of its radio
traffic in various highly-compressed formats
and beamed around.
They might have omnidirectional broadcasts
of certain things, their solar system equivalent
of a GPS for instance or a news broadcast,
but this is likely to be compressed too.
However, you don’t need to be able to read
someone’s mail to know they got it.
You generally don’t broadcast in frequencies
already full of natural noise and even if
you did, you are adding to the noise even
with your signal.
If you look at a solar system and see that
it’s emitting twice as much of a given radio
frequency as you’d expect, it doesn’t
matter if it all looks like noise, it’s
still an anomaly, and you can turn your scopes
that way and investigate.
You’ll start noticing other anomalies that
shouldn’t be there that will increasingly
make the setup look artificial, making you
point more and more stuff that way till you
can say “Hey look, a civilization”.
Now it’s far easier to detect them if they’re
waving a torch around trying to be seen, but
of course there’s a common notion that they
might try to hide.
As we discussed in the episodes Hidden Aliens
and Dark Forest Theory, this is a fairly futile
endeavor because hiding takes effort and you
only do it if you think it will be effective.
There’s no need to hide from any civilization
that can’t reach you in some fashion that
would hurt, like sending an Armada your way,
and anyone who can send an Armada can send
probes sooner, easier, and cheaper, not to
mention build huge telescopes capable of seeing
your planet well enough to know it hosts life
long before that life got sophisticated enough
to have discovered fire, let alone radio.
If hiding is either unnecessary because they
can’t reach you or you reach them, or futile
because they can reach you and knew your world
was inhabited long before your species inhabited
it, you might as well opt for saying hello,
since they might have things you’d find
interesting or useful.
Now to be fair, not everyone would do that,
but not only can we not assume every civilization
would be terrified or apathetic about communication,
but we can’t assume any civilization is
going to have a unified opinion on this matter
throughout their entire civilization, both
in space and time.
It’s not just that one country might be
fine with it while another country would not.
Rather, you have to assume they’d keep this
opinion indefinitely.
Again we only care about civilizations that
last long enough that they’re likely to
overlap with other civilizations simultaneously
existing anyway.
If everybody only exists as a technological
civilization for a few centuries and never
colonizes other worlds, then you’d need
them popping up like weeds for any to ever
talk to each other and that’s a Fermi Paradox
solution all by itself, they whisper into
the night but there’s nobody alive right
then to hear them.
So only if civilizations can arise, last for
very long periods of time – which implies
a certain amount of energy abundance at least
in terms of being renewable – and cannot
or do not wish to engage in interstellar travel,
do we care about them whispering.
If they’re a galaxy spanning civilization
they can whisper and we’ll definitely hear
them, it’s hard to miss such a thing, see
the Dyson Dilemma episode for why, it’s
essentially like standing in the middle of
city and missing all the people and buildings.
This is what it boils down to though.
It’s true we could easily miss an equivalent
to our own civilization even just a few light
centuries away, but not for long.
Either they will die off or we’ll die off.
Either one or both of us will have mastered
space travel, or one or both of us will decide
space travel is off the table.
If so, then someone will decide transmitting
loudly into the void, bellowing into the night
not whispering, and building great big telescopes
to hear even whispers, is the only way to
explore space for other civilizations and
is safe to do so because they either can’t
reach us to hurt us or can but don’t wish
to.
If the latter, there is at least a non-zero
chance that they might share such travel methods
with us if we make ourselves known to them
and build a relationship.
It’s also advantageous to be the first civilization
to meet a new civilization.
Whether you want first dibs on their information
for trade or want to make a good first impression
as helpful rather than letting other civilizations
inform that new civilization about you, and
possibly unkindly, or simply because you remember
the loneliness and ignorance of your own early
days alone in the night and wish to help.
So for the Fermi Paradox solutions that suggests
that civilizations are abundant and around
but we just can’t hear them yet, because
the signal is too weak for us to hear, ultimately
it just doesn’t work.
We could miss them whispering into the night,
but we wouldn’t miss them bellowing, and
someone would be… assuming anyone is there
to shout.
We were discussing radio and electromagnetic
signals a lot today, and those can be a lot
less intuitive for most folks than many other
physics and math concepts.
Indeed as I mentioned earlier, there’s often
a lot of misassumptions about how far we can
broadcast a signal or hear one that I suspect
come from folks having so delved into the
intricacies and limitations of modern transmission
that they overlook options available simply
by applying brute force on detection and transmission.
If you’re curious to learn more about electromagnetism,
waves, and light, then try out Brilliant’s
course on Waves and Light.
Brilliant is an online learning community
with over 60 interactive courses and many
quizzes and puzzles, plus fun Daily Challenges
that help get the brain warmed up for the
day.
Those Challenges provide a context and framework
that you need to tackle, so that you learn
the concepts by applying them, which is the
best way to learn new concepts.
Brilliant makes learning fun and easier, and
their online community gives you places to
discuss the material or ask questions, and
their mobile apps offline feature lets you
take courses even when you’re not getting
a good signal.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
So we were talking today about listening for
alien signals arising on distant worlds, and
next week we’ll be teaming up with our friends
over at What If to consider what if life emerged
on Low Gravity Planets, and then we’ll close
the month out with our Monthly Livestream
Q&A on Sunday, March 29th.
As we head into April we’ll start the new
month off by looking at what new technologies
might be in the cards in the not too distant
future and what their impact on us we’ll
be.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
which is linked in the episode description
below, along with all of our various social
media forums where you can get updates and
chat with others about the concepts in the
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
