This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
They say you need to “dress for success”.
This applies particularly well to working
in space, where you and your spacesuit become
one symbiotic entity.
Today we’ll be looking at spacesuits and
extreme environment suits, along with the
improvements we’d like to make to them and
the challenges we’d face in doing so.
When you think about it, the historical driving
force behind functional clothing is the need
to protect ourselves to weather severe environments
and deadly hazards—and to look good while
doing so if possible.
Whether it was harsh sun, freezing cold, sand
in the wind, thorns on the ground, or spears
coming at our torsos, any problem we thought
we could solve with a garment, we solved with
a garment.
The earliest get-ups we could reasonably call
environmental suits would probably be the
underwater salvage suits of the early 1700’s,
which were basically barrels with a window
and sleeves.
These evolved into true diving suits in the
early 1800’s, human-shaped suits of sealed
canvas and leather with lead boots and brass
helmets connected via hoses to a pressurized
air supply on the surface.
The first pressure suits, which were made
to keep human bodies under enough pressure
when the environment didn’t, were products
of high-altitude aviation programs of the
1930’s, an alternative to pressurizing a
plane’s cockpit.
These are the ancestors of spacesuits.
Modern firefighting gear draws heavily on
spacesuit technology developed for the Apollo
Missions.
And some of those technologies are even making
their way into casual day-to-day use, like
air-conditioned vests.
Suits that would let you explore lethal environments
like the depth of gas giants or the infernal
surface of Venus are really environmental
suits not spacesuits, but there’s a long
history of connection and feedback between
development of the two.
So you might say that spacesuits were developed
for the vacuum, but not in one.
At higher levels of technologies the term
spacesuit might get to be a bit vague too.
As an example, if the general notion is to
be able to feel like you’re walking around
normally at home, a telepresence into an android
or even a mind upload into one is arguably
achieving that goal far better than any suit
could realistically permit, but isn’t really
what we’d think of as a suit.
Alternatively, going around in some non-humanoid
vehicle, like a submarine or space shuttle,
is obviously not a suit, but some large humanoid
robot or mecha presumably isn’t either,
though something like an exoskeleton or power
armor presumably is.
For that matter, even a definition like a
self-sufficient garment or closed system,
while ideal, is not realistic, you either
have a short deployment time or you need something
feeding in air or electricity or fuel or so
on, not to mention removing waste from the
suit, where you can’t recycle it.
Which for anything you are planning to spend
many hours in is not just going to be exhaled
carbon dioxide and moisture from your breath
and skin.
Toilet humor aside, there’s no easy way
of saying it, so let’s dive right in.
Going to the bathroom in a spacesuit is generally
going to involve a diaper – as it currently
does - or tubes being stuck places most folks
would rather they were not.
We’ve got some higher-tech solutions for
that we’ll discuss in passing, but if you’re
curious, the science-y name for an adult diaper
in a space suit is the MAG – Maximum Absorbency
Garment – and we will not even discuss the
early-space-era options which basically involved
a bag worn under spandex, which is apparently
exactly as unpleasant and disgusting as you’re
probably imagining.
A space suit is generally considered to have
a handful of primary functions it needs to
perform and a few secondary ones.
For the primary ones it has to be able to
supply breathable oxygen, which in practice
means also having a method to remove carbon
dioxide, though not necessarily.
It has to be able to maintain a stable internal
pressure, though not necessarily Earth pressure.
Suits leak and leakage is based on the difference
in pressure on each side of the leak.
Higher pressure means a faster leak, so we
use partial pressure in spacesuits usually
with a high ratio of oxygen, whereas normal
air is mostly nitrogen.
Partial pressure requires a delay in adapting
to it though, pre-breathing to get the nitrogen
out of your blood, so you can’t just jump
in such a suit and out an airlock.
In an emergency or if you’re impatient that’s
a problem.
That’s something we try to rectify with
the Z-series spacesuits, which take advantage
of improvements in materials and manufacturing
processes to be more robust and operate at
higher pressure so you don’t need to pre-breathe.
The EMU suit we’ve all seen normally runs
at a little under a third of normal atmospheric
pressure, which is 14 PSI or 100 Kilopascals.
The Z series runs at over half, 8.3 PSI, as
does the Mark III suit.
We don’t need to pre-breathe to purge nitrogen
until pressure drops to a certain point.
The magic 8.3 PSI is sufficient to circumvent
that so is ideal for suits since they leak
less and we can use them sooner because we
don’t need to pre-breathe.
Also, it’s actually rather hard to move
in some space suits from higher internal air
pressure.
One of the reasons Hard Shell suits are nice,
even though they are heavy and not flexible,
is they leak less and they aren’t essentially
a balloon.
It’s not something you normally think of
but if you’re wearing something flexible
at a higher pressure than outside, everytime
you move you’re fighting a lot of gases
moving around and stretching at that fabric
as you bend it.
Think about trying to bend a hose while it’s
turned on or crunch a soda can that isn’t
open yet.
That’s one reason skintight suits, like
MIT’s Bio Suit, which is elastic and compresses
you to maintain pressure on the body, except
at the helmet, are optimal for mobility if
we can get them working well.
You could potentially wear all but the helmet
for prolonged periods and just don it if you
need to go out.
One reason skintight suits are optimal for
mobility.
Skintight suits, like MIT’s Bio Suit, are
elastic and compress you to maintain pressure
on the body, rather than relying on an envelope
of air in the suit to do that.
Getting out an airlock is a time-consuming
process too, and the Z-series I mentioned
a moment ago seeks to circumvent that using
the new suitport dock mechanism that lets
you crawl from the vehicle into the suit and
back out when you’re done.
While saving space, it actually has other
advantages in environments like the Moon and
Mars because the regolith soils there are
corrosive and toxic, so you don’t want them
in your vehicle anyway.
Besides delays from pre-breathing, donning
spacesuits is hazardously time-consuming during
an emergency so a suit you can don very quickly,
without help, and at full vehicle or habitat
pressure is essentially your ideal one.
So components able to self-seal reliably and
without oversight is another of those areas
future technology might help with a lot.
Additional primary functions are temperature
regulation, mobility, a communication system,
and the waste elimination issue we discussed.
Communication can be non-obvious, as a reminder
you need a microphone and transmitter in a
suit because there is no air to carry sound
around you unless you touched helmets together
and shouted.
Nor can you use sign language very well in
those suits as even if you have line of sight
to signal someone, the mobility, especially
in the gloves, tends to be very limited.
Indeed astronauts often have very sore hands
from just trying to do anything in those bulky
gloves.
The ability to introduce computers into equipment
is obviously an advantage that needs no explaining,
but controlling things inside a suit is quite
difficult, those bulky gloves make typing
hard and result in very large buttons on devices
in space.
One of the ways of helping with that is incorporating
things like electronic textiles for buttons,
heads-up displays, and speech recognition
software, and we see that in the I-Suit, one
of the other candidates for replacing the
EMU.
It is also lighter than many designs by incorporating
materials like titanium, fiberglass, and graphite-epoxy.
Temperature can also be non-obvious, we get
told about space being a frozen ultra-cold
place but it mostly isn’t, those suits can
heat up quite fast in direct sunlight as they
can only get rid of heat by radiation.
This is not true in an environment other than
space, like the surface of Venus, and we’ll
come back to some methods for dealing with
heat, for the moment it’s just a reminder
that some functions of spacesuits won’t
be necessary for extreme environment suits
or alternatively include new necessary functions
or the same ones but harder to deal with.
Of the secondary functions for a suit we have
to solve problems like radiation and micrometeoroids,
other matters of hygiene, as well as propulsion
capability, the other half of the mobility
issue besides dexterity, and of course duration
so you can be in one and survive, or be comfortable.
Comfort does matter a lot too, not just as
a nice addition to make more folks willing
to wear one, but in terms of productivity
and errors.
If you saw our Giant Robots & Power Armor
episode, you probably remember me mentioning
that I always found the stifling heat of wearing
body armor far worse than its weight and it
wasn’t just from exhaustion.
If you’re itchy – and it’s hard to scratch
in such things – or nauseous or disoriented
or just generally distracted by your own gear,
it represents a real hazard.
It gets easier to make mistakes by distraction
and fatigue, and your productivity in that
thing, already slowed by mobility and dexterity
issues, drops further from compensating for
that added risk.
There’s also the low gravity concern on
health.
We wouldn’t typically think of that as a
problem since these are short term devices
and you either are going back to a ship or
station with just as low of a gravity – in
which case the problem isn’t relieved but
isn’t really different in the suit – or
it is just temporary as you are returning
to a place with gravity, natural or artificial
like a rotating habitat module.
This amusingly is actually fairly easy to
solve though, if you have to persist in a
suit for a very long time you could mount
a winch and tether on the shoulders of such
a suit and shoot it into something, like tossing
a grapple around a beam and swinging around
it to produce centrifugal force, or detach
a piece of your gear on a tether, like a spent
oxygen or supply tank, so you could spin around
that way.
It’s hard to work that way but you could
sleep under spin-gravity then, which would
help.
Similarly if you’re working on the outside
of a rotating habitat drum and you tether
to it, you will get that spin-gravity effect,
so you’d want to orient so it was above
you so you didn’t feel like you’re hanging
upside down and get blood rushing to your
head, as you would if you were walking on
the outside of the drum with magnetic boots.
Fluids migrating around inside your body in
low gravity is an issue too, one we mostly
handle now through compression clothing to
fight swelling.
Fluids outside your body is another problem,
humans sweat, a lot.
It’s actually one of our nicest adaptations
that most animals don’t have and why we
can get away with a lot of long endurance
activities without suffering heatstroke.
Sweating out a liter of water during an hour
of exercise would be fairly normal, and in
a heavy suit, especially one getting hot,
you need a way to clear that humidity and
unfog your visor.
One approach for that is to have something
like an air-conditioning vest, keeping you
cool and condensing that moisture and ideally
draining it away.
But that means you need radiators, big ones,
so that you might look like you had a pair
of batwings.
However that also takes power and we have
very bad batteries, even nowadays.
Power can be maintained through a cable, or
beamed in, but you could also pump in air
and coolant too and pump them out.
Plus a large radiating surface might do double
duty as solar collectors.
What you’re pumping to and from might be
mobile as well.
It might be something like a rover or jetbike
that was your main vehicle and which you were
linked to by cables, but it might be various
specialized drones that follow you around,
detaching and resupplying from elsewhere as
needed and staying out of the way.
In the power armor episode I mentioned how
you might tend to be followed around by a
posse of robots who carried around all your
resupply or power generators, or even carried
around your guns and you just directed the
show.
The same could apply here, you go out in a
vehicle, or on a vehicle, with various drones,
and they do a lot of the work of keeping you
alive without your attention or inconvenience.
So a couple are carrying spare air tanks or
hoses connected to air supplies and scrubbers,
another is running around with a big shield
keeping between you and the Sun, and supplying
power via solar panels.
Others are running radar and feeding that
info to you while watching for micrometeors
and targeting them, one is possibly hooking
up to remove bodily waste as needed, and so
on.
These need not be high tech or smart, and
I should certainly hope not for the toilet
drone, since it takes a special level of sadism
to give high intelligence to such a device.
You could potentially do the same in a case
like Venus, with a very well insulated suit
that was connected by a hose to a big mobile
coolant robot that trundled alongside you,
but heat’s not the only issue.
You’ve got pressure too, which is very high
on Venus’s surface so that suit needs to
be very strong, and that is generally going
to mean very heavy and bulky, maybe too heavy
or bulky even with super-materials and artificial
muscle fibers in the suit enhancing your strength.
If you’re ever seen the Star Trek Animated
Series from the mid-1970s, you might remember
they had personal forcefields that let them
beam down to places wearing just their normal
uniform.
We’re not likely to ever get such forcefields,
but there’s a concept there of importance.
If you live on a spaceship, especially one
that gets shot at a lot, you basically need
a uniform you can wear around all the time
that can serve as very basic spacesuit for
at least a few minutes.
That’s the general notion with skintight
suits or skinsuits like the Bio Suit I mentioned
earlier, though it is not light and should
not be thought of as just some spandex catsuit.
Such suits will generally have rigid ribs
on them and ideally ones that could contract
around you so you could basically hop in and
have it hug down on you.
Potentially such suits might incorporate veins
to carry coolants or heating to the body as
needed and some strap on equipment like air
tanks though that sort of stuff starts adding
mass and power needs.
It doesn’t necessarily need a big power
supply, it might just have microwave power-absorbing
antennas - rectennas - woven into it for soaking
up wireless power and a small battery and
air tank for short durations of emergency,
but if you can’t make it very light you
can potentially weave in artificial muscle
fibers to offset the mass.
Although such technology is still in its infancy,
artificial muscles are one of those technologies
we can probably safely assume we’ll get
working well eventually, and that will help
with a lot of mass problems with suits, which
generally weigh as much as the person inside
them these days.
The emphasis is on mass not weight, as while
a ship might have spin gravity, in zero gravity
you have no weight but you and everything
you’re wearing still has mass, which has
to be pushed or pulled to move, and you will
tire out very quickly in tons of gear even
without gravity.
You probably also need some sort of rapidly
assembling or inflating emergency helmet worked
into the collar of such a suit that can automatically
trigger in a pressure drop, though you might
get away with a helmet drone, you walk around
with it strapped on your hip or flying near
you and if it reads that pressure drop it
zips over and locks onto your head as ferociously
as one of the facehuggers from the Aliens
Franchise.
A human can survive depressurization for a
bit but drops unconscious almost immediately
so it has to be automatic, but a blow-out
collar helmet or drone with a pressure sensor
and maneuvering thrusters that just need to
lock onto a couple of clamps that might emit
a positional signal needn’t require much
fancy tech or smart machines.
A similar option might just be to have that
drone carrying an inflatable balloon and big
mouth so it can open up and swallow you in
a pressurized cocoon for a bit.
Though I suspect a collar that could inflate
around your head would be most folks’ preference.
Of course, speaking of collars, it’s always
possible a last ditch protocol for spacesuits
might be a collar that doesn’t just inflate
or fold out around your head but right through
your neck too.
If you’ve sufficient technology a decapitation
might be survivable, and it’s a lot easier
to power life support for a lone head or freeze
one, to later be slapped onto a cyborg chassis
or cloned body or similar.
If you’ve just blown out a big tear in your
ship from a bad accident or some other ship
shooting at you, you’re probably tumbling
away at fairly high speed, potentially tens
or even hundreds of meters per second in a
situation in which nobody might be in a position
to help for some time, or at all.
A lone head needs a lot less delta-v to move
it back or stop it flying further away, and
way less power for life support or cooling.
Extreme, but presumably better than death.
I should also note, since micrometeoroids
are a big concern, that a space suit with
built in auto-tourniquets could be very handy
too, for other limbs besides your head, which
you normally can’t tie a tourniquet around.
Well, you can but unless you have that advanced
technology for restoring decapitation victims
it’s not a good idea.
Speaking of micrometeoroids, you’ve probably
heard of the Thermal Micrometeoroid Garment,
which is the outer layer of most spacesuits.
It helps with heat loss, provides a radiation
shield, and helps with very small micrometeoroids,
which are the most common, that would cause
pinprick leaks.
In general you can’t really make something
that will stop anything carrying bullet levels
of energy because those are smaller than bullets
and way faster, so they penetrate very well.
Things like that or bigger, you can’t armor
a suit against, you can maybe have a point
defense system that could shoot it before
it hits you but if it does the good news is
it will leave a small hole through you and
keep plowing through space, retaining most
of its kinetic energy, hopefully, and if that
doesn’t hit a major organ or your brain
you’re probably going to live and leak air
slow enough to be able to slap patches on
the holes in you and the suit before passing
out.
But flying heads and robot replacement bodies
and micrometeoroids through squishy body parts
brings up cybernetic augmentation and that
might be a much more popular path for future
spacefarers than suits.
It’s quite possible we could get some materials
that let you have a great skin suit, that
you could wear all the time that takes care
of getting rid of your dead skin cells and
other excretions and just don a bubble helmet
for EVA in, but what about a synthetic coating
for your skin that just let it be resistant
to vacuum?
Radiation shielding is nice too, and you could
maybe build that into such a coating, but
radiation is mostly a concern in space because
of cancer, not short term lethal doses, and
if you’ve got good cures for that you maybe
don’t care as much about getting irradiated
anyway.
You still need air, but you actually might
not.
Needlessly to say if you’re sufficiently
cyborged you might not need oxygen anyway,
but if you had a machine that could convert
water into oxygen implanted in your lungs
and some sphincter in your throat or airtight
seal in your lips and nose, those could just
slap shut.
Your body is mostly water, which is mostly
oxygen by mass, and assuming you can eliminate
the CO2, you only need around a pound or half
a kilo of oxygen a day, and you’ve got way
more water than that in your body.
Power’s an issue but once you’re start
replacing existing organs with more compact
or efficient stuff you can go full-on Inspector
Gadget, and something like an expandable or
inflatable solar panel worn in your clothes
or tucked into some compartment of your body
might be quite the power generator.
You could potentially eliminate a lot of the
digestive system too, which would make a nice
solution to the bathroom issues, but you might
even be able to get away with housing things
like a 3D printer in that cyborg body or,
assuming you’ve got plenty of power, wander
around on some airless moon eating rocks,
which are mostly made of oxygen themselves.
See the Cyborgs episode for some of the other
cool options, and we’ll talk about survival
options in Space Accidents and Search and
Rescue in some weeks.
Now of course that begs the question, if you’re
going that cybernetic, why not go full on
android?
That’s a brain in a jar on a robot chassis
or an uploaded mind in a robot, not even necessarily
a human shaped or sized one.
And certainly that would be way easier, especially
in extreme environments.
You can potentially make a suit that would
let you fly around in the crushing pressure
of Jupiter’s atmosphere or slog through
lava on Venus or a volcano on Earth, or sit
around on frigid Pluto or even maybe fly around
the Sun’s surface, but you’d almost always
have an easier time with a larger vehicle
with life support in it or it tailored to
survive that specific environment, like an
android or giant walking lava-proof spider
tank.
Much of this depends on what materials you
have of course and to do a lot of these realistically
you’d need materials we’re barely beginning
to understand or aren’t even on the radar
yet, effectively Clarketech, and since folks
have been asking, yes we will do an episode
on supermaterials this year, those we’ve
got, those we’ve got on the drawing board,
and those that for now at least are only in
the imaginations of scifi authors and might
never be something we get, things which will
never exist, the topic of our 200th Episode
Special.
But materials that are almost completely reflective
to all frequencies of light could give you
ships and even suits that let you fly close
to the sun, even skimming it.
Those that are basically thermally nonconductive
might let you wade into deep dense hot lava,
those that are ultra-conductive to heat might
let you do that by connecting you to a radiator
a ways away and much larger that siphoned
the heat off you faster than it penetrated.
Smart matter and nanotech, tiny little robots,
might let you not just patch and repair suits
near instantly, and the person inside them,
but let you jump out through an airlock that
was just a membrane of the stuff that wrapped
around you to form a skinsuit as you leapt
through, like a soap bubble.
Or could rapidly manufacture you the survival
gear, including sophisticated devices for
signaling for help or refining materials to
use as your supplies, that you needed to last
till rescue, or even build you that rescue
ship.
Needless to say all such options, if we ever
get them, are a long way off, but worth considering.
A lot of these options also have potential
uses back home, same as we mentioned near
the beginning that our spacesuits helped improve
our firefighting gear and our other hazard
suits.
A suit you could comfortably wear in space
almost all the time is one you can wear at
home here on Earth too, and a lot of the features
we discussed today would be handy here or
have adaptations that would be.
Again, hazardous environment suits are basically
as old as humanity, right down to the first
time we donned a hide or fur cloak or tunic
or shoes.
You need the right gear to protect you in
dangerous places, but they’re still dangerous,
and as we mentioned earlier, one of the ways
we might get around that in the future would
be using android or cloned explorers, and
we have a new video up on Nebula, “Me, Myself,
and I: Cloning and Duplicants” that explores
this and many other uses and challenges such
technology might present in the future.
If you’d like to catch that video on Nebula,
or our other recent exclusive, “The Butterfly
Effect”, you can get full access to Nebula
for free when you sign up for CuriosityStream.
So in addition to being able to see their
thousands of top-notch documentaries and non-fiction
titles, like Packing for Mars, you can now
also catch all of the Nebula-exclusive content
I and other education-focused channels have
been making, if you sign up for a year subscription
of CuriosityStream.
A year of CuriosityStream is just $19.99,
and it gets you access thousands of documentaries,
as well as complimentary access to Nebula
for as long as you're a subscriber, and use
the link in this episode’s description,
curiositystream.com/isaacarthur.
We started Nebula up as a way for education-focused
independent creators to try out new content
that might not work too well on Youtube, where
algorithms might not be too kind to some topics
or demonetize certain ones entirely, and it’s
taken on a life of its own from the enthusiastic
responses of our audiences, and I’m very
glad that we’re partnering up with CuriosityStream
as we get ready to invite in more creators
and bring more content to Nebula.
So now in addition all of CuriosityStream’s
great educational content, you’ll be able
see videos from independent creators like
CGP Grey, MinutePhysics, Wendover, and of
course, myself, just remember to use the link
in the video description when signing up.
We were talking about how we might survive
on Venus and it’s molten surface, but next
week we’ll look at how we might cool Venus
down and terraform it into livable place where
you wouldn’t need a spacesuit, as we discuss
how to bring Winter to Venus.
But even if we terraform dangerous worlds
to be more Earth-like, we’ll still need
space and survival suits and folks willing
to don them to rescue other folks, and in
two weeks we’ll take a look at Search and
Rescue operations, the technologies that will
improve them, and some of the new dangers
we might have to rescue people from.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to support the channel,
you can visit our website to donate, or just
share the video with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
