One day people will travel to Mars, hopefully
soon, and perhaps come to live there.
Which means they’ll need to grow their own
food, and that isn’t easy on a planet that’s
more barren than any desert or tundra.
Probably one of the best science fiction films
I’ve seen in the last decade is the Martian,
starring Matt Damon, and based on the excellent
novel by Andy Weir, and while it generally
got great reviews it was often criticized
for a lack of realism about the astronaut’s
emergency potato farming on Mars.
As far back as we could see Mars, even when
we thought it had canals, we have discussed
agriculture on the Red Planet, both in terms
of terraforming the world and in terms of
building domes and greenhouses.
I thought today we would walk through the
challenges and how we can address them so
that future visitors or colonists to Mars
don’t have to import all their food and
drink.
And speaking of food and drink, we will be
here for a bit so you might want to grab a
drink and snack, possibly some potato chips,
and don’t forget to hit the like and subscribe
buttons while you’re at it.
Now there’s three obvious problems right
out the door for agriculture on Mars, and
that’s the general lack of air, water, and
sunlight.
Mars does have all three but its sunlight
is weaker than we get, it has precious little
water, and its atmosphere barely counts as
one.
It’s a cold world whose highest recorded
temperature is 70 Fahrenheit or 21 Celsius,
while its average temperature is -80 Fahrenheit
or -60 Celsius.
Giving it more sunlight, air, and water would
help to fix that, but in its absence you either
need insulated domes or entirely enclosed
options like an underground hydroponics bay
that’s artificially lit.
Our next problem comes down to the soil, or
rather the lack of it.
Mars technically doesn't have any because
by definition, soil must contain organic matter,
and we currently assume life on Mars is either
non-existant or ultra-minimal.
Terran soil contains 50% air and water, 45%
minerals and 5% organic matter.
Martian soil on the other hand, is 98% minerals,
only 2% air and water, with 0% organic matter.
Not much can really grow in that.
Although high in nutrients, Mars is basically
just volcanic rock.
It has various clay or silt sized particles
but it’s mostly sand, and as we’d expect
from the Red Planet, it’s iron rich.
Surprisingly, it’s also rather homogenous;
unlike terrestrial soils which vary considerably
by location, the dirt on Mars is similar all
over.
The planetary dust storms distribute the material.
Mars does have all the nutrients plants need,
and again is high in some.
However, some of these minerals are spread
pretty thin.
The nutrient’s in the dirt are so low in
many that we would need extensive fertilizer.
In 2015 in the Netherlands they simulated
Martian soil and grew ten crops in it, as
well as trying it for simulated Lunar Soil;
those were chives, cress, garden rocket, leeks,
peas, quinoa, radishes, rye, spinach, and
tomatoes.
Obviously water and air were added, and while
none of them produced as much biomass as on
Earth, only spinach was particularly poor.
They didn’t eat any of it though because
it was rich in heavy metals like arsenic and
mercury, and everything was high in iron.
We’ll get to discussing handling those as
well as perchlorates in the soil in a bit.
Inspired largely by that movie, there have
been experiments growing potatoes in Martian
soil simulants as well as other Martian conditions
and with modest success, but everything does
better once organic matter is added in.
That will always be available after a first
generation of plants and by the simple presence
of humans, since we produce a lot of organic
matter, but it nonetheless tells us that we
need to be creating our soil on Mars, not
just expecting to dump seeds in Martian dirt
and having a garden grow.
Speaking of gardens, we might imagine the
plants we grow on Mars will primarily be for
food or feed for animals, as well as herbs
for adding some flavor and smell.
However, there's another important thing we
might want to grow too: medicine.
We're far from a short trip to the emergency
room to get some antibiotics or painkillers,
and any medicine sent from Earth has an expiration
date.
By the time we get any medication shipped
to someone sick on Mars, they might already
be dead.
So we might want to be growing plants that
have some kind of a medical benefit too.
There have been some early experiments to
genetically modify fast-growing plants like
lettuce to let us grow acetaminophen, the
active ingredient in Tylenol.
You could imagine using the same method to
create a bunch of useful compounds that we're
used to having on hand for first aid or common
ailments.
But we might also need some other pharmaceuticals
that we don't need on Earth.
For instance, since we know that humans lose
bone density in space, we might want to start
taking supplements that will help stimulate
bone growth.
So we’ll probably have a mix of plants for
food, feed, and pharma that we need to grow,
and as I said earlier, insulated domes and
underground artificially lit hydroponics are
good options.
Now if you’re building a dome over something
it's not much harder to give it a floor, and
given that initial farms on Mars need to be
pressurized and airtight, you need a floor
anyway and are probably doing either hydroponics
or raised beds to start.
Algae grown in vats is a good way to get some
initial biomass and potentially feedstock
for plastics, including polycarbonate domes.
It's also a good way to process Martian Dirt
into soil while you’re building domes so
the first agriculture there might be setting
up large insulated water tanks with grow lights
in them.
Those might be supplemental or primary, depending
on if using sunlight is convenient.
How we cultivate crops depends on what the
base’s power situation and workforce look
like, so let’s discuss that first.
The truth is, even on a two year round trip
to Mars it is likely to be easier to pack
food along than grow most of it, as dehydrated
foods are pretty low mass, and you need equipment
for growing food on the trip anyway, both
in the ship and down on Mars, so we’re mostly
interested in plant growth on early Martian
missions for supplemental fresh food, emergency
medicines, and for scientific research into
future space and Martian farming.
We need something low on manpower, both to
build and maintain.
Robots might help but they take mass too,
and we need to know our power supply.
For my part I don’t think any mission to
Mars should fail to have a nuclear power source
involved unless our solar power and battery
options get way better than they are today.
Admittedly, given how much they’ve improved
in recent years, that is plausible.
Alternatively we have some very robust, lightweight,
and safe atomic options.
And unlike the common light water nuclear
reactors on Earth, anything going to Mars
can’t require lots of water to work.
I suppose my ideal first attempt would be
to send a nuclear power plant down to Mars
first, near a preferred manned mission site,
complete with some drone harvesters and a
stockpile of LEDs, and automated manufacturing
and refining gear, so it could just land and
start making and assembling big old algae
vats for mass producing biomass and fuel.
That tends to be a bit beyond the scope of
robot manned missions aiming to arrive before
the first explorers but I tend to feel that’s
about where our technology will be by the
time the public permits a manned Mars Mission.
You might be wondering about that choice of
phrasing but right now Mars missions enjoy
the general goodwill of the public who don’t
really mind paying for one, though that’s
mainly because it's not seen as something
that’s about to happen.
When a serious mission is on the table, it
will start getting picked apart for many reasons,
such as the missions’ cost, odds of success,
and what it will actually accomplish in the
short term.
For any plan to be approved, it is also going
to need high public confidence that nobody
will die or come back with cancer.
People can accept risk, but I suspect even
10% will be too high.
To seriously discuss those kinds of odds at
all means a lot of preliminaries, like a protracted
moon base and dropping supplies and robots
down on Mars first.
And that’s not exactly science fiction anymore,
we could be talking even just a decade.
Every extra year improves all of our associated
technologies and lowers the mission cost,
so we aren’t necessarily contemplating a
few trays of plants growing in a prefabricated
habitation module as part of a half-trillion
dollar mission where the ship has good odds
of becoming a coffin.
By the time the first mission is a go, we
might be in a position to contemplate landing
automated assemblers, who can just get their
reactor setup and start milling out heavy
items like grow vats, glass or even the main
components of habs and solar panels.
So we would just assemble and install the
small expensive electronic and mechanical
bits on arrival.
Not everything is necessarily heavy though.
Aerogel is a potentially awesome insulator
for space applications.
It’s ultra-light, so could be easily transported
along, and it's also typically made of silicon
which is abundant on basically every rock
in this solar system, so we might be able
to make it onsite anyway.
It's also translucent and can now be made
transparent, so I could easily imagine us
opting for domes made of two layers of glass
or polycarbonate with aerogel sandwiched between.
Done right that might make for a very shatter
resistant dome.
Speaking of dome glass and breakage, on places
like the Moon where micrometeors commonly
rain on the surface, or in space, such panels
would be even better with multiple layers
and wire mesh woven in, for added strength
and fracture resistance.
But on Mars our concern is more about scratching
and wear from dust storms.
Now a note on that, we tend to portray those
dust storms on Mars as being wildly powerful
affairs, but the wind speed of those famous
storms is typically 10 or 20 miles per hour
or 16 to 32 kilometers per hour, and can get
up much faster.
About every 3 Martian years, that's 5 and
half Earth years, these storms become planet
wide and can move as fast as 60 miles or 100
kilometers per hour.
Here’s the thing though, the air is very
thin and you wouldn’t be getting thrown
around in that, indeed you’d probably have
problems flying a kite.
Think of the force on a lightly breezy day,
not a hurricane, even when the wind is moving
at hurricane speed there.
On a typical day you wouldn’t really notice
it.
But you would notice the accumulation.
The storm would be depositing a lot of dust
and that dust is small electrostatic particles,
which makes them stick to everything, as we’ve
found with our rovers, which get filthy fast.
Now this is manageable for manned missions
because we can just have someone go out and
brush the solar panels off after storms and
a scratch resistant coating should let them
easily have a lifetime in excess of the mission
duration, but for domes and panels that need
to be operating, and preferably with minimal
human effort, a robot window and panel cleaner,
or even scratch polisher, seems a good plan.
I would personally bet on that being tech
that makes rapid strides in the next decade
given the success of robot vacuum cleaners,
mops, and lawnmowers, to see robot solar panel
and window cleaners.
Of course we usually clean with water and
that might be tricky on Mars.
On the other hand, we need a water source
for those domes and a setup that allows the
robot to spray water under a pressurized cup
while it cleans them then lets it dump that
muddy water into the domes for the plants
to use as soil, might work very well.
If filtered anyway.
Now I mentioned heavy metals earlier and perchlorates
and that’s probably the next topic to address.
Chlorine based compounds actually are pretty
valuable for a lot of applications on Mars,
including making fuel and air, and indeed
make for good antifreeze, which is handy on
a cold planet, so we’re interested in extracting
them rather than just getting rid of them.
They are water soluble which is partly why
I often talk about algae vats in the context
of terraforming alien soils.
We can use algae for removing heavy metals
from wastewater.
That’s been under study for decades now
for use back here on Earth, I recently saw
a study in Frontiers of Environmental Science
last year, “Synthetic Biology-Based Approaches
for Microalgal Bio-Removal of Heavy Metals
From Wastewater Effluents” where they said
they had studied 49 unique genes for their
bioremoval properties of various heavy metals,
so I think there’s definitely room to be
considering genetically engineered algae for
soil and water reclamation in both our own
future and Mars and sooner than later.
Centrifuging is an option too of course.
That can get pretty energy intensive at the
large scale though and while we can always
get freebies on our heating bill by using
our electricity to power something that then
lets its waste heat warm us, Mars is pretty
cold so would need more than that to stay
warm especially in the context of insulated
and airtight living, working, and growing
spaces.
It’s not just humans that need to be warm,
and plants also have their own different needs
when it comes to a safe temperature and humidity,
as well as air composition which having many
airtight domes lets us fiddle with.
Not to imply we just want to go nuts on nuclear
or solar power there, though you might have
to go nuts with excess heat for the purposes
of terraforming or para-terraforming, which
is where you dome large chunks of a planet
over and terraform under the domes.
An alternate thought, especially seeing the
gravity on Mars is much lower than Earth and
may require spin gravity to be added to the
equation, for us and animals to stay healthy,
is spinning habitat areas.
This typically involves a wide ring or cylinder
with a tilted floor to combine centrifugal
force with natural gravity, what we call a
Rotacity or Rotahab, see the Megastructure
Compendium for details.
Big tall cylinders have other advantages too,
especially for insulation and shielding, and
are easier to build on low gravity places
with little to no wind pushing them over.
A big thing to think about here is usable
space or volume from stacking multiple levels
with minimal surface area exposed to the outside
while still conforming to a structure commonly
accepted on Earth for habitation, the skyscraper.
This is probably an outer shell with normal
gravity and some spinning interior sections,
and maybe much underground too, but might
be a preferable arrangement over our normal
notion of sprawling domes, or used in tandem
with them, like the foothills of a mountain.
That outer shell of shielding is your expensive
bit, the more surface area the more air you
leak, heat you leak, damage you take, and
radiation you need to stop, so minimizing
that is ideal and a cylinder gets you way
more interior area per surface than a typical
rectangle.
Spin-gravity aside, a cylinder or ring or
circular dome is also a good shape for plant
growth, as you don’t need as much insulation
and don’t get as much air and water leakage
if you have less surface area.
There’s always going to be losses, and for
that matter recycling still has losses and
a place like Mars, or the spaceships that
get there, need to work to be very good at
recycling.
In the short term though it’s not like energy
is hyperabundant on Mars.
As it is mostly an airless desert we’re
not needing to be super-concerned about maximum
safety with early nuclear power there but
it also makes it a pretty good place for power
beaming too, especially as you have an orbital
network there from the get-go.
Solar power always works great in space, even
if it's 45% of the strength at Mars of what
it is in Earth Orbit, and power beaming works
well there too, but so does concentrating
light with mirrors in orbit.
It wouldn’t take too much sophistication
to get a thin mirror sent in a capsule to
Mars and have it spin itself out into a big
wide lens, focused down on a base on Mars.
They can keep that power going even at night
time too, a satellite above you when it's
dark isn’t necessarily in the Planet’s
shadow, and a ring of power satellites would
always have light on most of them and could
shift power to groundside locations as needed.
Early on it would seem easier and cheaper
to bring solar panels from home and drop them
off in orbit, rather than trying to get them
groundside and installed.
So let's consider a hypothetical case, it’s
the year 2060 and our outpost on Mars is one
of a couple dozen run by various countries,
multinational agreements, or private companies.
There’s maybe five hundred people on Mars.
Every big country wants a base there and can
have it these days for an initial entry cost
of tens of billions and about a billion in
annual upkeep.
Our base is a private one, but receives a
lot of funding and logistical help from various
countries, and we basically just grow food
as one of our missions and study botany and
ecology as our other, with a long term goal
of paraterraforming our location, just south
of Elysium Mons in Elysium Planitia.
We have a 100 kilowatt nuclear reactor that’s
essentially blackbox technology with an anticipated
lifespan of 30 years, and we’re 10 years
into that.
We have some groundside solar and limited
chemical and organic fuels, plus batteries,
but we rent beaming time from the network
of satellites overhead who can send power
not only to us but also to vehicles that are
parked.
The positioning system isn’t good enough
at tracking to allow power beaming to mobile
vehicles like back on Earth, but it can recharge
them when they pause.
This system is expanding and improving and
is expected to become the mainstay for small
bases on Mars.
We have a trio of big robotic land crawlers
who do nothing but drive north and collect
ice from a base there and come back with it
in a never ending circuit bringing 50,000
liters of new water to us each week.
We lose a couple thousand liters in that same
time to exports of food and losses to a never-perfect
containment system but we’re bringing in
a net 2.5 Million liters of water each year,
660,000 gallons.
We have found that between our hydroponics,
aquaponics, and water reserves making up most
of our water on hand, we can still create
a new square meter of soil under dome for
every 100 liters of water we get in, or one
hectare for every million liters, or 100,000
gallons per acre or about 2.5 gallons per
square foot.
That’s not exactly a one time investment,
we anticipate leaking water from our domes
fast enough that we’d need to replenish
it every 25 years, which is actually an amazing
reclamation rate.
Which means once we’ve built enough domes
to cover about 60 hectares or 150 acres we’ll
either be needing new land crawlers to run
up to the north pole if we want to keep expanding,
assuming one hasn’t broken down irreparably
by then, or to have built a pipeline.
Realistically that’s not in the cards anytime
soon, thousands of kilometers of piping, but
bulldozing a better makeshift road there might
be.
Either way on a planet of 500 people where
most of the food is still imported or made
at local bases, that’s a lot more growing
space than we need to keep up with current
food needs, which is mostly done hydroponically
anyway.
We don’t have that many domes yet and currently
it takes up a big chunk of the domes we do
have.
We’re the medicine and luxury goods place,
so to speak, where things like coffee and
orange juice and bananas and such can get
grown, and where there are actual animals
and non-food crops.
We’re less a farm than an ecological research
station, garden park, and zoo, and a lot of
budget from home comes from groups and wealthy
individuals who endow a new dome for a dedicated
purpose by paying for the plant, animal, seed,
or embryo to come in on the next Aldrin Cycler.
There’s talk of building big solar mirrors
and there’s been some prototypes, Mars is
almost all prototype some-or-other, but we
do have mirrors made of sheets of glass with
layers of wire mesh and aerogel sandwiched
in them, on domes made of aluminum with very
thick earth sides.
Some domes are long tunnels or rectangles
but the main work is a growing collection
of geodesic domes 100 meters wide and arranged
in a hexagonal pattern, with the empty space
between being filled with storage and other
facilities, including living quarters for
our 10 person crew, and occasional visitors
from other bases, as we’re the closest thing
to a resort on the Red Planet.
Each of those domes, which currently number
12, is .785 hectares or 1.94 acres and each
is designed to be a semi-self sufficient ecosystem,
emphasis on ‘semi’, as it takes a lot
of effort to keep these going.
All in all such an operation is set to expand
as long as we can locally fabricate dome glass,
can keep bringing in power and sunlight, and
keep finding water and nitrogen.
Supplemental lighting can be electric or it
can be reflected down by mirrors in space,
on the ground or on local towers reflecting
light in, you can expand as quickly as your
technology and resources let you add domes
and make soil.
And we are creating new soil on top of the
old, typically scraping the existing regolith
off and lining the bottoms with a moisture
proof layer and processing the heck out of
the future soil.
We usually grow very simple grasses in domes
in the first seasons, which can be grazed
by animals, with the resulting manure added
back into the soil mix.
There’s the other half of the farming, to
leave our narrative tale behind, Mars isn’t
really able to support a heavy meat diet for
inhabitants, but there is lots of room for
fish and even chickens or larger livestock,
like sheep or goats.
It raises the question of when the first animal
goes to Mars, and what it would be.
I would guess it would be one of fish, ants,
or bees.
As for 4-legged critters, I’d make a joke
about it probably being a rat since they always
find a way on ships, but they’ve only ever
gotten to space as contained lab rats, and
that’s probably how they’ll first get
to Mars.
I don’t think it would be long before someone
arranged to ship a dog or cat to Mars.
Generally we assume that cows would be among
the last well-known critters to make the journey
as even a baby cow is nearly adult human weight
and more inside a month or two, and even our
most optimistic travel times to Mars without
massive advances in propulsion take longer
than that, plus beef isn’t well-known for
its efficiency compared to other meat animals
and isn’t the only source of dairy.
The usual assumption is we would send lone
female critters and lots of frozen sperm or
even fertilized embryos for implantation,
which circumvents the inbreeding issue, but
realistically I think we’ll have gotten
our artificial wombs pretty good by the time
we’re importing ark’s worth of critters
to Mars so weight might not matter much.
There are also all sorts of problems with
creatures with social needs that we discussed
in more detail in our episode Exporting Earth,
and we also dipped into ecological issues
of alien worlds more there too.
There's also the possibility of cellular agriculture
to support a taste for meat, if we want it,
but don't want to ship up Bessie the Cow.
For that to work, we'd need to make some kind
of nutrient solution in order to grow animal
cells directly and then 3d print those cells
into dinner.
Several companies have been successful doing
this already and although we're still figuring
out how to make lab grown meat more like a
filet and less like a blob, by the time we
need Martian meals, there's good reason to
think we will have figured things out.
The good news is farming on Mars should be
much easier than on the Moon, the bad news
though is that while a lot of our Mars plans
and equipment can be more easily proof-tested
on the Moon before being used on Mars, basically
nothing involving farming and domes will really
translate over.
More good news is that while the sunlight
is dimmer on Mars, it's enough for essentially
any plant, though many of the most sun-living
would not thrive away from the equatorial
region of Mars and may need supplemental lighting
even there.
There are many different ways to concentrate
light if it’s needed and it will depend
on many different factors, a lot of which
we can’t foresee yet, which works best or
easiest and becomes the norm.
If we begin seeing more cold climate greenhouses
emerging here on Earth that’s likely to
tell us much about how best to do it on Mars,
and vice-versa, those experiments there may
help us learn how to better green our own
arctic regions and tundra if we wish to do
so.
The other good news is that while we don’t
know how humans will fare under Martian gravity,
or other animals, it seems likely that most
plants will do well and insects and aquatic
life also, though until we get there and test
it out, there’s more speculation than information
available.
As always, we need to head out to space to
learn how to live there, but the time is coming
soon when we will, and one day soon you or
maybe your great-grandchildren might be farming
out in space, helping bring life to a new
world.
So we have a couple of announcements coming
up as well as our upcoming schedule as we
get ready to head into 2023 but first, a question
folks who watch the show sometimes ask is
if a STEM career in Science, Technology, Engineering
or Math is for them and one of the factors
that can never be ignored is if your future
career is going to actually pay decent, and
if you’re curious, the Bureau of Labor and
Statistics cites folks in SREM earning 238%
more than is typical non-Stem Careers, or
95 dollars for every 40 others make.
So if you enjoy science-focused shows like
our own and have been considering going into
a STEM field, there’s a ton of good reasons
to follow that dream.
A lot of folks also worry that it might be
too hard, and science definitely needs some
brains and willpower, and it helps to have
a good learning partner like our friends at
Brilliant.
Brilliant focuses on interactive and hands-on
learning, and breaking big important concepts
down into understandable and interactive pieces,
like they do in their intro to algebra lessons.
The best way to learn math, science, and computer
science is by interactive problem solving.
With thousands of lessons and more be added
each month, Brilliant can help you reach your
goals.
In just 15 minutes a day with bite-sized lessons,
you can master topics that you once thought
impossible, be it the basics like fractions
or advanced topics like calculus.
Learn the core concepts so you can help pioneer
new innovations.
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own
pace, learn on the go, and learn a little
something new every day.
To get started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or click on the link in the description, and
the first 200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
Before we get to the upcoming schedule, some
of you have probably noticed that today’s
episode is available in 4k resolution and
so was Sunday’s Scifi Sunday episode, Planetary
Civil Wars.
I’ve had folks requesting we do that for
some time and I noticed that these days more
than half of our animations and footage is
in 4k resolution anyway, and some of the animations
just look so much nicer in their full resolution,
so I figured we would try it on a few episodes.
It takes a fair amount of extra rendering
and uploading time, and that might turn out
to be prohibitive in the long term, and there
will be spots in episode where it's still
1080p or even lower, but I figured we should
at least try it out and I hope those watching
on 4k devices are enjoying the higher resolution.
Also, today happens to be my mother’s 74th
birthday so I wanted to wish her a happy birthday,
and as she does often watch the show, thanks
for everything Mom, and I love you, and I
hope you’ve had another excellent year as
this one draws to a close, because you’ve
helped make so many of mine wonderful.
Speaking of closing out the year, our normal
time for our livestream Q&A would have fallen
on Christmas Day, and with three new little
kids in the house, doesn’t seem a great
plan on my end, so we’re shifting that to
Saturday, December 31st, to have it on the
afternoon before New Years.
As we usually do Sundays, for those who can’t
join us then, this is a great chance to get
your questions about the show and its topics
answered.
Before then though we still have a couple
more episodes, starting next week by asking
whether or not our Universe might be a black
hole, as some believe, and also if it might
be possible to live inside black holes.
And we’ll closing out the year by exploring
the future of Transhumanism and Humanity.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like to help support future episodes,
please visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net,
for ways to donate, or become a show patron
over at Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
