I teleported home one night
With Ron and Sid and Meg.
Ron stole Meggie's heart away
And I got Sidney's leg.
    So today’s topic is teleportation,
the ability to move instantly from one place
to another.
This is a concept that is very common in science
fiction, but it’s also very under-utilized.
Our goal today is to talk about some of the
options sci-fi overlooks, and also to talk
about some ways to do teleportation, or something
similar, under known science.
    The concept was popularized by the
Star Trek Transporter, as a way to avoid budget
and time constraints of having the crew fly
down in a shuttle.
That necessary cost-saving measure got repeated
in a lot of shows made before we had good
CGI, likes Blakes 7, which was notoriously
short on its budget.
The problem it creates in a fictional environment
was actually quite obvious to all those writers,
but they didn’t have much choice.
    And it definitely wasn’t a secret,
even the earliest examples in fiction, like
Fred T. Janes 1897 novel, “To Venus in Five
Seconds”, highlights the big problem of
having teleportation technology in a sci-fi
setting focused on spaceships.
J.J.
Abrams showed that in his re-booted Star Trek
films, I’m guessing accidentally, by letting
folks get transported over far larger distances,
interstellar ones.
The problem is, if you can transport folks
over light years you really don’t have much
need for spaceships, so of course most writers
slapped in all sort of range and condition
constraints, along with a healthy amount of
turning a blind eye to obvious alternative
uses.
    Some authors have opted to go the teleportation
route for interstellar travel instead of spaceships,
and our Audible Book of the Month, Richard
K. Morgan’s “Altered Carbon” is one
such example.
In that series, teleportation occurs by transmitting
digital copies of the mind from place to place,
with an awaiting body, one of our examples
for today of how you could do teleportation
inside known science.
    That book, which Netflix recently adapted
into a TV show, explores a lot of the overlooked
options and dilemmas with that approach and
you can pick up a free copy of “Altered
Carbon” and also get a 30-day trial of Audible,
just use my link, Audible.com/Isaac or text
isaac to 500-500.
    We should start with that example though.
Not all fictional teleporters work the same
way but a common approach in the digital age
is to take a scan of an object, or a human,
or just their mind, digitize it, and send
it as a normal data transmission to some place
where it will be replicated.
There’s obviously a lot of problems with
this in terms of noise scrambling the signal
or how you make the object on the other end,
but folks tend to overlook just how much bandwidth
is involved.
    You have about 10^26 atoms in every
kilogram of your body, you’d probably need
a kilobyte of data just to accurately record
each atom type and isotope as it was, where
it was positioned, what sort of bonds it had
with its neighbors and what the various electrons
energy states are.
A person might weigh 100 kilograms; so you
could be looking at as much as 10^31 bytes
of data, or 10 billion, billion terabytes.
    Maximum bandwidth for a laser is inverse
to its wavelength, and a 400-nanometer wavelength
blue laser could do 200 Terabits a second,
so an even shorter wavelength UV laser might
be able to send 10^31 bytes in a mere 10^17
seconds, or a few billions years.
    Obviously not a very fast way to travel.
Now just as obviously, we can compress the
heck out of such a signal.
Maybe you just do the gene sequences for each
human cell and the brain state, some physics
students at the University of Leicester looked
at that approach and got similarly huge transmission
times, but even so, it’s definitely overkill.
We have another problem too.
If you want to make a copy of something at
the quantum level, you effectively can’t.
Observing the energy of a particle means we
cannot tell what its position was.
Likewise, observing the position of a particle
means we cannot tell what its momentum or
kinetic energy was.
To faithfully copy a particle, we need to
know both the position and the energy of a
particle, which is something that quantum
theory says we can’t do.
This is a major problem when it comes to traditional
teleportation that copies everything at the
quantum level; but we probably don’t need
to take a copy of the teleported object down
to the quantum level for us to achieve what
arguably would still be considered to be teleportation.
    We really don’t need the genetic
information for each of your billions of fat
cells, we just need maybe a few hundred.
Of course they won’t be identical, the DNA
in your cells mutates so they won’t all
be the same.
But we can send just those core bits to our
receiver, after all your fat cell DNA is pretty
similar to most people’s so we only need
to transmit the very tiny amounts of data
varying from the main template.
Nor do we care if you new body’s fat cells
match your old ones perfectly, including minor
mutations.
In fact we probably would prefer not to have
most of those.
After all, if you are replicating folks cell
by cell, why make a defective one when a functional
one could be used instead?
    We only need that relatively tiny amount
of data specific to your fat cells, and we
don’t need the full variation, along with
the approximate amount of fat and where it
was stored.
Where fat is concerned, most folks won’t
mind if they arrive a little short either,
and of course you can do similar compression
with the rest of the body’s cells.
    Of course this raises three key points.
The first has to do with underutilization
of the technology in science fiction, the
obvious medical example being removing damaged
cells, or cosmetically trimming weight off
people.
The second has to do with exactly how close
a copy needs to be to be the real thing, and
if a perfect copy even counts.
The third has to do with what happens to the
remaining thing, or person, you just copied,
the same as we have with brain uploading,
as it’s essentially a copy and paste not
a cut and paste situation.
When you’re done the original object or
person is still there, what do you do with
them now?
    Let’s take those in order.
Typically, scifi bypasses the medical applications
implied by this sort of teleportation, though
the writers will often play with it for an
episode then subsequently  everyone conveniently
forgets that option.
Probably a good idea too considering its implications.
    If you didn’t already zoom in on
those implications, it happens to be automatic
immortality.
Got a virus or disease?
Just transport the person and leave the viral
cells behind, or just lock on to those and
yank them out.
Age-damaged cells?
Transport them away or teleport the person
but replace them with healthy ones on the
re-render.
Gunshot wound to the abdomen?
Replace all those bits.
Total vaporization?
Just use a stored copy of their most recent
scan.
    This still has some of the issues we
discussed for extreme lifespans and mind uploading
in the Digital Death episode, it doesn’t
truly grant immortality, just ridiculously
long average lifetimes but we’re talking
millions or billions of years, not centuries.
    That second issue though can interfere
with this, the one asking how good a copy
needs to be to count as the real thing and
if it even can.
This dates all the way back to the Ship of
Theseus, a thought problem and one we discussed
before in the episode “Consciousness & Identity”
a couple of years back.
Theseus, the fellow from Greek Mythology who
killed the Minotaur and escaped the Labyrinth
to sail home did so on a ship that was allegedly
preserved at Athens in memory of him.
When Plutarch wrote about this he noted how
every time a plank or timber got old they’d
replace it with a new one, until the ship
had not a single remaining original part.
Philosophers argued over whether this meant
it was the same ship or not, and it’s a
conversation that has kept folks busy arguing
all the way up to modern times.
    Parallel examples would be the grandfather’s
Axe, where a man has replaced the handle of
the axe many times and even the axe head,
and asks if it is really the same one his
grandfather used.
Another example would be rivers.
A river not only constantly changes the water
in it, but even changes its path and shape.
    Even Marvin the Paranoid Android, from
Douglas Adams’ Hitchhiker’s Guide to the
Galaxy series, from which we also got our
opening quote for this episode, refers to
this.
In that, Marvin remarks that between time
travel and getting left to wait for his companions,
he is actually older than the Universe itself
and has had every part of himself replaced
many times, except the aching diodes down
his left hand side.
    This issue is complicated since even
before modern biology folks knew that people
ate for fuel and for materials, since they
gained size as they grew and gained and lost
weight routinely.
Nowadays, we know everything gets replaced.
You still have some of the atoms you had as
a kid, a few random ones that coincidentally
stuck around or even left you to become part
of some plant and ended up back in you when
you ate it, but it’s minimal and irrelevant.
Nor is there some precise body template you
stick to, your exact structure constantly
bounces around a basic template that alters
over time from aging, damage, and decay.
Even your brain is constantly changing.
Every new memory we create alters the mind,
which impacts the way you think forever.
Nowadays, short of a soul, it’s pretty much
the only thing we have left that we can think
of as some essential quality that is core
to our identity.
If you are moving your mind, or brain pattern
around between bodies, identity presumably
moves as well, be it into an android, or into
some cloned body, or even into some other
body, as is this case with “Altered Carbon”
where folks often change bodies and start
calling them ‘sleeves’ instead, with consciousness
moving between hard drives implanted in the
body.
    Interestingly, this means you basically
don’t need the actual brain, and you can
make a pretty good argument all those sleeves
are really just androids, regardless of how
organic they are.
It also means you don’t have to transfer
to a body, you could just make an extra copy
in one instead, so that two of you were walking
around, or three or four or forty billion.
    Which brings up that third issue with
this style of teleportation, what do you do
with the extra copy left behind?
As I mentioned, we have this same problem
with mind uploading, you get your brain scanned
into a machine and blink when it’s done,
wondering if it didn’t work, just to see
your digital copy waving back from a monitor
and saying you both need to sit down with
a lawyer to discuss who owns what and who
the kids should be calling mommy or daddy.
You are still there, just now there’s two
of you.
In the Outer Limits episode “Think Like
a Dinosaur” an advanced saurian species
facilitates human teleportation to their homeworld,
after which they must “balance the equation”
by destroying the original subject, Kamala.
 However, something goes wrong this time
and the original remains.
While awaiting news of her teleportation results,
Kamala’s human minder develops feelings
for her, and when confirmation is received,
balancing the equation seems more like an
execution.
    Star Trek played with this concept
too, in the episode “Second Chances” where
a then Lieutenant Riker beamed down to a planet
and when they beamed him up, the transporter
signal bounced back, leaving an extra copy
of him marooned for many years on that planet
while the other one returned to duty.
Credit to the series, they actually brought
the copy back for a later episode in Deep
Space Nine’s “Defiant”, as opposed to
forgetting entirely about the setting-breaking
piece of technology as they normally do, though
they do conveniently forget him after that.
Still two very good episodes in the Trek Franchise.
    Anyway, since they know what caused
it, and indeed the implication is that they
always knew how to do it intentionally if
they wanted to, it sort of messes with every
single death they have since they could just
copy people from their last saved pattern.
    You don’t want to be able to resurrect
folks this way at will, or have to deal with
leftover copies, so authors usually have some
sort of handwave to deal with it, like the
original being vaporized by the sheer energy
needed to scan that accurately, but since
we don’t live in a sci-fi novel, it’s
an issue we need to consider for this type
of teleportation.
A common suggestion is to just vaporize the
person anyway, as in that Outer Limits episode,
even if the scan doesn’t do that, but even
with their permission this seems a pretty
dubious ethical stance skating on some very
thin ice with murder below.
    Don’t assume a court would regard
resource scarcity and necessity as a factor
for precedent either.
Putting it bluntly, while it often gets ignored,
the amount of energy needed to transport someone’s
signal this way is generally going to massively
exceed what you’d need to support the original
for the rest of their life anyway.
    At the end of the day, I suspect this
type of teleportation would end up involving
an android on the other side, ideally a very
good simulacra able to do some cosmetic alteration
to look like the replicated person uploaded
to it, who goes and does whatever they are
being sent there for while the other person
either sleeps or goes into stasis back home,
so as to experience no subjective time, and
then those memories get integrated back in
to the original mind.
Done right, you might even be able to integrate
them comfortably back into their awareness
even as they experienced things in their original
body so they could have copies of themselves
coming back from doing all sorts of things,
climbing mountains, traveling to new worlds,
learning whole new fields, etc.
That still leaves the issue of what to do
with the data in that android though, which
is arguably still a person, but it at least
feels a little bit less like murder or suicide
to wipe that hard drive.
    This tends to be the most common type
of teleportation in fiction these days as
it does safely fall into accepted physics.
The other common one is usually some variation
of a handwave on quantum teleportation so
let’s talk about that next.
    Quantum teleportation, like quantum
entanglement in general, has been horribly
abused in scifi in recent years, see the Quantum
Entanglement episode for clarification on
that in general and its essential uselessness
for faster than light travel or communication.
Quantum teleportation doesn’t permit FTL
travel either.
The first thing to note is that when you quantum
teleport some atoms, you’re not actually
moving them at all, you’re copying their
data onto some other atoms.
Take a box full of atoms and quantum teleport
them outside that box, and you’ve still
got that box full atoms.
In that respect, it’s a lot like our last
example of transmitting the data.
    It does happen to be destructive by
its nature though, which removes the remnant
copy issue.
When you measure all those atoms you change
their state so the new atoms get the copy
of the original while the original changes.
You can get many atoms entangled together
and teleport, or copy if you prefer, the whole
state onto something else.
There’s no theoretical limit on how much
can be entangled together, but keep in mind
quantum entanglement is core to how quantum
computers work too and even getting a hundred
or a thousand entangled in very controlled
and artificial circumstances is the best we’ve
done, and you’ve got billions of trillions
of times more atoms in you.
This is the nicer technological handwave if
you want teleportation that is a perfect copy
you can’t alter if you wanted to.
There’s no obvious range limits either but
again it is NOT FTL.
    This is also the sort of approach that
works well for moving through time or to alternate
universes, as it doesn’t violate conservation
of mass and energy, though would still presumably
violate entropy and cause temporal paradoxes.
Jump back in time conventionally and you have
the issue that the time you left is suddenly
missing mass and the time you went to just
gained it, that’s not an issue when you’re
just copying the state rather than moving
the matter itself.
    Another option is a little more like
a wormhole, indeed it’s essentially the
same concept, you take a chunk of space and
just move it along with everything in it,
but not directly through space, into a wormhole
or a quick jump into hyperspace or whatever.
This approach we obviously can’t go into
the science of much, see the Wormholes episode
for discussion of them specifically, but is
nice since it involves no concern over copying.
    But we have a somewhat similar brute
force trick for this.
Even limiting yourself to light speed you
can’t move someone across the planet in
an eyeblink because their body couldn’t
handle the acceleration.
We encountered that same problem when discussing
space warfare in terms of ships accelerating
to dodge, or create a large window of positional
uncertainty for folks shooting at them.
Move or even turn a ship too fast and you
turn the crew into pancakes.
However one very high-tech approach, that
doesn’t actually violate any physical laws
at least, would be to have little nanomachines
inside someone basically pad all their cells
against acceleration by ripping them apart
at the cellular level, and move that big cloud
of disassembled cells to reassemble them elsewhere.
I think the only place I’ve seen this trick
was in Alastair Reynolds’ novel “Pushing
Ice”, and if you can do it then you have
a great method of moving around planets very
quickly, and you would seem to just puff from
one place to another since those machines,
assuming they have the energy for it, can
probably handle thousands of G-force.
    You might ask why you couldn’t just
do this at the atomic or at least molecular
level, but keep in mind there is energy involved
in ripping things apart.
Your cells don’t really have a lot binding
energy between them compared to all the energy
holding your molecules or atoms together.
Discussions of teleportation often worry about
what happens if you beam directly into the
side of a mountain, for instance, which ought
to cause a sudden pressure increase there
that’s more than modestly explosive, or
even just pressure differences when you teleport
down to some planet where the air pressure
is less and suddenly your ears pop and you
cough from the higher-pressure in your lungs.
Keep in mind, though, that ripping things
apart at the atomic level, especially quickly,
involves a ton of energy that needs to be
dissipated somehow.
    That’s less of an issue for the cell-encapsulation
method we’ve just discussed, but those bots
pillowing and moving your cells still need
energy to move.
Neat method though, and it kinda makes you
like the T-1000 from Terminator 2, as you
could go sliding through cracks in doors.
You could potentially maintain consciousness
through that if those bots encapsulating your
brain cells were reading and mimicking the
normal neuron connections for you.
And you might opt to exist like this all the
time, only holding to human form rather than
vapor out of personal preference.
After all, we often talk about transhumans
having nanobots all throughout their body
anyway.
    Another method that’s doesn’t technically
violate physics even if we have no idea how
to do it currently would be very parallel
to one of the weapons we discussed back in
space warfare, the Meson Beam.
Mesons, particularly the kind called the neutral
pion, can fly through normal matter uninterrupted
before decaying rather explosively, so they
make a good bunker buster or armor penetrator
weapon.
Same as neutrinos, they don’t really interact
with anything either nor presumably does dark
matter, but the difference in this case is
that mesons are made up of normal quarks,
same as protons and neutrons are, whereas
neutrinos are not and dark matter almost certainly
isn’t either.
    Regardless of which weakly interacting
particle one uses though, if you could turn
some normal matter into some other non-interacting
matter temporarily and set to decay back into
that normal matter at a specific time, or
a specific distance based on its velocity
and time before decaying, then you could presumably
beam right through any material.
    Two caveats, first we have no idea
how to do that, and second, mesons like most
particles with half-lives do not magically
decay at exactly that half-life, that’s
just how long it takes on average for half
of them to do so.
That’s fine for a gun but not for re-assembling
a complex object.
If you had some sort of field that caused
the decay when they hit, then maybe you could
do it precisely.
Of course that also implies a pretty obvious
defense against unwelcome visitors too.
    There are many more methods proposed
over the years from the vaguely plausible
to downright silly but those are the core
methods that fit more or less into known science,
with some obviously doing so better than others.
Let’s take a minute to discuss some other
options folks often overlook.
    We pointed out that teleportation has
some obvious medical uses for surgery or disease
control or damaged cells.
We also noted that you could use it cosmetically
to remove fat for instance.
Sounds a bit vain and lazy but it’s not
nearly as lazy as, for instance, having a
teleporter that locks onto your bladder or
intestines to save you a walk to the bathroom
or using one to clean off sweat and grime
and dead skin cells.
    It’s also got some industrial applications
too.
Tons, you can use it to assemble objects like
the Star Trek Replicator does, or to move
around matter, heat, and energy in general.
You don’t stop at the gas station it just
teleports more fuel in as you go by, for instance,
though one would wonder why you need a car
in such a case, but it would work for your
lawnmower or even the batteries in your cellphone
potentially.
    However it isn’t just for making
things, you can move them too.
You no longer need a hammer or two in every
household that most folks use a few minutes
a year.
Instead you wiggle your fingers the right
way to tell your home computer what you want
and it teleports a hammer to you from the
local communal tool shed, which probably only
needs a dozen hammers for several thousand
people.
    In this way a teleporter can work a
lot like Hammerspace, something we see in
fiction and a lot from the old cartoons.
It takes its name from those old cartoons
where a character could pull a hammer out
of seemingly nowhere and hit another character
with it.
Like the TARDIS from Doctor who, that’s
bigger on the inside than it looks.
There’s a joke about most older action films
having gun magazines in hammerspace because
they never seem to run out of bullets, but
a teleporter could achieve the same functional
end.
    All of which emphasizes the weird and
unexpected uses it can be put to that a lot
of writer’s skip seeing or examining, with
this and other technologies and our Audible
Book of the Month, “Altered Carbon” does
a good job looking at many of those, particularly
in terms of the possible effects on our psychology
and civilization.
Richard K. Morgan’s 2002 novel is also a
fascinating detective novel with that cyberpunk
film noir flavor we see in a lot of works
like Blade Runner.
Lots of examination of some of the implications,
including some very dark ones, of what happens
when folks can move their minds between bodies
or exist entirely in virtual reality.
    The book has a couple of sequels too
and does differ noticeably from its Netflix
Adaptation if you’ve already seen that,
and same as for January’s book, Jurassic
Park, I tend to feel the books are almost
always better than the film or show adaptations.
    And you can pick up a FREE copy of
the audiobook today, just use my link in this
episode’s description, Audible.com/Isaac
or text isaac to 500-500 to get a free book
and 30 day free trial, and that book is yours
to keep whether you stay on with Audible or
not.
I think you will find Altered Carbon is an
intriguing novel, but if you don’t like
it, you can swap it out for another at any
time.
    Next week we will be looking at a technology
that is already having a huge impact on our
civilization and will only keep growing, as
we explore Advanced Metamaterials.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
           Until next time, thanks
for watching, and have a great week!
