Last time we covered Space Elevators and Orbital
Rings, two very nice ways of hauling massive
amounts of cargo into space at a fraction
of the current cost per pound.
Now, both of those were essentially introductory
pieces so we could move on to even bigger
and cooler things.
We wanted to look at how we’d get up in
space in the first place to build all this
cool stuff and move people from Earth to them.
But both had a pair of weaknesses.
We haven’t got any materials truly strong
enough to build a space elevator and an orbital
ring is very expensive to build.
So before we move on we’re going to take
a look at a couple other types of megastructures
that can help get you into space.
The first of those is the Skyhook, something
you’ve probably never heard of but in truth
are very familiar with.
A classic space elevator is a type of Skyhook,
called a Synchronous Skyhook.
This was before we found ultra-strong materials
that made space elevators plausible and it
it was just one type of skyhook.
A skyhook is a pretty simple concept.
A cable that instead of running from the surface
of Earth up past geosynchronous orbit instead
hangs from a high orbit down to just over
atmosphere.
Ships then fly up to it, get hooked, and can
climb up higher.
What’s more, while the bottom of the hook
moves relative to the ground, it moves slower
than objects in orbit at that altitude normally
do, so the ship doesn’t need to fly as fast
to hook up.
But how does this work?
In a nutshell it works off how rates of orbit
vary with altitude.
The further you are from Earth, the slower
you orbit, both in real speed and in how long
your orbits take.
To illustrate this let’s take three glowing
satellites at different altitudes.
One, the purple one, is just over the atmosphere.
One, red, many hundreds of miles higher up,
and the third, blue, about twice as far up
as that.
As you can see the purple light orbits faster
than the red one which orbits faster than
the blue one.
For a skyhook its top and bottom cover a very
long distance, hundreds or even thousands
of miles.
As long as your material can support.
Since it is occupying all those orbits but
is rigid, it will not orbit as quickly as
objects at the lower altitude or as slowly
as objects in the upper altitude but somewhere
in between instead.
As a result of this the bottom of the skyhook
is moving much slower than normal for that
altitude, and the top is moving much faster
than normal.
Since kinetic energy rises with the square
of velocity, and drag forces also grow as
you get faster, you save a lot of fuel by
hooking up with the bottom of a skyhook.
Now the one I’ve been showing you is called
a non-rotating skyhook, and is the visually
simplest form but not generally considered
the best one.
Most skyhooks designs call for skyhook to
rotate.
Rotating skyhooks spin around their center
of mass even as they orbit the Earth, and
do so backwards.
Normally spaceships launch west to east to
gain a little extra speed from the earth’s
own rotation.
It’s not a lot, but it’s not tiny either,
especially when you don’t need to go as
fast because you’re linking up to a skyhook.
By spinning the skyhook backwards we can play
on that trick even more.
The tip is moving very fast, a few thousand
miles an hour in the opposite direction the
thing is orbiting, so it is still zipping
around the Earth but much slower compared
to even a non-rotating hook, making the speed
our launch vehicle needs to hook up even slower.
And that’s the skyhook.
Not nearly as cheap as a space elevator or
orbital ring in energy cost per pound put
in orbit but much cheaper than normal space
launch.
If you remember the last video when I mentioned
the main cost of an orbital ring was getting
it up there in the first place, something
like a skyhook could cut those cost down to
a fraction.
But you still need a hypersonic launch vehicle
to get to the hook, and while we can build
those it’s possible one might want to a
skyhook in tandem with a maglev launch system
like a Lofstrom Loop or StarTram.
Types of ground-based megastructures we’ll
be looking at in our next video in the series.
Before we look at those however we’ll be
jumping back to our other series on Habitable
Planets and looking at Earth-like worlds orbiting
as the moons of gas giants.
That’s it for today, if you enjoyed the
video hit the like button and don’t forget
to subscribe to the channel if you want to
be alerted for future videos, or click the
video links on the screen to watch one of
the other series.
As always, questions and comments are welcome,
as are requests for which megastructures you
think I should cover next.
Thanks for watching, and have a Great Day!
