A million years is a long time.
A million years ago mankind did not yet exist,
and yet, we can still contemplate the same
timescale for an interstellar mission in our
future.
So today we return to the Generation Ships
series for our fourth episode.
In the first we looked at the basic concept
and its history; in the second, “Exodus
Fleet,” we looked at more of the physics
of building, moving, and powering these ships;
and in the third episode, “Exporting Earth,”
we got some idea how big these ships need
to be in order to move viable ecosystems to
new worlds on centuries long voyages.
Today, we’ll be focusing more on how you
keep such a colony ship or fleet maintained
that whole time, particularly in regard to
the civilization on it, the social drift involved,
and if we could realistically keep a ship
going for vast amounts of time, potentially
a million years.
It does no good to keep a ship running for
many centuries if the people have forgotten
what the mission is, or to keep them focused
on that goal only to have the ship simply
break or run out of resources before they
arrive.
A million years is an eye blink in astronomical
terms, but it’s a near eternity in human
terms.
It’s about how long humanity has been around,
depending on how you define human, but it’s
a couple of hundred times longer than our
entire recorded history.
Even a century is a long time for a civilization,
as not many last more than a few centuries
and even if they do they’ll change radically.
This episode will come out on October 11th,
2018, a month from now, on November 11th,
it will be the 100th anniversary of the end
of World War 1.
That’s a time that’s similar enough that
most of us could still function in our homelands
of that era - speak the language and navigate
the social mores etc - yet it’s a very different
world, with different priorities, and not
just because of technology.
The 20th century probably had the most dramatic
changes of any of its predecessors, but every
culture changes a lot from one century to
the next, something that can get missed when
we read quick surveys of history.
That said, human culture does tend to pivot
around basic biological imperatives.
A culture can get very far away from the norm
but generally it does stay mostly leashed
to a general area.
I’d be hesitant to say a culture can drift
far off that basic biological norm, particularly
since we can’t really pinpoint what that
is, but it would tend to seem the more numerous
and spread out a culture is, the less it will
tend to drift far away from the median and
the longer it takes to do it.
One thing we’ve seen throughout the series
is that generation ships tend to do better
the bigger they are, and this is just one
more reason to think bigger is better.
Alternatively, technology we have now or close
on the horizon eliminates a lot of the needs
for bigger populations.
As we saw last time, when discussing the biological
and ecological aspects of generation ships,
the need for large populations has to do with
social continuity, something not unique to
humans and not genetics itself, as we can
circumvent or fix that problem with frozen
or digital DNA and gene therapy.
Even on a million year journey, far longer
than anything can last even frozen, that digital
option of having DNA encoded and being able
to print it, tech we already have even if
it’s still in its infancy, ensures no generation
ship would have genetic issues.
Of course, that’s assuming they keep their
technology, and that’s a popular theme in
fiction for colony ships and colonies themselves,
that they lose their tech during the flight.
We see examples in works like Robert Heinlein’s
“Orphans in the Sky” and Gene Wolfe’s
“Book of the Long Sun.”
In the former, they essentially are maintaining
the ship with a Cargo Cult mentality.
They don’t really get the science and technology,
they just have rituals for it, very akin to
the Adeptus Mechanicus of Warhammer 40k.
There’s a certain legitimacy to this, too.
A generation ship, even a pretty big one,
is still one lacking a very large population.
If we scooped up the population of a medieval
city of maybe ten thousand and dumped them
into a full-size O’Neill Cylinder, they’re
very unlikely to ever develop modern technology.
There’s no coal or oil, and at a few hundred
square miles of living area, that drum has
a carrying capacity of maybe 30,000 people
using medieval farming technology.
It’s hard to imagine them making much technological
progress.
If they fell back to being hunter-gatherer
tribes, they could support only a few hundred
people.
So you do not want to lose your technology
on a trip like this, because if you do, you’re
never getting it back.
Even ignoring that, the ship probably needs
maintenance and will fall apart otherwise.
It’s also very unlikely to happen.
Common sense says a ship maintained by a bunch
of modern scientists and engineers is going
to fare better than one run by medieval peasants
trained to perform ritualized tasks.
So you wouldn’t do it intentionally.
We already memorize a lot of stuff like start-up
or maintenance procedures for this or that
piece of equipment, you don’t need to invent
a religion or culture devoted to that.
One might tend to emerge naturally with time.
We tend to incorporate our priorities and
goals into our belief systems, spiritual or
secular, and indeed we often develop subcultures
around specific fields or professions, but
that doesn’t imply forgetting our science
or history.
Consider, any given maintenance or production
aspect of a ship that’s important will tend
to draw folks to it who value that.
When a leader is getting selected for that
group, it’s going to be based on some combination
of competence in the field, at skilled administration
of the work, and at being a good spokesperson.
None of those qualities would tend to result
in a mindset that wanted to change it from
an effort at true understanding to ritualized
performance of duties.
Let’s also not ignore that there’s likely
to be some competition for positions or shifting
to other duties, both of which encourage folks
to try to be good at what they do and cross-train
to other skills, neither of which would encourage
memorization over true understanding
Now, overtime duties could still develop into
ritualized tasks, one could imagine positions
being passed on as hereditary offices, that
tends to happen a lot with skill trades traditionally
because Dad is a blacksmith and his son grew
up helping out in the shop and is pretty good
at it.
If you get raised doing something, you are
typically better at it than another random
person who started later, but there will be
other folks with a deep passion and talent
for it too.
If a system is working well, an awful lot
of folks in a field will be second-generation,
having picked up a passion and talent for
a field while growing up surrounded by it,
but most won’t be.
Other folks will acquire a passion for it
and apprentice in it, while many kids will
want to grow up and do something else.
That’s the problem with hereditary succession.
Not everyone is going to have the passion
or talent their parent had, but if they do
it anyway, they’re just good enough at it
that more skilled folks are bypassed, nepotism
creeps into the whole system, and actual incompetents
sneak into important positions.
And the system can go entirely hereditary
if a trade guild keeps its knowledge secretive
to protect their interests and rarely permits
new folks in.
Those processes take generations, but this
is a generation ship.
One advantage we have here is that those colonists
are probably supplementing their gene pool
with frozen or digital stock, so you’d expect
a lot of kids would not be genetically related
to one or more of their parents, which would
probably discourage a focus on hereditary
privilege.
Though note that I said supplementing.
You likely only need a gene pool of a few
hundred people breeding normally to keep things
healthy so long as a decent minority of kids
were getting born from frozen stock.
They also are probably pretty good at genetics
and automation, this has some major consequences.
First, they likely are longer-lived than you
or I, meaning decay is likely to be much slower.
Even just having most people live the natural
human lifespan like we have now has a pretty
big impact on our culture and if folks routinely
live over a century – potentially much longer
but we’ll save that for another day – they
should be much better at retaining knowledge
and skills and the original mission intent,
more than just proportionally to their lifespan
increase too.
They probably do have access to fairly sophisticated
gene therapy as well, which again is handy
for avoiding genetic problems but also means
they probably can tweak kids to be smarter
or healthier on average.
Add to that, they are good at automation,
the existence of a giant generation ship tends
to indicate that in the first place, you can’t
realistically build such things without a
lot of automation.
This means they don’t have many tasks people
can do better through a ritual than thinking
about it, because those are the first and
easiest things to automate.
The colonists aren’t working in a factory
recycling and reforging new bits of hull plating,
they’re working on the robots who do that,
or the robots who do the robot maintenance.
They are still vulnerable to rote memorization
over understanding, since any standardized
piece of equipment is going to have a lot
of maintenance issues where a memorized diagnostic
and maintenance procedure will be outlined,
but again having those doesn’t mean you
lack understanding of what’s going on, just
that you don’t have to think much to do
it.
When I was in the Army I spent a lot of time
fixing, maintaining, and instructing people
on various weapons and equipment, all three
of those tended to involve a lot of memorizing,
but they’re also great ways to learn.
Taking something apart and fixing it, or teaching
someone how to use it, are two of the best
ways to learn yourself, and in doing so I
went from fairly mediocre at marksmanship
and maintenance to being a sharpshooter and
skilled gunsmith, somewhat atypical skills
for a scientist admittedly.
But we all have those extra skills, especially
nowadays when technology means we have more
free time each day, access to all of human
knowledge, and a longer average lifespan to
pursue that knowledge.
I’d have problems imagining us turning into
cretins, cultures change on unpredictable
lines, but background influences matter.
If you picked the hundred or so cultures that
have existed and that most valued knowledge
and learning, the overwhelming majority of
them would be around right now, this would
not seem like a bizarre coincidence.
That would be even more noticeable if we specifically
limited it to technical and scientific knowledge.
Again cultures place an emphasis on what’s
important to them, I could imagine a ship
on a very long journey losing its focus on
the eventual colony effort, I can’t see
them losing interest in maintaining the ship
they’re living on.
We can’t rule it out entirely, but it’s
seems unlikely even on a very long trip.
However, forgetting how to terraform a planet
is another story.
Now, if they’ve kept their interest in science
and technology they presumably kept their
colonization skills recorded and should be
able to train those back up fairly quickly,
and their real limit is the unavoidable one
that they had when they left, none of them
had ever done it before.
However, you probably do have plenty of colonies
already, we should never have to employ true
generation ships to reach the nearest stars.
It might take a century or two for a ship
to reach the hundred or so nearest solar systems,
and that means there are generations going
on, but not so long that you’d expect them
to lose their technology or mission goal,
and they’d be getting constant updates from
each other about other missions that had arrived
and were busy terraforming.
After that, every ship would have endless
updates and progress reports and papers about
terraforming to draw on from prior missions.
You colonize closest first, so folks leaving
for more distant missions will be passing
by already established colonies on the way
out from which to draw tips, indeed they’d
generally have systems nearby them who were
a generation or two ahead on the task, they
don’t have to phone home all the way back
to Earth for help.
Indeed, since new colonies are likely to have
kept their spaceflight capacity, you might
easily be joined near the end of your trip
by a passenger ship full of eager experts
who have gotten bored with their work on their
own system a dozen light years back and are
racing to join you to ply their trade on a
virgin world.
A passenger ship doesn’t need to be very
big or redundant, if it’s just chasing to
rendezvous with a fleet still cruising to
its destination, particularly if they can
freeze their passengers, something we’ll
talk about next time.
But it’s important to note that while you
are on the one hand all alone in the empty
night, potentially hundreds or thousands of
light years from home, all but that last generations
of travelers on a colony ship may be moving
through space where other colonies already
exist.
You can’t rely on them for much physical
aide, as there’d still be years of delay
for them to even know of a problem and many
more to get something to rendezvous with you,
but they are providing a constant background
hum of aid, well wishes, knowledge, culture,
etc.
Things differ a bit if the mission isn’t
colonization, or if your colony was intentionally
aiming for isolation and picked a world far
from the frontier, a fairly likely scenario
and one which amusingly means the expanding
sphere of main colonization might bump into
strange colonies hiding on the fringe.
Particularly since an isolationist group likely
already is more prone to many of the behaviors
that might cause certain aspects of their
culture to drift quickly from the human norm,
so they might be quite alien.
But drifting off the original mission could
happen fairly quickly, even if it doesn’t
involve them losing their knowledge.
A common concern is that the second generation
of colonists didn’t pick the mission, they
were born on it and are stuck with it and
might resent that.
Let’s not even say might, many will.
It doesn’t have to be rational, people gripe
about things without good logical basis for
them all the time, but it is a legitimate
complaint.
I didn’t pick where I was born, none of
us did, and we don’t tend to resent that,
but I can leave, and people often do “get
out of this Podunk town when I grow up”.
Even if they don’t, the option was there
as a release valve.
Folks on a generation ship cannot and do not
have that release valve.
This is one reason I’d tend to expect a
preference for a colony fleet rather than
a single ship, and for habitation on those
ships to still break up into groups.
Better a dozen medium-sized ships than one
large one.
We already discussed the advantages of that
in Exodus Fleet for redundancy, but here we
see a social advantage.
You could have a fleet, all close together
while cruising so folks could shuttle or even
tether back and forth, and each with redundant
components but some specialization.
Never anything that would cripple the mission
if that ship blew up, but you might have Hulltown
on one ship, where they gather worn down and
eroded ship plating and recycle it to make
new ones for every ship.
Each ship might have an Engineberg, where
the focus was on maintaining the power plant
and ship drive, and an Ecotown, devoted to
providing food and overseeing the flora and
fauna they couldn’t freeze for the trip.
This gives everyone a place to go if they
want to leave their community or get ostracized,
gives them a sense of independence from each
other that would act as a check on any changes.
It’s easier to seize power in a city of
10,000 on one ship and try to implement a
course correction to a new world than to seize
power in 100 villages of a hundred scattered
across 10 ships.
This doesn’t mean that if the mission is
long enough you can’t have this breakdown
in science and technology.
Engineberg might go from being dominated by
engineers who work on the power plant to engine-seers
who oversee the Holy Temple of the Sun God,
given thousands of years to do so.
However you’d still have one on each ship
and likely not all would go the same way and
act as a break on each other drifting, and
moreover drifting in ways that didn’t work
well, since there’s likely to be at least
some competition in such situations.
If two ships in a colonial fleet are in competition
or conflict, over their approach to maintaining
engines, the one using the method that works
better is generally going to win in the long
term.
Also, the more technology and science you
have, the harder it is to lose, to a certain
point, since it enhances things that make
learning easier and more necessary.
You need technicians to fix the robots, those
robots give you a lot of free time to think,
and so on.
At a certain point this could break down though.
A ship that is automated enough might actually
be a hindrance, particularly if it can maintain
itself and the humans on board are simply
passengers, like the animals, not crew.
I was joking about ritually applying holy
oil to machines a bit ago and I imagine many
of you caught that as reference to the Mechanicum
of Warhammer 40k, and one of their notions
is that every machine has a spirit in it,
some fragment of the Machine God, their literal
Deus Ex Machina, that they worship.
That fictional setting is full of contradicting
canon but a thing a lot of folks miss about
it is that it isn’t meant to be taken as
necessarily them being stupid and non-scientific,
though it depends on the author of any given
book or game in the setting.
Beyond that their Universe is full of weird
warp entities that tend to possess people
or machines anyway, they had a huge robot
rebellion way back and tons of viruses unleashed
then or in any of the virtually endless wars
40k is known for.
A popular fan theory at least some of the
writers seem to subscribe to as well, is that
virtually every piece of technology they have
has some computers in it and they are all
infected with various artificial intelligences
of various levels of quirkiness and insanity,
so the Tech Priests of the Mechanicum might
actually have to genuinely appease the machine
spirit of a device and probably unsurprisingly
appeasement methods would tend to correlate
strongly to proper maintenance methods too.
If your car had a personality, odds are good
that changing the oil regularly would be ones
of those things that you’d need to do to
keep it happy and not deciding to suddenly
stop working because it feels abused.
It’s a crazy and contradictory setting,
which is generally worse about keeping the
science in their science fiction than Star
Wars is, but much like satires like Futurama
or Rick & Morty they often manage to hit some
bull’s eyes.
A term I sometimes borrow when thinking about
maintenance of various space habitats and
megastructures is Genius Loci, the Roman concept
of a protective spirit of a place.
It would be very easy for me to imagine virtually
every space habitat having an artificial intelligence
that existed to maintain it, given a lot of
intelligence to handle unpredictable events
or sabotage too.
It would also be very easy to imagine such
a thing mutating down the years until it thought
of itself as essentially the protective spirit
of such a place and might even branch out
how it did that protecting, like hitting someone
with a lightning bolt if they misbehaved.
It would also be easy to imagine almost every
device intended for self-maintenance to have
a limited intelligence and personality.
This brings up a problem.
People might forget a lot of knowledge if
they themselves don’t have to practice it,
because the ship maintains itself and its
mission, and rapidly take a backwards approach
to Arthur C. Clarke’s famous quote that
any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable
from magic.
They might forget stuff as they replaced it
with close parallel rituals meant to keep
those devices happy and working.
This also brings up another disturbing issue.
I can make a smart machine with a specific
set of priorities it will stick to and which
can exist indefinitely, there’s concerns
about it going rogue or mutating, but probably
on far longer timelines than a human culture.
A problem with smart people is that they are
actually more dangerous than dumb ones, especially
to large systems with lots of redundancy that
can survive someone just smashing them with
a blunt object.
In fact some crewmember going nuts is one
of the reasons bigger crews are better, one
person going ax crazy from isolation in a
crew of six is a much bigger threat to a ship
than one person in a hundred thousand.
Note how we keep converging to bigger is better
for colony ships.
So you might willingly dumb folks down for
these voyages.
You might rely on the Genius Loci of the ship
to command and train them when they approach
their destination, similar to the seed ship
notion we’ll discuss a few episodes down
the line where an AI ship arrives and grows
and raises all its colonists, but more modest.
You might steal a page from Isaac Asimov’s
Foundation series, where Hari Seldon predicts
the future and guides humanity after he’s
dead by having holograms of himself pop up
to explain what’s going on and nudge them
on the right path.
You also might take the Pacman ship approach
we discussed a couple episodes back where
you litter the ship’s course with new raw
materials and include redundant copies of
knowledge databases and mission profiles.
More on that in a moment.
While we were brainstorming for this episode
we thought of tons of way to keep the knowledge
around or revive it, both the technical knowledge
and mission goals, but most had new problems
they introduced too.
Many could be used in combination to work
better, others could not.
One thing they all had in common is they were
very manipulative.
We launch people, and whether that first generation
was in on it or not, every future generation
at least was essentially a pawn being manipulated
by a dead hand.
This strikes me as both very unethical and
a poor strategy too.
I don’t want someone dead a thousand years
trying to tell me what to do, not just because
I’m my own person, but because I am on the
scene in the present with a better knowledge
of the situation.
I don’t have to be as wise as they to come
up with an equal or better solution, because
I know the problem at hand better and what
tools I have to deal with it, but I probably
am wiser in that regard because I live now,
and have had all those centuries of other
people since then who have been learning and
solving problems.
Moreover, and it’s a personal attitude that
I think helps me keep more positive about
the future in general, it’s not just that
I think we do get wiser as a civilization
with time, it’s that I don’t actually
care what happens to our descendants if they
don’t.
I expect them to solve their own problems
as well as we could if we were resurrected
in their time to deal with them, and if they
can’t, then that’s on them.
So for colony ships, my attitude is to give
them a mission in mind, and the tools, resources,
and flexibility to accomplish it, knowing
that it probably won’t be exactly what I
had in mind but where it diverges from that,
it’s more likely to be in a good way than
a bad way, on the whole.
Of course that’s another reason I don’t
think of single colony ships but fleets of
them for each system to be colonized and millions
of those fleets.
In that context, with you simply expanding
as a vast sphere, you can afford some failures
and nobody is truly isolated.
Of course this was all the social preservation
aspect, the mechanical side is either much
easier or much harder.
There are some things we could build that
would keep functioning for thousands or even
millions of years, especially in the vacuum
of space, where so long as they are shielded
from radiation they have little to erode them.
However complexity is not your friend in case
like this, nor is compactness, a mountain
can last eons and still be a mountain whereas
a modern computer will cease being a computer
pretty much in mere years.
Also, while we might be able to design a ship
that can keep its crew on ice and just plow
through the void without much maintenance,
humans tend to accelerate decay around them
as does biology in general, and as we mentioned
back in the first episode, you can only freeze
people for a few thousand years before the
radioisotopes in their own body will kill
them.
This means your ideal strategy is to go for
maintenance, not endurance, and that means
you need to be able to replace every single
component of that ship.
This is handy as it means you can manufacture
at your destination too, making all the colonial
gear you need and even making new ships if
needed, but it means you need to have that
manufacturing capacity on the ship, know how
to use it, and be very good at recycling.
You also need to keep stockpiles of reserve
raw materials around.
You will be losing some with even the best
recycling, and whatever you are using for
power will be slowly depleted.
That will likely need to be atomic, be it
fusion or fission or even passive decay, but
such materials are energy dense enough to
allow you to power a ship for a million years.
A thing to remember too, some materials have
half lives short enough that a million years
might deplete them, so you will be losing
mass to various factors no matter what you
do, and that loss can stack up.
Just as an example, a ship that lost 1% of
its mass to outgassing or lost parts every
century, a very high rate of efficiency, would
arrive just fine at a nearby star a century
away.
One on a voyage of a thousand years will have
lost just under 10% of its mass.
It will be down to 37% of it mass in 10,000
years, and will be down to just .0043% of
it mass in 100,000 years.
In a million, even a ship that started off
the size of mountain would be down to a single
atom.
So you need to do way better than 1% loss
a century, with an effective ship half-life
of 7000 years.
Or you need to be able to pick up material
along the way.
For this first, we have some examples, and
again, bigger is better, Earth is a spaceship,
and one working fine after over 4 billion
years of travel.
We do lose material, but far slower than 1%
a century.
The bigger your ships are, the easier it is
to prevent losing mass, you can have thicker
ship hulls, even multi-layer hulls, that leak
less and little cracks or losses to an airlock
are proportionally much smaller.
Build big enough and you’d actually retain
some material by gravity, but you have to
get very big for that, and we’ll discuss
Planet Ships another time.
Now to gather material along the way you either
have to stop fairly often or be keeping to
speeds that allows you to profitably gather
materials.
That start and stop method is something we’ll
discuss more later too, in Gardener Ships,
since it would tend to make sense to stop
for a while and setup a colony, then move
on and do it again.
We also have the Pacman approach, where pods
are sent at fairly similar speeds, so the
ship need not slow to gather those resources.
As to grabbing resources as you go, this all
has to do with your internal power plant.
If you’re flicking along at 2 or 3 percent
of light speed on a fusion engine, you can
probably absorb interstellar gas as you go
and refine it for fusion fuel and heavier
elements, but if you’re going much faster,
trying to suck that matter in is going to
result in slowing you down by more than the
energy in that fuel is worth.
If you run on uranium or thorium, much rarer
than hydrogen and much lower in energy density
than fusion, you’ll have to go even slower.
Alternatively if you’ve got matter to energy
conversion or a black hole drive, something
we’ll also discuss more later in the series,
you can probably achieve a cruising speed
of more like half of light speed.
You will have a breakeven point for any drive
where if you go any faster, you’ll slow
down more than the fuel you are running into
can speed you back up.
This break even point becomes your cruising
speed.
But the void of space isn’t a complete void,
there’s gas and dust, and it isn’t just
hydrogen and helium, so you could resupply
this way.
It’s not as cool as a bussard ramjet, which
was proposed to let you indefinitely accelerate
this way, but it should be viable whereas
the Bussard ramjet isn’t.
It’s an interesting ship design paradigm
shift too, we always picture spaceships, especially
interstellar ones, as long and narrow, to
cut down on collisions and drag from those
gases and dust, but if you’re collecting
them you want to be wide, and for many of
our designs that rely on long distance laser
propulsion, you also want to be wide.
We usually assume extending a cheap thin sail
or collector for those ends, or even just
a magnetic field, but it does give you an
excuse to make ships that aren't shaped like
needles or arrows.
And it’s not just gas and dust out there,
it accumulates into small clumps and you could
possibly send a smaller ship to harvest that
and then catch back up.
It still has to pay the energy bill to slow
down and speed back up, but it might be able
to cheat.
A collector ship could stop on a small rogue
planet you spotted, burning a lot of fuel
to do that, and collect much of it but leave
much behind, building a big laser powered
by materials on that mined out object to push
it back up to speed, so it can catch back
up and just decelerate a little so it doesn’t
overrun the fleet.
This would be very handy on long term missions,
particularly those far from any other place,
since they could set those up as communication
relays back home, and which follow up missions
could also use.
Where that’s not an option, which should
never be the case except maybe in the intergalactic
void or between the spiral arms of our galaxy,
you could send pods of material out ahead
of the ship for it to catch up to or behind
it but moving a little faster.
A big slab of iron should handle eons of travel
through the void just fine, and comets prove
volatiles like water or ammonia can last a
long time too, again, bigger is better though.
And we shouldn’t think of a journey of a
million years as only intergalactic, 5% of
light speed is fairly realistic and even high
speed for a generation ship, and for such
a speed, even a journey of 20,000 light years
across a piece of the galaxy could take a
million years.
There’s other reasons bigger is better and
that is that bigger things are generally harder
to break.
Also, bigger populations tend to innovate
a lot more than smaller ones and tend to be
more resilient too.
A small crew is unlikely to provide much in
the way of innovation and something relatively
small could wipe them out, whereas a bigger
population in a bigger ship could do a lot
more on that front.
In the cold void of space or in alien systems,
the need for innovation might be the difference
between survival and total destruction.
So, while it’s harder to produce a large
ship that could accommodate hundreds of thousands
or millions of inhabitants, it’s probably
the way that a successful mission would have
to go.
If we accept that we need a large population
to innovate to deal with the unexpected or
downright weird, we also have to expect that
change is inevitable.
We often say that a battle plan never survives
the first skirmish and we are dealing with
a war of humankind versus the radiation-soaked
cold vacuum of space that is out to get us,
a war that will last for longer than we have
been around in our current form as humans.
Trying to maintain a ship for thousand of
generations is more about trying to maintain
the civilization on it than the ship, though
that will be no easy feat either.
However, by techniques like we discussed today,
it may be possible to create a generation
ship able to last almost indefinitely and
stay on mission, an Ark of a Million Years.
For a civilization to thrive on a generation
ship, it’s going to have to emphasize retaining
its knowledge and skills.
For it to retain its knowledge and skills,
it has to value them and show how they are
useful and applicable to the people on board
the ship then, not far in the future at their
eventual destination.
But this is true of the here and now too,
we focus on skills that are applicable here
and now, and while we place a value on knowledge
for its own sake, that grows out of coming
to love a field as we see how useful and enjoyable
it is.
I mentioned last time that showing how knowledge
is applicable to problems was one of the pillars
of education for our sponsor, Brilliant, and
another of those, as we’ve seen to day,
is that it needs to be community driven.
If a community doesn’t value knowledge and
learning, it can wilt away, but if it does,
it can inspire people to learn and they can
learn alongside friends and peers.
However some knowledge is less immediately
useful, be it nowadays or on a colony ship
far from its destination, and to make sure
folks are learning those, that knowledge needs
to be exciting and cultivate curiosity.
We try to do that here at SFIA and so does
Brilliant.
To truly learn math and science, to be able
to master it like the folks on a generation
ship will need to, you need a community and
environment focused on enhancing our curiosity
and showing how exciting and applicable such
knowledge can be.
If you want to increase your own skills and
understanding, you can go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription
We’ve explored a lot about generation ships
in recent episodes and have more yet to come
in the series, but next time we’ll look
at an alternative approach, the idea of freezing
everyone to be awoken at arrival, in “Sleeper
Ships”.
Before we get there we’ll be returning to
our new Earth 2.0 series to continue our look
at living in the seas, with Colonizing the
Oceans, and see some of the amazing habitats
and cities we might be able to make on the
sea floor.
We’ll also take a look at our book of the
month, Jules Verne's’ classic novel, “20,000
Leagues Under the Sea”
Two weeks from now we’ll be exploring more
on the ecosystems and landscapes we’d expect
to find on various rotating habitats we discuss
here, like on our generation ships or other
megastructures.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the Notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
