So today we’re going to be discussing Flat
Earths, disc-shaped artificial worlds, Alderson
Discs, and the general notion of how gravity,
lighting, seasons, and orbit around these
things would work.
The last video in the series, Shellworlds,
involved a type of megastructure we don’t
see too much of in fiction, discworlds on
the other hand are incredibly common.
Probably the best known example would be the
late Sir Terry Pratchett’s massive fantasy
parody series appropriately named Discworld
which ended at nearly half a hundred books
and over 70 million sold.
He died a year back so this video is something
of a tribute to one of my favorite authors
on the anniversary of his death and I’d
strongly recommend him to others.
The concept of a discworld itself requires
little introduction, but Flat Earths come
in a lot of styles and I wanted to give these
a deeper look than they tend to get when looked
at as seeming impossibilities.
So for the rest of the video we will all be
honorary members of the Flat Earth Society
and we’ll even look at their model because
while it is flat out wrong, pardon the pun,
it is surprisingly well constructed.
What we won’t be looking at is Pratchett’s
specific discworld, a flat disc on top of
the backs of four giant elephants standing
on a colossal turtle since much like the weather
patterns from George R.R.
Martin’s Game of Thrones it was never meant
to have a natural and physically possible
explanation.
Now the usual image someone gets of a Flat
Earth is a square or rectangle, something
you could sail of the edge of and has four
corners, but while that is also possible the
actual concept has normally revolved around
a disc shape.
We’re pretty used to seeing Mercator Projection
maps but an Azimuthal Equidistant Projection
is also pretty popular, it’s what we use
for the United Nations logo, and it fits on
disc just fine.
As you can see, there is no way to sail off
the edge of such a thing.
You can fly all the way around the world east
to west on a circle with your compass always
pointing north.
If you go south toward the edge you eventually
hit an impassable frozen landscape of Antartica,
not that you’d fall off anyway, you’d
just curve around the rim to the other side.
Interestingly while most images of flat worlds
have a sun that circles around the planet
the version put forward by the Flat Earth
Society has a sun thirty miles across that
circles over the Earth, and that’s not quite
as ridiculous as it initially sounds since
light has pressure.
We’ve talked about moving stars with their
own emitted light or propelling spaceships
with laser beams using that light force, and
to keep an object hovering in a gravity field
you need to provide it the same force, but
in the opposite direction, that gravity exerts.
That translates as a bit over a billion watts
per ton of sun, and the sun hits us with about
a hundred million times that light, so a thirty
mile diameter sun weighing about a hundred
million tons would be quite capable of hovering
over the earth and could circle above it just
by tilting itself a bit to change its direction
of thrust.
This actually works a lot better than a sun
circling the planet so if you’re building
fake suns that basically giant light bulbs
it might make more sense to just go with a
cocked light bulb tethered by its power cord
to the north pole and pushing up and slightly
rimward.
We’ll come back to discussing gravity and
orbits in a little while but first let’s
review the lighting system.
If we built a flat planet, shaped like a coin,
around a normal sun, then we could spin it
to produce day and night just like on Earth.
This does give us our first limitation on
size though since you can only get so big
before centrifugal forces at the rim would
exceed gravity and throw you off.
You can have seasons, like on Earth, by giving
it an axial tilt.
What you can’t have is temperature variation
based on being north or south.
Tilted or not, every bit of the planet gets
the same amount of light.
It isn’t Earth’s axial tilt that makes
the poles cold.
It’s that they are steeply angled compared
to the sun.
If you take a piece of paper and start it
off perpendicular to a light, it’s intercepting
the maximum amount of light, as we turn it
away to be angled it intercepts less and less
light until its parallel and intercepts none
at all.
But its total surface remains the same, so
that’s less light per square foot.
Less light, less warmth, so its colder.
So a flat disc can be angled to have seasons,
but the whole thing experiences the same temperature
since then entire disk is at the same angle
to the sun.
At least when the sun is an actual normal
old star not some fake approximation.
This brings up the Alderson Disk, which is
a hypothetical megastructure that’s a big
flat disc around a star, one with a surface
area comparable to a Dyson Sphere, more than
a billion times what Earth has, which makes
it an attractive idea.
This thing is actually a very silly megastructure
in and of itself because it gets virtually
no light.
Even less than you might expect since it also
has a giant rim wall to prevent air leaking
into the sun.
It’s also got the problem that it should
want to contract into itself and no known
material would be strong enough to be able
to stop that.
Some versions of these just hand wave the
sun bobbing up and down in the middle to better
light the disc, how this is accomplished is
unknown since stars don’t generally bob
up and down and they certainly do not do this
around absolutely nothing at a pace sufficient
to do it once a day and at a steep enough
angle to matter.
So that’s where Alderson Disks tend to get
abandoned but that is selling the notion rather
short.
We’ll get to the work around for disk’s
crunching up, and of not having gravity point
straight down, in a little bit.
Let’s light up an Alderson Disk.
I mentioned a bit ago how an artificial sun
might hold itself up just by its own radiation
acting like a thruster, but this is even easier
around a star using mirrors.
There is a device known as a Statite.
This is a highly reflective and thin satellite
which does not orbit, or does not orbit normally,
but instead simply hovers in place by reflecting
sunlight away.
We’re already talking about building one
giant thick disk around a sun, a couple thin
ones is a minor matter.
Incidentally with statites distance is not
a factor.
While the force holding them up is dependent
on the total light hitting them, which falls
off as the inverse square of distance, the
gravitational force pulling on them also falls
off as the inverse square of distance so two
identical statites will both hover the same
even if one is far further away than the other.
The key variable two how thick a statites
needs to be to hover, or it’s mass per unit
of cross section, so it doesn’t fall or
fly off, is how bright a star is compared
to how massive it is.
Bigger stars actually produce far more light
per unit of mass than small ones, that’s
why giant stars don’t live very long, so
ironically you can build thicker statites
around more massive stars.
So you can hover thin disks, one or a collection
of them, over the sun, to reflect light over
the whole disk.
You can give them curvature and angles to
produce bands of day and night and even twilight,
and either have them spin or have the disk
spin to give days and even season by having
the statites mirrors not be of uniform width
or reflectivity.
So that’s the lighting issue solved, and
it’s actually an amazingly easy fix.
Now let’s talk about the gravity generated
by disks in general.
Like most things if you’re far enough away
you can treat it as a point like object, and
if you’re circle around the rim it still
acts fairly normally.
Our issue is above it, or below it, but fairly
close to it.
If you’re at the very center the gravity
acts perpendicular to the surface, so everything
is fine.
But as you get out from the middle the direction
of gravity is going to start tilting at an
angle.
By the time you reach the rim its pointing
almost entirely toward the middle, that’s
why you can’t fall off the edge, you’d
just walk around.
If you took a flat disk, rectangle, cylinder
or cube and poured water onto it its gravity
would make it lump up into the cap of a rough
sphere around the middle.
And that’s a bit of problem unless you want
great big oceans in the middle and land all
around the rim.
Also your air will do the same thing which
becomes more than a landscaping concern.
So what is the work around for that?
What about the whole problem of the disc crunching
together into a sphere?
We can get around the crunching with centrifugal
force, by spinning the disc, which helps us
with gravity too.
The further from the center you are, the more
centrifugal force acts on you pushing you
outwards.
To a certain point you can spin your disk
to counteract the crunching force of gravity
trying to make it a sphere and making water,
air, and people tend to migrate to the center.
But this is an overly simple and non-ideal
solution.
First off, these models of disks always assume
the structure is homogenous in density, that
makes sense since if you had denser parts
they’d just fall toward the middle and that
would exacerbate the gravitational tilt to
the center.
Relatively large disks couldn’t be made
of rigid materials able to avoid doing that
either.
But if you’ve been following the megastructures
series a couple workarounds should be occurring
to you by now.
We’ve talked a lot in this series about
active support structures, in the very first
episode we talked about orbital rings, in
the third we talked about space fountains,
and we revisited both concepts last time in
Shellworlds video.
You may want to review those if that’s new
to you but the summary version that if you’ve
got a stream of matter orbiting a planet,
or a star, inside a pipe, you can keep that
pipe stationary and rigid so long is it, and
anything sitting on it, has a combined momentum
with the orbiting particles equal to what
the whole sum ought to have if orbiting normal.
You speed up those particles as you add more
weight to your stationary structure, which
would normally be magnetically levitating
over the matter stream.
Ditto you can have atlas-like pillars holding
things up by just firing mass up a long narrow
straight tube to be magnetically slowed near
the top, transferring their momentum to whatever
you’ve got hovering at the top.
In this way you could keep two huge objects
separate without them needing to orbit each
other, and the only energy loss would be on
how inefficient your mechanisms were.
If they were 100% efficient you’d never
need to add anymore energy after the first
influx to get it going.
We can use both of these structures, orbital
rings and space fountains, in construction
of super large discs.
Let’s say we started with a big orbital
ring around a sun, for an alderson disc, or
small fat cylinder for a normal discworld,
it could be touching for the latter.
Only this ring segment is hollow and its full
of mass spinning around in orbit.
We pack so much mass into this that it’s
a little denser the core.
The orbiting material keep the segment rigid
and also provides gravity above it.
Then we put another ring in, touching the
first, where the mass is denser.
And another, and another.
We make the disc as thick as necessary to
ensure we can pack all the requisite matter
into that last layer.
Since these outer rings have way more matter
in them, in terms of being denser, this negates
out that inward pull to the center, and you
can even add in some centrifugal force to
make that a bit easier.
Now you can either just use the sides of these
rings as your firmament to build on or throw
over a skin which keeps from crushing together
by using those space fountains, those atlas
pillars.
Bingo, nice even gravitating disc.
In the case of the giant Alderson Disc we
still need that airwall to keep air from sliding
into the sun but that’s fine, we just make
that a huge solar panel to carry energy out
to keep all the other mass spinning.
Whatever you’re using as your filler material,
the stuff running through those pipes, is
something you’re going to need a lot of
since its generating your gravity too, but
as we discussed in the Shellworlds video the
universe has tons of hydrogen and helium which
aren’t things you’d normally build Earth-like
planets out of, but cramming it into these
orbital rings to generate gravity is just
as doable as using it for stuffing in Shellworlds.
You don’t necessarily need to use the orbital
rings approach either, if you want something
weird like a rectangle instead of a circular
disc.
You just make very long space fountains radiating
out from the middle holding everything apart
and pack the innards with rigid pockets of
matter of the right density, presumably hollow
rigid objects full of gas.
You can also make the disc wider as you get
further out if you’re having problems getting
the necessary density in those outer layers
to keep the gravity high enough but I dislike
that since it isn’t a flat earth anymore.
You can also add in walls, probably stylized
as circular mountain ranges, to help hold
in air and water if you’re not quite pulling
off nice even gravity and those same space
fountains holding it apart can also be used
for bulk matter transport to help deal with
issues of slow drift or erosion.
Now how dense these things have to be is another
matter.
Actually it doesn’t matter, so long as the
disc is significantly thinner than it is wide.
For an infinite plane of mass gravity doesn’t
drop as you get farther above or below it
and so it doesn’t matter how thick it is,
just how much stuff is in there, it can be
thick but not dense or dense and thin, all
that matters is how much mass is under a given
area of the surface.
So long as your discworld is thin enough compared
to your diameter, and your distance above
it is much smaller than that diameter, it
doesn’t matter if you’re packing your
discworld with super-dense neutronium or pressurized
hydrogen and helium.
But if you’re making something with a living
area comparable to Earth you do need it pretty
dense, a couple thousand miles thick of something
at least as dense as steel would do, but denser
is better because you really want to keep
your discs significant thinner than their
diameter.
For something as big as an Alderson disc it
would still be paper thin compared to its
diameter even if you let it be a hundred thousand
miles thick, and that makes it a lot easier
to fill it with pressurized gases for gravity
and having higher pressure, higher density
ones near the exterior to even out your gravity.
Needless to say if you’ve got artificial
gravity you can skip all this, and artificial
gravity isn’t definitely off the radar of
future technologies.
We still don’t know if gravity and electromagnetic
forces unify, that’s that whole grand unified
theory you sometimes hear about is…
…but if they do unify it is conceivably
possible you might be able to make a gravity
generator that runs off electricity, or an
electric generator that runs on gravity, the
same as we can whack something with photons
and knock out electrons or vice-versa, producing
gravitons instead.
Even if that’s possible it might easily
require way more effort than just using bulk
matter anyway, but it might be possible and
it would seriously simplify things.
Getting back to the lighting and seasons issues
before we close out, we first have to decide
how we’re getting our light and how big
our disk is.
For the Alderson Disk that’s just a sun
with mirrors hanging overhead.
In the Flat Earth Society model it’s a disc
or sphere around thirty miles across and so
is the moon, I’m not too sure how eclipses
work in that model though, they use something
called a Shadow Object that orbits the Sun
I think.
Like I said I find it rather fascinating how
intricate that model actually is but its still
nonsense.
I’d probably do it by having both as discs
that occasionally pass each other directly
sometimes above or below the other to do lunar
or solar eclipses.
In my version the sun and moon are thin lightbulbs
keeping a float by their own radiation pressure,
like a big rocket thruster connected to a
big leash of a power cord keeping it circular
around the pole, where you can maybe wind
the cord back or out to help simulate seasons
or just lower the power a little when you
want it colder.
If you want a sun actually orbiting the planet
geocentrically then you need the sun placed
at a distance that results in a 24 hour orbit
of the disc.
That won’t quite be a circle since it is
a disc not a sphere but you aren’t necessarily
limited to normal Newtonian Mechanics here
either since that’s obviously not a real
sun.
I don’t think there’s any disc size you
could produce that would have a disc significantly
more massive than a star, still have regular
Earth gravity, and still have orbits around
it of less than a day that weren’t either
passing through the disc or so close as to
burn it.
If you’re not using a regular star, either
because it’s got its own refuelable fusion
reactor or a black hole or something in it
then you don’t really need to worry much
about normal orbital mechanics because the
output of power would be so high compared
to the mass of the fake sun, compared to normal
suns, that it would basically be a spaceship
quite capable of charting any path it felt
like.
Sort of like Apollo or Helios or Ra or whichever
sun god riding around on their chariot or
solar boat you prefer.
In fact, as we’ll talk about in the next
video on black hole powered ships, the mass
of a black hole big enough to light a whole
planet – or rather small enough since less
massive smaller black holes actually radiate
more energy, you’d only need a sun of about
a hundred thousand tons, about as much as
an aircraft carrier, to illuminate a whole
planet and about that same mass of fuel every
year so there’s a lot to be said for a big
spaceship sun just flying around the disc
planet once a day, either doing a whole circle
or just having two, one for each side of the
planet, landing at the rims.
Depending on how high you are over the planet
the path you take is going to make some areas
more brightly lit then others and so hot and
cold respectively and you can vary your path
and distance to produce seasons or keep to
regular path but have the world spin once
a year.
Using a regular star, as I mentioned earlier,
doesn’t let you have cold areas near the
poles, you can still have axial tilt give
you seasons but it will be just as warm everywhere.
Amusingly you could have disc after disc form
a bracelet around a star in a ring and run
big circle around to their poles as a train
between worlds, or a big topopolis like we
discussed at the end of the rotating habitats
video, so the Alderson Disc isn’t the only
option for one essentially super large land
mass you could navigate around without needing
a space ship.
That’s how you build one, big or small.
Now the real issue is why you’d build one
and while we could rationalize making Shellworlds
instead of rotating habitats, discworlds are
a bit harder.
They are not as mass efficient as a Shellworld,
spheres are more efficient than discs in terms
of the amount of matter you need inside to
get gravity over your living area.
In both you can use multiple layers so long
as you provide artificial lighting to lower
layers and can get rid of your waste heat.
Discworlds just aren’t as much like Earth
as a Shellworld is and also aren’t quite
as mass efficient as a Shellworld, which is
already an incredibly inefficient use of mass.
So Discworlds probably are stuck in the category
of impractical megastructures, but not so
bad compared to Shellworlds that if you’re
building lots of those you’d never contemplate
building a Disk.
It’s probably going to be a while before
we revisit the megastructures series so I’m
not going to pick a subject for the next episode
yet.
Besides Youtube just created this fun polling
system and as mentioned next time we’ll
be talking about black hole powered ships
and some general use of black holes as power
sources, since that is what the first poll
overwhelmingly favored.
I like this system so from now at the end
of videos instead of just announcing the next
video and playing the credits and some music
and popping up the channel’s playlists I’m
going to star adding a poll for the next,
next video after that and asking for suggested
topics down in the comments section.
I’ll sort through those suggestions and
see what seems like good topics I can do justice
to and throw them up into the next poll.
Most of the viewers for a given video will
probably be after that poll is concluded so
if you don’t see it popping up then I probably
took it down already.
If it’s up, please take a moment to weigh
in on what topics we should look at next.
As always comments and questions are welcome
below, I try to get to as many as I can.
Don’t forget to subscribe to the channel
if you want reminders when the new videos
come out, and if you enjoyed the video hit
the like button and share it elsewhere.
Thanks for watching, and we’ll see you next
time!
