This Episode is sponsored by Audible
 
Biotechnology offers us a road to 
virtually endless ways to modify,  
alter, and improve on nature… but should 
we use it to do the same to ourselves?
 
So today we will be examining biotech and 
we should start by asking what we mean by  
biotech. We are likely at the start of what 
will be a long revolution in biotechnology  
which will change life for humanity as thoroughly 
as the industrial revolution and information  
revolution have, if not more so, especially given 
that it might involve changing people literally. 
 
The word “biotech” means a lot of things to a 
lot of people, so I think it would be useful  
to spend a little time discussing what we 
mean when we use the word in this episode.
 
The most obvious type is genetic manipulation. 
In principle, if any person, animal, plant,  
or microbe has an ability, it should be possible 
to recreate that ability through genetic  
manipulation. This should allow everyone to be as 
smart as the smartest human who has ever lived,  
as strong as the strongest, and so on. It could 
allow us to hibernate during long journeys through  
space, or navigate by the Earth’s magnetic 
field. In reality, the possibilities are  
probably far greater than what has naturally 
evolved and happens to have not gone extinct.  
It could allow the restoration of long dead 
species, or the creation of ones which we’ve  
never seen, like walking trees, or intelligent 
trees, or trees that grow candy or bacon.
 
I suspect that when most people hear the term 
genetic manipulation, what first comes to mind  
is something like CRISPR, or using tailored 
retroviruses as a way to alter the genes  
of a living person by adding, subtracting, or 
altering their DNA. This is known as “in vivo  
gene therapy”, and is such an incredibly risky 
and difficult approach that it may be very rare.  
Retroviruses are pretty sloppy machines, and tend 
to cause a lot of damage while making such edits,  
potentially resulting in cancers. On top of 
this, those viruses can also trigger dangerous  
and potentially fatal immune responses. 
Since this approach is akin to modifying  
an airplane while it’s in flight, it shouldn’t be 
surprising that it’s difficult and very risky. 
 
Of course, if it can be made more 
reliable it could hold a lot of potential,  
but we often instead imagine using more artificial 
approaches like tiny robots instead of viruses,  
which itself can be a fairly blurry 
distinction of life versus machine,  
especially given how tenuously viruses tend to 
meet the definition of life and that such machines  
would likely be reproducing and aping the viral 
approach to that. Be it nanobot or retrovirus,  
we still have a long way ahead before such methods 
would become available for mainstream use.
 
An alternative to gene editing that might be 
more likely is known as ex vivo gene therapy.  
This is where you remove some tissue from a 
person, perhaps just a few cells, and conduct  
your gene modification on that. This approach 
is much safer, since it’s completely external.  
If there are any problems with the editing 
process, the cell culture can be destroyed  
and a new culture started. This method also 
makes available the use of some chemicals which  
might be tolerated by the cell culture, but are 
unsuitable for injection. Perhaps a chemical has  
some benefit for a culture of liver cells, but 
produces psychedelic effects on neurons: being  
able to modify those liver cells in isolation 
could be a handy solution to that problem.
 
The third gene editing approach, and by far the 
most controversial, is germline editing. Folks  
often make the mistake in assuming this involves 
germs somehow as an analog to retroviruses,  
but it’s using the other, older meaning of 
‘germ’ as a seed or sprout, and works from  
the premise of making your genetic edits from 
that first seed with its single DNA copy.
 
This is where you would modify the genome of 
an embryo, which then is modified in every cell  
subsequently divided from that embryo, and grows 
up with those edits integrated into the future  
child or adult. Not only does this alter the 
genome of every cell that child is ever able  
to grow, but it also alters the genomes of 
that child’s descendents. The consequences  
of any decision to conduct germline editing 
will last a lifetime, perhaps many lifetimes,  
and could have far-reaching consequences indeed. 
But despite its currently controversial status,  
my guess is that germline editing is 
likely to be very widespread in the future,  
especially for non-human use. 
Incidentally, this is generally  
why I tend to like retrovirus and nanobot 
options over germline editing. They rely  
on using untold trillions of little viruses or 
robots to change every necessary copy of DNA  
inside a mature organism, which is trillions of 
times more work, but leaves the door open for  
agency. An adult would still be able to decide 
for themselves what to change about themselves,  
including whether they want to change themselves 
back if their parents modified them earlier and  
they, as an adult, decided they don’t want those 
changes. Whether or not parents have a right to  
modify their child’s genes, and how broad that 
right is if it exists, is an interesting debate,  
but one you can mostly circumvent if you have the 
option of waiting and the option of reversal.
 
In general, we should probably expect gene 
editing of humans in the foreseeable future  
to be widespread but cautious. Swapping out 
dysfunctional or lower-performing genes for  
better-performing examples already found in 
the wild human genome is pretty low risk,  
but it’s difficult to imagine ethical 
ways for novel genes to be safety tested.  
Of particular difficulty would be verifying 
that novel genes don’t cause mental illness,  
as proving safety would require testing on 
a large population of sentient humans. 
 
Any other testing protocol would still 
allow some outlying cases to slip through.  
If you’re planning on genetically modifying people 
to be vastly smarter and stronger, you might have  
to worry about them going all hyper-aggressive and 
narcissistic and trying to take over the world,  
like the classic sci fi example of Khan from 
Star Trek. Needless to say, that’s hard to test  
out safely or ethically, so you’d probably take 
an incremental approach, even just when using  
existing genes. We also have to keep in mind 
that whatever approach most folks think is safe  
doesn't mean that’s all we have to deal with.
If some mad scientist and ambitious parents decide  
to try making a person who is very outside the 
normal template, say they spliced in some squid  
neurons because they thought it would result in 
faster reflexes and overall mental augmentation,  
we’d still have to deal with that person made 
by that process. Similarly, while someone like  
Khan might be imprisoned or executed for crimes 
committed while trying to take over the world,  
any children they had would still presumably 
enjoy the same rights and if the Khan’s  
kids or the squid-person wanted to set up 
families that is something of a dilemma. 
 
An area that is often neglected when people talk 
about sci fi biotech is pharmaceuticals, but it’s  
important not to underestimate the enormous 
potential still left in the realm of drugs.  
In particular, developments in genetic 
research are assisting the development of  
new pharmaceuticals in a variety of ways. 
Better understanding of what genes are  
doing - especially when they malfunction 
- can also point the way to new drugs.  
For example, if a malfunctioning gene is causing 
a serious health problem by producing a malformed  
protein, you might solve the problem by 
supplying the right protein in a pill.  
If the malformed protein is directly harmful, 
you might solve the problem by making a drug  
that binds to it, blocking its effect. 
If you want to introduce a highly complex  
molecule into a person’s cells, a more efficient 
route than injecting them with that molecule  
might be to inject them with messenger RNA, 
or mRNA, which codes for that molecule.  
mRNA serves as instructions that the cellular 
machinery follow to produce complex molecules  
in your cells. Incidentally, this is how some 
of the COVID-19 vaccines work - by tricking your  
cells to manufacture the spike proteins present 
on the surface of the outer shell of the virus. 
 
Beyond more familiar applications of 
pharmaceuticals, there are also some ways  
they might be used in combination with genetic 
modifications. You might control novel gene  
expression by making the gene require a chemical 
or element that it will never encounter in nature.  
Some gene-tailored animals that needed Tungsten 
to live, for instance, are easily supplied with  
tungsten but not from random plants and animals 
in nature. This approach is potentially handy for  
controlling tiny designer microorganisms, viruses, 
or even nanobots we might make in the future.
 
When pharmaceuticals can’t fix the problem, 
you might resort to cloned transplantation.  
Failing organs or amputated limbs could 
be grown as part of a full human body,  
or with more advanced techniques, as individual 
parts. It’s likely to be a slow process to grow  
adult-sized body parts from an embryo, but there 
is likely a lot of potential for speeding up that  
growth rate from decades to mere years or months. 
Obviously the preferred goal is just to clone  
the needed organ, not a whole person, science 
fiction has a lot of examples of the latter case,  
people grown to maturity just to serve 
as an organ bank for another person,  
or for a full body transplant of someone who 
is old and plans to transplant their brain  
into a younger clone. Being able to grow the 
organs individually circumvents that issue. 
 
Being able to take donated organs or advanced 
prosthetics and implant them into people with no  
fear of rejection is another goal of biotech, and 
something that overlaps with the less-discussed  
fields of synthetic or xeno cellular implantation. 
Xeno Cellular Implantation is the implantation of  
animal tissues modified to be compatible with 
human biology and immune systems. For example,  
you might implant modified bird cells into a 
person’s scalp so they can grow feathers, or  
cuttlefish cells into a person’s irises to produce 
eyes that change color depending on mood. 
 
Tissues might be living cells, or non-living 
scaffold material which is then colonized by  
human cells. The example you might have heard 
of is washing a pig heart free of its material  
until just the protein scaffold is left beneath, 
on which we may grow a human heart. This might  
be done inside or outside a human. Currently 
non-living scaffolds from pigs are used to grow  
organs from human stem cells. Since the 
non-living scaffold material contains no cells,  
it generally doesn’t trigger an 
immune response when implanted. 
 
If you want to produce complicated structures 
already present in the animal kingdom,  
it is much faster and easier to produce 
them this way rather than trying to  
program those structures into the genome. 
These techniques could also be used with  
fully synthetic cells which do not come from 
nature, but were instead designed by engineers  
from the ground up. Tremendously useful 
things can be done by modifying nature,  
but at some point in the past we stopped spending 
so much time modifying parts of trees and rocks  
and instead spent time casting metals and weaving 
carbon fiber. It seems likely that fully synthetic  
biology will provide advantages over modified 
natural biology in certain situations. 
 
One type of biotech that is almost never 
depicted in sci fi is engineered microbiota.  
Microbiota are the various microorganisms 
which live on and inside of our bodies.  
Engineered microbiota can be naturally evolved 
organisms implanted from a different individual,  
domesticated organisms, or fully 
synthetic organisms designed by  
engineers. The gut microbiota can be used 
to produce and administer pharmaceuticals,  
detect ingested substances, control appetite, 
and metabolize previously indigestible  
substances - for example, lactose. Some people 
never develop dental cavities or obesity despite  
eating the same diet as those who do. Often 
this is due to a difference in microbiota.
 
On the other hand, perhaps the most wildly 
exaggerated type of biotech in sci fi  
is mechanical implants or cybernetics. Cyborg sci 
fi generally uses cybernetics for shock value,  
so they’re depicted as bulky, intrusive, 
asymmetrical, and almost always penetrating  
the skin. The writers and special effects 
team are specifically shooting for inhuman  
and disturbing appearances, perversions 
or adulterations of humanity,  
and as is often the case for science fiction, 
the science part often suffers for the fiction. 
 
Needless to say, adding a 150 pound steel robot 
arm in place of a flesh and blood arm doesn’t  
allow you to lift enormous weights as the arm 
is still attached to your flesh and blood torso.  
In fact, you would likely struggle to even stand 
up straight due to the asymmetrical weight load,  
so you would have to do a rebuild 
basically from the ground floor up  
and that shouldn’t look all 
non-symmetric and haphazard,  
though I suppose a cyborg sub-culture might 
have big cyberpunk roots and enjoy that look.  
Also any device that permanently penetrates 
through the skin is prone to infection. 
 
In reality, mechanical implants will likely 
only be used when a biological solution is not  
yet available, either not being invented yet or 
because there’s a long lead time in manufacture,  
like it takes a year to clone a lung or heart 
or arm and you get the cybernetic version in  
the meantime. They will tend to be as small as 
possible, as soft as possible, and will avoid  
breaking the skin whenever possible, at least 
for physical augmentation, situations like mental  
augmentation by including digital memory implants 
or interfaces might need to be very inorganic. 
 
One of the most useful implants would be a 
digital radio circuit able to communicate  
with the future equivalents of bluetooth and 
wifi. This would allow internal systems to  
communicate with worn objects, and objects in 
the environment. For example, you don’t need  
to implant large quantities of digital memory. 
Instead, you wear a small gadget on your person  
which contains the memory chips, and this gadget 
communicates with the implanted digital radio. 
 
This type of neural radio would also give one 
a communication capability that would have some  
similarities to telepathy. You might be able 
to communicate entire concepts or emotions,  
or you might just be limited to something like 
hands free texting or silent phone calls. Even  
with the more limited versions though, people with 
this ability would seem connected in a way that is  
qualitatively different than what is possible 
via a cell phone. The cultural differences this  
would produce are likely to be analogous 
to trying to explain internet meme culture  
to someone who has never seen a computer. 
The second most useful implant would probably be  
input and output taps on your sensory systems, 
giving you access to augmented reality,  
virtual reality, and sensory recording. 
With the audio tap, you can play music with  
perfect fidelity without headphones. So long as 
your neural pathways are intact, it doesn’t even  
matter if your hearing has been damaged. You 
can turn off background noises, or the steady  
whine of tinnitus. You can play audiobooks 
and podcasts while showering or scuba diving.  
By linking to an external gadget capable of voice 
transcription and real time language translation,  
you could mute the actual voice of someone 
speaking in a language you don’t understand, and  
replace that audio feed with the translation. 
With the video tap, you could overlay a wide  
variety of augmented reality elements, including 
anything you currently look at your phone to see.  
If that sounds annoying, imagine the display as 
less like a bunch of obnoxious cluttered icons,  
and more like a small window that you call 
into existence when you perform some gesture,  
for example perhaps reaching into your pocket. 
It behaves very similarly to a cell phone except  
you can resize it to be as big or small as you 
want at the moment, and when you let go of it,  
it floats in midair. If you want, you can pull 
more windows out of your pocket. But they weigh  
nothing and they don’t make awkward, pointy 
bulges in your pocket. When you’re done with it,  
you just put it back in your pocket to dismiss 
it, or maybe just blink a quick pattern. 
 
Recipes or tutorials could hover in 
front of you as you try to learn a skill.  
Multifunctional appliances used to have zillions 
of buttons and knobs, but then they started  
replacing that with touch screen interfaces. 
In an era of ubiquitous augmented reality,  
appliances will have almost no hardware interfaces 
at all. They’ll be stylish and sleek. If you need  
to make an adjustment to your breadmaker or 3D 
printer, you’ll just pull out a virtual interface  
that becomes as large as you need it to be. And 
when you’re done, you make the interface disappear  
again. They’d probably have no other buttons, 
just a jack for manually adding some universal  
control device if needed. They might not even 
have power cords, as we are making progress on  
wireless power transmission and that too might be 
a very handy way to power some internal machinery  
on a person, like implants or nanobots.
You could view movies on arbitrarily large,  
virtual screens, and even dim the rest of your 
vision if you want. The movie might completely  
surround you, as though you were inside of a 
spherical screen. Go further with this concept,  
and you can imagine replacing all of your 
sensory inputs with a full virtual reality.  
If the computer generating the virtual imagery 
is smart enough, the VR experience might tailor  
itself to the real-world environment around you 
to prevent injury. Doorways and staircases would  
still be there, but they might look like a dungeon 
portal or a marble staircase from a mansion. 
 
Full VR would presumably benefit from an olfactory 
and taste override, so you could smell the jungle  
or taste elvish cooking. Humans have a lot more 
senses than the commonly claimed seeing, hearing,  
smelling, tasting, and touching. For example, 
touch could be broken into a tactile sense,  
proprioception, temperature, pain, and balance. 
Hunger and thirst don’t seem to easily fall into  
any of those categories. Some of these senses 
can be kind of dangerous to mess with, though.  
For example, it’s hard to imagine much good 
coming of messing with one’s sense of balance,  
unless you’re lying on the ground.
Messing with proprioception (which  
is your sense of where your body parts are 
located in space) seems even more dangerous,  
as you could be flailing around without realizing 
it. Pain overrides might take some people aback,  
but at least moderate levels could presumably 
spice up video games. Conversely, the usefulness  
of being able to dampen down severe, natural 
pain goes without saying. It’s still not without  
dangers though, as pain often serves as a warning 
that you’re doing something you shouldn’t be.  
Presumably, plenty of injuries will result from 
people using pain dampening for stupid things,  
but that’s also the case with literally 
every technology ever invented. 
 
So how do you interact with 
all of these virtual objects?  
One way would be for a computer to read the 
neural signals actually produced by your retinas,  
and use that to determine where your hands 
are, assuming they’re in your field of view.  
A better method might be to tap into the neural 
circuits involved in your sense of proprioception.  
Either of these techniques would allow you 
to use your hands and fingers to interact  
with virtual objects and user interfaces. 
As we looked at in our episode on Mind  
Augmentation, we also have the learned and 
programmable Universal Remote option. 
 
We can currently insert a few thousand leads into 
animal’s brain that would react to stimulation,  
which is what Neuralink has been 
working on for the last few years.  
In a human, these could act as a rather deliberate 
mental button the person learns to mentally push,  
with each connection being something a person 
could learn to flip by thinking in a certain way,  
much like flicking a finger or blinking, and 
this could act like some blank keyboard we could  
set each mental button or hotkey combination as a 
control for some device and the person would learn  
to be rather deliberate in flipping it. 
This gives you all the advantages of  
thought-control without the concerns about 
accidentally activating it, especially if  
its a mental button combination, as it would be 
more akin to accidentally punching in your pin  
code or accidentally saying a specific sentence. 
You’re not going to accidentally write a contract,  
sign it, and file it while you’re asleep. 
Such neural augmentation is something we  
can already do, on animals anyway, and I 
suspect this will be where we see our first  
thought control devices emerge from.
But presumably it would eventually be  
possible for a more invasive system 
to read your intentions directly.  
Rather than opening a virtual user interface for 
the air conditioner, you would simply desire the  
temperature to lower slightly and the machinery 
would respond. This is often how such things  
are depicted in science fiction, but reading 
intentions is likely to be a far more complicated  
task than simply reading sensory inputs. 
But as I said before, these types of implants  
would likely only be mechanical until 
they could be replaced with biological  
versions capable of doing the same things. 
One technique that’s almost never discussed is  
what we might call “neural shaping”. This would be 
the artificial guiding of a person’s own neurons  
to produce engineered circuits. For example, one 
might implement digital calculator circuitry in a  
tiny corner of your brain, giving you the ability 
to calculate the cube root of a 10 digit number  
as quickly and easily as you parsed this 
sentence. It also allows wiring shunts around  
neural damage/scarring, enabling us to cure most 
forms of paralysis, and some mental illnesses.
 
Lastly, there is the possibility of nanobots, 
and as I mentioned earlier the line between  
them and something like a retrovirus or 
engineered microorganism can be blurry.  
But I think it’s reasonable to say the term 
nanobot should only be used for things which  
don’t already have a good name, and thus would 
not apply to bacteria, viruses, or enzymes.  
This is more to do with defining our terms 
for the sake of easy discussion than accuracy.  
The capabilities of these devices in fiction are 
often either wildly exaggerated, or just as often,  
wildly underestimated. For a nanobot to 
work it needs some systems which are very  
challenging to engineer at nano scales including 
power, data processing, and sensory input. 
 
It will also produce heat and get 
worn and torn by doing activities,  
which is the missing bit that prevents them from 
being the super-fast magic wands sometimes seen in  
fiction. The faster a mechanical device works, the 
more damage it causes to itself for each activity,  
and the more energy it needs to do 
that activity, generally speaking,  
while at the same time it produces heat faster 
simply from doing more things in a shorter time.  
As is often the case with technology, the real 
bottleneck on it is getting rid of the heat,  
and we explored this notion in more detail 
in our episode on the Santa-Claus Machine.
 
Of course, to make heat it needs to have a source 
power that’s fueling the work it does to produce  
heat as a waste product. The most readily 
available sources of power in an organism  
are either blood sugar and oxygen, or beamed 
power from an external source. The latter is  
sufficient in a clinical setting, but can be 
awkward to maintain as part of day to day life.  
Beamed power for nanobots is more complicated 
than at macro scales due to minimum size  
restrictions on antennae versus wavelength.
One alternative is the multi-tiered approach  
we sometimes discuss for nanotech, 
where you have bigger microscopic  
factory and controller bots who produce and 
manage many specialized species of nanobots,  
and in a similar way to how mitochondria produce 
fuel for our cells, you might have a large control  
bot producing some nanobot-specific fuel via 
beamed power. There are a lot of chemicals that  
can be used as a fuel and assembled to provide 
abundant power, and this might make a good way to  
prevent problems like grey goo - where nanobots 
who build other nanobots get loose and turn  
everything on a planet into copies of themselves. 
In the same way a rare element or alloy could  
limit excessive production, a control-fuel 
specific to the body, or to certain situations,  
could provide an extra layer of safety.
Data processing would also consume a large  
portion of a nanobot’s total power budget, and 
space is limited for complicated logic circuits.  
Sensory input is important too, as you probably 
only use nanobots if you have a task that needs  
to be done at a particular location in your 
body, but not in others. Most importantly,  
they might not self replicate. Designing a 
device to self replicate is more challenging  
than designing a similar device that doesn’t, 
and requires additional hardware, resources,  
and capabilities. It also raises enormous 
liability risks in the event that it colonizes  
people without their consent, or replicates out 
of control within the intended host. Again this is  
why the larger microscopic, or even macroscopic, 
robot factories and control centers we discussed  
a moment ago might be handy, potentially 
with many tiers of bot, each manufacturing  
the next lower tier of smaller robots.
An important subject worth mentioning with  
networked biotech is data security. A complete 
VR sensory overlay sounds like amazing fun  
until you contemplate someone hacking 
your hardware to blind and deafen you  
while cranking your pain levels up to maximum. 
Or the hacker could compromise your sensory taps  
in order to see and hear everything you do without 
your knowledge or consent. More advanced implants  
allow more advanced hacks, allowing the hacker to 
literally read your thoughts or expose you to fake  
realities. Hacked nanobots could do whatever 
nanobots can do, and it won’t be pretty. 
 
So what’s possible with all this stuff? I’ve 
already mentioned a number of applications here,  
but the possibilities are almost infinite. 
Other easy stuff includes curing all genetic  
disorders forever and using vaccines and other 
immune system enhancements to eradicate many  
contagious diseases the way we have eradicated 
smallpox. Cancer is an inherently tricky disease,  
but survival rates have been increasing and 
will likely continue to do so for a long time. 
 
Appearance modifications have always been on the 
cutting edge of medical science and this will  
undoubtedly continue. The trend toward increasing 
obesity will suddenly go into rapid reversal.  
Noses and jawlines will be sculpted, and 
sometimes in ways that are inheritable.  
Presumably there will be a brief period 
where there are suddenly large numbers of  
people walking around looking like Barbie dolls or 
Conan, and possibly a phase afterward where this  
was seen as excessive and tacky. I mentioned that 
early cyborgs might embrace the cyberpunk genre  
and intentionally go for the jarring or gross 
imagery we often see with cyborgs in that genre,  
while others would presumably try more 
desperately for a natural human look the  
more augmented they were, like getting 
moles, baldness, or liver spots added. 
 
So that could go either way, with folks embracing 
inhuman forms, or idealized human forms, or very  
natural forms, and we’ll probably have periods and 
subgroups doing all of the above in various ways.  
A lot of the stigmas we have about body alteration 
have to do with safety and cost, and concerns  
about the psychology of the person doing them 
when we view those as potential problems. 
 
We view getting a rhinoplasty to alter the nose to 
a more preferred but normal human shape as being  
vastly different than putting on cosmetics 
that include colors found on no human skin,  
because the latter is cheap, safe, and 
fast to add or remove, so why someone  
might choose to do it doesn’t raise concerns 
about an unhealthy mental state or body image.  
In a civilization where you can change physical 
characteristics cheaply, quickly, and safely,  
and change them back again cheaply, quickly, 
and safely, you would presumably see a lot of  
folks doing so, and with less concerns 
about mental health and body image.
 
Extensive Biotech should let people live 
longer, and they'll be healthy for longer too,  
so I would not be surprised if folks felt like 
changing things up physically from time to time.  
I mentioned mental health a moment ago and 
Biotech has a role to play there, as well.  
Mental health problems such as clinical 
depression, schizophrenia, and anxiety disorder  
are likely to become less and less common as we 
develop a better understanding of the causes,  
and better drugs and implants to help us treat 
them, as well as better counseling techniques  
I would hope, but we’re focused on biotech 
today. Certain gene variants are likely to  
be associated with certain mental health 
problems, and Biotech should allow options  
for easy early detection and intervention.
Augmentations - possibly excluding cosmetic ones  
- are likely to creep in slowly and quietly unless 
some avenue for unethical human experimentation  
suddenly opens up. The risks to subjects 
being augmented are literally life and death,  
and the risks to organizations doing this research 
are severe financial and reputational damage,  
possibly even criminal penalties if everything 
isn’t above board. A certain amount of risk is  
likely to be viewed as acceptable when battling 
leukemia or MS, whereas scientists taking risks to  
add cat ears to people is likely to get a lot less 
leeway or sympathy when something goes wrong.
 
One of the big risks is the potential for 
unanticipated interactions between different  
biotech treatments. Maybe a rare gene variant 
is discovered that is associated with cavity  
free teeth, and another one is discovered that 
is associated with champion weight lifters.  
Great! So, a generation of parents pays gene 
clinics to add these two discrete genetic  
modifications to their embryonic offspring. 
Unfortunately, when the children reach middle age,  
it’s discovered that the specific protein forms 
produced by the two gene variants combine to leave  
plaques in the brain, resulting in early onset 
dementia or hyper-aggression in the mid-life.  
Doctors have been administering these two 
genes to kids for decades by the time the  
interaction is discovered, and now you have 
a bunch of musclebound, cavity-free lunatics  
wandering the Earth, presumably turning to 
cannibalism with those perfect teeth of theirs.
 
In the more distant future, people living in 
space habitats and colony ships will likely  
no longer experience muscle wasting or other 
maladies which result from long periods in zero  
G. Their tissues might be made tougher to allow 
them to hold their breath for long periods of time  
while working unprotected in space. You might 
add something like an additional eyelid,  
like cats have, with the intent of allowing 
folks to keep their eyes open in a vacuum,  
where liquids normally freeze or turn to gas. 
It’s uses in turning desolate planets habitable,  
either by molding the planet to 
be more earth-like, terraforming,  
or sculpting species to be more adapted to that 
planet - Bioforming - are topics we have examined  
on other occasions, but are clearly enormous.
Biotech is potentially both a great danger to  
humanity, but also a great potential boon, as 
is often the case with an emerging technology.  
But it differs from most, as it doesn’t just allow 
humans to alter their environment or interact with  
it in novel ways. Biotechnology lets us alter 
the human itself, for better or for worse.
 
So we have a couple of announcements 
along with our upcoming schedule, but  
first... Last week we were looking at the 
impact of Multiverses on the Fermi Paradox  
and we mostly looked at the alternate 
reality types of Multiverses,  
not those dealing with older Universes or parts of 
our own Universe beyond the edge of the Observable  
Universe, where the CMB originates, the 
Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation,  
and it's a topic we’ll probably look at in the 
future but I wanted to give a shout to my friend  
Brian Keating, host of the Into the Impossible 
Podcast which is also available here on Youtube.  
Brian’s been one of the strongest forces for 
conceiving and pushing forward research for Cosmic  
Microwave Background Radiation, having worked 
on BICEP2, and he’s currently the Director of  
the Simons Observatory under construction in the 
Atacama Desert that will continue that research. 
 
He’s also the author of the book “Losing the 
Nobel Prize” which discusses the BICEP experiments  
but also zooms in on some problems we 
have nowadays with how we go about these  
super-large or important research projects and 
how it might be hindering scientific progress.  
It’s a wonderful exploration of how scientific 
progress takes place and the audiobook version is  
excellently narrated, so I’m glad to name it our 
May 2021 SFIA Audible Audiobook of the Month.
 
Audible has the largest collection of Audiobooks 
out there, indeed it is so large you could hit the  
play button and still be listening to new titles a 
few centuries from now, and as an Audible member,  
you will get (1) credit every month good for any 
title in their entire premium selection—that means  
the latest best-seller, the buzziest new release, 
the hottest celebrity memoir or that bucket list  
title you’ve been meaning to pick-up. Those titles 
are yours to keep forever in your Audible library.  
You will also get full access to their 
popular Plus Catalog. It’s filled with  
thousands and thousands of audiobooks, original 
entertainment, guided fitness and meditation,  
sleep tracks for better rest and 
podcasts—including ad-free versions of  
your favorite shows and exclusive series. All are 
included with your membership so you can download  
and stream all you want—no credits needed.
And you can seamlessly listen to all of those on  
any device, picking up where you left off, and as 
always, new members can try Audible for 30 days,  
for free, just visit Audible dot com 
slash isaac or text isaac to 500-500. 
 
As a sidenote, this episode and 
the one from two weeks back,  
Post-Human Species, began as a a single episode 
suggested by a pair of our regular editors,  
Jason Burbank and Jerry Guern, and 
evolved into two separate topics,  
and maybe a third for down the road, each of 
which they assisted in writing with Jason being  
the principal co-writer of today’s script and 
Jarry the Post-human script from two weeks back. 
 
I’ve said it before and will say it 
again, it’s awesome to get to meet  
and work with so many talented folks, and most 
times they come right from our own audience,  
pitching an episode idea to me or volunteering 
some time to edit script or make graphics. 
 
On a personal note, my wife Sarah and I are moving 
this month so there may be some disruptions,  
delays, or errors as we get out and over 
and settled into the new place and studio.  
It's more out in the country so I can 
further enjoy solitude and the hermit life,  
and Sarah can move and expand her blueberry farm 
and start her new beekeeping hobby - which I  
blame in part on my friend Cody don Reeder from 
Cody’s Lab - though mostly for me finding them  
interesting and safe enough to have hives in my 
backyard. If you’re looking for some fun stuff to  
watch while waiting on our next episode, Cody’s 
Lab and Brian Keating’s “Into the Impossible”  
both contain endless hours of fun 
and mentally stimulating content.
 
Speaking of those upcoming episodes, this was our 
first for May and we have plenty more ahead. Next  
week we will move on to Alien Languages and how 
to decode them, then we have our mid-month Scifi  
Sundays episode on Laser Pistols, Lightsabers, and 
other scifi weapons. After that we’ll be discuss  
Arcologies, giant buildings containing whole 
communities and ecologies and how to design them,  
before wrapping up our episodes with Solar Flares 
and their impact on the Fermi Paradox. Then  
Closing May out with our Monthly Livestream Q&A on 
Sunday, May 30th, hopefully from our new studio.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,  
and if you’d like to help support future 
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are 
linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media forums 
where you can get updates and chat with others  
about the concepts in the episodes and many other 
futuristic ideas. You can also follow us itunes,  
Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our 
audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
