In the past, we had entire civilizations 
devoted to agriculture, but in the future,  
we might have entire planets devoted to it.
 
As the harvest season wraps up for those of  
us in the northern hemisphere for 2023, I thought 
it might be a good time to examine the concept of  
Agriworlds, entire planets dedicated to growing 
food inside larger galactic empires, such as the  
twenty dedicated farming planets that supported 
the Imperial Capital of Trantor in Isaac Asimov’s  
Foundation series, or the far more dystopian 
agri-worlds of the Warhammer 40,000 setting. 
So we will look at this concept, what farming 
might look like in such vast civilizations,  
and ask if there is a scientifically plausible 
scenario where an entire planet might export  
food to another world, and if so, what kinds? 
As well as asking what role space farms might  
have in the future and what they might look like.
These planets are ubiquitous in science fiction  
but often covered only in passing, the literary 
equivalent of driving through the cornfields  
of Indiana or the endless plains of wheat 
stretching from Oklahoma and Kansas through  
to Alberta and Saskatchewan. I’ve only seen 
one description longer than a few sentences,  
in Chris Wraight’s novel Lords of Silence, one 
of my favorite authors from the Black Library,  
and it’s decidedly darker than the worlds 
we’ll discuss today, but I’ll read an abridged  
excerpt of it now, discussing the creation and 
tending of an Agri-world, Najan specifically,  
but they’re all basically the same, and it 
is the passage that inspired today’s episode. 
“After discovery of a candidate planet, the first 
fifty years are spent in terraforming according to  
well-worn Martian procedures. All pre-existing 
life is scrubbed from the rocks, […] Weather,  
at least as generally understood, disappears. 
Rainfall becomes a matter of controlled timing,  
governed by satellites in low orbit and kept in 
line by fleets of dirigibles. The empty landscape  
is divided up into colossal production zones, 
each patrolled by crawlers and pest-thopters. […] 
Soon after this process completes, every 
agri world looks exactly the same – a flat,  
wind-rummaged plain of high-yield crops swaying 
towards the empty horizon. A person could walk for  
days and never see a distinctive feature. Not 
that anyone sane would choose to walk in such  
places – the industrial fertiliser dumps are so 
powerful that they turn the air orange and make  
it impossible to breathe unfiltered. A single 
growing season exhausts the soil completely,  
requiring continual delivery of more sprays of 
nitrates and phosphates, […] The entire world  
is given over to a remorseless monoculture, 
with orthogonal drainage channels burning  
with chem-residue and topsoil continually 
degrading into flimsier and flimsier dust. 
But that doesn’t matter. A planet can be 
driven like this for thousands of years before  
it eventually keels over and becomes a death 
world. […] At the end of every season, the great  
harvester leviathans are stoked up and dragged 
from their pens and let loose on the grey fields,  
smokestacks belching and tracked under­carriages 
sinking deep. These massive creatures of  
high-sided metal and intricate pipework, the 
smallest of which are a hundred metres long,  
crawl across the blasted prairies, sucking up 
every last speck of pallid grain and piping it  
directly to antiseptic internal hoppers. 
Feed-landers come down from high flight,  
dock with the still-trundling leviathans and 
extract the raw material, from where it is  
taken into the city-sized processor vats, 
blasted with antibiotics, smashed, burned,  
crushed, then stamped and packaged. Once ready for 
transport, containers are dragged up into orbit  
aboard swell-bellied landers, ready for transfer 
to the void-bound mass conveyers, which deliver  
the refined product to every starving hive 
world and forge world in their long circuits. 
There is a quaint tradition […] of marketing agri 
worlds as quasi-paradises, free of the squalor and  
overcrowding of a standard urban station, 
and full of bucolic ease. […] In reality,  
life on an agri world is as unrelenting, 
back-breaking and monotonous as the vast  
majority of other Imperial vocations. 
There are no trees laden with glossy fruit,  
only kilometre after kilometre of hissing corn. 
There are no gentle strolls under the warming sun,  
only punishing work details in rad-suits, leaning 
into the dust-laden winds that howl around the  
equator with nothing to halt their rampage. Once 
the new arrivals have made planetfall and found  
this out, it is too late. Crew transports arrive 
on agri worlds full and leave empty. There is a  
saying among the indentured workers – you 
come for the soil, you end up part of it.” 
And again that was from Chris Wraight’s novel 
Lords of Silence, and listening to the unabridged  
audio of that passage from that book made me want 
to examine this topic and ask a few questions.  
First, why would you monocrop a whole planet, 
and I don’t mean that as a rhetorical question.  
Second, could you plausibly transport foods 
between planets, or even between stars in a  
no-FTL Universe, and if so, what limitations 
or technologies are needed. And third,  
would it actually be profitable to burn a world 
out that way? Because while it sounds loathsome,  
we can always imagine someone doing 
it if it truly were more efficient. 
So, for the first one, the answer is mostly 
no but it depends. There’s a reason why we do  
crop rotation, quite a lot of them. Up near me the 
majority of farms grow soybean one year and corn  
the next, this replenishes the nitrogen and helps 
with pest and disease carrying over in the soil,  
and is fairly sustainable though not without some 
caveats, the big one usually discussed the days  
being glyphosate, or roundup, for keeping weeds 
down. Corn and soybean are not the only things  
grown locally of course, my area has a lot of 
apple orchards and vineyards. We do hay on my  
own farm, and you don’t need to rotate that, 
though it is usually a mix of plants anyway,  
such as clover for nitrogen. Growing 
grass is trickier than it sounds like. 
Other areas do other rotations, but corn, 
soybeans, and wheat were very common monocrops,  
and monocropping is where you just keep growing 
the same thing on the same land year after year  
till depletion occurs, and in their case on the 
grounds that they are crops that produce a lot  
of calories per acre, or hectare, and with very 
little manpower per calorie produced this way,  
and in a foodstuff that’s very easy to 
transport and store for a long time.  
Intercropping is where you’re growing two 
or more crops in the same field together,  
and overlaps with the concept of polyculture. 
Monoculture is having a single crop in a spot  
at a given time, so includes crop rotation, 
where monocropping is always the same plant,  
in the same place, by itself, year after year.
Rotating corn and soy is usually better than  
monocropping it, and a lot of fertile river 
valleys could grow a crop over and over because  
the flood every year replenished nutrients. The 
upside of monocropping is that it lets you really  
specialize, you only need the equipment for one 
crop, only need to learn and master one crop, only  
need to be an expert in its diseases and pests, 
and so on. We’ve all been raised to think of  
monocropping as bad, but we do need to be mindful 
that it has big advantages, and that we don’t tend  
to think of retooling a factory every season to 
produce a different product because it wouldn’t  
tend to make sense. Almost every other industry 
does the equivalent of monocropping so we should  
be mindful that it does have some advantages.
It has tons of disadvantages too, but the whole  
point of technology is to let you have your 
cake and eat it too, and odds are good a lot  
of monocropping problems can be addressed 
via technology. If you’re wizards at pest  
and disease control, it’s not a problem, if you 
have easy access to the mineral form of whatever  
you’re depleting, like phosphorus, or have huge 
fusions plants churning out ammonia fertilizer,  
then it’s not a problem. If you’re real 
wizards at genetics, then you might have  
put nitrogen fixing genes into some plant 
that normally depletes nitrogen, and so on. 
We could imagine some masters of genetic 
engineering had designed a plant with all  
black leaves that ate every bit of sun that 
came down on it, perhaps even near-infrared,  
and was perennial and ever-bearing, and robotic 
drones came by and harvested the fruit or seed  
and clipped it or dead-headed it as needed 
so that some seasonless world was constantly  
under-production. That’s a pretty bleak sounding 
place though it probably wouldn’t be a uniform  
shade of total black and I can’t see any reason 
why you would need to flatten the terrain. 
One exception might be an existing flat terrain. 
Some years back in our ocean worlds episode we  
defined a number of types of ocean dominated 
planets and one example we gave was what I  
called an Epipelagic Planet. The epipelagic zone 
on Earth is that first zone where sunlight can  
penetrate to, around a hundred meters or yards 
down. And you could have low-tectonic planets with  
faster rotations or just older planets where the 
mountains were all worn down. The mountains are  
not eternal and only active tectonics would keep 
a planet from flattening over time, then the water  
would sit on top of that. Indeed, I would imagine 
most Earth-like planets around orange dwarf stars,  
left to themselves, would eventually become 
entirely oceanic, perhaps just dotted by a  
few archipelagos, and then as the water slowly 
evaporated to space as that star aged and heated,  
you would have a time where it was not very 
deep in most places. Everything flattens out,  
and such a planet might be an awesome place 
for certain monocrops like rice or seaweed. 
That’s also a good reminder that algae 
and seaweed and fish are things you can  
farm just as intensely as corn and wheat 
and chickens. We’ll come back to that but  
it’s worth remembering that if we’re working 
with existing plants and critters then you are  
always going to have some polyculture even if 
it’s non-obvious. You will have indigestible  
bits of food – to humans anyway – that you can 
feed pigs, cows, or chickens – and any number  
of insects aerating soil, who may or may not 
be needed for pollination too. Though again,  
technology opens a lot of doors that would seem 
nonviable under normal agricultural practices. 
Let’s contemplate production 
and population for a bit. 
First, we can assume a planet focused on 
agriculture is probably using about half its labor  
force for that and is at least as productive per 
person as modern agriculture in the US is. As of  
2020 a thousand acre wheat farm generally needed 
8 workers and produced 44,000 bushels of wheat,  
which was low compared to the year before 
or after, and it takes about 12 bushels to  
provide the calories for a typical human adult as 
their sole source of calories. So each worker was  
producing enough food for a bit under 500 people 
and on 125 acres, or 4 people fed per acre.  
Earth in total, every bit of land, sea, ice, and 
mountain, is about 125 billion acres so we could  
be talking 500 billion people being fed off that.
And before you go ‘wait a minute!’ about the  
inclusion of tundra and sea, keep in mind wheat 
is not a calorie dense crop by acre. Soy does  
about the same but corn does about twice as many 
calories per acre and potatoes thrice as many,  
though all those numbers vary a lot. Algae can do 
far better and use saltwater to boot. And while it  
would seem like you would be planting these 
based on both available climate and demand,  
it is worth noting you could monocrop an entire 
planet by using domes and that often terraforming  
a planet is going to involve them anyway. 
We might imagine a planet sized greenhouse,  
what we call a worldhouse, to ensure some barren 
planet was transmuted into some titan of industry,  
to make all the gear for terraforming, then turned 
to agriculture, churning out enough food to feed a  
few trillion people a year, factories to farms, 
rather than the other way around. And since it  
would be many big domes, not one single enormous 
one, that allows superior climate control, erosion  
prevention, water retention, and huge advantages 
at preventing the spread of pest and disease. 
Again I wouldn’t expect them to monocrop but 
we’re seeing how they might if they wanted to,  
especially as they could pump heat around 
that planet via vast cistern aqueducts too,  
to cool and hydrate deserts while warming tundra 
and desalinating water. This might be a preferred  
approach to terraforming too, doming and mass 
producing food as your way of paying for the  
terraforming effort and as your population 
grows you transition from farming planet to  
regular one. And doming everything makes sense, 
especially since most worlds would need a floor  
put on to keep the potentially poisonous 
surface layer of regolith separate from the  
soil you were producing there from it by a lot 
of treatment. In this way the planet is moving  
not from Agriworld to barren Death World, but 
rather to paradise planet. Indeed the default  
order might be Death World to Forgeworld to 
Agriworld to Paradise Planet and perhaps to  
Ecumenpolis or Hive World after all that.
But if we were assuming 500 people fed for  
each farmer, and 125 acres tended by each, then 
that implies that if every bit of land and sea  
was farm, and our planet Earth-sized specifically, 
that you would have only a billion farmers on the  
whole thing. Now they have families and other 
needs, they will still want restaurants and  
schools and so on, but even if we assumed they 
were fully 10 to 1 in terms of other workers  
and kids to active farmers, I suspect future 
automation would do much better than that. For  
one thing, modern equipment already does, just 
most farmers run on stuff a bit more dated and  
often have other work they do. I am in no 
way a full time farmer and my own tractor  
is fairly new but a smaller and general purpose 
one, rather than a large and specialized device,  
with many specialized attachments. So a billion 
people would probably be on the high side,  
with them feeding well over a trillion, and 
that would imply a population density of about  
5 people a square mile or 2 a square kilometer, 
with many living in floating homesteads on the  
seas tending algae or other crops.
Or fish, again we shouldn’t assume  
monocropping or no other exports. But this 
implies villages spread all over, probably  
with populations in some single digit multiple of 
Dunbar’s number, low hundreds to low thousands,  
which are probably kept to the optimal size of 
minimal travel time to field work and not needing  
to replicate basic services too often, which is a 
major background influence on rural towns in the  
last century or two anyway. Is this place big 
enough for its own school or church or library  
or convenience store? If so, the land is probably 
more expensive to farm, so it becomes a tradeoff. 
This might be a case of mobile communities too, 
not just the ones engaging in sea farming either.  
As we discussed in mobile cities, the game 
changes a lot if you’ve got plentiful energy,  
like compact fusion reactors, because now you 
can have a town rolling around on the landscape  
on what might be a single massive harvester or 
tiller. That tilling machine might have a big  
fusion-powered Haber-Bosch reactor yanking air in 
and spitting out ammonia fertilizer made from the  
nitrogen and water in the air. Things like that 
might move on some giant rail system with huge  
crane arms on it too, and you don’t care about 
soil erosion because it all ends up in some other  
field eventually, even if it’s dredged up from the 
ocean floor occasionally instead. Or maybe you’re  
in huge dirigibles instead of land crawlers so you 
don’t disturb the field and everyone works while  
suspended from cables above, supplying them power 
or water not just holding them above the field,  
as individuals or on floating platforms or 
modules. Which actually sounds kind of cool,  
hanging in some harness while manipulating some 
huge fertilizer hose or suspended harvesting rig. 
Or your climate controlled domes might all be 
supplemented with day light and heat and providing  
wireless power transmission to the crop tending 
drones. Such a dome, interwoven with microwave  
receivers, could also absorb energy coming in from 
orbital power satellites. And even without fusion,  
a lot of these planets might add in supplemental 
lighting via orbital mirror and dish arrays. So  
if you want to grow oranges in Alaska, that’s 
no problem if you don’t mind doing it inside an  
insulated dome and having some extra lighting 
provided by an orbital mirror or electric  
powered LED lights. You can fine tune either for 
photosynthetically optimized frequencies too. 
So on 107 Piscium B, a roughly Venus sized planet 
in orbit of that K1 orange dwarf star 25 light  
years from Earth, they founded an agricultural 
colony. The world had a decent amount of water,  
mostly frozen, as it was further from its star 
than would be classically habitable. That star is  
old too, 2 billion years older than our own, and 
the world had no real moon helping with tectonics,  
so it wore down. The last volcanic eruption there 
was about the time life crawled out of our seas.  
It’s a very flat place, and while some agriworlds 
counter this with fruit trees or hardwoods for  
windbreaks, here they just dome everything over. 
107 Piscium B has a very small axial tilt and  
little seasonal variation. The entire planet is 
domed over like bubble wrap with diamond-domes a  
kilometer wide that got slowly added over 
the centuries, and even over its oceans,  
as the local air mix wasn’t breathable by humans.
From higher up the planet looks honeycombed by  
those domes, packed in hexagonal fashion, and 
every 127 domes there’s a modest town instead  
of a farm with a tether to an orbital ring at 
which huge spaceships dock to carry cargo away.  
The night sky is dotted with the orbital rings, 
these spaceship leviathans, some kilometers long,  
and the huge mirrors and power satellites shining 
light and microwaves down. Some worlds focus on  
mirrors that are filtered to send only red light 
down to enhance that photosynthetically valuable  
range of the spectrum, but this orange dwarf is 
already heavy in that range so they just absorb  
the infrared light to generate power they beam 
down and reflect the visible spectrum to world  
below, particularly the more polar latitudes.
One of those cargo haulers, Grange-922,  
contains 5 billion cubic meters of storage area 
in its holds, and has over a thousand kilometers  
of heavy transport rail internally to allow rapid 
loading and unloading. Fully loaded, Grange-922  
can carry as much as 4 trillion kilograms 
of wheat, or 13.6 quadrillion kilocalories,  
enough to feed 186 billion people for a year.
Which begs the question of where this ship is  
going, and if could you plausibly transport 
foods between planets. And that’s tricky  
question because usually what folks mean is 
interstellar travel, transporting cargo between  
two star systems light years apart. And that 
can only ever be viable if we have FTL of some  
sort. Now that’s all fine in science fiction, 
and there you might have behemoth ships like  
Grange-922 parking for loading and then traveling 
through hyperspace or warp to another star. 
Alternatively, they might have actual 
wormholes like the stargate-style portal,  
and just leave them open, with rail lines running 
food to a distant capital world while others ran  
back with cargos full of fertilizer fresh from 
sewage planets. Or they might have sewage pipes  
dump it right into oceans of some planet, 
same as they might terraform a planet by  
opening a gateway between an ocean planet and 
a desert one and letting water drain between. 
It's hard to imagine transporting it slower 
than Light though, simply because even if you  
had giant cheap stasis options – which you kind 
of do with freezers being cheap to run ultra-cold  
in interstellar space – it should always take 
way more energy to move that food between star  
systems than it would take to grow it locally 
in some artificial space habitat and farm. 
Now if those turned out to be impossible beyond a 
certain scale then yes, this could still be done  
in some very limited cases. Earth is likely 
to be the most valuable bit of real estate in  
the galaxy for millions of years to come and 
the one where an awful lot of the science,  
technology, and finance runs through. They may 
very well expect colonies to pay them for those  
valuable assets by shipping enormous cargos of raw 
materials or ultra-durable foodstuffs and be able  
to afford it if they were the center of an empire 
of a million star systems – still a tiny dot in  
the galaxy – and were home to 1% of the wealth 
and the pipeline for science and technology. 
However, that’s likely to be a rare and unstable 
exception, so by and large you only could move  
food around one star system. As we’ve discussed in 
other episodes, the real limit on population – as  
well as agricultural or factory production – 
is waste heat removal and it’s usually going  
to take less heat to move food or retail goods to 
Earth, than to produce them locally… or whatever  
star empire capital is under discussion.
Such being the case, the question is if we  
can get them off another planet cheaply 
enough, in terms of money and heat,  
to make that a profitable trade path. And the 
answer is yes, we discussed a lot of the options  
for that in Interplanetary Infrastructure a 
couple months back. Those might be examples  
like our hypothetical 107 Piscum B or ones more 
like Najan from earlier. Or maybe they’re a world  
that’s got giant towers running into space which 
are themselves huge arcologies or vast underground  
chambers of artificially lit crops and forest 
of mushrooms, some lying fallow for years while  
roving tribes move in before being chased out 
when it’s time to cycle up production again. 
We need not go so far as a full Dyson Swarm to 
imagine a future solar system in which Earth  
imports virtually all its food and retail. It’s 
common to view such planets as leeches on their  
wider empires but in practice that’s no more valid 
than saying a nation’s capital is – albeit they  
have also often been viewed this way. But in an 
emerging K2 civilization in a couple thousand  
years, one maybe just at what we call the K1.6 
region, about a thousandth of the Sun’s light  
being used to support civilization, that would 
already imply they had at least a million times  
our current numbers, and a national capital being 
just 1% of it’s nation’s population would tend to  
be on the small side of normal, so an Earth of 
100 trillion people almost entirely focused on  
running government, finance, research, and museums 
would not need to export a single thing to more  
than cover its costs of importing everything, and 
would then presumably need something on an order  
of hundreds of Earth-like worlds to feed itself.
Obviously those hundred planets don’t exist in  
our solar system, but we might easily build many 
times that number of space habitats. Hence part  
of why I keep calling them Agriworlds, in spite of 
that being harder for me to pronounce than planet,  
because on this show we tend to use 
world to mean any independent body,  
be it a planet or large moon or a very large space 
station or asteroid. Amusingly even my speech  
therapist had problems pronouncing agriworld 
so I wonder if the word is likely to catch on. 
These presumably would focus on farming, and 
it might be a huge McKendree Cylinder filling  
ships like Grange-922 every week, or a billion 
smaller space farms, filling more modest cargo  
vessels. Some might be on elliptical orbits of 
Earth, orbiting in every few months when the  
harvest season nears, before looping out deeper 
in Cislunar space. Others might be part of the  
Terran Ring concept we’ve discussed elsewhere, 
most recently in Interplanetary Infrastructure,  
where a billion kilometer long tether 
of habitats encircling the sun allows  
physical rail travel of people and cargo 
from a billion habitats right to Earth. 
I don’t know what the optimal shape or gravity 
or size would be for one of these space farms.  
A lot will depend on culture and technology. As 
an example, we might assume space farms tend to  
be big enough to allow the comfortable support of 
Dunbar’s number, which at around 150-160 people  
is what we tend to think is on the small side of 
viable for a community. If that were the case, and  
one person’s labor with robotic help could supply 
foodstuffs for a thousand others – including a  
wider diet like fruit and meat – then your minimum 
viable space farm supports feeding 150,000 people  
and needs an internal land are, or its equivalent, 
of probably somewhere between a few miles wide to  
tens of kilometers in radius, and of course many 
might have multiple layers and even orbit closer  
to a star where they get more sunlight. They might 
be big flat plates or long cylinders to provide  
gravity, with their axis aimed at their sun and 
a big mirror on the back to scatter light in. 
Farms habs on distant and cold worlds might us 
a big parabolic reflector behind them capture  
and focus more sunlight on their crops while a 
farm tower on Mercury might be a big mushroom  
shielding them from much of the sunlight 
while spreading it around a vertical farm,  
the mushroom’s shaft, a hundred levels tall, 
and with cargo picked up from the top in huge  
container pods scooped up by skyhooks. The 
subsurface vertical reefs of Europa might  
descend for kilometers surrounding long chains 
of fusion-powered lights, with the non-digestible  
waste spilled out for local fish to eat, pursued 
by submarine drones who netted some of them for  
processing in the fish stick factories of Io.
The options are limitless, and a hungry Earth  
of the year 4000 AD might need that, as it 
consumes 5 quintillion chicken nuggets each  
year. Some from chickens, some from genetically 
modified megaraptors, some printed from an  
algae base as synthetic meat. The dairies of that 
future ship in 10 quadrillion gallons of milk and  
500 trillion pounds of cheese and butter every 
year. 50 trillion bushels of apples, and once  
a small town was destroyed when a ship docking 
at an orbital ring ruptured its cargo hold and  
50 billion apples fell down upon the town below.
10 quadrillion tins of cat food come in per year,  
500 trillion dog bones, an uncounted amount of 
hay for pet horses or other animals on Earth,  
and again is well below the heights 
of a true Kardashev-2 civilization,  
just a Kardashev-1 Earth with a wide panoply 
of space habitats on which most folks lived.  
How fast we can move things and how far they must 
travel at what speed, along with our technology  
for storage helps control if those apples are 
coming in fresh or as canned applesauce. It  
controls if fresh bananas are affordable or if 
those big ships bring in dehydrated food and  
staple crops known for their shelf-life.
In all of the scenarios I am glad to say  
that such worlds are likely to be much more 
ecologically sound and much less bleak than  
our early example of the Agriworld of Najan, 
and while I suspect most space habitats would  
do a lot of their own agriculture, there is room 
for trade inside solar systems. And whether an  
agriworld is Kansas times a million or a floating 
space farm lazily orbiting the Earth-Moon system,  
I think the future leaves the door open for 
farming and for a decent life for future farmers.
So while I was researching and writing this 
episode on farming in space I was struck by how  
often even articles and news on agriculture, 
space, and technology seem to come with the  
writer’s ideological agenda stuck in there. I hate 
when it feels like the article I’m reading was  
written by someone with an agenda and bias that 
they’re consciously pushing, even if it's one I  
share. It worries me when topics get entirely 
covered by one side or ignored by another. 
But there’s a better way to read the news, 
and that's with Ground news. Grounds News  
is a website and app designed to help you 
pull back the curtain on media bias. Every  
story comes with a quick visual breakdown of the 
ownership, factuality, qnd political bias of the  
sources reporting - all backed by ratings from 
three independent news monitoring organizations. 
Ground News is a fantastic tool for sifting 
through the daily misinformation and bias.  
They let you see who is covering what and 
which groups are ignoring a topic. You can  
see the bias, the typical factuality of 
the outlet, and who owns them, keeping  
your news feed transparent and accountable.
Ground News is on a mission to empower readers and  
provides all the tools you need to be a critical 
thinker. I believe Ground News is so useful that  
I’m offering 30% off their Vantage Subscription. 
You can only access this discount through my link,  
so go to Ground.News/IsaacArthur or click 
the link in the video description and  
support an independent news platform working 
to make the media landscape more transparent.
So that’s it for November but join us next week 
as we begin December with a discussion of how  
to select spaceship crews, before returning to 
our Alien Civilization series for Scifi Sunday  
on December 10th, with a look at Nihilistic 
Aliens. Two weeks from now we’ll talk about  
ways to warp and manipulate reality, on 
December 14th. In three weeks we’ll look  
at discussing Silicon based lifeforms on the 
21st, and then will finish the month and year  
with clearing space debris on the 28th and our 
final Livestream Q&A on Sunday, December 31st. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
