Our daily life seems to increasingly 
revolve around smart phones, and soon  
smart houses and smart cars, but what 
about the towns and cities we live in? 
Some months back, I was at an event where a 
lot of discussion was taking place about urban  
planning and the various technologies we might 
incorporate into it; everything from vehicle  
charging stations to phone charging stations, 
wifi coverage, and many points in between. 
Ironically, for someone who dislikes living 
in cities personally, preferring my farm here  
in Plymouth, I always find city management and 
planning fascinating, or at least I have since  
playing SimCity on the Super Nintendo a few 
decades back. So the conversations on urban  
planning at that event caught my interest and 
I heard the term smart city getting used there,  
which I’d heard in-passing elsewhere in 
recent years but had never really heard it  
defined. I asked some folks for more info on the 
general concept and I got a lot of fascinating  
but also often vague details and explanations, 
some nt matching others. Needless to say,  
our goal in today’s episode isn’t really 
to try to better-define a term that’s still  
rather embryonic, but rather to discuss the 
concepts under its umbrella and what we’ll see  
coming of it in both the near and far future.
The term “Smart City” has been growing in  
popularity in recent years, doubtlessly due 
to the influence of the word smartphone,  
and while many of the concepts involved are 
older than the widespread use of cellphones,  
it seems that the new term is here 
to stay. A quick check of Wikipedia,  
which currently lists only 4 US cities including 
Columbus, here in Ohio, as Smart cities, gives us  
a rather complicated opening definition, seemingly 
heavy in technospeak that I will boil down as  
saying “Smart cities are those which collect and 
collate data and then use it in their management”. 
Which, of course, pretty much defines any city or 
village or town that actually has someone managing  
it, who is not utterly incompetent or lazy. Of 
course, you collect data about your town and use  
it to make decisions from. So, obviously it’s a 
matter of degrees here and as for the decisions,  
we might throw in some automation too. 
As a fairly simple example, conceptually,  
traffic lights that monitored flow rates based on 
the time of day and week and were able to adjust  
themselves to optimize traffic flow, would be an 
example of a smart city device. Taking that the  
next step up, we could have a timer on each 
that nearby cars could detect and set up on  
their console or HUD automatically, giving 
the remaining countdown before it turns, and  
we could also have ones that we could inform of 
upcoming roadwork or big events, like a festival,  
which would alter those ideal timings.
But the back end of that is that you can  
be using all those traffic counts and times 
to be predicting when you’ll need to repair  
roads or expand existing segments. And of course, 
that’s something civil engineers have been doing  
for years, but the more improvements in making 
data-collection up-to-date and cheaply-collected,  
the better. This is also where we start seeing 
AI having a role, as, while AI is now finally in  
the public awareness for its chatbot ability as a 
real thing that exists, not technology of twenty  
years from now, it is generally much better for 
applications like real-time traffic-monitoring  
and learning how to predict and optimize traffic 
patterns, than it is at writing a song for you. 
Right now, to avoid smog, for instance, we 
optimize around minimum time spent just idling,  
which is all for the good, but it's less of 
a concern for electric cars or those which  
automatically shut off when not moving. Situations 
change a lot if we decide to start using more  
automation in cars. I don’t like the term 
self-driving car, it’s not really accurate anyway,  
plus it bugs people, but having an auto-pilot that 
can keep you stay inside the lines doesn’t really  
seem to bug folks any more than cruise control, 
and our real objective is to allow maximum safe  
and convenient driving, which, at least for the 
immediate future, is always going to be at its  
best when any onboard computer is merely assisting 
a human, as opposed to being in direct control. 
I think most folks want the robot that’s able to 
slam the break for the dog or kid running into  
the road, and that notices when your eyes are 
off the road and can beep at you, or just keep  
things rolling-on, not the machine equivalent 
of a chauffeur, though many will like that too,  
and in time, that might become the norm. For 
now though, it’s all about how much automation  
we actually have in terms of capability 
and price, and which ways it can safely,  
and non-irritatingly, be incorporated into 
our driving and public transportation,  
or even our walking and biking. And to communicate 
to the other devices around it, so that your car  
can see a kid running out into the road, but the 
kid’s smartwatch also warns the car and so do the  
motion sensors on the streetlight. Redundancy 
and alternative avenues are critical to safety  
and automation can really help with that.
That’s even more the case for cities, so, as  
we contemplate smart cities, and here on SFIA 
at least we are going to contemplate actual AI  
potentially being incorporated as a city, we 
need to ask how much autonomy is available,  
preferable, and agreeable to both the city’s 
administrators and the citizens in it. In an  
ultimate sense we like the idea of a city where 
strips of grass, trees and flowers are all over  
the place and carefully tended by robots, so 
it presumably costs less and can be done at  
night when it won’t interfere with traffic.
In the nearer term though, we could imagine  
the monitors on a stretch of nicely tended green 
noticing how often folks slowed or paused there  
compared to other places and what they most took 
interest in. A slightly more advanced version  
might also anonymously query the smartphones and 
fitbits of passersbys to see if the passage or  
pause there had lowered their stress or anxiety. 
And in more complex terms we might even see data  
sufficiently utilized to determine if a 
given greenspace or piece of public art  
had contributed to lower crime rates, or stress 
rates, or even heart attack and divorce rates. 
Needless to say, that does raise some ethical 
concerns about data-use and privacy, and I don’t  
want to spend too much time on that today, not 
because it’s not a major deal, but because it’s an  
issue in basically every part of life these days 
and cities aren’t special in this regard compared  
to other entities. Your local city government 
either is or isn’t tyrannical already. Such  
technology, like many others, is merely a tool for 
enhancing what can be done, which includes brutal  
police-state oppression, if that’s on the agenda.
There’s a tech-tree cutscene for the Self-Aware  
Colony in Sid Meier’s classic video game ‘Alpha 
Centauri’, where someone is spraying graffiti  
around, about needing to dissent, presumably to 
the government, where the city basically stalks  
the guy in the dark of night, neutralizes him, and 
erases the graffiti, all without witnesses. That  
always stuck with me when I first read 1984 
some years later. That really isn’t all that  
impressive on the Big Brother scale of what an AI 
running a city with full decision-making ability,  
with cameras and drones all-over, might be able 
to do either. So basically, if your city council,  
mayor or dictator is the sort of person who read 
1984 like an instruction manual, you’ve already  
got problems, but if not, then AI with lots of 
public transparency, carefully-considered use,  
and healthy caution, can be an amazing tool to 
make cities safer and more pleasant places to  
live, and with cost-savings to boot. Nor are 
these applications limited to large cities,  
many will work well in towns and villages.
Going back to the more pleasant aspects,  
like adding green spaces, and other 
beautification options, this is where we  
have the concept of “Third Places”, which include 
public-operated space, like libraries and parks,  
as well as private businesses like 
cafes, churches or gyms. The notion  
here is that it is a social surrounding that’s 
separate from either your home or workplace,  
those generally being considered the first and 
second place you spend time at and socialize  
in. The term is relatively recent, having been 
coined by urban sociologist Ray Oldenburg in  
his 1989 book “The Great Good Place”, who passed 
away shortly before I decided to do this episode,  
at the age of 90. Nonetheless it can still feel a 
touch dated with so many of us working from home  
and using virtual places for socializing, as well 
as the growing use of third places for doing work. 
Going to study in the library is nothing 
new for instance, but by and large,  
most jobs of the past did not really have an 
option to go sit in the sun and relax on a bench  
in a garden park while working. Even just taking 
your cellphone to the park to make phone calls,  
which was new and uncommon tech when the term 
emerged, could be difficult due to road and crowd  
noise. Now we aim to make third places, publicly 
or privately owned, the sort of place where you  
can spend tons of time while socializing or 
working or both, and they can help a person  
feel more like a part of their community 
as well as being a vent from home and work. 
Needless to say, they tend to attract people 
and businesses to come to such communities,  
when well-done anyway, though obviously at a cost. 
Balanced right though, it’s the option that lets  
you decrease office tensions by encouraging 
employees to take working breaks to the park  
where there’s wifi, and lets parents have some 
place to take their kids to play and socialize,  
and a thousand other things including everything 
from local theater groups to monthly flea markets. 
I don’t want to overly focus on greenspace here, 
or even third places in general, but greenspaces  
tend to be reliable, cheap, and universal options 
for third places, at least when the weather is  
nice. Cheap is relative of course, devoting a 
few acres to a football or baseball field in the  
middle of a city is obviously not cheap, and even 
if you’re just removing a vacant and low-interest  
lot, like an old broken-down warehouse, you still 
have to mow the thing and it’s not generating you  
much direct tax revenue like a strip mall 
or some apartment buildings would. It can  
indirectly of course, by raising local property 
values and encouraging folks to move nearby. 
But both are much more expensive than, say, a 
basketball court, which take up way less space  
and are easier for a city to find room for, and 
which also don’t need to be mowed, or sprayed  
with pesticides or fungicides. Of course, robotic 
lawn mowers and hedge trimmers – and yeah those  
are a thing now too – alter that paradigm. In 
a way this isn’t new either, the village green  
everyone could use and which festivals and 
games could be held on is older than dirt. No  
doubt we’ll also see them in early space colonies 
too, especially when a dome on a planet or garden  
spot on a space habitat is still incredibly 
expensive and so needs to be a shared space. 
It is really easy to talk about adding parks 
to towns or rooftop gardens but it’s generally  
a lot more complex than folks tend to think, and 
a lot of that is maintenance and administration,  
and keeping up with changing tastes and moving 
populations, not to mention managing resistance  
to doing so. Having good data as to what folks 
like in a given park, and what attracts them to  
other parks, is handy for improving your parks 
but equally handy for convincing local community  
members that your planned overhaul is justified. 
If you want to replace the old baseball field with  
a skatepark and lots of cool marble benches and 
herb gardens it helps to have some actual data to  
show the folks who have lived there their whole 
life and grew up playing baseball on that field,  
and aren't anxious to see it changed.
Same, if you’re trying to repurpose some  
old site with neighborhood garden plots. Not only 
does that data help decide if that’s warranted and  
remains so, but technology and data-collection 
make it easier to set up soil-monitoring and  
automatic watering and mowing, and having a shared 
tool shed that doesn’t turn into a cluttered mess,  
full of everything but the tools it 
was supposed to have which have all  
been stolen or borrowed indefinitely. Again the 
modern notion of smart city isn’t really about  
robots going around fixing stuff, it’s about 
gathering data to make better decisions with. 
But that is likely to be a path we go down with 
further automation, and as an example, most cities  
love the idea of repurposing some derelict, ruined 
building into some greenspace, like community  
vegetable gardens, but you have a big problem of 
maintaining plots not in use so that they either  
look nice, or at least not be a giant overgrown 
mess of weeds which some skunk decided to claim  
as its home, and enforcing reasonable standards 
or having some robot that tills patches and sprays  
them with some nice pollinator-friendly seed 
mix of flowers while vacant is definitely a  
plus. Especially in terms of headaches since your 
overseers can just shrug and say “I’m sorry ma’am,  
the robot is just set to turn a garden plot 
over if no one has tended it in a year… didn’t  
you get its automated texts and emails?”
Greenspaces for play are hardly the only  
options of course, and they’re also not really 
very vertical. A park might have some up and  
down elements but is generally just one level, 
not several stories like the buildings near it.  
This is also much of the appeal to arcology 
towers, the giant super-skyscraper concept  
where the inside might have whole levels of parks 
and gardens and even farms. For further discussion  
of those and adding verticality to cities, see 
our Arcologies and Arcology Design episodes.
So, what are some of the goals of smart cities? 
These are inevitably going to be a bit vague,  
and variations on improving the wellbeing of 
citizens and the economic health of a town,  
with data and communication, as it really is just 
how to better-use computers and modern technology  
to help in planning and running a city. This is 
going to involve a lot of the Internet of Things,  
because it’s about integrating a million 
and one types of gadgets into the wide  
grid of that city. I’m not sure if there’s a 
specific term for something like a blend of  
noosphere and internet at a city level, maybe 
noopolis, but the keystone on a lot of this  
is making those integrations fast and seamless.
I’m going to guess the big one in another decade  
or so will be how to create a shared 
augmented reality at the city level,  
probably with several map layers, that is 
useful to citizens, administrators, businesses,  
and visitors. This strikes me as something that on 
the standardized software side of things, might be  
on the Microsoft Office, Google Search Engine, 
Amazon Marketplace, Facebook level of cultural  
impact for any software engineers looking for 
long-range, potentially super-profitable projects,  
especially given that the clients are likely to 
be public entities. Though I suppose it’s worth  
noting one way that data and AI might help run 
cities smartly is to help them find waste and  
fraud, including some piece of software they have 
an expensive license for that barely gets used. 
We might instead ask what some of the examples 
are of cities doing this and how those might  
be realized. As I mentioned near the beginning, 
one of the few examples of Smart Cities I could  
find was my state’s capital of Columbus, and 
if you’ve been there, it is a pretty-well-laid  
and modern town, but the articles discussing 
why and how it is a smart city seem to mostly  
focus on attempts to best locate 300 charging 
stations for electric cars, principally on a  
grant from the US Department of Transportation, 
and some forward thinking about how autonomous  
cars might play a role in the near future.
My own bet is that the main role autonomous cars,  
ones intended to drive themselves entirely 
and possibly without someone in them,  
in the near future, is to get themselves banned 
very nearly everywhere. I think it’s a big lift  
to get people okay with their kids’ school bus 
being driven by a robot, and if you can make that  
work you can probably sell people on automatic 
freight trucks and deliveries very easily.  
Many places have a heck of time finding enough 
school bus drivers these days, and I suppose if  
parents could access the cameras such a vehicle 
would presumably have, they might feel better. 
But that whole area has a lot of room for 
automation and AI, be it bussing routes  
or snow plows, and I would not be surprised if 
cameras which parents could view on their baby  
monitor app started showing up on buses and at 
the fronts of schools for dropoff, complete with  
facial recognition software to let you know 
your kid got dropped off. Facial recognition  
software at schools in general, and at parks, 
is probably a this-decade technology, though  
depending on its rollout it might be beloved or 
spark outrage, suspicion, or all of the above. 
I’m actually betting that a lot of smart city 
tech is going to be stuff the public initially  
hates and demand gets removed, and has to get a 
decade of PR rehab and rebranding before being  
gradually and systematically reintroduced. Notice 
all those traffic cameras we don’t have in most  
American cities that can save a lot of money, 
make the roads safer, and free police up for  
other tasks. I remember over a decade back, 
the nearest city to me spent a ton of money  
putting them in, and a citizen-driven petition 
and election promptly saw them all removed. 
As another example of that, one of the other 
‘smart cities’ I saw listed was Santa Cruz,  
specifically for its use of data for predictive 
policing, to figure out how many police should  
be on shift and where police officers should 
be waiting when not responding to crimes. The  
basic method was to generate by analysis 
some spots where property crimes were more  
likely and have a handful each day an officer 
would be at. It was discontinued back in 2018.  
Again, I expect that the job of making folks feel 
safe and comfortable with a given new bit of smart  
city tech, especially the ‘data collection’ 
part of that, is going to be as big of one  
as the actual engineering of the technology.
New York City is unsurprisingly a place trying  
its hand at smart city initiatives, 
and the big one there is LinkNYC,  
which actually builds off an effort to replace 
the 10,000 or so remaining payphones… I assume  
they used to have way more too… and it’s weird 
to think back to a time when these things were  
everywhere and also to realize that payphones, 
collect phone calls, and the battle between AT&T  
and MCI and various other less-known long distance 
providers belongs to another century now. But,  
the Big Apple started converting those into 
wifi hotpsots and USB charging stations with big  
screens almost a decade ago, and we have certainly 
seen variations of that in many other places. 
In the city, being able to stroll along the 
sidewalk while maintaining high-speed wifi  
access is getting to be as important a bit of 
infrastructure as those actual sidewalks, much  
as last mile broadband rural internet has come 
to be viewed in recent years as akin to getting  
telephone and power lines out to everyone. 
Even ignoring Starlink and parallel options,  
my guess is that we’ll also see state initiatives 
to get not just every city with public wifi,  
but maintain some degree of it along 
the major roadways and highways. 
It’s just too critical to commerce, or will 
be, and that sort of easy and everywhere wifi  
is critical to any smart city design too. If 
wireless power transmission makes much progress,  
it may also develop along those lines, people able 
to have their devices powered or recharge in their  
pocket all the time, no plugs, which might require 
some usage monitoring, unless we have energy  
abundance. Pondering how that affects the local 
economy gets tricky, as it also starts opening  
the door to drones that can hang around all the 
time, smartly controlled to avoid collision by  
the local grid, which also runs power into them.
Options continue for things like determining how  
much power you need and how much production 
capacity you need for that, or for water and  
sewerage, or what your optimal garbage and 
recycling pickup paths and frequency are.  
And also where you might be needing two 
different systems, rather than something  
one-size-fits-all for different parts of the 
city with different layouts and densities, which  
is easier to have if an AI is doing a lot of the 
basic administrating, so you don’t have the extra  
administrative burden of using multiple methods.
On the administrative note, and as a last  
near-modern topic before we jump ahead to the 
more distant future, I think we should assume an  
increasing amount of virtual spaces for public 
offices like the BMV. Why stand in line to do  
some paperwork that’s mostly filling out your 
name and address when a mix of modern tech and  
augmented reality and maybe ChatGPT-like 
interfaces can handle almost all basic  
clerk-at-the-counter interactions, so that one 
person can handle many times the basic clerk work. 
I had to get a minivan recently to accommodate 
the trio of new kids we adopted, and the various  
nieces and nephews who often come over, and I was 
at the BMV registering it and have no complaints  
about the process. It’s faster and easier than 
when I was 16, but I was struck by how easily  
that could have been done from my home PC or 
phone if we had a fairly seamless and trusted  
way to handle the whole “Need to see some ID, 
fill this out” part, and the inevitable “Can  
you explain this bit here on the form?” part.
In some ways, speed isn’t a virtue on upgrading  
these things, there are hardworking folks 
who have been clerks their whole career and  
the cost for retraining and disruption to 
their lives is often cutting heavily into  
your apparent savings for some new tech, 
but I think this era is definitely coming,  
where an awful lot of government offices close 
down physically and shift more and more virtually.  
This might end in something like the local 24-hour 
county community center as the place to go if you  
have something very atypical or just can’t figure 
out the tech remotely, and most every other office  
is done from home, or third places, or whichever. 
It also means you can share specialized personnel  
easier with neighboring towns. Needless to 
say that alters your city planning a lot,  
when the office of city planning is no longer at 
city hall and city hall is more like a museum. 
I’m not expecting these upgrades to come 
very fast, but they’re too valuable -if  
you can make them work- not to try to 
implement, and as improvements come along,  
they should get better, cheaper and 
easier to make people comfortable with. 
Where that shifts over to becoming a city hall 
that is actually an artificial intelligence gets  
a bit blurry, but I suspect folks will 
find letting a computer run their road  
crew dispatches is going to come easier than 
letting them run your tanks and fighter jets.  
I would not expect android police to be a thing, 
especially for beat cops and crowd control,  
but the AI detective might be a thing. Probably 
not the way we see with Eljiah Bailey and his  
humanoid android partner R. Daneel Olivaw in Isaac 
Asimov’s classic robot novels, but AI is already  
making its way into detective work and of course, 
computers have been used in that role since before  
there were home PCs, let alone smartphones.
Would you have an actual AI as the incorporated  
mind of a city? Maybe, something like a Genus 
Loci, the spirit of a place, that we often see  
in some religions or mythologies, and which 
we have discussed as an option for maintaining  
space habitats, especially intentionally 
unpopulated ones like nature preserves.  
More likely, I think, than an actual AI that 
thought of itself as New York City or London,  
you would probably have something more like 
Department Deputies, the AI that helps the  
engineer’s office for a town and might slowly 
evolve to become the actual chief engineer. 
In a lot of counties in Ohio and other states, 
it’s not unusual for there to be an elected  
department head and a deputy who does most of 
the work but avoids most of the credit or blame,  
and I could see this role shifting to 
something an AI is filling. Indeed,  
I could imagine pathways to futures where the AI 
is regarded as a person and has been doing the job  
for decades and just inherits the role, or even 
gets elected to it. The notion of an AI who ran  
the road department in a small town deciding it 
wanted to move up and run for office in a bigger  
city is an interesting one to contemplate.
One could imagine a dozen or more different  
department AI who could be under a human city 
council or mayor, who may or may not be entirely  
human themselves anymore, lots of cyborg and 
transhuman options on the table unrelated to all  
this that are likely to play a big role anyway. 
Maybe they can engage in a temporary hive mind,  
like the Unimind we see with the Eternals 
in Marvel comics, when a big decision needs  
making. Those might be changing too, where you 
annex some ward of neighboring city that had its  
own AI that now moves into the mix, or instead of 
a city hive mind, the twenty AI in the region who  
all handle power distribution or water or sewers 
have to bump heads, or merge them, to plot out  
where to build the new water treatment facility 
or shift the load while one is being upgraded. 
Smart cities, or smartly-run cities at least, will 
grow and others will probably not, or even shrink,  
and so I think we will see ourselves moving 
more this way because, again, fundamentally it  
is just too useful to use AI, automation and data 
collection to run things and get better results,  
and to offer more options to citizens, and by 
and large, it’s results and options that people  
care about when picking their community, 
and when picking who leads or manages it. 
One thing seems sure though, whatever the role of 
AI and the internet is in cities moving forward,  
it is going to be a big one, whether the 
city is a big one or a small village. 
So today we were talking about Smart Cities and 
the idea of making them just generally better  
places to live and work in, to have your home or 
your business. A lot of that is about being more  
efficient and organized, but just as much is about 
making communities people actually love being part  
of. It’s not just about finding a place or job you 
enjoy, it’s about finding something that makes you  
feel positive about doing it. Every job has good 
and bad days, but if you love your work and feel  
it makes a difference in the world, even hard days 
can be energizing, because you know it matters. 
Most people spend about 80,000 hours of their life 
in their job, 40 hours a week, 50 weeks a year,  
for 40 years, and would prefer that time helped 
the world. 80,000 hours is a lot of time,  
so it’s a good idea to do some research on how 
best to use it. And that’s where our friends at  
80,000 Hours come in, they’re a non-profit 
that spent a decade alongside academics at  
Oxford University researching which 
careers have the most impact, and all  
the research is on their website, for free.
80,000 hours website includes a lot of tools  
and resources to help you find your path. Problem 
profiles, aiming to answer the question ‘what are  
the most pressing problems facing humanity today?’ 
Career reviews, which discuss which career paths  
they recommend if you want to have an impact, 
and lots of decision-making tools, such as their  
8-week career planning course. They also have a 
jobs board, that’s curated & constantly updated  
and list of hundreds of active job openings, that 
they think might help you have a high impact,  
and you can filter those by job location, role 
type, job requirements, and what problem area  
they work on. Scanning around, there’s 
everything up there from Nuclear Physics  
Jobs at MIT or AI research in Silicon Valley to 
city management or ecology roles, from Intern to  
senior directorships. Potential careers for a wide 
variety of different skill sets and career stages. 
And again, 80,000 hours is free, completely, 
if you looking for a career that works on  
one of the world’s most pressing problems, 
sign up now at 80000hours.org/isaacarthur 
So that will wrap us up for April, and I’m heading 
off for an anniversary trip with my wife this  
weekend so apologies in advance if I’m delayed 
responding to comments on the episode. We’ll back  
next Thursday though for two of our favorite 
topics, the Fermi Paradox and Megastructures,  
as we contemplate Dysonian SETI, and how we can 
search for Dyson Spheres. Then we’ll look at  
a lot of the common misconceptions about Space, 
Life, the Universe, and Everything, on May 11th.  
After that we’ll have our Scifi Sunday episode, 
on May 14th, as we explore the grim realities of  
super-urbanized Hive Worlds, then we’ll have its 
companion episode, Hungry Aliens, on May 18th. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other 
ways, you can see those options by visiting  
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can 
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early  
and ad free on our streaming service, 
Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
