This episode is brought to you by Hello Fresh.
 
Many folks assume the future of farming 
is robots, algae vats, and soylent green…  
but is this future forecast accurate? 
 
The answer, as we’ll see today, is ‘probably yes’
A few months back we did a number of polls 
of some potential topics folks had suggested,  
and the winner over on our Reddit group was 
“The Future of Farming”. It's an interesting  
topic in that until fairly recently, farming 
was such a common profession that discussing  
its future was the same as discussing 
humanity’s future or the future of jobs.
 
There are some very high-tech options we 
will touch on today that might alter farming  
drastically, including everything from vertical 
farming to growing meat or printing food – or  
even turning humans into cyborgs who don’t need 
food or who live in pods like in the Matrix, fed  
nutrient gruel while living in virtual utopias.
But I’d like to keep our main focus on the major  
new developments relating to challenges and 
opportunities that are likely to arise in the  
next generation or so. These include things like 
international dietary changes, population growth,  
land repurposing, robots, genetic engineering, 
invasive species, and changes to local ecologies  
and environments… just to name a few.
We also need to keep in mind that farming  
is a big blanket term, and most individual 
farmers have a single crop they specialize in,  
or a small handful. Homesteaders, family farms, 
or polyculturists often aim to have several crops  
or products in medium production but this 
is not the norm and whether or not it could  
become the norm economically would be very 
technology dependent. As long as it is not,  
someone’s entire livelihood is at stake if 
one crop disease sweeps through or even if  
the demand in the market just changes and this 
year people love broccoli and hate cauliflower.
 
A single lone technology can obliterate a 
market too. For instance we tend to eat a  
lot of staple grains – wheat, corn, rice and 
so on – not because they are super-nutritious  
in every aspect of that word, but because it 
stores well and also because a single person  
with a tractor can do hundreds of acres of corn. 
Indeed in the US the average farm is 444 acres,  
or 180 hectares, which is huge by the 
size of most local farms in my county.  
For staple crops this is a necessity, 
as a single acre might produce less  
than 5 tons of corn or grain and not even 
a thousand dollars in revenue each year. 
 
Only a fraction of that is profit, necessitating 
grain farms of thousands of acres. Hundreds of  
acres handled by a single worker on that end 
of the spectrum, because it's so easily and  
highly automated, on the other end an acre of 
strawberries might produce 25 tons of berries  
a year and no single person is tending hundreds 
of acres of them, indeed farms will often need  
dozens of pickers per acre. Needless to say, 
a bunch of robots coming by and clearing fruit  
from trees or bushes and properly pruning them 
for maximum yields is the sort of thing that  
would cause a simultaneous boom in production 
and crash in prices. Probably akin to what we  
saw with the invention of tractors or combine 
harvesters for those grain crops, or more. 
 
It’s easy to forget our ancestors often grew 
those grains in part because they could harvest  
them fairly easily compared to many plants, more 
crop for less work than with many other plants,  
rather than always nutrition per acre or 
any interest in balanced or flavorful diets.  
Livestock usually does even better than 
that, as long as you have lots of land,  
letting critters eat what grows there without 
you needing to farm it much is frequently your  
path to most calories per least effort, 
and they’re high protein calories at that.  
That matters for contemplating the future because 
there’s only so much land, for now at least,  
there’s also way more people being born 
every day than dying, for now at least.
 
Now strawberries aren’t an ultra high-calorie 
crop, 330 calories per kilogram, versus about  
960 for corn, so that yield per 
acre in tons is a bit misleading,  
also that corn silage – the whole plant as opposed 
to just the grain – is an excellent food source  
for livestock, economically anyway, especially for 
dairy cows. Folks often beat up on the amounts of  
grain or pasture needed to produce beef compared 
to other animals or just eating the vegetables,  
and Ranchers often argue that data is cherry 
picked, but regardless it also tends to ignore  
the dairy aspect which is vastly more 
efficient in calories per farmland used.  
A modern Holstein cow can literally fill 
a tanker truck full of milk each year.
 
On the other hand, don’t expect the dairy 
industry to survive this century in anything like  
its current form. Sarah and I were at the local 
Farm Bureau’s Ice Cream social earlier this week  
and the main presentation was on dairy and what a 
rough time the industry has been having this year,  
even compared to the rough time it’s been 
having almost every year I can recall.  
Incidentally, very good ice cream, and same 
the local Cattleman’s Dinner each year which  
has the hands-down best prime rib I’ve ever 
had so if you live in an even vaguely rural  
area these sort of events are common, usually 
open to the public for free or quite cheap,  
and often are good way for folks to get to 
know that part of their community better  
or even consider going into it themselves. 
Which is my little public service shout out  
for Agriculture. Incidentally, since I rarely do 
autobiographical commentary, my wife and I co-own  
a farm. I’m newer to farming, although I grew 
up in the country and have been an avid gardener  
since I was a toddler. My wife on the other hand 
has been farming her whole life and serves on  
the Agriculture Committee for the Ohio House of 
Representatives. So I am no expert on the topic of  
farming, or even gardening for that matter, but do 
have a pretty solid grounding in the basics, and I  
tend to think having a garden or even homestead 
or farm is a good hobby or profession for folks  
to contemplate even as we get ever more high-tech, 
indeed possibly because we are doing so..
 
I hate to say though that I probably would not 
recommend entering the dairy industry. A lot of  
the technological improvements are resulting 
in a need for very large capital investments,  
very big machines for running barns of 
many hundreds of cows, not ten or twenty.  
At the same time we see a lot of folks switching 
to alternatives like soy or almond milk – though  
to be fair in many cases this represents someone 
who had an allergy or digesting issues with milk  
products and wasn’t using them anyway. 
However, while cows are pretty efficient at  
converting plants into milk, we are already seeing 
artificial milk rising in quality and production  
in an equal if less loudly broadcast fashion 
as artificial meat. Such being the case it is  
quite likely we’ll just start growing raw milk 
in vats or giant bioreactors, and I’d say that’s  
right over the horizon but I would bet on this 
being one of those areas where interested parties  
try to skew public approval or desire for such 
alternatives and get roadblocks and regulations  
in the way. It will happen anyway though, there’s 
just too many obvious advantages to growing huge  
vats of milk in clean sterile and controlled 
environments without a cow being involved,  
and there’s nothing super-tricky about 
the recipe or biological process.
 
Not everything is bleak for the dairy industry,  
improvements in medical science 
will probably eventually find some  
way to eliminate any lactose issues that 
prevent folks from enjoying dairy products,  
or mitigate them a great deal, and this would 
probably see a disproportionate rise in its use.
 
Dairy and meat make up a big portion of farming 
so I didn’t want to bypass either today,  
but we discussed synthetic meat in its own episode 
a couple years back so we’ll shift away from  
animals with one last exception: Pollinators.
It’s pretty easy to forget that bees, butterflies,  
ladybugs, and hummingbirds aren’t the 
only critters that pollinate plants,  
just the prettiest, and out of all of them, 
only bees produce a crop of their own for use,  
honey, and only honeybees do that, and there 
are 20,000 species of bees incidentally. Now  
the super-majority of plants need pollination, and 
acreage with lots of pollinators produces vastly  
better yields. You can keep any kind of pollinator 
around and encourage them to multiply in various  
ways, and some are even better at pollinating 
than honey bees, but honey bees are the preferred  
pollinator, because people like honey. 
Sarah and I keep some hives and it’s worth  
the occasional sting for the sweet, sweet honey 
inside, and ironically this is a problem in some  
areas. I saw a paper from the Royal Botanic 
Gardens that a new fad of beekeeping in London  
in the last decade had resulted in too many bees 
for the small local garden environment to support  
and also that they were getting issues with 
bees transmitting disease between hives.  
Diseases have a harder time spreading 
between different species, so packing  
a lot of the same type of pollinator into a 
region can risk high rates of transmission. 
 
We also want to beware of that elsewhere. 
With hundreds of thousands of pollinator  
species out there, we risk damaging our 
biological diversity if we limit ourselves  
to only that relative handful of species that are 
hyper-efficient pollinators, pretty to look at,  
or produce tasty honey. As a counterbalance, 
there is a good probability that honey, like milk,  
might be something we learn to artificial 
produce more efficiently down the road.
 
This is also a good place to get into genetic 
engineering, because we may also see a lot of  
crops genetically modified to be self-pollinators, 
or alternatively we might see some lab engineering  
honey bees that are twice as efficient at 
pollination and nectar gathering, and never sting.  
Which would be nice, though this is probably 
a case where superior science of knowing what  
keeps them from stinging us comes into play, 
so you could spray on a pheromone that said  
‘ignore me’ so to speak. So many critters in 
nature run in large part on pheromone signals  
that the ability to understand and fabricate 
those might see huge gains in agriculture.  
This is another area where research is likely 
to produce huge changes and gains in farming.
 
Or other signals too, honey bees for instance have 
what’s called the waggle-dance, and really good  
internal clocks, sense of gravity, and where 
the Sun is, and they can precisely transmit  
direction and flight time to their peers 
via a carefully coordinated set of waggles.  
We may have to adapt them genetically to function 
on other worlds or space habitats. However for  
such types of signals, instead of making something 
like robotic pollinating bees by the million to do  
a farm field, slipping a robot bee into the hive 
to waggle-dance the coordinates of the places you  
want pollinated most is maybe a better approach.
On the genetics end, it is possible this will  
lead to vast fields of clear-topped vats of 
hyper efficient black algae sucking up every  
photon of sunlight and converting it into 
genetically perfected blends of high-protein  
or high-oil algae, to be used as animal feed 
or even human feed in 3D Food Printers. Do  
not rule out the possibility that by century’s 
end your kitchen might have tanks of printer  
feedstock and appliances able to render 
those stocks into foods identical in taste,  
texture, and appearance to the food they 
were mimicking, and be indistinguishable, or  
differ only in that they were absent impurities, 
toxins, or had a better nutritional breakdown.  
Nor do they need to match or surpass 
current food to be in wide use,  
desperation and hunger are the 
best sauce, and for that matter  
we might be able to fix the taste and texture 
through augmented reality and mind augmentation.  
You eat your protein slurry and soylent green 
but it tastes like steak and ice cream.
 
Short term though, genetic engineering brings up 
the issue of GMOs. Many folks insist that they  
are dangerous or unnatural – where unnatural is 
bad, unless it’s a smart phone of course – many  
others are such proponents of the higher yields 
of GMOs that they ignore the various problems and  
concerns, like accidentally introducing some 
crop that’s so strong and abundant it starts  
growing in every nook and cranny, which 
is a common GMO worry, justified or not.  
This is also pretty wrapped up in the Organic 
Foods sector, and I would actually guess that  
is a fad too, but one that will end with generally 
greater scrutiny and quality control of production  
and transport of food. In the long term, use 
of GMO technology will increase. Learning more  
about genetics and utilizing that knowledge 
to improve crops is just too useful. 
 
Short term, we’re still novices at it, and it 
can have unexpected consequences as a result,  
and because genetic engineering permits 
much bigger and less probable changes to DNA  
than classic means of changing crops over dozens 
of generations. Though it appears transgenic  
transfer between similar species is more common 
than once thought. Genetic engineering, though,  
allows radical and hard to react to changes 
to local ecologies and economies. So GMOs are  
often seen as more of a higher-risk, high-reward 
approach and our goal is to keep learning more so  
the risk goes down while the reward goes up. 
There will be a point where it reaches a place  
most folks consider safe enough and a generation 
after that I’d expect it to be a dead issue.  
That might be 40 years from now or 4000. The more 
distant future of farming means millions of alien  
worlds we terraform to various degrees, where 
genetic engineering is darn near a necessity for  
even the most Earth-like worlds, and for inside 
millions of rotating space habitats, each of which  
is its own enclosed and quarantined ecology, at 
which point experimentation with GMOs inside those  
enclosed habitats seems virtually guaranteed. 
Closer to now, it is likely we will see more and  
bigger greenhouses in decades to come, and this 
can serve as a fairly decent quarantine method too  
along with producing higher yields per acre, 
so might result in more greenhouse grown GMOs,  
ditto for vertical farms inside buildings.
Two other notes on genetics.  
First, while GMOs could cause problems, they also 
often solve them even now, a lot of vaccines are  
genetically modified for instance, and greater 
knowledge on that can let us rapidly counteract  
diseases spreading to flora and fauna too. Or for 
that matter, crafting our diseases and predators  
to carefully and knowledgeably curb 
overpopulation of a given species,  
or the spread of animals or plants. Tomorrow a lab 
might whip up a magnificent GMO algae or fungus  
able to produce biofuels at a tenth the cost of 
gasoline – causing an unintentional food shortage  
as folks race to shift land and production over 
to that – or someone might finally convince  
folks nuclear reactors are safe, or invent fusion, 
freeing all land given over to biofuel production,  
or better solar panels might come out, suddenly 
requiring new land to put them on or not,  
maybe roof-based solar but in doing so replaced 
rooftop gardens and much urban agriculture.  
Cause, effect, and unintended consequences are 
always a huge consideration in contemplating the  
future or ecological and agricultural engineering, 
doubly so for the future of agriculture.
 
Second point on genetics, they can alter our 
own needs. Right now there’s a debate on what  
our population size will look like in the next 
century, for my part I’m going to guess at least  
20 billion by 2121 but I might be optimistic. A 
lot of folks think it will stop at 9 and begin  
contracting. There is no real room for accuracy 
on such things though as, for instance, someone  
could come out with a fertility extension method 
next year that permits women to have children as  
easily and safely at 45 as 25, which might result 
in a fairly large increase in average family size.  
Or on the flip side, a birth control pill so 
cheap and effective, with so few side effects,  
that accidental pregnancy became a rare anomaly. 
How much farmland we need depends on how much we  
need to support a person – which can include 
land for solar, biofuels, textiles, and lumber,  
not just food. However it also depends on how 
many folks we have. If the production per unit of  
land rises, as it's been doing, but the population 
does not, or rises slower, or even falls off, that  
price per farmland goes down. Which also means 
uses which are less labor or resource intensive  
but more land intensive become more economically 
viable, such as meat and grains. If the population  
rises faster than production increases in land, we 
either need to use more land-efficient but labor  
or resource intensive methods, like hydroponics or 
greenhouses, or we need to make more land – which  
is on the table, see our Space Farming and 
Seasteading episodes for discussion of that. 
 
Which emphasizes how sensitive all our predictions 
on agriculture are, however, it’s another example  
of how genetics and medical sciences will play 
into an existing problem: the age of farmers. 
 
In the US for instance, the average farmer 
is over 58 years old, and keep in mind it is  
frequently a family profession with a lot 
of young adults included in that average.  
This has been an ongoing trend to, the average of 
the ‘principal operator’ of farms was already 50  
years old fifty years ago. And while my wife has 
been in farming her whole life, I’m new to it,  
and yet at the age of 41 I’m actually 
younger than the average beginning farmer.  
The average beginning farmer, those with less than 
5 years experience, is 47 years old. That bit of  
data was decidedly on my mind earlier in the 
episode when I none-too-subtly encouraged folks  
to consider farming as career or side hustle.
I could not find any data on the world at large,  
but a few other highly developed countries I 
could spot check seem to have parallel numbers.  
Of course in developing nations farming 
is still often the most common profession,  
and yet it would seem likely those lands will 
also go the same way with fewer folks doing  
most of the farming. Whether or not they’ll 
face the same aging issues is harder to say,  
aging workforces in an economic sector is 
frequently a sign of a contracting economic  
sector, but cultural preferences for or against 
being a farmer will presumably be specific  
to each country or even more zoomed in.
Will this trend reverse? No, not a chance,  
and again because of genetics and medicine. We 
might make it more popular as a profession with  
younger folks but people are also living longer 
now and that is a trend I expect to continue.  
Indeed I would be surprised if the condition we 
call aging and often view as inevitable was not  
effectively eliminated by the end of this century. 
That often seem extraordinary to folks but disease  
was considered a way of life, and regular 
cause of death, for most of human history,  
and yet Covid hit us so hard because it was the 
first big pandemic in a century and even then,  
there is just no comparison between how the last 
pandemic hit us and the mass death and panic of  
prior plagues, which was considered ordinary and 
inevitable to those times and cultures. Aging  
will likely be the same and it’s likely to have a 
very big impact on land ownership and farming. 
 
We’ll come back to that in a bit but there’s 
another major effect of farming in terms of  
life extension technologies that should also be 
considered. Back in our Future of Pets episode,  
I pointed out that while super expensive life 
extension serums were the norm in science fiction,  
most probable pathways to the real technology 
indicate it would be dirt cheap and perfected  
on animals first. So longer-lived pets might 
result before we ever got clinical testing let  
alone FDA approval for human life extension 
technologies. But that also opens the door  
to hundred-year old cows still producing 
thousands of gallons of milk per year. 
 
When we discuss colonizing new worlds on this show 
we often point out that your two big options are  
terraforming – making a world more like Earth – 
and bioforming – adapting the organisms to that  
world. So our alternative to genetic engineering 
might be widening the area we can use for farms,  
or how well tailored they are for that crop. 
We have a lot of tundra and desert we can use,  
and plants grown inside greenhouses get much 
higher yields per area and allow plants to exist  
in dry areas or cold areas, by minimizing loss 
of water and heat. I would not be too surprised  
if we saw a vast increase in greenhouse usage, 
as well as a vast increase in greenhouse sizes,  
in the years to come. I could also see potential 
subsidies for these options, not just to add  
food production capacity, but also as ways to 
let new folks into the industry economically  
without having to interfere in current land 
ownership, which is often generational.
 
Let’s talk Farm size. I mentioned earlier that 
the US average is 444 acres, and that number  
has been on the rise. Don’t get the impression 
size correlates super-strongly to revenue or  
profitability though, a strawberry farm a tenth 
the size of a grain farm or ranch might use ten  
times the people and move ten times the revenue. 
The other thing is that average is not the same as  
median. In the US there’s 900 million acres of 
farmland and 2 million farms and ranches, both  
numbers have actually been on the decline in the 
last decade, while average farm size has risen.
 
In the US we currently divide it into 6 
categories: farms which generate 1000-10,000  
dollars of annual revenue, 10,000 to 100,000, 100 
to 250,000, 250 to half a million, half a million  
to a million, and those that make more than a 
million dollars per year in sales. Many small  
farms are hobbies, side incomes, or tax shelters 
but it’s a little hard to distinguish those from  
small poor farmers, but I do know a fair number 
of wealthy professionals in my area who run their  
farm as some mix of tax shelter, hobby, or 
income diversification. I would guess we would  
see more of that in the future too, though it may 
fluctuate in time and place a lot in popularity.
 
Anyway half of those two million farmers fall into 
the under $10,000 in sales per year class, and  
average 81 acres or 33 hectares of land, meaning 
they’re averaging less $100 in revenue from each  
acre. I feel obliged to mention that along with 
the part-time farming roles because very few of  
these folks are farming for a living, and while 
there are exceptions, this is not your poorest  
class of farmers, it’s the majority of farmers, 
accounting for around a tenth of the farmland,  
and whether poor or wealthy themselves, most 
of their income doesn’t come from farming. 
 
That second category of 10-100,000 is your 
poor farmers category, containing about 600,000  
farmers in the US, and averaging 304 acres or 
123 hectares, and about a fifth of the farmland  
overall. These bottom two categories then make 
up 4/5ths of the farmers and less than a third of  
the land. I should note that this category also 
still includes a lot of part-time farmers too,  
so do not get the impression most of 
this category is hard-scrabble living,  
it could as easily be a doctor or lawyer who 
enjoys rural life, likes riding a tractor around,  
and has an accountant who is familiar with 
various farming tax credits. It includes  
lots of part time farmers keeping up their 
inherited land while having a different career.  
This can also include a lot of homesteaders, folks 
who have opted for the self-subsistence lifestyle  
and the farm is their main job and they may have a 
part-time job, but the farm revenue is for buying  
what they can’t make. This is fundamentally the 
category that most folks who self-describe as  
farmers fit into, so it’s the biggest spectrum 
of reasons and backgrounds, whereas the  
category below it is rarely a full-time farmer.
The next three categories above this is where we  
get into the area of almost exclusively full-time 
farming, those generating 6-digits of farm sales a  
year, and in those three categories 100-250,000, 
250-500,000, and 500,000 to a million dollars in  
annual sales, we have 135,000, 89,000, and 71,000 
farmers in each respectively averaging 1000, 1500,  
and 2000 acres of farmland respectively and fairly 
parallel portions of the overall farmland, each  
about 15%. The last category of over a million in 
annual sales makes up about 4% of farms and 25%  
of land. Incidentally we classify something 
as a ‘small farm’ in the US if it's under a  
quarter million in income, which is 91% of 
all US farms. But keep in mind earlier we  
said the average farm was 444 acres, whereas 
the median farm size was well under 100.
 
Fair amount of data, and very US specific I’m 
afraid. It is not universal though many of the  
trends are common around the world, unfortunately 
most countries aren’t as good about churning out  
data as the US Department of Agriculture is so we 
stick with that today. I think what it tells us  
is that if technology stopped right now, we would 
probably see a convergence to 3 camps of farming,  
mid-sized operations for folks who wanted it to 
be their life and were able to keep it profitable  
enough to support a family, large scale corporate 
operations, and part time or hobby farming.  
Mind you that this also varies by state as much 
as nation, and also by crop. The reality is that  
growing corn, grapes, blueberries, or trees 
for lumber all bear about as much resemblance  
to each other sailing a boat, driving a car, 
flying a plane, or jumping a pogo stick. 
 
Technology won’t stay the same though so lets ask 
what the big shifts there will be. Again robots  
are the big obvious one, and we’ll come back to 
those in a moment, but anything that helps with  
soil erosion, water irrigation or desalination, 
weather prediction, and the cost and availability  
of nitrogen, potassium, and phosphorus is capable 
of totally disrupting the agricultural industry,  
mostly positively for the world but in many cases 
not so positively for farming. Small things can  
have a big impact too, imagine someone manages to 
get an operation going that can replace plywood  
with a 3D printed hardwood, allowing wooden 
furniture and objects to essentially be printed  
to shape as though some master carpenter had 
selected the finest woods to work with. 
 
Same, improvements in growing and processing 
mushrooms might result in a vegan leather with  
all the appeal and durability of normal 
leather but much cheaper potentially,  
while on the flip side, a civilization which began 
favoring synthetic meat or meat alternatives might  
see leather become as rare as ivory... or they 
could learn to grow ivory without elephants.  
Never rule out weird options a century down the 
road like a genetically engineered tree that grew  
bacon and had sap for blood. Or that someone 
might make ultra-cheap electricity allowing  
us to just churn out cheap irrigation water and 
nitrogen while centrifuging other minerals right  
out of the runoff water or oceans, or permit vast 
towers or underground caverns made of ultra-cheap  
and durable materials lit by LED lamps... see 
the arcologies episode or the Earth 2.0 series.
 
Okay, now let’s talk about 
robots before closing out.  
No other innovation will alter the agricultural 
landscape as much as them and artificial  
intelligence, the two are not always identical. 
First, all our big farm equipment in modern  
times requires simplicity over detail-oriented 
selectivity. Combine Harvesters are simplistic,  
but even a berry picker or apple-shaker is 
still a brute force approach to harvesting,  
compared to some smart drone that could 
carefully identify each piece of fruit  
at the moment it was ripe or carefully alter 
the soil in one specific spot a meter-wide.  
Instead of a few soil samples speaking to rough 
soil makeup for a large area, you can apply soil  
amendments to each plant individually with 
least use and waste. Same for watering. 
 
These are all different levels of sophistication 
of course but note that we’re not even  
contemplating something like a humanoid android 
robot in shape or mind yet. Nor would we be,  
the future wouldn’t be farming plantations 
with androids on them, it would be a bunch of  
different specialized equipment, some owned, some 
rented probably, doing specific tasks coordinated  
by a computer. A Smart Farm or Smart Farming.
This is the drone that spots birds and drives  
them off, the smart camera near a beehive 
that counts where and when the bees are going  
or even inside it and analyzes them for parasites 
or has fake robot bees infiltrate the hive to do a  
waggle-dance to give coordinates to the other 
bees where a crop needing pollination is at.  
It’s the one where the weather and markets are 
being carefully watched to give everybody a best  
guess how much of what they should plant, 
or a few best options to pick from,  
and is precision coordinating transport and 
storage for optimum efficiency. It’s the  
one where the tractor drives itself and sends 
notes when it needs maintenance and for what. 
 
However I think it’s a future where the spirit 
of farming remains intact, on the same farmland  
our civilizations have been using since the 
height of farming technology was a sharp stick,  
but also into the tundras and deserts, up 
in vast vertical farms or deep underground,  
in vast space farms or on alien worlds. It will be 
more automated, so we’ll see a lot more metal and  
silicon in the fields, but also more green in the 
ecological, environmental, and economical sense. 
 
And as a last prediction, while it was one 
of the most common professions of the past,  
and now is fairly rare, I personally 
think we will see that reverse,  
more and smaller farms, as automation 
improves, and more folks have a desire  
to go beyond the small garden to the small 
farm. It’s easier to contemplate having a  
big lawn when you’ve got labor-saving tools 
and products for mowing, weeding and watering,  
and I think more folks would do more gardening and 
farming if similar labor-saving approaches emerge,  
the smart home transitions to include the smart 
lawn, the smart garden, and eventually the smart  
farm, greenhouse, and land management system. 
There are thousands of major innovations going on  
in agricultural all the time, we’ve barely 
touched on even a handful of them today,  
and the history of agriculture is a fascinating 
one too, it's often driven civilizations and I  
suspect that will still be as true tomorrow as it 
was yesterday and will be a century from now.
 
As I mentioned one of my hobbies is 
gardening and another is cooking,  
and there is nothing better than working 
with fresh ingredients, and as we discussed  
today and in other episodes, getting produce 
from the farms to the dinner tables quick,  
clean, and safe is going to be critical to that 
industry in the near future and I’m happy to  
welcome on board our newest show sponsor, 
Hello Fresh, who excel at all of the above.  
They are a meal delivery kit service that delivers 
a series of meals with the ingredients and recipes  
in a box, and I thought we’d run a video of 
me going from unboxing it, through cooking it,  
to eating it, with the assistance of my lovely 
wife Sarah and my 7-toed mutant cat Flax.
 
Hello Fresh delivers all their meals fresh to your 
door and you can be eating in about half an hour  
or less, but we’ll still accelerate the cooking 
process. Today we’ll be cooking White Cheddar  
Wonderburgers & Old Bay Fries, and as a preview 
it tasted great, better than take out or delivery,  
and much cheaper. Everything is 
fresh, you still need to do your prep,  
but you cut down on time and waste as they send 
you exactly the right amounts for the dish,  
resulting in 25% lower carbon footprint than 
store-bought groceries, and fresher than them too,  
with the produce sourced directly from farmers. 
I love cooking but I often get interrupted while  
doing it, meaning I can’t always give it my full 
attention, so it's nice to have everything in the  
right quantity and a handy step by step visual 
recipe right there. I’ve also got a nice amount  
of space to film this in, but I’ve done a lot 
of cooking in dormitories, barracks, and even  
tents in warzones or over engine blocks before 
and so it was nice to see they didn’t require  
any elaborate tools or equipment for food prep. 
I also love the variety and weekly and seasonal  
changeups of the menu, to help break 
out of a recipe rut and try new things,  
plus for when you’re not wanting to spend a 
lot of time in the kitchen and don’t have a  
fast-forward button, they’ve got 20-minute 
meals, easy cleanup, and low prep options.
 
Hello Fresh has more five star reviews than any 
other meal kit, and you can try them out today,  
just go to HelloFresh dot com and use 
code “ISAACARTHUR14” to get 14 free meals,  
plus free shipping! Eat fresh, eat healthy, 
eat variety, and eat sustainably, and again  
you can try it out for free today, just go to 
HelloFresh dot com and use code “ISAACARTHUR14”.
 
So that will wrap us up for today, but we’ll 
back this weekend for another Scifi Sunday  
here on SFIA, to take a look at the concept of 
living, Sentient Planets & World Consciousnesses.
 
As mentioned, this Upcoming Thursday 
we’ll be looking at Convergent Evolution,  
the notion that certain traits - like eyeballs or 
a humanoid form - might tend to be something we  
would expect to see out on alien worlds. Then 
the week after that we’ll take a look at the  
notion of artificial intelligence being used for 
crimes, or being criminals themselves. Then we’ll  
close the month out with our Livestream 
Q&A on Sunday October 31st… Halloween.
 
Now if you want to make sure you get 
notified when those episodes come out,  
make sure subscribe to the channel, and if you 
enjoyed the episode, don’t forget to hit the like  
button and share it with others. If you’d like to 
help support future episodes, you can donate to  
us on Patreon, or our website, IsaacArthur.net, 
and patreon and our website are linked in the  
episode description below, along with all of our 
various social media forums where you can get  
updates and chat with others about the concepts 
in the episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
 
[outro]
