This episode is brought to you by Brilliant
Every human being who has ever existed has
been born on Earth, and only a handful have
ever left our planet, and then only briefly.
Yet we often talk of a future where most people
live and work in space.
How do we reach that time?
How do we kickstart the real Space Age?
We’ve spent a lot of time talking about
how we might get into space better, cheaper,
and safer.
We’ve also spent time talking about some
of the things we can do up there, but there’s
always a bit of a Catch-22 about space industry.
Once you have it setup, there’s tons of
things you can do profitably to grow a space
economy and civilization, but a lot of them
can’t be done until you already have one.
A lot of conversation about space often seems
like the underpants gnomes from South Park,
Phase 1, collect underpants, phase 3, Profit!
Phase 2, and overcoming that Catch-22, is
pretty much the big hurdle we have to jump
to get ourselves into space in a major way.
Now, not every type of development has some
single big thing that sparks a fire of growth,
sometimes it is just incremental, slowly lowering
launch costs lead to more interest, and more
research and development, which lowers launch
costs, rinse and repeat, but it would be nice
to have some industry or breakthrough that
started the avalanche going.
We’ll be discussing some possibilities today.
Now, many that might occur would be something
we can’t anticipate and may be unrelated
to what a space civilization might actually
run on.
As an example, there was no way to guess in
advance, or even in hindsight, that we’d
discover gold in California and it would turn
into one of the largest economies in the world,
one that has very little to do with gold either,
and that’s a good parallel for space because
one of the potential kickstarters we’ll
look at today will be asteroid mining for
precious metals.
Another example might be us getting a mysterious
signal, one that’s clearly artificial in
origin, what SETI has been looking for all
this time, and we’d obviously have a big
rush to build more space-based telescopes,
maybe some very large ones protected from
noise on the Dark Side of the Moon, and all
the related industry and secondary ones around
that might serve as the basis for developing
more in space.
Or such hypothetical aliens might show up
in person offering new technology that helps
us master space, or they might be like the
alien from Star Trek IV, showing up out of
nowhere demanding whales, and suddenly we
need to build massive whale guns to launch
whales into space, and with them made we now
can use them for launching other things.
Many others might be unexpected but only in
advance, very obvious in hindsight, what we
call a Black Swan.
In hindsight it’s very obvious that improvements
in electronics would lead to someone thinking
we could build unmanned satellites that would
be handy for looking at Earth or transmitting
data.
Seems very obvious now but it’s not something
you saw in early scifi much, even those featuring
spaceships traveling the galaxy or with robots
far smarter than any electronics we put in
space now.
Indeed, I’d tend to expect whatever leads
to major space industries is going to be very
obvious in hindsight, but at the moment it’s
not very obvious.
We should ask ourselves first, what do we
mean by a kickstarter?
In this case, we’d be looking for something
so advantageous that we would start doing
it in a robust fashion and everything else
could piggyback onto it, either benefiting
from all the infrastructure setup to pursue
the kickstarter, or as a secondary byproduct
of it.
As an example, if I’m some medieval king
wanting to build a cobblestone road to benefit
trade, and I start a brickyard and hire a
lot of bricklayers, when I’m done doing
that there’s going to be a lot bricklayers
looking for work and a lot of brickyards turning
out bricks.
So you get more homes made of brick, because
it’s cheaper to make them now, probably
more roads, maybe increased supplies for fuel
sources to bake those bricks or other things
needing heat, and then you get secondary industries,
like taverns and inns opening up along the
new road, caravans coming through more, maybe
hiring guards, needing things fixed, offering
to carry letters or packages for people in
a secure and cheap way, and so on.
This is what we’re looking for today.
I should also note that we do already have
a lot of space industry, it’s just by and
large a somewhat bizarre product for sale
and borders on what’s called a monopsony,
the reverse of a monopoly where only one entity
supplies a service, in a monopsony you’ve
only got one purchaser who drives what tends
to get developed and offered.
We do have commercial ventures in space, like
communication satellites, but by and large
the big buyers are major governments, and
frequently the product being sold is national
prestige.
That’s certainly a real product, plenty
of people have made their livelihoods sculpting
monuments, engraving plaques, or painting
portraits, and between that, security concerns,
and general research, both huge industries,
they could be considered kickstarters or at
least setting the ground for making the real
one easier and sooner.
Same, one can argue that a desire for personal
prestige and legacy is at least part of what
is fueling our first efforts at private space
industries like Space-X, Blue Origins, or
Virgin Galactic, but that’s nothing new
in art and science funding either.
We’re obviously looking for something that’s
flat out profitable but we don’t want to
ignore the impact of these routes on helping
to get things going.
What is profitable in space?
Launch costs control that in a large part
and those have been dipping down in recent
years.
I pointed out in one episode that if our telescopes
saw a big stack of gold on the Moon, it would
be profitable right now to launch a mission
to collect that.
There’s not many things more valuable than
gold, but that’s a decent place to begin
hunting.
It’s not enough for it to be more valuable
than gold of course, kickstarting a space
industry has to be something where the cost
of doing it in space is adding more value
than the cost of launching it there.
Gold is not made more valuable by flying it
up to space and minting it into coins there,
beyond perhaps some limited novelty value.
Novelty isn’t enough, not to sustain major
growth.
It needs to be a major industry, existing
or new.
Or a closely coupled niche of industries.
For instance, atomic energy is not too popular
on Earth and it’s actually very hard to
do much R&D and prototyping, we’ve literally
got billions of dollars in funds waiting and
ready for that if someone can provide a place
they can do it, and while setting up atomic
research on the Moon seems like an almost
ludicrous idea for just testing out a new
reactor design, it might be viable, just because
there is that much need - and aversion to
terrestrial testing .
Coupled to that, while we don’t like atomic
rockets near Earth, they’re great for deep
space, so if you can source your fuel and
reactors on the Moon and use them just for
ships or bases out past Cislunar space, like
asteroid mining, that suddenly becomes a much
more profitable endeavor.
Setup for something like that could easily
run into the hundreds of billions but if you’re
shipping back a hundred billion in gold and
platinum every year, it’s a nice investment,
and as history has shown us with mining towns,
exactly the sort of thing that kick starts
a new economy around that mining that can
grow and branch out.
See the episodes Asteroid Mining or Colonizing
Ceres for more discussion of that.
Now the more of a precious metal there is
on a market, the less value it has, but gold
production on Earth is a few thousand tons
a year, at current value that’s a couple
hundred billion dollars of new gold entering
every year, platinum is a modest fraction
of that, and there’s other metals in play
too.
As we discuss in asteroid mining, the launch
cost per kilogram doesn’t really relate
to the price to get stuff home, you launch
the mining equipment, not the metal, and launching
stuff home costs way less fuel, especially
if you can make it onsite or can use atomic
rockets.
So this is a market where an initial investment
of even a trillion dollars can get returned
fairly quickly and a market where you could
probably expect prices not to tank until you
were trying to feed hundreds of billions of
dollars of product through a year.
This used to be my favorite one for kickstarting
space, but as I mentioned earlier this year,
I tilt more toward power satellites these
days.
In our episode on that, I noted that if you
can profitably beam energy down to Earth for
equal or less than modern power costs, you
now have an industry that has a multi-trillion
dollar annual revenue.
Power satellites are likely to be, by mass,
almost entirely very simple reflective surfaces,
a thin metal sheet, and that’s exactly what
you’d be looking for in terms of an early
moon industry.
Something you can bulk manufacture with very
little complexity, saving you launch costs
from Earth.
It’s a good example though of how a technology
might only have a short window to be a kickstarter,
if we design a power satellite next year that
can be economically produced at scale to rival
coal or oil, and then someone comes by five
years later with a cheap commercial fusion
reactor, you’ve probably just obliterated
that industry.
On the other hand if you’ve got it in place
and robust when someone figured out an aneutronic
fusion reactor running on helium-3, you can
convert all your mirror production on the
moon to helium-3 refining with relative ease.
Similarly, while there’s a lot of precious
metals in the Asteroid Belt, Earth has far
more than the whole belt combined, just hard
to reach.
It’s ironic that it’s harder to get your
hands on tons of gold and platinum buried
under your backyard, kilometers down, than
the stuff on one asteroid, millions of times
further away, but at the moment it is.
Someday someone might invent a superior mining
process that lets us far more easily detect
and reach stockpiles deep in the crust or
even the mantle, and kill a nascent asteroid
mining industry off by doing so.
Neither power nor raw materials are really
safe industries in space since improved terrestrial
versions might supersede them, if they’re
more cost-effective or developed sooner.
If space mining or power is developed first,
it becomes more difficult to displace them,
what with the terrestrial implications and
risk.
This is Jeff Bezo’s and Blue Origins thinking,
that heavy industry will preferably be located
in space.
Note that these markets, power and precious
metals, both rely heavily on the moon or asteroids
too, and they’re not really for things used
in actual space.
Now I mentioned earlier various substances
more valuable than gold, gram for gram, and
one of those is diamond, as are a lot of crystals.
Interesting thing about space is there’s
no gravity there, and no way to get rid of
gravity on Earth, and in general many crystals
grow easier or come out far better when grown
in space, some can only really be grown there.
So crystal growth is a good orbital industry,
and there is obviously a lot of money in chips
and semiconductors (which require crystals),
and they tend to have a value in terms of
mass that makes gold look cheap.
Though again, launch costs aren’t about
the value per mass of the final product, it’s
about the cost of all the equipment and consumables
involved in making them that would need to
be in orbit too.
A few examples though, you can grow denser
and purer diamonds in space, which are great
for industrial applications, not just wedding
rings, and you can also make graphene in that
environment better, and we’re just starting
to see how useful that material is for tons
of applications.
Fiber optics can be done better in space too,
and needless to say telecommunications is
a big industry, heck communication satellites
by themselves are already the largest chunk
of private sector space investment.
You’ve got alloys that can only be made
in space or made easier and better there too,
and while you might not think of a chunk of
non-precious metal as super-valuable, we have
a lot of things like turbine blades that are
incredibly expensive in terms of mass.
We engage in very sophisticated and expensive
metallurgy with those in order to get just
a tiny percentage better performance out of
them and both the private and defense purchasers
of those generally consider it well worth
it.
That includes power plant turbine blades too,
but a lot is obviously in aerospace and that
would make it another complementary industry,
what improves aerospace in general is going
to help space flight too.
So that’s another example of a possible
kickstarter, both as a large economic sector
and one whose R&D is likely to have positive
feedback on launch costs too.
So crystals and metallurgy both offer us potential
kickstarters.
Speaking of chemistry in general though, I
mentioned earlier looking up various lists
of things more valuable than gold and one
of the more amusing ones started out with
cocaine, heroin, and meth.
Needless to say we’re not really looking
to bootstrap space industry with narcotics,
but pharmaceuticals are also a huge industry
and another example of one where zero-g might
be hugely beneficial.
It’s not only possible but quite likely
that many current or future medications can
be made better in space, or for future ones,
maybe only in space.
We often talk about needing to be careful
to preserve our rainforests in case it turns
out a cure for some disease is stashed away
in some obscure plant there, and that’s
certainly one of many reasons to want to preserve
those ecosystems, but it’s quite probable
there are whole classes of medicines we can’t
even research yet because they can only be
done right in zero-g and we just don’t have
a lot of chemistry labs up there.
For instance we have something called protein
crystals.
Proteins are macromolecules often containing
hundreds of thousands of atoms, rather than
the relative handful that most chemicals we
use or make crystals out of, and it’s very
hard to work with proteins for that sort of
crystallization in gravity.
Gravity and convection – which you don’t
get in space – are rough enough on simple
crystal growth as is, and rougher on protein
crystals.
We already have a number of medical therapies
relying on these, such as monoclonal antibodies,
or MABs, and others that might allow microscopic
dialysis, very handy for things like diabetes,
so this would be one area that might boost
space industry.
Again, anything that can only be done in space
or done better there, that’s a growing list
since we haven’t done much actual science
in space yet, for all that a big chunk of
our astronaut’s time on the station is spent
tending random experiments sent up with them.
That’s a thing to remember too, we’d often
say we need to find things to do in space
besides science but there are several million
scientists on our planet and over a trillion
dollars spent on R&D every year that alone
makes it an industry, by itself, big enough
to support quite a large sector of the economy
even ignoring that at a basic level, the product
of science is essentially what our whole modern
economy is based off of.
We don’t want to ignore non-industrial applications
either.
People talk of space tourism and tourism is
another sector of the world economy that exceeds
a trillion dollars a year.
Disneyland alone gets over a million visitors
a month and has been around for generations.
Even my own home county gets tens of thousands
of visitors a year, and as much as I love
the place, I’m sure it would attract less
tourism than space.
Launch costs wouldn’t need to drop too much
more before a lot of folks could afford that
trip, and it’s certainly something to brag
about when you got home, at least until travel
to orbit becomes as cheap as travel to a nearby
city.
Something we talk about in our episode on
orbital rings.
Prestige is a big one of course, we talk sometimes
about corporate sponsorship for space missions,
potentially to the Nascar level, logos painted
all over them, but let me toss out a weird
example for the moment.
The ISS is visible to the naked eye, and not
that big, one can make something bigger and
brighter in the sky with a nice thin foil.
I don’t think we’d ever see billboards
hanging in orbit, but a company could right
now, for a few million dollars, launch a payload
of foil to fold out in the shape of their
name or logo and twirl around low orbit for
a few months till it burned up.
I wouldn’t be surprised if we banned that
after the first company did it, but imagine
the kind of PR bump you’d get from having
your logo sail around the sky over the planet
for a few months?
Think of all the companies that do skywriting
or have a banner dragged by a plane or blimp.
Something like that would be a hazard in low
orbit if we did it a lot, though you could
set them to burn up pretty quick so they didn’t
leave debris, but one might imagine building
a billboard up at geostationary or even a
graveyard orbit above, just a big flat panel,
and projecting an image onto it.
We often talk about making giant shades or
mirrors to hover over Earth to block or reflect
light, and those make pretty good projector
screens when you think about it.
We may have to build those someday too, one
of those examples of kickstarting space industry
out of necessity that we mentioned earlier,
say a swarm of solar shades to help cool the
planet, and it would be nice if you could
mitigate the cost by renting them out as billboards
when they were passing through the Earth’s
shadow.
For that matter, you might be able to use
large and temporary signs as a way of sweeping
an orbital area clear of debris, and we might
use short terms sails or mirrors to tweak
a short term problem like a drought or hurricane.
In some cases, where maybe you have to build
up to deal with a temporary problem like an
asteroid approaching Earth, but now you want
to keep and repurpose those assets with the
crisis over, you’ve got a lot of industries
that could help it squeak through.
For instance, we talked about space farming
some while back, mostly to help feed the people
up there, but another example of things more
valuable than gold are truffles, I wouldn’t
suggest space truffles as a future industry
but a novelty market for food grown in space
could help supplement space farming which
supplements space development in general by
cutting down on transport costs.
However you could end up with some unique
foods or flavors that could really only be
made in space or low gravity.
Of course another upside to space is that
it’s a good place to do dangerous research,
particularly biological, since it’s already
removed from any risk of contamination and
such a facility would burn up if it came down.
Again, R&D is a trillion dollar global industry,
and more likely to expand than contract in
the near future, and there’s a lot of things
better done in space for our safety and security.
Or for the company or clients security too,
dedicated servers or data storage in space
has some advantages over alternatives.
We mentioned a while back in Seasteading that
small nation states in the ocean might do
well as secure data locations, but one in
space could do even better.
First, it’s very hard to sneak up on a space
station, compared to an island where you can’t
even see them till they crest the horizon.
Second, there is that horizon, whereas a satellite
can do a direct line of sight laser beam to
and from a client.
Right now, while it’s encrypted, all your
data is bouncing over millions of kilometers
of cables someone can directly hack into.
Third, if its damaged, stuff is retrievable
from an island or boat usually, it’s going
to sink but still be intact, and this is not
preferable in this context.
Your hard drive on a satellite that falls
down is not going to be recoverable, not with
its individual atoms falling down as dust
people inhale after it crashes and burns in
the atmosphere.
You’d want redundancy of course, but you’d
need a few satellites to ensure one was overhead
with your data at any given time too, though
since orbital periods in low orbit are in
the 90 to 120 minute region, that’s a pretty
decent window for things likes backups or
transmissions that don’t need to be real
time.
As industry develops, things get cheaper,
economy of scale kicks in, and people migrate
to follow the jobs, creating or enlarging
other industries, new towns, and of course
people go for tourism too, or potentially
to retire.
There’s some major downside to zero gravity
and low gravity hasn’t been studied much
yet, but there are some indicators it would
have some benefits for geriatric medicine,
so we could see folks retiring to the Moon
or low-grav rotating habitats too.
Needless to say I don’t see that being the
kickstarter for space industry, even if it
is a big economic sector, but again it is
good to remember that Black Swan Event scenario.
We were trying to look at options we might
be able to predict but often it is unpredictable
even if obvious in hindsight.
There’s nothing surprising in hindsight
about any of our tech giants these days, Microsoft,
Facebook, Amazon, Google and Youtube and so
on all seem obvious now but not so much prior
to their existence.
It is very likely to be something like that,
though if I had to pick one from those we’ve
seen today, I’d put my money on power satellites
or asteroid mining, both coupled to lunar
industries for raw materials or fuel.
And I do think we’re getting very close
now, it won’t happen tomorrow, and it probably
won’t be a big fast boom, but I think history
is going to put the start of serious space
industry inside a decade of now, and might
even point to prior to now as the time.
As I said, you couldn’t predict a lot of
the tech giants many years out, but they weren’t
actually big surprises when they got moving,
and while a lot of us might kick ourselves
for not buying stock in them early on, quite
a lot of people did and retired young to a
beach house to sit around tanning and being
smug about their foresight.
It’s good to get into such things early
on, and I can’t offer any investment advice
on who or what, beyond saying that it really
helps to know the science and technology involved
in that so you can be on the leading edge
without having to wildly guess where to be
investing yourself or picking a future career.
Half of what this channel is about is daydreaming
about the future, but the other half is encouraging
people to learn by showing them all the awesome
options that knowledge offers us a civilization
and as individuals.
If you want to enhance your own knowledge
of the math and science our civilization increasingly
operates on, and have fun while you’re doing
it, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur and sign
up for free.
And with the Holiday Season here, consider
gifting someone a Brilliant membership.
We all know there’s little that’s more
valuable than knowledge, and sparking a lifelong
love of learning is the best gift you can
get someone.
Help your loved ones nurture their curiosity
and build problem solving skill in a fun,
bitesize way, with Brilliant’s gift subscriptions.
So we’re moving into the Holiday Season
and we’ve got some appropriate episodes
for that.
With winter approaching, and cold weather
ahead, we’ll contemplate how to make our
arctic regions more livable, next week.
The week after that we’ll look at the Santa
Claus Machine, and some other technologies
like Cornucopia Devices or Replicators for
making almost anything you want with the snap
of a finger, and examine some of the impact
that would have on society and how realistic
such technology is.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
