In the grandeur of the universe, the tapestry 
of life may be woven from stranger threads  
than we ever dared to dream, and spun 
from materials far different to our own.
As we’ve studied the immensity of the cosmos, 
we've spent decades searching for life as we  
know it, clinging to the belief that the universe 
must be teeming with carbon-based organisms like  
ourselves. But what if life's building blocks 
are not limited to the familiar carbon atoms  
that compose our DNA and proteins? What if, 
out there among the stars, there exist beings  
unlike anything we've ever imagined, lifeforms 
fashioned from the silicon of alien worlds? 
Today, we’ll embark on a journey of imagination 
and scientific exploration to ponder the  
possibilities of silicon-based lifeforms, 
creatures that could thrive in environments  
hostile to our kind and challenge our very 
understanding of life itself. I am your host,  
Isaac Arthur, and I hope you’ll join me today as 
we delve into the realms of silicon-based biology,  
where the chemistry of the cosmos 
takes on new and exotic forms. 
This is not our first look at alternative 
chemistries for life, and when we explored  
Ammonia-Based Lifeforms early this year there 
were many requests that we should look at other  
chemistries, Silicon-Based Lifeforms being 
foremost amongst them. We may cover those  
others down the road but Silicon turns out to be 
big enough topic on its own, so grab a drink and  
snack and relax, we’ll be here for a bit, and 
make sure you like and subscribe to the show,  
and hit the notifications bell, if you 
want alerts when new episodes come out. 
Now odds are good that you’ve heard folks 
mention the possibility of silicon-based  
lifeforms before and for those curious, we 
are not discussing machine intelligence,  
AI, and computer brains today, except as a minor 
tangent. The concept of silicon life predates the  
discovery of the silicon semiconductor, which is 
from the mid-1950s and wouldn’t become synonymous  
with computers or robots for some years. Indeed, 
scifi from that era and earlier focused on  
calling them iron-based life or references 
vacuum tubes. Glass and steel constructs,  
like the skyscrapers that were beginning 
to dominate the skylines of bigger cities. 
While silicon lifeforms as a concept was probably 
popularized by the Horta in Star Trek’s 1967  
episode “The Devil in the Dark”, the idea is 
much older. Way back 132 years ago in 1891,  
German Astrophysicist Julius Scheiner suggested 
that silicon’s similarity to carbon might make it  
an alternative for life out among the stars, 
and at that time we couldn’t distinguish our  
galaxy from the wider cosmos and had no 
idea about the age of the Universe or how  
elements like carbon or silicon came to be.
But if you’ve seen the periodic table,  
it’s hard to miss Silicon there right under 
Carbon and sharing many of its features,  
critically that they are both tetravalent. Tetra 
meaning four and referring to the outer layer  
of electrons of an atom, the valence electron 
shell, which has 8 openings, so any atom that  
is tetravalent can have 4 covalent bonds 
to other atoms, and in the case of carbon,  
this is how we have methane, composed of one 
carbon atom with 4 hydrogen atoms attached to it. 
How many covalent bonds an atom can take is 
important, especially for our big 3 of oxygen,  
nitrogen, and carbon, which are divalent, 
trivalent, and tetravalent respectively,  
or able to have 2, 3, or 4 bonds. Those 
three are also incredibly common, with  
carbon being a byproduct of helium fusion 
and a common substance in the Universe,  
while the CNO cycle, or Carbon-Nitrogen-Oxygen 
Cycle, fuses carbon into nitrogen and oxygen,  
both very common in the Universe too, especially 
Oxygen. All three have very common partnerships  
with the most abundant atom, hydrogen, 
to form Oxygen plus two hydrogen, water,  
nitrogen plus three hydrogen, ammonia, and carbon 
plus 4 hydrogen, which again is methane. Those 3  
substances are most of what your typical comet is 
made from, are what we are usually talking about  
in space contexts when we reference volatiles 
and organic building blocks, and make up a large  
fraction of the matter in this universe once 
we remove dark matter and hydrogen and helium.  
Indeed it's the largest fraction of atoms made 
since the Big Bang, most hydrogen and helium date  
back to the first couple minutes of the Universe.
It's no surprise then that something similar to  
carbon by being tetravalent would interest us as 
an alternative, and indeed the methane equivalent  
of silicon exists and is called Silane or 
Silicane, and is one Silicon atom plus 4 hydrogen. 
There are other tetravalent atoms, Germanium for 
instance, which was our preferred semiconductor  
material for a time till we switched to Silicon, 
which is better at higher temperatures. And that’s  
where silicon as an alternative to carbon for 
life starts coming into play, places where  
carbon chemistry couldn’t function for the heat.
As we discussed in our ammonia-based lifeforms  
episode, what we really mean by carbon based life 
and water based life is chemistry built on carbon  
but inside water as a solvent, and ammonia is 
a good solvent too, if not quite the equal of  
water as a solvent, but freezes at a much lower 
temperature than water and thus opens the door to  
life in very cold places. Silicon goes the other 
way, opening the door to hotter temperatures. 
And as mentioned, ammonia is an option because 
nitrogen is quite common in the universe,  
but there are about a third as many silicon atoms 
as nitrogen and around a tenth as much as carbon.  
More importantly, here on earth, in our crust, 
silicon is the second most abundant element, right  
after oxygen, and indeed most of our rock and dirt 
and minerals are made of those two substances. 
Ironically silicon’s abundance here on 
Earth, compared to carbon or nitrogen,  
actually hurts it as a candidate for life, 
since it is more abundant than both, neither  
making up even 1% of the matter in our crust, 
and yet the more abundant silicon is a relative  
non-factor in the life that did form here.
One caveat, it may be that silicon-based life  
is far more common on planets like earth 
and we just happened to be the freak case  
where carbon life popped up first and became 
dominant and crushed any competitor that formed  
later. But that seems like a stretch. Still, 
when you only have one example of something,  
in this case life, we should not take for 
granted that it’s the normal situation. 
Silicon has other things that make it weaker for 
possible organic, or quasi-organic chemistry,  
and as an example, Silicon is much more massive 
than carbon, more than double, which means it puts  
greater strain on molecules it is part of. Though 
it also makes it more temperature resistant,  
since an atom of it jerks around less at the 
same temperature. Silicon and carbon polymerize  
differently too. Carbon polymers are frequently 
long chains of carbon attached to each other,  
and polyethylene, for instance, is basically a 
long chain of carbon atoms, where each carbon  
atom has a bond to one carbon on either side of 
it and one hydrogen on either other side of it,  
much akin to hydrocarbons we use for fuel. 
While Silicones are made up of Silicon  
to Oxygen, not Silicon to Silicon linkage.
Carbon forms these large scaffolds of atoms on  
which other atoms can latch on and thus is the 
basis for our organic chemistry and life. This  
is a major reason why we talk about carbon-based 
life at all, given that it’s not even a fifth of  
your body’s mass, which is almost 4 times more 
weight of oxygen and is heavily outnumbered by  
hydrogen atoms. It is not the only scaffolding 
non-metal though, nor is it just silicon,  
boron and sulfur are other examples and they too 
get suggested as an alternative basis for life. 
Silicon also readily bonds to oxygen to form 
simple silicon dioxide, most commonly as quartz,  
and again silicon and oxygen make most of the 
ground you’re standing on. Silicon dioxide is  
highly stable and inert compared to carbon 
dioxide. Silicon dioxide isn't particularly  
soluble in water either, which is okay as we’re 
mostly interested in it in hotter places than  
liquid water would be at, but helps explain why 
life on Earth is made of carbon, not silicon. 
No, what we really are thinking of in regard to 
silicon-based life isn’t it arising on Earth-like  
planets or cold frigid ones where ammonia might 
be king, but rather on hellishly hot planets like  
Venus where carbon is actually very abundant 
in its atmosphere but where carbon chemistry  
isn’t viable from the viciously hot temperature.
Odds are you have a pair of silicone mitts at home  
for pulling hot objects out of your oven or some 
silicone utensils for your non-stick cookware,  
and if not, I’d strongly recommend them. But it’s 
temperature resistant, also solvent resistant too,  
again making it tricky to couple with water 
or ammonia as basis for life. It does react  
to Hydrofluoric acid, which like ammonia has 
also been suggested as an alternative to water  
as the solvent for life-bearing chemistries, 
but in our context today we are more interested  
in silicon using molten metals as a solvent.
As an example, Aluminum melts at 1220 degrees  
Fahrenheit, or 660 degrees Celsius, and is 
very common, while tin melts at a mere 449  
degrees Fahrenheit or 232 Celsius, and 
Lead at 621 Fahrenheit or 328 Celsius,  
both common components of the solder we 
use on circuit boards and for that reason,  
plus being conductive of course. Incidentally 
tin, lead, and boron are also tetravalent  
elements like carbon, silicon, and germanium.
They are also decently common, and one reason  
why we have a lot of silicon in our crust is that 
it is low density and floats in molten metal, so  
we figure big rafts of the stuff commonly surface 
on molten worlds as they cool, leaving a crust  
heavy with it. And silicon can handle monstrously 
high temperatures, silicone doesn’t melt but will  
catch on fire at 840 Fahrenheit or 250 Celsius, 
quartz melts at over 3000 Fahrenheit for instance. 
Amusingly that means there is a non-zero chance 
that silicon-based life did live here on Earth  
way, way back and was killed off as the planet 
cooled or when that dwarf planet Theia smacked  
proto-Earth and blew our crust off, from which 
the moon later formed, and onto which we assume a  
long rain of comets later fell to give us oceans.
But planets start hot, and can stay that way if  
near their sun, and it isn’t too hard to imagine 
silicon life on a Venus-like planet or living in  
the lava tubes of some volcanic or Chthonian 
planet. Chthonian planets are believed to have  
originally formed as super-Earths, gas giants, 
or ice giants, similar to Jupiter or Neptune  
in our own solar system or smaller. However, 
they have undergone significant atmospheric  
loss over time from being that close to their sun, 
photoevaporation, thermal escape, or interactions  
with their host stars strip off their atmospheres 
and lighter elements much as Earth lost most of  
its hydrogen and basically all its helium. So you 
get left with a big hot ball of metal and silicon  
and probably a lot of oxygen still too. These 
sorts of planets are likely to be pretty common  
in the galaxy and also likely high on tidal 
forces which might be beneficial for life. 
Could they hold not just life 
but complex life? Well, perhaps. 
We normally talk about habitability in 
terms of surface oceans and atmosphere,  
subsurface oceans are entirely viable too, indeed 
biologists generally favor life originating deep  
in the oceans. The problem is the power source 
though as the Sun allows photosynthesis and dense  
biomass and ecosystems, which we assume seriously 
helps move evolution along to let intelligence  
possibly develop. Subsurface oceans on moons like 
Europa can probably have life as tidal forces from  
Jupiter on its moons is big enough to power a 
modest ecosystem, but while contemplating giant  
alien kraken on Europa is fun, it’s not very 
likely we’d see big critters there or complex  
ecologies with such a limited power pump for 
the ecosystem. Hence the focus on surface oceans  
and atmosphere in our hunt for life, along with 
biosignatures being easier to see astronomically  
if they are on the surface of course, rather than 
buried down in caves or lava tubes or magma seas. 
However, the key is a large energy flux and a 
molten planet tidally wracked by its own Sun  
absolutely fits that bill. The problem isn’t 
if there’s energy to run the chemistry of life  
in these places, but if the temperatures are 
too hot for any life. And the answer is no,  
we could absolutely design some sort of artificial 
lifeform for this, it just wouldn’t be carbon  
based, unless we’re talking diamond and graphene 
types of carbon, not the classically squishy bag  
of water that best describes lifeforms of Earth.
Whether or not a natural lifeform could develop  
is harder to say, as evolution 
has to follow a path of minimum  
steps that engineered lifeforms or freak 
improbabilities like Boltzmann Brains do not. 
Heat is not the only extreme that might permit 
silicon life, again it isn’t soluble to the same  
degree and to the same things carbon-based 
life is, so some acidic environment might  
work well for it, extreme conditions such 
as high temperatures and radiation might  
be suitable for these lifeforms, expanding 
the possibilities for habitable exoplanets. 
So we’re definitely seeing room for silicon life 
in places carbon-based creatures should fear to  
tread, but I think we also need to acknowledge 
that it has some key problems. All the way down  
to that basic DNA, or silicon equivalent, 
which we’ll label sDNA. Carbon-based DNA  
relies on a long chain of nucleotides, with each 
nucleotide composed of deoxyribose - the D in DNA,  
and a sugar - a phosphate group, and one of 
four nitrogenous bases - adenine, thymine,  
cytosine, or guanine. These bases form pairs, 
A-T or C-G, that encode genetic information. 
Silicon, although again tetravalent like carbon, 
does not readily form the stable, intricate, and  
versatile molecular structures that are essential 
for genetic material. Silicon-silicon bonds are  
generally weaker than carbon-carbon bonds, and 
silicon compounds tend to be less stable in water,  
which is a crucial environment for life as we know 
it and why hotter areas without water interest us. 
However, in speculative discussions 
about silicon-based life, we do have  
some ideas that have been proposed for 
silicon-based genetic-like molecules,  
or again, sDNA. One such concept is the use of 
silicones, which are silicon-oxygen compounds,  
to create a chain or polymer structure that 
could store information. Silicones are more  
stable in some conditions than other silicon-based 
compounds, but they are still quite different from  
carbon-based nucleotides. This is all very 
speculative though and I feel obliged to  
emphasize that the viability of silicon-based 
genetic molecules remains highly speculative,  
and there is currently no empirical evidence to 
support the existence of such molecules in nature. 
Now, we have the basic building block of life, 
such as these silicones, and something for them  
to do chemistry in, a solvent like water – 
or acid or molten metal – but we need energy,  
or more accurately, energy flux. Heat offers 
that, and we might see some interesting silicon  
life forms such as those that were basically a 
big thermocouple running on geothermal energy,  
maybe something like a giant silicon tree growing 
from deep in the molten sea to up into the empty  
sky above to radiate heat away and run on 
that flux. Or a mobile version of that might  
be some huge silicon whale or kraken or very long 
Dune-esque sandworm that ventured through the lava  
or the huge lava tubes left inside some slowly 
cooling but still viciously hot Chthonian Planet. 
They might also run on electromagnetic 
radiation, remember silicon is our ideal  
semiconductor material and the basis of modern 
solar panels and I think it is plausible enough  
to assume that photosynthesis might be no 
harder to evolve than some equivalent of  
a biological thermocouple or photovoltaic cell.
This opens the door to some interesting options  
for life forms as we might easily have creatures 
with quartz hides instead of skin or quartz-barked  
trees with roots that drank in magma or were 
long hybrids of wire, root, or hair that were  
very high in thermal or electrical conductivity. 
You might have weird options like an organism  
that was a gasbag made of silicone latched onto a 
gas vent from a molten interior to a low-pressure  
near-vacuum airless surface above, feeding 
on those mineral-rich gases while soaking up  
sunlight from its natural photovoltaic cells.
Indeed, that’s the sort of scenario where  
life might evolve on a moon like Io, tidally 
wracked and volcanic from Jupiter’s gravity,  
and be able to spread out to other nearby 
moons or a planetary ring like Saturn. In  
our Void Ecology and Space Whales episode we 
contemplated that scenario more and options  
like a natural Kardashev-2 civilization or Dyson 
swarm of quasi-organic critters who might be no  
smarter than a whale or a fish or even a coral 
reef. And it is not hard to imagine silicon-based  
lifeforms manifesting as something like a coral 
reef made of quartz instead of calcium carbonate. 
Though we should not assume silicon-based life is 
all silicon anymore than we are all carbon, and  
they may well swim through oceans of molten lead 
with skin made of iron or titanium or tungsten. 
On the flip side, just because silicon can 
survive high heat, doesn’t mean it’s unable  
to handle great cold either, and I could imagine 
worlds where slabs of quartz among the ice ran  
on low-energy flux but ultra efficient low 
temperature conductors. Or a planet whose  
sky was dark from a thick atmosphere the sun 
couldn’t penetrate but which had storms that  
ravaged the planet and wrecked any carbon 
life, but that quartz monolith shot through  
with veins of metal soaked up the lightning 
and ran some mind upon it that danced on the  
hazy edge between a brain and a computer.
And while it’s not our topic for today,  
another type of silicon based life 
would be robots and computer minds,  
and if it is the habit of alien civilizations to 
send out von Neumann probes to explore for them,  
and to conclude that colonization is harder than 
they wish to pursue, we might see the mutated  
remnants of those self-replicating probes slowly 
shift from being a machine with some life-like  
characteristics to a lifeform that is based on 
silicon and has some machine characteristics. 
The possibilities seem vast, but that said, we now 
have plausible chemistry and various ecological  
niches available from various power supplies, 
allowing large and diverse ecosystems, and we  
can move to the SETI aspect of silicon-life. 
In other words, we know where it might live,  
so how can we spot it and recognize it? What 
are some possible silicon biosignatures? 
These are hard to say for biosignatures, 
as without knowing the chemistry they use  
in any detail, things like waste products are 
hard to guess at. If it were silicon dioxide,  
the way carbon dioxide is a waste product of 
animals and modern industry, then we would not  
likely see that in an atmosphere, but we might 
see it as a waste product covering the surface  
of a planet as dirt covers ours and which is very 
unlike natural regolith in the absence of life.  
We might notice a biosignature in the albedo 
of a planet, that it wasn’t reflecting certain  
expected wavelengths, as they were being used for 
natural photovoltaics, much as plants use certain  
frequencies for photosynthesis. If they’d spread 
out over a metallic rock or into space, they  
would surely alter that planet’s spectrum off the 
natural surface and its expected characteristics. 
It is inherent to life that it should 
alter the world around it and evolve  
so as to use more of the available 
energy and resources of its ecosystem,  
which it should also seek to expand from into 
new niches, and thus it is inherent to life  
that it should leave some signature. But if you 
are a vast whale skinned in quartz and titanium  
swimming around the subsurface magma pockets of 
a planet that makes Venus look hospitable, it  
will be hard for us to find you. Indeed, strictly 
speaking such things might dwell deep below Earth,  
but that would be a topic for another time too.
In the end, for the topic of Silicon-based life,  
while it shows some promise as a plausible option 
for life, we are left with far more questions  
unanswered than we would like, and can do little 
more than speculate for now. But as we venture  
deeper into the mysteries of the universe, finding 
new exoplanets every day, we're reminded that our  
own world is an enormous canvas upon which nature 
paints many surprises, and on which strange life  
thrives in the most hostile circumstances.
And yet this world is but a pale blue dot  
compared to the cosmos, which is a near infinite 
canvas on which even stranger tales might be  
painted. The possibility of silicon-based 
lifeforms challenges us to cast aside our  
preconceived notions and explore the uncharted 
territories of existence. Whether we find these  
exotic organisms or not, the search for them 
broadens our horizons, as the horizon of this  
Universe is very broad indeed, and doubtless it 
contains wonders we have yet to even dream of.
We spend a lot of time on this show 
discussing the Fermi Paradox and SETI,  
the search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence, and 
one of our concerns is always if we’re searching  
in the right places. Which is usually looking 
for some Earthlike planet with liquid water on  
the surface. Today we saw how alternative life 
chemistries like Silicon or Ammonia, if they  
exist, might mask alien life from our current SETI 
hunt. But another of those assumptions is that we  
are hunting for civilizations, that those are 
necessary for the development of technology and  
that they remain so. But there is a possibility 
that at a certain level of technological  
development large civilizations are no longer 
needed and become viewed as a threat to survival,  
a world in which anyone can print their own 
spaceship up or their own doomsday device,  
so long as they have access to energy and raw 
materials. Many might flee into the depths of  
space or even to the galactic rim for a life as 
a hermit, sneaking into star systems only long  
enough to claim some more fuel and resources, and 
we will be examining that in our episode The Fermi  
Paradox, Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis.
That’s out now exclusively on Nebula,  
where you can not only see every regular episode 
of SFIA a few days early and ad free, but all our  
other bonus content, including extended editions 
of many episodes, and more Nebula Exclusives like,  
Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark Stars at the 
Beginning of Time, Life As An Asteroid Miner,  
Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters, 
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will, Conformal  
Cyclic Cosmology, Colonizing Binary Stars, 
and more. Like next month’s Nebula Exclusive,  
Giant Space Monsters, that will continue 
our look at strange alien biologies. 
Using my link and discount, 
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and my code,  
isaacarthur, Nebula is available for just over 
$2.50 a month, but this holiday season we are  
once again offering Lifetime Memberships to Nebula 
for $300, part of which goes directly to our show,  
and part to help raise capital for a number 
of creator-owned projects we’re greenlighting  
for 2024. Instead of a monthly subscription, 
lifetime memberships are a one time payment  
where you can get access to everything 
that’s on Nebula now and in the future,  
including our quickly growing catalog of exclusive 
movies, plays, shows, documentaries and more. 
And right now for the holidays you 
can even gift a lifetime membership  
of Nebula’s life-changing and stimulating content.
Monthly, annual or lifetime, whichever you choose,  
you not only get access to all 
of the great stuff Nebula offers,  
you’ll also be directly supporting this show. 
Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, and with all  
the exclusive bonus content like Hermi Shoplifter 
Hypothesis, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
We already had a bonus episode this month, 
Orbital Defense Platforms, but it’s a bit of  
custom to write an episode about the future as we 
approach New Years, and as a futurist I usually do  
something more of deconstruction of predictions 
and I decided we would do another this Sunday as  
a bonus for the holidays where we’ll ask if we 
truly will colonize space. Then we will finish  
the month and year with clearing space debris on 
the 28th and our final Livestream Q&A on Sunday,  
December 31st. And then we’ll move into our 
tenth year here on SFIA with a return to the  
Fermi PAradox and a look at Pancosmorio Theory, 
and the idea that colonizing other planets around  
distant stars may simply be ecologically 
unfeasible. Then we’ll have a bonus episode  
on atypical satellites like the Statite, 
Lagite, and Quasite on Sunday January 7th. 
Make sure to hit the like, subscribe, 
and notification buttons to get notified  
about those upcoming episodes. You can 
also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of 
SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on our  
streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, like this month’s Neula  
Exclusive Episode, the Hermit Shoplifter 
Hypothesis at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
