There once was an intelligent 
young lady named Miss Bright 
She traveled far faster than light,
She left one day in a relative way, 
And arrived home the previous night.
When I was younger, the big debate in science 
fiction was if you were a fan of Star Wars or  
Star Trek, and personally I quite liked both as 
well as lots of unrelated and independent sci fi,  
but I loved when the movie Stargate came out and 
loved the series Stargate SG-1 when it made its  
way into syndication. This episode isn’t about 
that show or even that specific titular stargate,  
but to me it moved quickly into a competitor 
for best sci fi franchise with Star in its  
title and remains a personal favorite and 
one with a far greater sense of realism then  
Star Trek or Star Wars often had.
The show was set on modern Earth,  
and one of the problems it had to tackle in later 
series was how they kept the program secret and  
dealt with all the new technologies that they 
encountered and tried to integrate into Earth’s  
economy quietly. But one point of heavy unrealism 
was that you could only have one operating  
stargate on a given planet, and perhaps a backup, 
and yet these were often entirely abandoned or  
unguarded. For story purposes it explains why 
a 4-person team could casually stride through,  
but of course realistically you would expect that 
portal to be the center of local civilization  
and guarded heavier than Fort Knox. And indeed 
that’s how they guarded their one gate on Earth,  
complete with thick steel vault doors 
and machine guns pointed at the gate  
and encrypted pass codes to get through.
This episode isn’t about that show or  
even that specific variety of Stargate, but 
rather on the concept of these in general,  
and we’ll be looking at what science tells 
us about such portals and also what sort of  
civilizations might result from them, how it might 
affect interstellar colonization, and a number of  
other points that scifi often glosses over.
For instance, what we would expect to see is  
that portals between planets would result in 
empires with a lot less spaceships. They might  
need them to bring those portals in manually to 
begin with, but at that point you’d almost expect  
this sort of seed ship to be an entirely robotic 
one, especially if the portal could be activated  
at any point or continuously. And indeed this is 
the plot we see in the spinoff Stargate Universe,  
where robotic ships lay gates down between planets 
and even galaxies, on multi-million year voyages. 
But such robots don’t need to be even as reliable 
as a normal spaceprobe in some ways, as you can  
just flick on a gate occasionally to check if all 
is well. You could use it as a telescope to survey  
the planet before putting its landing pod and gear 
through to assemble around it, and maintenance  
teams in EVA suits could go out through the 
portal from Earth at any time to work on it  
during its interstellar flight. You could even 
bundle two together for safety and redundancy. 
Indeed, you could send it out there by 
attaching a rocket nozzle and the fuel  
supply could be continuously pumped in from 
Earth, which would really change the dynamics  
of space travel too. Once the portal is there, if 
it’s just a magic doorway, you don’t have folks  
occasionally step through, you run rail lines 
and power cords right through there and ship in  
material and people by train like we see in Peter 
F. Hamilton’s Commonwealth Saga. Or if big enough,  
you terraform planets by opening a passage 
between a water planet and desert one, and  
equalizing them. Space travel becomes much easier 
but also largely redundant, in favor of gates. 
Of course, if your gate is more of a classic 
wormhole, getting it on a planet and safely  
keeping them there gets very dubious and 
you might have to go where the wormhole is,  
or at best put it into orbit of your planet… 
Although given the mass of the typical wormhole  
under known physics, you would generally 
be orbiting the wormhole, not the other way  
around. Indeed, generally your entire solar 
system including your Sun would orbit one. 
But first we should probably start with what a 
wormhole is, and to cover that we should also  
begin by noting that there’s several different 
types of them or other portals that folks  
have discussed over the years. The best-known 
variety these days is the Einstein-Rosen Bridge,  
and it’s probably the most likely type 
to be able to work, though it might be  
better to say it is the least unlikely to work.
But it is not the first or only wormhole concept,  
nor does it include all types of possible 
portals. Since it is the most discussed,  
and a couple of the other better known ones 
are just minor variants or expansions of it,  
it will get a discussion here today, but 
in many ways, I’d rather focus on the  
alternative options which are less known.
And indeed there’s so much about space and  
time we don’t know that I don’t really want to 
rule out options like simply having a door to a  
closet in your house that opened directly and 
seamless into warehouse storage on some other  
planet or a ship engine that was simply a portal 
to a young universe where the big bang happened  
mere moments ago and your ship can accelerate to 
near-light speed with blatant indifference to the  
tyranny of the rocket equation or conservation of 
momentum and energy. In this way, even a wormhole  
that didn’t allow signals or objects to pass 
through, just raw incoherent matter and energy,  
might let you better travel through space. This 
was the method used by Lighthugger ships from the  
Revelation Space book series by Alastair Reynolds; 
they drew energy through a wormhole from a younger  
universe right after a Big Bang. And there 
are some hypothetical types of wormholes that  
essentially are just a connection from the start 
to the end of the universe, or a universe anyway 
Incidentally, the term wormhole didn’t pop 
up until physicists Charles Misner & John  
Archibald Wheeler coined the term in a paper 
they wrote in 1957, and Wheeler was inspired  
by work back in the 1920s by Herman Weyl 
that wasn’t focused on gravity or matter,  
but rather making one-dimensional tubes from 
electromagnetic field energy. It wasn’t related to  
black holes and indeed the term ‘black hole’ was 
also coined by Wheeler about a decade after the  
wormhole. So while wormhole explanations nowadays 
tend to lean heavily on black holes in discussion,  
for the first decade we discussed wormholes, 
black holes were never even mentioned by name. 
Half a century before that, we get our first 
formal example of one described under theoretical  
physics and math, from Karl Schwarzchild in 1916, 
and what he described is basically a black hole.  
Indeed the event horizons of black holes have 
a radius based on his calculation called the  
Schwarzchild radius. These types of wormholes, 
named after him, are prone to collapsing if  
any matter passes through them and would require 
some form of exotic matter, like negative matter,  
to hold them open, otherwise even a beam of light 
going into one would collapse it. And of course  
even in the most empty part of the universe, 
particles of light from the cosmic microwave  
background radiation are constantly passing 
through, so we would not expect these to stick  
around anywhere naturally. Nowadays anyway, they 
could potentially exist essentially at the end of  
time when the CMB radiation was effectively gone.
However, later analysis indicated that we could  
maybe potentially make small ones that would 
not be collapsed by a very tiny trickle of  
electrically charged particles, which would 
hypothetically let you use these for Faster  
Than Light Communication, emphasis on ‘maybe’.
Now this is Sci Fi Sunday so I’m not going  
to rattle off the potential problems and 
paradoxes such a communicator might have,  
and for today I’m mostly burying my skepticism 
about any type of FTL ever being possible.  
One thing folks tend to forget about a classic 
wormhole using a black hole is that a black hole  
masses multiple stars so this sort of technology 
is still only useful if you can either make micro  
black holes – which I tend to suspect we can – or 
are willing to sacrifice whole stars, or nebulae,  
to making communicators. Which you might be 
too, even if your bandwidth is worse than old  
telephone modems, the ability to send messages at 
FTL speeds allows regions of galaxies to stay in  
touch. You might only be able to get away with one 
such communication hub per 100 light year bubble  
but that still allows some semblance of galactic 
civilizations to work and even intergalactic too. 
Alternatively, as we discussed in our 
look at Kugelblitz black holes last month,  
tiny black holes radiate energy and the 
faster the smaller they are. This Hawking  
Radiation puts a lower limit on what we could 
probably use as a communicator without serious  
noise issues rendering the device unusable. A 
one megaton black hole is arguably portable,  
and indeed very much so since it gives off 
356 trillion watts of power that you could  
use for an engine, and it gushes that from a 
space smaller than an atomic nucleus, so how  
you’re getting a charged particle in there as a 
message is anyone guess. Same for making out that  
particle at the other side from your receiver.
Even a billion-ton transmitter, one 10,000 times  
more massive on its own than a modern aircraft 
carrier, has just hit the radius of an atomic  
nucleus and is still spewing 356 Megawatts of 
power out. That’s only a millionth the power of  
the previous example but still a lot. Great for 
running a space station, but not for running a  
delicate signal through. Even here your particles 
carrying signals would be like trying to throw a  
baseball into and through a firehose that was on.
You obviously aren’t fitting this transmitter  
system onboard a spaceship, except one of the 
truly Olympian Planet-scale ships we sometimes  
discuss for trying to colonize other galaxies. 
It’s hard to say how much more mass and less  
power would allow a signal through but probably by 
the time we get to one with a diameter of a tenth  
of a nano-meter, something at the atomic rather 
than nuclear scale, and massing 34 trillion tons,  
200 times the Mass of Mount Everest. It is 
down to generating just 314 milliwatts of  
power and this feels a lot more plausible.
Thus, something in the trillion ton scale,  
maybe even low trillions or upper 
billions, but possibly even high trillions,  
seems like a viable mass range for a black hole 
transmitter. As to coming up with the mass,  
as huge as 200 Mount Everest sounds, and it is, 
that is about 6 billionths of Earth’s own mass,  
and there are hundreds of asteroids more massive 
than that. Ideally, you’re making these out of  
some hyper abundant material like hydrogen or 
helium, or even dark matter, and just a single  
gas giant like Jupiter should be massive enough 
to let you make one for everyone of the billions  
of star systems in this galaxy, and presumably 
they don’t all have to be made here or material  
could be outsourced from beyond our system.
This isn’t letting you send huge amounts of  
trade or troops around the galaxy, indeed it 
isn’t likely to let you send very large data  
files either, though the bigger your black hole, 
and the lower the power it gives off, the easier  
it should be to get higher-bandwidth through. So 
this probably does not allow regular citizens,  
or post-human ones anyway, to ship copies of their 
minds around, and it might be that you really are  
limited to kilobyte scale transmissions 
of raw text and very compressed images. 
The Hyper-space Bandwidth generators of the 
BattleTech or MechWarrior setting work inside  
this communication limit, sending messages 
more akin to texting or telegraphs than Zoom,  
and where a single letter in a interstellar 
transmission might be as costly as putting it in  
an ad of the most expensive newspaper. So regular 
citizens weren’t sending a lot of messages,  
even a wealthier family might limit communication 
to a single sentence or two informing a distant  
relative that someone was very ill or dead.
Of course in that setting they can jump through  
space with huge ships, from deep out in space, 
so they can still bulk transmit stuff cheaper  
if slower Pony-Express Style. And depending 
on your bandwidth with such communications,  
you might still do this for things like arts and 
entertainment or bulk messages. Send them slowly,  
or maybe send one copy across the galaxy to a 
dozen major hubs where it can go the rest of the  
way at light speed to the nearest million worlds.
This, again, is the Schwarzschild Wormhole,  
and you’ll see it described, often vaguely and 
inaccurately, a lot in somewhat older sci fi,  
the Einstein-Rosen Wormhole gained in popularity 
in both science and sci fi in the last few decades  
though and tends to be the one folks are referring 
to now, if they are trying for scientific realism. 
Much of this comes down to the idea of 
a traversable wormhole – one that won’t  
collapse if you enter it or utterly destroy you 
– and ideally one traveling to elsewhere in your  
own Universe, though arguably a Traversable 
wormhole to another Universe is even better,  
as it’s a whole new universe, and also doesn’t 
raise any paradox or time travel concerns. The  
Einstein-Rosen Wormhole is unstable too, 
but we think if negative matter turned out  
to be a real thing we could stick some 
inside a black hole to stabilize the  
throat of the wormhole and let passage occur.
Kip Thorne and Mike Morris proposed a different  
type of wormhole back in 1988, and ironically 
folks often think this is the Einstein-Rosen  
Wormhole, partially as scifi technobabble 
explanations tend to get blurry and confused on  
it. Which is understandable, even among physicists 
discussion of wormholes is fairly uncommon,  
and even the Einstein-Rosen Bridge Wormhole 
and Schwarzschild Wormhole often get listed  
as basically identical. They do overlap a lot 
but Schwarzschild’s Wormhole is a black hole  
with a singularity at its center, and the 
Einstein-Rosen Bridge specifically tries  
to go around that singularity. The Schwarzschild 
Wormhole is also usually assuming a non-rotating,  
totally spherical, and symmetric black hole.
This is where the exotic matter aspect comes in,  
as Thorne proposes using it to hold that wormhole 
open and stable, and that's a major difference  
and source of confusion, and you can probably 
see why they get used interchangeably. So too,  
Matt Visser’s wormhole just carries on this idea 
by using exotic matter to hold things open but  
far less than earlier estimates, something in 
Jupiter-mass region worth of exotic matter would  
allow a 1-meter passageway. Though I’ve seen 
smaller figures offered too, even much smaller.
I generally rely on Enrico Rodrigo’s wormhole 
FAQ for a lot of my numbers on this topic,  
and his 2005 book The Physics 
of Stargates, or the Orion’s Arm  
site’s discussion of Visser Wormholes. But 
planetary masses, even Jupiter scale ones,  
are still entirely doable for a Kardashev-3 
civilization looking to stay in touch. 
A Thorne Black Hole is big incidentally, Gargantua 
from the movie Interstellar is based on his work  
and comes in at 100 million solar masses and 
would be nearly 400 million miles across,  
and 25 times more massive than our own central 
black hole for the Milky Way, albeit not as  
big as the current record holders for largest 
black hole. If you’re wondering why that mass,  
it’s because the tidal forces of black holes 
– the bit that rips you to pieces - get weaker  
as a black hole gets bigger and that’s the mass 
range needed to allow you to pass through safely.  
Though as I recall, that would actually 
be the amount of negative or exotic matter  
required to stabilize the throat at something 
bigger and mild enough we could pass through. 
And that’s not even a thousandth of the mass 
of our galaxy, so it would be believable that  
an intergalactic civilization might force 
feed galactic cores to allow such travel,  
or that later in the universe as these naturally 
get bigger they may be used to let people travel  
between galaxies even as Hubble expansion makes 
them spaced too far apart for light to ever reach. 
Alternatively, Visser’s Lorentzian wormhole uses 
way less mass and exotic matter and starts making  
them plausible in the same sorts of mass ranges 
we were discussing for micro-black holes of the  
Schwarzchild variety used for communications-only.
It also lets us start finding ways to avoid these  
gateways being used for time travel. Which is 
a bigger issue.The basic reasoning usually goes  
that any wormhole has two mouths, and if you move 
one the clock at it is going to begin slowing down  
during transit, under normal special relativity, 
very fast objects experience less time. If we send  
it to another system 100 light years away at 25% 
of light speed, it will arrive 400 years from now,  
in the year 2424, except the clock and calendar 
there will be 13 years slow, and think it's 2411.  
People stepping out there will read the 
local clock, think it weird, and if the  
wormhole is two-way, which isn’t guaranteed, many 
theories make them one-way, then they could step  
back through and see the same time they left at. 
No problem here. But if you take that wormhole  
back home where it was created, it would arrive in 
the year 2824 and its own calendar would say 2798,  
26 years behind. And when we set the two mouths 
near each other, you step into the one in 2824 and  
out into 2798, 26 years back in time, though never 
earlier than the time they were first created. 
Some wormhole approaches do prevent time travel 
hijinks and again, these are specifically the  
ones allowed under basic general relativity. Start 
throwing in string theory and options can change,  
so too if you’re simply opening a portal to 
another congruent universe that’s smaller or  
has a higher speed limit, traveling there, 
and jumping back into this universe. We  
looked at that option more in our Folding Space 
episode and Cheating Reality, in our FTL series,  
but we usually call options like this either 
folding space or entering a hyperspace[a]. 
Another method to avoid time travel hijinks 
without hyperspace is to simply keep both  
mouths further apart in space than they are 
in time - creating spacelike curves instead  
of timelike curves. If those earlier wormholes are 
13 years apart in time but never get closer than  
13 lightyears in distance. No object or signal 
can return to the original wormhole before it  
departed. And if we assume these wormholes would 
naturally fizzle out if you brought them closer  
or lose the connection, by some unknown physical 
law, you would have no time travel issue, and this  
is often assumed the case with examples in science 
fiction, or that for some reason the clock’s stay  
matched at both ends regardless of relativity.
Now this also raises the issue of what shape  
these mouths are and while in fiction they tend to 
be 2D portals you pop in and out of one side of,  
in most cases they are going to be 3D, probably 
spherically though in some cases they could be  
squished or extended in one axis or asymmetric, 
as event horizons of black holes are typically not  
quite spheres either. When we talk about holding 
their throats open using negative matter I think  
folks imagine a ring on some long corridor, but 
imagine instead simply two spheres, the mouth  
and the other mouth, and down deeper in them is 
another pair of spheres that in reality overlap,  
being in one is being in the other, and you could 
imagine a thin shell of negative matter here,  
or maybe something like a wiffle ball 
with lots of holes you could pass through,  
but Visser’s approach is to use a ring 
or a torus of negative matter because  
it uses less negative matter than a sphere
Incidentally, you probably don’t want to waste  
too much time trying to visualize these things. 
The whole point of them is that they screw with  
normal geometry so outside of mathematical 
formulae they’re not going to be intuitive  
and if you feel like one is intuitive odds are 
you’re probably misunderstanding it. In this  
context though the intent is to create a black 
hole and then drop negative matter into it to  
turn it from a non-traversable wormhole into 
a traversable one. Nothing about that tells us  
where the wormhole’s other mouth is at and if 
it’s one way, you’re going to be making a leap  
of faith every time you enter it since your 
probe or explorers or colonists can’t send  
a signal back except the long way around, which 
might be millions of light years away, or more. 
Other options could have a flat portal, it 
might be a circle or ellipse or rectangle,  
but this is not how one deriving simply from 
Einstein Relativity is going to look, that’s  
going to be essentially spherical. If you can 
see through it to the other side, it’s going to  
either be 2-way or you’re at the receiving end of 
a one way tunnel which means you bury that inside  
fortifications in case anyone decides to visit, 
and you do have the defensive edge that they  
can’t see you. They probably send through probes 
and maybe ones with instructions on building your  
own portal to reply to them and say hi, or the 
probe is designed to build such a thing itself. 
Now when it comes to using them for power 
or as weapons, that’s a lot more limited  
for these types of wormholes. In almost no 
case can you run tons of power through one  
of these things without destabilizing them so 
as tempting as it would be to take on end of  
the wormhole and stick it in the core of star 
and the other in the back of spaceship or a  
power plant, that’s not likely to ever work out. 
Alternatively, you can take a regular old black  
hole and generate amazing power from it as is.
On the flip side, if it really is a portal like  
in Stargate then this trick works fine. So does 
opening one end under the other and dropping a  
ball down that enters the lower mouth and drops 
back out the upper mouth and just keeps speeding  
up, as it falls and resets up top over and over 
again. But with one that operates under general  
relativity, that ball would actually slow down 
when it went back up to the higher wormhole mouth. 
While we only think of them as portals, or 
doorways, they appear to offer some insane  
abilities. In practice those operating nominally 
under known physics don’t get to have those cool  
cheats. It raises questions like if you jump 
through a wormhole and emerge in space a billion  
light years away, where Hubble expansion is moving 
everything away from you at 7% of light speed,  
do you emerge stationary relative to that place 
or blast out of it moving 7% of light speed. Do  
you pick up the speed of the planet you’re 
stepping out onto that’s rotating at a very  
different speed and angle than your world was when 
you left, and several thousand miles per hour in a  
different direction too, for a fiery entry?
Another thing to remember is that you are  
entering a high-mass object and falling toward 
a singularity, even if you do skip around it in  
an Einstein-Rosen Bridge or Thorn Stabilized one. 
You then have to move out of it on the other side.  
This transit is not instant in any way, you 
are covering a real physical distance, albeit  
one very warped relative to us, essentially the 
wormholes event horizon diameter, at a minimum. In  
many wormholes scenarios your transit could take 
months, and months you experience too, not just  
jumping around it to your delivery date on the 
other side. And again, there’s nothing letting us  
pick these destinations, even the assumption you 
could make one with two mouths and tow it to your  
preferred destination is doing some hand waving.
The exception here is cosmic wormholes, which  
are those that might have been created when the 
Universe was mere instants old. If these are real,  
these wormholes would naturally exist as part of 
the universe's fabric, their locations would be  
determined by natural processes in the early 
universe or the dynamics of space-time. Such  
wormholes would have locations that are accidental 
or inherent to the universe's structure. However,  
you could potentially predict them and even if 
they are one way it’s very likely folks would be  
dumping through probes that would say where they 
were… which might be so far away in space and time  
we couldn’t tell but you don’t need to know where 
your own one’s go to know they work if you’ve got  
probes from other people emerging from other ones 
popping through or even just coherent signals. 
Which can be natural. If radio signals and probes 
can come through, than so can astronomical data,  
and you could tell if one was moving you through 
time by examining the CMB radiation coming through  
it and see if it’s redshift matched the factor we 
would expect from the spectrum of whatever stars  
we could see through it too. Here’s some hydrogen 
lines, here’s the CMB, hey this wormhole is from  
4 billion years ago or hey everything coming 
out is redshifted to 28% of light speed or hey,  
this one is from the year one trillion in 
the future. If a signal can pass through,  
then we can collect useful information even if 
no one is transmitting on the other side and we  
can’t step through ourselves to the other side 
or send a probe or signal. A two-way traversable  
wormhole does not have an event horizon on either 
side incidentally, and a one-way wormhole would  
seem to have an event horizon on the side you 
had to jump through, looking like a black hole,  
so again a bit of a leap of faith there.
We also have quantum wormholes[b], and indeed  
some theories think the entire spooky action at a 
distance phenomena might be the result of these,  
but it's kind of inherent to these theories 
that using them to send useful information  
is impossible, let alone people and spaceships.
One last note on scientific realism for the day  
before we get full into discussing civilizations 
using stargates, and that’s on negative matter.  
Now the idea here is that this stuff repels mass 
rather than attracts it gravitationally and thus  
can counteract gravity, but the problem is that 
while it works on paper, so does a negative dollar  
bill or a negative gallon of water or a negative 
cookie. We’ve never found any negative matter,  
nobody has ever carried a negative gallon of 
water, never fed a negative cookie to Santa Claus,  
and a negative dollar is called an IOU. In 
physics we have positive and negative charge  
but this is simply the opposite charge, 
we could have called it A and B or Red  
and Blue and left out the negative connotation.
That said, there are reasons physicists discuss it  
seriously, such as the Casimir Effect, and we deep 
dived into that in our Vacuum Energy episode. I’m  
very skeptical of any negative matter actually 
existing though, and thus I don’t really give  
the Thorne or Visser wormholes any more credence 
than other varieties from different cosmological  
models or even fictional ones, though with no 
disrespect there to either gentleman incidentally,  
I don’t believe either has ever said they 
thought such wormholes very likely either,  
they’re just a fascinating possibility worthy of 
theoretical exploration. The same could be said  
of a Tolman Wormhole, which opens to the end or 
beginning of the Universe, often called a universe  
with a bounce, or a Krasnikov Tube, and again 
see our FTL series for more discussion of those. 
But let’s imagine for the moment that 
something like the Stargate was around,  
as opposed to a Thorne or Visser Wormhole. 
Incidentally a Stargate was used by Arthur  
C. Clarke in the 1968 novel 2001, and the 1994 
movie with Kurt Russel in it further popularized  
the term. It makes a bit more sense there whereas 
in the Stargate Franchise, they’re essentially  
planet-to-planet gates that basically circumvent 
a need for developing space around stars. 
We don’t see it in the film but in the 2001 novel 
Dave Bowman goes for quite an existential ride  
through ancient alien empires on his trip 
through the monolith and space and time,  
a scene the film represents a bit strangely 
albeit in a very Stanley Kubrick sort of way. 
In any event, we don’t get to see much of the 
monolith builders there or elsewhere in the 2001  
series, they’re kept pretty mysterious which 
is usually a wise approach in writing ancient  
powerful aliens, indeed the Ancients of Stargate 
probably should have been kept more wisely obscure  
rather than filling in some dots on them. But 
what would a civilization with stargates be like? 
It matters a lot if they can open a gate 
anywhere or if they have to fly the device there,  
and if one can be opened, can we pick where it 
goes or is it to a random location anywhere in  
this Universe or even a different one, and does 
shutting it off lose that connection for keeps? 
In that last case, you not only have to worry 
about some accident shutting your gate off,  
you also have the issue of planets wanting their 
independence being able to just close their gate  
down, though that could also be seen as a positive 
aspect of these devices. There’s also not much  
reason to assume they would stay tethered to 
a planet or star system they were made in. 
They might be gravitationally bound to a spot 
and conserve angular momentum so that you could  
stick them in some building on a fixed point of 
a planet, or you might have one that had fixed  
locations inside a galaxy and once made, they 
stayed there even as stars migrated around. All of  
these have a big effect on how your interstellar 
empire plays out, and if for instance you can dial  
up any place randomly in the Universe, which may 
include way beyond the Cosmological event Horizon,  
you have an empire that has no internal neighbors 
except by node connections of the gates. 
In Stargate you can only have the one 
gate per planet and it can dial any other,  
which would tend to imply you had preset 
schedules for when each planet is getting dialed  
up or dialing in and probably you have a crash 
team ready to go throw a rail line connection  
and power cord plug down as soon as a connection 
establishes so everything can pass through quick. 
It also implies a hierarchy of planets. In 
Stargate you can only keep the connection open for  
38 minutes, which means 37 full-length openings a 
day or 265 a week. Maybe you left a short time gap  
between each for emergencies calls and updates. 
And if it were one-way, like in the show, you  
might have Earth connecting to 18 planets daily, 
once coming and once going about 12 hours apart,  
or do it weekly for 232 such connections. 
In which case those 18 tier-1 planets,  
or 232 if twice a week contacts was sufficient, 
could then each have 17 or 232 other planets they  
each serviced in tier-2, for Earth and 325 more 
Tier 1 and 2 worlds, and 5527 worlds in tier 1,  
2, and 3, etc, for daily contact, and weekly 
would be 71,225 Tier 1, 2, and 3 worlds combined. 
Incidentally, security and common sense would 
encourage you to have at least one other planet  
that regularly dialed those other planets, both 
in the tier below them and those lateral as well,  
so maybe each tier is reduced in size to 
half. They need not necessarily dial with  
the same frequency. Obviously this Stargate 
scenario is very specific to the 38 minute  
arbitrary value from that show and the idea 
you can only have one portal per planet. You  
can probably only move a thousand folks 
through in a given 38 minute opening too,  
or in that order of magnitude, so moving between 
planets might be rather limited and pricey. 
If on the other hand you can have hundreds or 
thousands of such gates on a single planet and  
permanently open, then you probably still 
do a tiered system as you get big enough,  
but you might have some unexpected planets 
on that list. Garbage-world comes to mind,  
as you might have a place that is just not a 
decent candidate for terraforming but on which you  
can slowly dump waste until it reaches a useful 
level for active mining. It might even be a place  
you plan to terraform but want to bring the mass 
up that way, and when you get to the right zone  
you switch from garbage to some equivalent 
of barrier material followed by topsoil. 
Indeed, you might have portals on the backs 
of large land conveyances or even planes that  
were dumping material down below them in an even 
spread. You might generate rain by opening one to  
an icy body in an Oort Cloud and dropping chunks 
of ice from tens of miles up to thaw and switch  
to rain during the fall, or first to a hot planet 
and into a water reservoir there, then to Earth.  
All while portals in the deep sea helped remove 
excess water and to some planet that needs that  
water and salt. Everything would just depend on 
how easy these were to make and maintain and you  
might have folks commuting in from a suburb planet 
to the ecumenopolis on Earth it’s essentially a  
suburb of. Indeed you might have nations on Earth 
where it was just some city, like Los Angeles,  
that actually had hundreds of worlds connected to 
it one or two steps away that made it a city-state  
here but a multiplanetary empire in total.
And again they might not even be in the same  
universe. You could have portals opening up to 
another universe for raw materials or energy or  
to run heat pumps to shift entropy around, or to 
take advantage of different physical constants to  
create materials that wouldn’t otherwise work. 
You could use something like this to create a  
computer that sprawled over a million worlds 
and multiple chunks of various universes to  
form some sort of super-mind that surpassed 
a Jupiter Brian or even a Matryoshka Brain. 
There are no obvious limits as to how 
sprawled out such an empire might get to be,  
or how often entire chunks of it might 
sever their connections to go their own  
way. If physics allows such options, it 
means we have a path forward to virtually  
endless possibilities among countless worlds.
So we were exploring some options for galaxy  
spanning gate networks and civilizations, and in 
this month’s Nebula Exclusive, Galactic Beacons,  
we’ll ask if stellar empires might create beacons 
and how those would work, what types there are,  
such as for SETI purposes or to warn of danger 
or territorial markings, and what the advantages  
for and against building them are. And how 
we could find any if they currently exist. 
Galactic Beacons is out now exclusively on Nebula, 
our streaming service, where you can also see  
every regular episode of SFIA a few days early 
and ad free, as well as our other bonus content,  
including extended editions of many episodes, and 
more Nebula Exclusives like last month’s episode  
Crystal Aliens, Topopolis: The Eternal River, 
January’s Giant Space Monsters, December’s episode  
The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis, 
Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark Stars at the  
Beginning of Time, Life As An Asteroid Miner, 
Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters,  
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will, and more.
Nebula has tons of great content from an  
ever-growing community of creators. Using my 
link and discount it’s available now for just  
over $2.50 a month, less than the price 
of the drink or snack you might have been  
enjoying during the episode.
When you sign up at my  
link, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use my 
code, isaacarthur, you not only get access to all  
of the great stuff Nebula offers, like Galactic 
Beacons, you’ll also be directly supporting this  
show. Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, 
and with all the exclusive bonus content,  
go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
So today we explored tunnels through space  
and this thursday we’ll explore a different type 
of tunnel: the immense lava tubes on the Moon,  
and what life in those might be like for lunar 
settlers. Then we’ll finish out the month with a  
pair of episodes looking at colonizing white dwarf 
star systems, bringing new life to those dead  
stars, and binary star systems, and their unique 
challenges with habitable zones and stability. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early 
and ad free on our streaming service,  
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content like 
Galactic Beacons, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
