This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. 
Get access to my streaming video service,  
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
In Douglas Adams’ famous Hitchhiker’s Guide 
to the Galaxy series, we are introduced to  
the Babel Fish, a little fish you could put 
in your ear that instantly let you understand  
any language you heard. Sadly, the 
poor Babel fish, by effectively  
removing all barriers to communication 
between different races and cultures,  
has caused more and bloodier wars than 
anything else in the history of creation.
 
So today we will be looking at alien languages, 
what strange forms they might take, and how we  
might go about decoding and translating them. 
Those are hard enough when we consider them  
in the context of classical Sci-Fi and SETI, 
where we assume humanoid aliens are speaking  
to us intentionally, sending us radio signals 
we are technically capable of receiving and  
intellectually capable of understanding, but 
things are likely to be much harder in reality.
 
SETI, the Search for Extraterrestrial 
Intelligence, comes in a lot of forms, but the  
most well-known is listening for radio signals 
that look like clear signs of communication,  
or at least signs of transmissions by intelligent 
life. It’s biggest weakness, and one of the  
reasons we don’t spend much time discussing it on 
the show, is that it assumes alien communications  
would be readable or at least recognizable to 
someone other than their intended recipient.
 
The obstacle might not be that the aliens are 
encrypting their transmission, because it would  
make reading their signals difficult enough if 
they were just compressed. Transmitting data is  
expensive, so it’s in a sender’s interest to limit 
how much raw data needs to be sent to achieve a  
successful transfer of information. Let’s use this 
video as an example, at about 30 minutes long,  
with 60 frames per second and over a 
hundred thousand individual images.  
In its uncompressed form, with about 2 million 
individual pixels per image, we’d need over 200  
billion pixels to be recorded and sent, along with 
information about the appropriate wavelength of  
light, and its intensity or brightness. In an 
uncompressed and simple form, this might well  
be over a trillion bytes. But rather than raw 
data, I generally upload my videos at 1080p HD,  
and about 3 gigabytes each. So that’s a lot of 
compression. And like any compression, it works  
fundamentally by taking any pattern and replacing 
it instead with a note that the pattern exists.
 
So the better you are at data compression, 
the more parts are left out, and the more  
your signal looks like noise, making it hard for 
folks who don’t know the method of compression to  
recognize they’re seeing a signal at all. But this 
doesn’t mean a compressed signal looks completely  
like noise: the goal with compression is not 
encryption, it’s minimizing data and improving  
transmission speeds, so we shouldn’t assume 
that the more advanced a civilization is,  
the more their signals look like gibberish. No, 
the objective is to transmit the information with  
minimum loss or distortion, while minimizing 
effort needed to pack and unpack the signal.
 
Note that I say effort, because while 
the objective with a digital signal is to  
minimize the bits being transmitted, the goal 
of language in general is the transmission of  
concepts in a way that least distorts their 
meaning. Essentially all language is intended  
to be a form of data compression. This is 
the critical point about alien languages,  
that language is a way of relaying compressed 
concepts, and that compression is part of what  
might make them so hard to translate while at the 
same time the universal nature of many of those  
concepts is what ensures we can translate 
them, that it isn’t an impossible task. Of  
course if words are compressed concepts, 
we can’t know the means of compression,  
if they have vocal cords and ears for instance, 
and some of those concepts might be alien.
 
On the other hand, numbers like two, three, and 
four should be universal concepts regardless of  
culture or biology and, the notion of adding or 
multiplying numbers should be universal. Area,  
volume, density, and essentially all of math and 
geometry, should be commonly shared, which is why  
we often think of math as a potential universal 
language. Logic too should be universal.
 
But it goes beyond that, since physical objects 
should also be fairly universal. I’m not sure  
if we can take for granted that an alien mind 
has a notion for objects and categorization,  
but it’s difficult to imagine how an advanced 
intelligence could operate without such concepts.  
It would be a very alien mind indeed that doesn’t 
look at an elephant and think, “This is a specific  
thing, it is very similar to that other thing to 
its left – another elephant -- and different than  
that tall skinny leafy thing nearby, a tree, they 
are all standing on a mostly flat surface, I shall  
call that the ground, many small objects make that 
up, rocks and dirt, and far above is a big burning  
object that moves, I shall call that a sun.”
Such a mind would be particularly foreign to  
us as a species, one that does not classify 
and categorize or even recognize objects,  
since we think that way for a reason, and part 
of that reason is our method of data compression,  
not just linguistically but in our own thinking. 
Our brain has to move data around and act on it,  
so it presumably also has to take patterns and 
simplify them into a compressed form that works  
on recognizing those patterns. We can actually see 
this at work in our psyche, when we see shapes in  
clouds or faces in an image: it’s essentially our 
pattern-recognition playing tricks on us. While it  
works most of the time, we can still see cases 
where the suggestions of a pattern or concept  
tell us something that isn’t quite right. 
On a more complicated level, mental fallacies  
are also examples of this, where we perceive a 
pattern or continuation of a pattern that isn’t  
necessarily there. Somewhere in your head, and my 
head, is the gooey brain-analogue equivalent of a  
file titled ‘elephant’, or ‘face’, with a list 
of what these things are, and how to identify  
them. There might well be another broad category 
titled “rock”, presumably listing a wide range  
of attributes that define a rock. But we have 
to consider that it might not match mine or  
the next person’s completely. So if I say ‘Can 
you hand me that rock?’ and point at a brick,  
some people might instantly grab it, while 
others might be a bit confused and search  
near where I pointed for a different nearby 
object, figuring I didn’t mean “brick”,  
and someone else might ask for clarification, or 
offer it by saying that a brick is not a rock. 
 
Somewhere in our head is a file that says 
“sun”, and that one for sun presumably contains  
information that the one that appears every 
day is actually the same one, not a new object.  
This is something we take for granted, but 
it really is wired into our association:  
we don’t have discussions about multiple suns, or 
measure days in sun-deaths, though if our brain  
or our cultures did not have this requirement, 
we might well call our days “sun deaths” or ‘sun  
births’, and have myths about all the past suns 
that have come before. And so we might consider  
that a given alien culture might not think this 
was the case until they had the technology to  
investigate their own sun, thinking of it as 
a new object each time. Object permanence,  
the notion that objects continue to exist and 
act or be acted upon even when we do not see  
or otherwise sense them is a fairly advanced 
step of cognition in animals and human infants  
and maybe is not something we could take for 
granted on alien worlds or in alien minds.  
 
Or maybe this would be something that would be a 
Universal idea even pre-science, as thinking its  
a new Sun every day because it disappeared over 
the horizon might be like a child thinking it was  
a new Mommy who appeared everytime they uncovered 
their eyes playing peek-a-boo. Given the central  
and comforting role both the Sun and our parents 
tend to play in our existence there might be a  
strong psychological tilt to drawing conclusions 
that made such central pillars seem stable and  
eternal. I was going to say that evolution should 
generally prevent a species becoming culturally  
and technologically sophisticated if it was 
insane, and thus things which reduced anxiety  
like assuming the sun would rise tomorrow might 
be convergent concepts for that reason alone,  
however I’m very reluctant to say insanity or 
anxiety are barriers to civilization, I sometimes  
suspect they are instead prerequisites. 
Anyway, we might safely assume some physical  
concepts like objects, categories, and the 
fundamentals of physics and chemistry are  
likely to be universal as well. Whatever they call 
stars, they should have a distinct word or words  
for them. They may also put a different boundary 
on them. For example, a species that evolved  
on the Moon of a gas giant around a star might 
place the divide on words like planet and moon,  
and have gas giants and stars in very different 
conceptual places. We ourselves changed categories  
on planets like with reclassifying Pluto, 
and we did used to thinking of planets as  
a subcategory of stars, planets simplify meaning 
those stars that wandered around the night sky,  
folks didn’t know they were rocks and 
the stars balls of hydrogen and helium. 
 
There are other considerations as well. 
For instance, they might not have eyes,  
or might simply be sensitive to light, much as 
we are to temperature, with a vague feeling for  
variance and direction. And yet, if we gesture 
at the Sun and they are able to see that gesture  
and recognize it as an attempt to indicate an 
object – both big ifs, admittedly – then there  
should be a fairly limited number of concepts 
they think I’m attempting to convey if I then  
utter a word and they can hear it. Taking all 
those big “ifs” into account, they’re likely  
to get that I’m trying to say “That thing in 
the sky I’m pointing out is called the Sun”.
 
They might think I’m saying “Bright object”, 
and think I mean the general concept which  
would include a lightbulb, which might be called 
mini-suns or portable-suns in their language.  
They might think I’m describing the trait of 
bright, or the time of day, based on its east  
and west position, or even the season based on how 
high it rises at noon based on time of year. They  
might think I mean the color, or am expressing a 
warning about radiation, sunburn, or cancer. They  
might be deaf and think I’m pointing at objects 
asking them to name them, which they will do by  
flashing infrared heat patterns on their forehead 
or blinking their eyelids in a precise pattern.  
They might be blind and have very good hearing, 
but have no idea what we’re pointing at.  
They might have directional hearing that let 
them know what way I was projecting my voice,  
so that they could identify the object if I 
named it while having my head titled that way.
 
And yet in spite of all of that, blind though 
they are, literally or metaphorically, they can  
figure out what color is because they can think, 
and they still conceptualize and categorize.  
They can know what a photon is in the same way 
we know about a proton, neutron, or electron.  
We can’t see those either, though a species that 
could somehow detect and manipulate them as we  
do light or sound might “see” those particles 
in some analogous way to how we see colours,  
and make images of them. Indeed, we even name the 
quark forces of color charge red, green, blue,  
anti-red, anti-green, and anti-blue, even though 
they have nothing to do with color for us,  
because we can categorize and conceptualize, 
and have used those names as an arbitrary  
system for classification. We just color coded 
the mysterious force for discussion purposes,  
letters or directions would have worked too. An 
alien somehow able to see these color charges,  
as we call them, but unable to see photons of 
the visible light spectrum, might detect photons  
through scientific experimentation and name them 
after whatever they called the quark force types,  
in a similarly unrelated and arbitrary way.
But translating to or from an alien language might  
present a significant challenge. On the one hand, 
we might find all kinds of different lifeforms,  
and they may not communicate in the convenient, 
Sci-fi, humanoid way: they may use clicks and  
buzzing, or colour patterns on their skin, or 
scents, which may not even be detectable to us,  
making any form of translation completely 
impossible without some form of purpose-built  
technology. If we’re lucky enough to encounter 
aliens who communicate in a manner similar to us,  
there are all the questions that come 
along with any earth-based language,  
but with all the additional issues of having 
different references. Coming back to the example  
of the sun, if we attempted to talk about a 
“day” with people from a tidally-locked world,  
we’d likely need to draw on different shared 
concepts to convey that we mean “a period of  
roughly 24 hours which we denote by the motion 
of our home star in the heavens”, something for  
which they may have no independent notion. For 
us, this idea of “day” crosses cultures and is  
universally understood, but we’d almost certainly 
need to discuss it in independent terms. 
 
It’s hard to discuss having a ‘rough day’ with 
a creature from a tidally locked world with no  
night and day, or one that has no sense of 
texture for a concept like rough perhaps.  
A creature adapted to zero-gravity is not going 
to have euphemisms for ‘getting floored’, ‘being  
up against the wall’, or a hundred other little 
ways height and gravity work into our languages.  
Given that one of the more likely scenarios 
for meeting aliens would be far ahead in time  
and deep out in space, it’s quite possible 
they would no longer be adapted to gravity,  
or for that matter that we might not 
be, see our Zero-Gravity Civilizations  
episode for more on those physical 
and psychological adaptations.
 
So the reality is that even if a being 
evolves teeth, tongue, vocal chords, and uses  
vocalizations to communicate, it may not make use 
of words in the sense we think of them. Everything  
could go “right” in the direction of human-like 
communication and an anthropomorphic form,  
and we could still end up ‘left’ with a language 
based on grunts and squeals. On the other hand,  
they might use sign language, which we also have, 
and our language is not just spoken words, it is  
a hodge-podge of facial expressions and gestures 
and body language too. For that matter our modern  
languages are hodge-podges of old ones.
English is a great example of just how messy  
things can get, since it incorporates elements and 
even entire words from Latin, French, old Norse,  
and several Germanic languages. It has linguistic 
rules, but they’re riddled with exceptions,  
and loan-words with no other context in the 
language are used to fill in contextual voids.  
In terms of a language having consistency, English 
is pretty bad. But we still manage to understand  
what someone is saying, and even if we don’t know 
the word we can generally guess their intent.  
We break thoughts up into discrete sections, 
like sentences, and those have a syntax which  
we recognize. For instance, we can tell that “John 
walks the dog” is different from “Dog walks John”,  
because of how the sentence is structured: even 
if we don’t know what “walk” is, we know that  
it’s an action somehow relating “John” and “the 
Dog”. Similarly the dog wags its tail, the tail  
does not wag the dog, and this is another example 
of universality, as it's hard to imagine an alien  
species would not have an understanding of cause 
and effect, but be smart enough to actually  
talk to rather than simply interact with. No 
technological civilization should be able to  
exist without understanding cause and effect.
When we’re talking about alien language,  
this is probably our biggest boon. Anyone coming 
into a language with even a basic understanding  
of its syntax and a few of the core concepts we 
discussed earlier--like mathematics, geometry,  
or chemistry--can probably piece together some 
simple statements, and use those statements to  
establish meaningful dialogue about other topics 
down the road. In essence, we might be able to  
learn the compression of other languages through 
certain fundamentals which are universally shared,  
even if certain localized ideas like ‘sunrise’ 
aren’t our initial point of reference. 
 
On the other hand, translation of an alien 
language when neither of you already knows  
the other’s will be a difficult feat, and probably 
not something we could do without massive amounts  
of recorders and computers unless we got very 
lucky about their biology paralleling ours,  
but it will be possible, because they are smart 
too. Assuming they are anyway. Folks like to  
quasi-anthropomorphize animals by saying humans 
just don’t speak their language but the reality  
is they haven’t got one, not like ours. My cat 
might understand another cat better than me  
principally because it has a very limited set of 
concepts and it happens to match the other cats,  
so through simplicity they are able to 
interpret what the other is expressing.  
It is not a language, language is a human 
concept that varies from place to place  
as an artificial construct of civilizations, but 
many of them can communicate, even across species,  
and some can communicate more complex 
notions. But the lion communicates to  
the antelope that it wishes to harm or eat 
it, and this communication is not language.
 
Communication, intentional or otherwise, is 
presumably the domain of any sentient entity,  
which is to say something able to perceive or 
feel things, language is presumably the domain  
of sapient entities, see our episode “What 
is Sentience?” for the distinctions between  
the two but for the moment we will say that 
language requires much more abstraction. 
 
Human language is a very artificial 
thing learned by each individual human,  
and uniformity – such as it is – is achieved by a 
combination of long exposure and usage, and shared  
biology. Which is to say you grew up around folks 
who communicated using equipment you also had  
and who put an effort into encouraging you to 
do it using the established protocols and terms.  
In other words babies usually learn the 
language their parents use, not a different one.  
You went along with it from a mix of curiosity and 
need, hence why your first words were generally  
either attention-getters of naming the caregiver, 
Mom or Dad, or object identifiers of the thing you  
wanted, like Ball or Food. For an alien, 
this same concept is probably applicable,  
their languages will be built on increasing 
complexity of shared biology that is well  
suited for fast information passage. 
That’s why it probably would not be  
smells. Humans can smell things, and our sense of 
smell is much better than we usually assume too,  
and we certainly can communicate 
with them in a very rough sense,  
but it is much slower and less precise than 
hand gestures, facial expression, glances,  
and noises which form our main communication 
method. Humans are not audio-only critters,  
we can pass information along a lot faster and 
clearer in face to face communication, but we have  
as complete a tongue in spoken words as we can, 
and an even more abstract words-only written form.  
Written language is hugely compressed but not 
as compressed as the spoken word, which can  
carry volume and tone more clearly and quickly for 
instance. Smell is slow, and same as you have to  
erase a blackboard when it's full and it leaves 
a thick blurry layer, a smell based language is  
going to be a low-bandwidth one because of the 
time smells take to move, dissipate, and so on.  
We principally use it in the higher animal world 
for communications meant to have long dwell times,  
like territorial scent markings. If you 
can’t see or hear, then it might have to do.
 
Now could you understand sight 
or sound if you could only smell?  
Presumably yes. I doubt that we all have identical 
concepts for visual objects and categories,  
where blue ends and green begins probably 
varies from person to person for instance,  
but can a blind person know color 
who has never seen it? Yes, they can,  
and it might be that they conceptualized it as 
something akin to the texture the surface of  
objects has to touch or maybe an analogy to 
sound, it would vary from person to person,  
and presumably from alien to alien more so. 
However, brain-imaging finds that when a sighted  
person hears a color it triggers the sensory parts 
of their brain as opposed to the abstract parts  
triggered when someone hears concepts 
like ‘justice’ or ‘responsibility’.  
For a blind person hearing a color will trigger 
those same areas of abstract thinking, red, green,  
justice, and responsibility are all abstract 
not sensory for them. A deaf person cannot hear  
birdsong, one born deaf can understand it, even if 
it's in the abstract sense. I cannot see justice,  
I cannot hear responsibility, I can discuss 
both, and while trying to discuss a rainbow with  
a person born blind or a morning birdsong with a 
deaf one may not be as easy it is with most folks,  
so too it isn’t easy to discuss them with a person 
who can see but has never seen a rainbow or heard  
a birdsong, and pre-modern times we couldn’t just 
pull up photo or audio recording of either. 
 
Which is the other half of the translation issue, 
sheer quantity of data, but we’ll get to that in  
a moment. First let’s talk about writing and data 
storage. An alien might live in a dark environment  
of thin air where the best means of communication 
available to them was to rapidly tap their feet so  
their exoskeleton generated a high tempo beat they 
could control the tempo on with high precision.  
This might be their language, but because 
sound does not linger for days let alone years,  
unlike smell, at some point they will want a 
written language, even if the means for writing  
it is to etch into stone with controlled 
use of their highly acidic urine or spit. 
 
Why? Because writing is not a human concept, 
writing represents the desire to communicate  
with someone who is not currently there, and 
that should be a universal desire. There may  
be a few exceptions, like giant hive minds 
or singular intelligences or ones with near  
perfect recall who really have little need 
to communicate that way and don’t develop it,  
but they should be exceptions not the norm.
Now writing can be used for other purposes, like a  
backup memory, where you draw a little cow’s head 
and mark sticks next to it for each cow that came  
by that day to keep track of your herd or tax the 
herders bringing in their cows to trade in your  
town, or giant squid-monsters I suppose since 
we’re talking aliens here. You can use this for  
your memory or as a quick unique language you made 
with a partner. You probably wouldn’t think you  
invented a language by telling your fellow herder 
that you tally sheep and cows and chickens by  
having empty pepsi, coke, and mountain dew bottles 
respectively in which you drop pebbles, but in a  
way you did, and you created a communication 
method with a specific protocol for data and a  
compression method. It’s obviously a very crude 
and limited one but could be expanded upon. 
 
We cannot assume an alien watching us gesture at 
various chickens, cows, and sheep while dropping  
rocks equal to their numbers in bottles, “One 
Chicken, two Chicken, one sheep, five sheep,  
six sheep” and so is going to get the point 
instantly or right on the nose, but if you do it  
enough they should. Again, sheer amount of data. 
We often talk about how we have languages from  
back in the day where writing was still not too 
common where we don’t know what it all means, and  
we use this as an analogy for aliens’ languages 
being indecipherable, but this is wrong. 
 
We can’t translate those old tablets of this or 
that ancient civilization because we just don’t  
have much data or uniformity. Some civilization 
that never invented dictionaries that sprawled  
over hundreds of towns and hundreds of years 
but only gave us maybe a thousand words,  
written by twenty different people 
each from a different town or time,  
is not something you can translate with certainty 
because you don’t know if someone’s shorthand  
abbreviation or typo with a slightly different way 
of doing some of the letters is even the same word  
as in another example, so determining what either 
or both of them mean is in many ways harder than  
brute forcing a language written by aliens.
Bigger and more technological civilizations  
will probably standardize meanings of the 
symbols they are using to record information.  
More importantly though they will just have an 
awful lot more of it. They will have a digital way  
of storing it, because computers are too handy, 
and I daresay any species naturally talented at  
math and computation will invent them faster even 
if they need them less, so they will have digital  
medium not just analogue. They will find it handy 
to rapidly send data between places and that means  
something moving at light speed, and they will 
probably find things like radio, magnetic tapes,  
optical discs, semiconductors, and so on are 
good methods of storing and transmitting data.
 
That means somewhere on their discs 
or whatever is a definition of a star,  
of hydrogen, and of fusion. I do not know how 
many times the word ‘Thursday’ is used in books,  
or on the internet, or on radio, but I bet it gets 
used more on radio on Thursdays then on Mondays,  
and I bet it has been used millions of time 
if not far more, and I bet it gets used in  
conjunction with words like day, year, month, 
24/7, 9 to 5, am, pm, and so on untold times.  
An alien hearing our radio is not us looking at 
a handful of damaged tablets written by different  
generations using different local lingos and 
having so little of it that most of their words  
aren’t used on the tablets even once. See our 
Cryptic Aliens episode for a walkthrough of how  
even just listening to radio DJs and analyzing 
the red-shift of the signals over a day and a year  
might let you crack a lot of our languages.
And a lot of physical concepts are going to  
just have words recorded in their digital 
or analogue signals. There is a definition  
of water, even if might get easily confused with 
seawater’s word or blood’s or liquid in general.  
A definition of carbon and lead and iron, all in 
digital form which if we can recognize it and or  
they can in ours, can then be rapidly translated.
And there’s probably a definition of the word  
‘justice’ even if for them its three different 
notions seen as separate that roughly translate  
as rules of a game, method or dispute arbitration, 
and record of execution, or similar. It should be  
possible for them to die, so they should have a 
concept for death. It should be possible for one  
of them to kill another, so their should be a 
concept for accidental killing and intentional,  
even if the latter requires such a break 
with the norm of their psychology that murder  
is universally considered a type of insanity 
rather than an act of malice for which one can  
be guilty. We can consider an alien species which 
may have no concepts for greed or selfishness,  
in that same light, and thus might not get 
theft, but it would seem likely that most if not  
all alien civilizations will arise around that 
same dynamic of individual survival and desire  
in tension with group cooperation, so they are 
likely to have concepts like murder and theft  
and thus presumably need words for them. 
Animals have territory so they can survive,  
they mark it out as theirs. They do so even though 
it is warning others you are there and claim it,  
thus making them on the alert for a possible 
attack by you, and an unexpected ambush would be  
more likely to work successfully. However, since 
neither entity wants to be injured or killed,  
and that’s a high probability in an encounter, 
the territorial marking decreases the number of  
encounters even if by forewarning the rival you 
increase your odds of losing any given encounter.  
This logic would seem fairly universal too, thus 
we would expect aliens to communicate territory  
to one another in some fashion, and probably in 
space too rather than hiding from other aliens,  
as we discussed in Hidden Aliens. This is probably 
done by radio signal rather than the time-honored  
traditional method of peeing on things, which 
is less effective in a vacuum light-years wide.
 
Maybe not, but we know every human civilization 
will have words for hands and ears and feet and  
hair because we have these things and will name 
them. These abstract concepts, territory, justice,  
love, possession, friendship, and so on may be a 
lot more universal than hands and tentacles are.
 
Now we can come up with an almost infinite 
array of ways in which languages might be  
built, yet we can assume things like radio 
transmission or optical or magnetic storage  
because of how universal physical laws are and 
how efficient such things are at the purpose.  
In this same way we should not assume any given 
alien is going to concoct a complex language  
utilizing a method their biology 
allows just for the novelty of it…  
though they may have limited versions of their 
language exactly for that. Possibly for novelty  
of course but because it might have niche uses. We 
have sign language even though we use spoken word  
as our principal communicator and gestures, facial 
expressions and so on as supplementary methods,  
sign language is handy for communicating at close 
range with line of sight when silence is desired  
for instance. This means they too are likely 
to have niche alternative means of speaking,  
and thus understand that some other creature might 
use a method they do not, but it is likely to be  
a method that makes sense for the environment or 
the goal of fast and accurate concept relaying.
 
So a careful use of a colored flag lifted in a 
specific pattern of directions and speeds, for  
instance, is generally not convenient, so we would 
not expect it to be a main language conveyor,  
though its one humanity has often used. Smell 
travels slow, carefully filling glasses with water  
to different heights and ringing them to create a 
pattern of sounds and tones is a major pain in the  
butt, so we wouldn’t expect someone to do that, 
but one could imagine a species whose biology  
was so arranged. A spider could weave a web that 
said something, like with Charlotte’s Web, but  
that’s not going to be too convenient usually. 
Again we can imagine a vast array but we can  
probably guess what an alien might use by just 
knowing their biology, if the creature has no  
vocal cords or lips because its lungs for air and 
mouth for food don’t share the same throat and  
orifice, but it has some big biological drum built 
into it that it regularly whacks and seems to emit  
repeating timed patterns, then you can probably 
bet that’s part of what it uses for talking. 
 
Though someone watching our lungs might 
falsely assume our rate of breathing was how  
we communicated, some pattern of breath or heart 
rate. It’s entirely possible it has a complex  
series of shoulder shrugs or toe wiggles that 
are part of the process, or how it puts its feet,  
and while we’re trying figure out what it means 
with its hand gestures, which mean nothing,  
its ignoring us point our fingers at things and 
trying to figure out what our toes or shoulders  
are saying, which is mostly nothing. We do 
communicate with how we set our shoulders,  
but we only use them in a limited way as part of 
our language, a shrug of the shoulders can state  
uncertainty on a matter, but we do not use them 
as a letter or word-sound. Fast breathing can  
communicate distress, fear, desire, etc but is 
not used for relaying words or letters either.
 
The other trick we might have for determining 
how they talk is by looking at how they listen,  
because odds are any natural language has 
a limited range of accuracy that makes the  
critters using it focus on whoever is speaking, 
so to speak. We don’t have to look at someone  
to understand them but it helps us guess 
what was said when it’s a bit unclear.  
Having had a speech impediment my whole 
life, even after a lot of speech therapy  
in recent years, I still habitually tend to 
look right at people when speaking to them,  
and more so if they’ve indicated in some 
fashion they had problems understanding me,  
to make it easier for them to read my face, lips, 
and so on. We can probably assume a lot of aliens  
would be turning their sensory organs toward 
the communicator and start guessing by which  
are used and when, what the various main 
and secondary means of communication are.
 
Ultimately after that it’s all about collecting 
a lot of data and examples, and analyzing their  
frequency and pattern, and if you can interact 
with them directly, not just by distant and slow  
radio, by assuming that if they are staying 
near you and not trying to flee or kill you,  
that they are also observing and that they will 
probably be trying to do what you’re doing,  
which is figuring out how to communicate and 
assuming the other person is too. So it might  
need a long time to figure out that us lining 
one on our limbs up in a various directions and  
exhaling in patterns was us pointing at an object 
and giving the auditory vibrational pattern to  
identify it, and we might need a long time to 
realize it was spitting on an object to indicate  
it was naming it while spitting halfway between 
it and us to indicate it wished us to name it,  
all while do that naming by a rapid and precise 
blinking of twenty eyelids. But with enough  
intelligence, recording equipment, computers, and 
most of all, a desire to communicate and patience,  
it will get figured out.
Differences in languages can make  
our fellow humans seem very alien to us, and yet 
in the end the fundamental purpose of languages,  
to share often abstract but universal ideas, is 
what makes each of us less alien to each other  
and what might make aliens 
seem much less alien to us.
 
So we ran fairly long today for an alien 
civilization series episode, and I ended  
up cutting out a discussion of what the common 
medium might be for transmission to say hello,  
like how we might send a signal with the 
intent of it being noticed or vice-versa. 
 
That makes it a great chance for an extended 
version on Nebula, and for those watching on  
Nebula rather Youtube you can see that extended 
version in place of our usual sponsor spot.  
Nebula is our rapidly-growing streaming service 
where you can see all of our episodes ad  
and sponsor free and a couple days early, as well 
as some bonus content like our extended editions  
or Nebula Exclusives like our Coexistence 
with Alien series. You can also see tons of  
content from many other amazing creators and 
help support this show while you’re at it.
 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself 
but we have partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational videos, 
to offer Nebula for free as a bonus if you sign up  
for CuriosityStream using the link in our episode 
description. That let’s see content like Stephen  
Hawking’s “Are we Alone”, and hear the late 
great genius discuss his thoughts on Alien life.  
So this means you can watch all the 
amazing content on Curiositystream,  
but also all the great content over 
on Nebula from myself and many others.  
And you can get all that for less than $15 by 
using the link in the episode’s description.
 
So that will wrap us up for today but we have our 
mid-month Scifi Sundays episode on Laser Pistols,  
Lightsabers, and other scifi weapons coming 
up this weekend. After that we’ll be discuss  
Arcologies, giant buildings containing whole 
communities and ecologies and how to design them,  
before wrapping up our May episodes with Solar 
Flares and their impact on the Fermi Paradox. Then  
Closing May out with our Monthly Livestream Q&A on 
Sunday, May 30th, hopefully from our new studio.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,  
and if you’d like to help support future 
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are 
linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media forums 
where you can get updates and chat with others  
about the concepts in the episodes and many other 
futuristic ideas. You can also follow us itunes,  
Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our 
audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
