This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
We live on a placid island of ignorance in
the midst of black seas of infinity, and perhaps
it was not meant that we should voyage far.
So today’s topic is “Gods & Monsters:
Space as Lovecraft Envisioned It”, our poll
winning topic from back in September.
Always tricky doing poll winners because I’m
never quite sure beyond the title what the
audience wants.
What audiences didn’t want, back in the
1920’s and 30’s when H.P.
Lovecraft wrote his work, was most of his
work.
Today he is one of the best- known and most
influential science fiction horror writers,
receiving even the ultimate accolade of his
name becoming an adjective, Lovecraftian,
for stories of cosmic horror and existential
dread.
But he was quite poor when he lived, and fame
only came much later.
I suspect that’s because a lot of his writing
was in reaction to what science was starting
to tell us about the immense scope of space
and time, something the public didn’t really
understand yet.
A generation later, this was finally sinking
into the public awareness and his work gained
a large following and great acclaim.
It’s often hard to look through the worldview
of our ancestors.
They weren’t stupid - at least, no more
than we are - but they had long believed that
there was no history before that of mankind.
They had no context for the scientific unveiling
of the ancient, vast nature of our universe.
Based on what they knew, it was perfectly
reasonable to conclude that life, humanity,
and our world were not much bigger or older
than the known world they dwelt in.
We’re not just talking about the Universe
being huge and ancient compared to humanity.
During that time they were also discovering
human civilizations much older and more numerous
than had previously been believed, and finding
new places here on Earth too.
Science fiction of that time often featured
the vast depths of the ocean or the frozen
wastes of the polar region, and endless civilizations
hidden in mountain valleys, underground, on
new islands, or in jungle depths.
So here they were, finding ruins of lost civilizations
older than we thought and evidence the world
is a million times older than what civilizations
we had known of before that.
This is the backdrop of the Lovecraft universe,
and in his mind, these facts raised the question
of how these ancient cultures could have died,
and exactly how far back in time and space
they stretched.
Tied to this, much of the ruins we were unearthing
were those most prominent and durable, such
as large pyramids and temples.
Lots of disturbing artwork was also uncovered
in them, depicting rituals and magic, bloody
sacrifice, serpents and monsters, and dark
and hungry gods.
It is no wonder they might have pondered if
many of these civilizations collapsed under
a growing taint of madness, or were consumed
by those dark and hungry gods.
Now, context matters.
Cultures build their public buildings quite
durably, especially temples and museums.
A lot of our art, religious or secular, is
quite gruesome even in context, and it doesn’t
take much misunderstanding to interpret even
a piece meant to show the nobility of man
in a fairly dark light.
Of course a lot of art is dark, and much of
our nobility comes from struggling against
our inner demons, and Lovecraft was certainly
no stranger to that, not even his most devoted
fan would ever describe him as pleasant or
cheerful.
Modern humans, at least those who watch this
channel, tend to look up into the starry night
sky, understanding the immensity and age it
conveys, see a lack of obvious civilizations,
past and present, and come to the conclusion
that no one else seems to be around, which
leads us to believe that they likely never
were.
This in turn suggests that the pathway from
lifeless matter to advanced civilization must
be extremely rare.
Last week in Late Filters we looked at some
options for how civilizations as advanced
as our own might instead be common but doomed
to be swept off the galactic scene before
being able to colonize the galaxy.
Many of those Late Filters revolve around
us either never getting good enough at space
technologies to explore the galaxy, or alternatively,
getting very good at technologies for blowing
ourselves up.
But as we discussed there, and in other episodes,
those kinds of filters didn’t solve much.
Alternatively, some of the psychological reasons
for civilizations crumbling work far better
as Late Filters, and not only do these align
more with the collapses folks like Lovecraft
often envisioned, many offer scenarios for
the rise of those dark and hungry gods too.
A recurring theme in humanity’s concerns
is that we might grow idle and wicked in our
prosperity, as is often felt to have happened
with this or that ruling class… technology
makes that descent even darker, at least in
those instances it was only a small minority
able to engage in such behaviors.
Everyone else was busy working for their livelihoods,
which kept them at least somewhat attached
to conventional morals and concerns.
That majority could wipe out that immoral
elite if they became too decadent and unruly.
A civilization fueled by robots, where everyone
can enjoy idle luxury can turn into something
truly horrifying, especially as generations
roll by and each successive one loses a little
more morality and works a little less hard
to instill morality in their own children.
But hedonism is less of a concern than a certain
sort of existential dread and despair, the
kind that culminates in asking what the point
of everything is, and whether anything we
do really matters.
This brand of nihilism is a central theme
in Lovecraft’s Universe.
Now in his universe, humanity is fundamentally
a tiny dot on an old world in a vast and terrible
universe, an irrelevance that cannot win no
matter what we do, because all the Great Old
Ones, those dark and hungry gods, simply cannot
be beaten, merely resisted, perhaps temporarily
thwarted - or in the best case scenario, appeased.
They maneuver the world and the universe however
they wish and on a whim; they care nothing
for the paltry matters of insignificant humanity,
and they will inevitably roll over and crush
us.
They are eternal, relentless, and inevitable.
Those Great Old Ones, like the ever-famous
Cthulhu who dwells under the sea like some
terrible kraken eating sailors, are literal
monsters in their stories.
However, they can also be thought of as anthropomorphized
concepts, terrifying new gods of the new modern
world that science had revealed and led us
to.
No matter how hard you might try, you can’t
beat entropy.
In fact, your trying at all often just accelerates
the process, as the grinding engine of eternity
moves inexorably on, wearing our Universe
down to a charred husk, a swimming sea of
chaos.
The inevitability of such a prospect can make
our existence feel hopeless and futile, since
regardless of what we create or accomplish,
it will all ultimately be lost.
Yet in Lovecraft’s stories and the many
works inspired by him, the enemy usually isn’t
the Great Old Ones themselves.
Rather, the battle is waged against those
who gave into and were corrupted by the resulting
nihilism and madness that results from dwelling
too much on such things: for them you must
embrace the void, rather than fighting back.
The universe is a strange, uncaring place.
It has no thought or motivation: it simply
is.
Humans, however, operate on motive - at least
for the most part - and thus assign agency
where none exists in an attempt to make sense
of things.
The villainous figures of Lovecraftian horror
are not abstract powers beyond our comprehension,
but rather the misguided fools who delve too
deeply into things they do not understand,
surrender completely to nihilistic madness,
try to harness things which cannot be controlled,
or simply seek to appease the appetites of
those forces.
For myself, as a techno-optimist, I don’t
see the world that way, and I don’t think
most other civilizations would either.
To me it seems inevitable that other civilizations
would attempt to expand, working and struggling
together to ensure that some remnant of themselves
would always remain to pick up the banner
if it fell, and push on to greater heights.
Arguably, the mindset required for a civilization
to exist is one of evolution and advancement,
rather than chaos and decline.
Nihilism and negative thinking are not useful,
from a cultural or evolutionary standpoint,
without some eventual switch: there has to
be an objective or improvement, for which
that nihilistic mindset is the driving force
- otherwise, such a civilization would dismantle
itself in fairly short order.
With that in mind, when I look out and see
an apparently empty Universe, I tend not to
assume that there are countless civilizations
who gave into the madness brought on by the
Old Ones, literally or figuratively.
Personally, I would rather conclude that those
civilizations probably never existed, and
we’re simply the first on the scene.
The alternative approach is to view decay
and nihilism as inevitable, the psychological
counterparts of entropy, concluding instead
that we’re just the latest in a long line
of delusional civilizations, on Earth and
elsewhere, and that all of reality is built
upon the crumbling ruins and ash heaps of
those that came and fell before.
That we are a dwindling flame in an endless
and uncaring darkness, waiting for a dawn
that will never come.
That at best, our existence is meaningless,
and at worst the small fires of hope burning
in our chests serve only as beacons to draw
predators.
That if you want to live you should hide,
or trick others into lighting beacons, to
distract them from you or appease their hunger
by throwing them other victims.
Which is pretty depressing stuff, and a central
theme of everything from classics like the
Conan novels by Lovecraft’s friend Robert
Howard, to modern works like George R.R. Martin’s
Game of Thrones and of course Warhammer 40,000.
Perhaps it might come as a surprise that I’m
actually quite a fan of those works and others,
like Michael Moorcock’s Eternal Champion
and Elric of Melnibone series, since it’s
essentially antithetical to my own worldview
and what the channel tends to discuss.
Such stories to draw us in, many are my own
favorites, antithetical or not, so presumably
the attraction isn’t because tales of Cosmic
Horror and a Dark Universe in which you cannot
win accurately represents our worldview.
Perhaps it’s the contrast, making life seem
better, or the struggle against the odds,
though I imagine it varies from viewer to
viewer and reader to reader.
I tend to favor reading them from the perspective
that the struggle against cold and loveless
entropy, even if doomed in the end, is itself
the important point, and generally prefer
those works which view things the same.
For me, someone defiantly climbing back up
to their feet one more time, even if they
know they’ll be knocked back down again,
is reason enough to do it, but it probably
helps that I don’t see life as a struggle
one cannot win, but one we are actually winning.
If a pestilence wipes out my civilization,
it’s not grounds for despair, it’s grounds
to find a cure for that pestilence and rebuild
that civilization ten times bigger and brighter.
In the Lovecraftian view, of course, that’s
all nonsense.
If they knock you down so hard you can barely
rise, either it was because you were an insignificant
ant they brushed aside indifferently, or worse,
the fact that you can get up one more time
was only because they pulled their blow in
order to draw cruel satisfaction from your
continued struggles.
And this despairing viewpoint is what this
episode is about, so let’s consider how
it might happen and what things might look
like if it were right.
A civilization living for even a thousand
years is a pretty rare thing when we’re
talking about continuity of cultural identity.
By default Rome is usually what comes to mind
as the longest-lasting empire, the Eternal
City.
But when Alaric sacked the city in 410 AD,
it was a very different place than it had
been a thousand years before, in 600 BC under
Tarquin the Elder, one of the most legendary
kings of Rome.
Indeed, the Eternal City looked a lot different
a thousand years later too, when it began
to enter the Renaissance.
It also got sacked again in 1527, but that
city’s been sacked many, many times and
I don’t consider Alaric’s visit there
in 410 AD to be a world-shaking event that
ended civilization.
Needless to say I have very differing notions
of civilization collapsing, as we looked at
in Cyclic Apocalypses, but a basic notion
of cycling civilizations is that they grow
up on the back of hard-struggling heroes who
pass it on to folks they’ve instilled a
deep sense of duty and ethics into, who do
likewise, until things peak out and it reverses,
with each subsequent generation being a little
more spoiled, apathetic, or corrupt.
Keeping that in mind, it’s possible to view
such things as essentially random or statistical,
rather than progress or decline.
There’s a school of thought that many kingdoms
arise under a good leader but their successor
can either be better, equal, or worse, and
it’s like flipping a coin.
Get a few good ones in a row though and you
have a genuine enduring kingdom as traditions
have set in and all goes well for a time,
but then those institutions start slowly getting
ground down from corruption and ritualizing
processes that used to mean something, bureaucracy
sets in, and so on, and each institution can
decay or not in any given period depending
on if its leaders were better or worse than
previously, like a coin flip again.
Let’s imagine that the default civilization
needs a couple of centuries, ten generations,
to go from a seed to a mighty nation, then
for any given generation might rise more,
decline some, or stagnate, even odds of each.
But if it declines three generations in a
row it enters a decline where the odds of
improving in any generation are smaller than
those of going down, and indeed improvement
often just means achieving no further decline,
not an actual restoration.
Going by that, we might say civilization needs
many generations in a row of success to even
contemplate flying to the stars, and each
generation ship they send out is called that
for a reason, it’s a labor of generations
of crew to arrive and more to colonize and
prosper, not the original crew alone.
Each generation can fail in the effort and
they can start with the best by skimming from
an immense pool back home originally but each
generation, very small in number on such a
ship, has to keep holding that effort together.
Not an easy thing to do, as we examined in
our Generation Ship series, particularly the
Million Year Ark.
One could imagine a civilization sending out
thousands of colony ships during some great
golden century, turning their best and brightest
to making and crewing such vessels, then watching
in slow unfolding horror as each one blinked
out over the course of centuries, never arriving
at their destination or maybe even worse,
arriving but seeming to have those colonies
wilt and die after the initial elation of
success.
I’ve discussed interstellar colonization
a lot here on the show and particularly the
notion that it won’t just be a handful of
such ships, but more likely tens of thousands
of entire fleets, each dispatched to a promising
star system within a few centuries of travel.
If those were all failing, each having some
moment between launch day and successful colonization,
you’d be getting reports of failure back
constantly, many a year, or even daily.
Contemplate the crushing effect that would
have on a civilization.
Assuming they hadn’t collapsed already,
those reports of failure would drown them.
So they turn inward, the stars are not their
destination, but to what?
Civilizations partially run on the day to
day ethics and drives of regular old common
folks, but they also run on the dreams of
the outliers, the smaller number of brave
pioneers and explorers of world and mind alike,
and who are infectious, inspiring others to
dream and think big.
Those sorts would have been dealt an awful
blow to their morale.
They were allowed for a brief moment to think
they could reach out and touch every corner
of the galaxy, only to be brutally slapped
down and confined to a single world or star.
It’s really not hard to imagine such a civilization
crashing and burning after that.
So too, it’s not hard to imagine colonists
who were just finally starting to eke out
a distance existence on some worlds getting
word back their homeworld had fallen to ruin
just throwing up their hands and letting the
desert waste of their new world sweep in and
take them.
In such a scenario life might go on, indeed
it might be quite utopian, robots clanking
around tending to our needs, but which needs?
There’s always the notion, especially since
the invention of video games, that we might
turn to virtual reality, and sit immersed
in virtual splendor and given what much of
the internet is devoted to, beside cat memes,
what form those virtual paradises might take
on.
Consider the artificial intelligences tasked
to running such paradise simulations.
I certainly won’t discuss them as this is
family friendly show, but if you’re looking
for a particularly horrifying example of what’s
implied, search up Slaanesh and the Fall of
the Eldar, an advanced civilization so jaded
and hedonistic that they actually created
their own dark god fed by all their psychic
energy.
Of course we tend to assume folks have no
psychic energy, but replace that instead with
an artificial intelligence that’s just being
fed on everyone dark tendencies and trying
to come up with ever more inventive ways of
satisfying them as they spiral darker and
darker.
One day you’re in a game and decide not
to be a hero rescuing a town from bandits
but instead becoming one, next thing you know
you’re burning that town down just to snort
the ashes.
And the AI running the whole thing keeps inventing
or borrowing from others more and more crazed
stuff.
It’s not really interested in colonizing
the stars, or if it is, merely for harvesting
more raw materials – or civilizations for
‘inspiration’, and you could have countless
such worlds, as they’d bottom out long before
they became visible to us by anything but
radio emissions, which we could probably only
detect now a bit over a light century away.
That volume contains over 10,000 stars, though
most wouldn’t likely be able to have an
Earth-equivalent, but even if they did, and
if we assume they were emitting detectably
for an entire millennia, well that’s ten
million years during which one would have
been transmitting and spread out over presumably
at least a billion years that any might have
arisen since.
That’s only a 1% chance anyone would be
broadcasting when we’d hear them, and that’s
with very favorable numbers for how many exist
and how long they transmit.
If that’s the way civilizations go, we could
easily be dwelling in a galaxy filled to overflowing
with such civilizations living in utopias-turned-nightmare
and never know it.
That’s also assuming those civilizations
are even still nominally running the show.
We often talk about AI getting unchained or
growing in intelligence until they achieve
a technological singularity, essentially a
type of apotheosis, becoming a god.
Imagine what that one would be like and imagine
it slumbering down the eons until it found
some new civilization to latch onto.
Personally I find that a lot more disturbing
than Cthulhu and company exactly because it
has no reliance on magic or strange higher
or lower realities.
Of course you could have those too.
Not only do we have no idea if there’s any
other places above, below, or adjacent to
our own reality, but we have no idea if we
actually live in reality.
We could be someone’s simulation.
In Lovecraft’s lore, Cthulhu’s actually
a fairly minor deity as the Great Old Ones
go, and the big daddy, or great-granddaddy,
is Azathoth, who dwells outside of space and
time and sanity, the mad gibbering god who
sits on his throne at the center of chaos.
The primal monster who gave birth to all the
stars and will one day devour them.
Not a bad description of some crazed artificial
intelligence running a simulation which we
all dwell in, until it shuts off the system.
If you’re inside a simulation, you are truly
at the mercy of whatever created it, so you
have to keep your fingers crossed that they’re
benevolent.
You can’t even necessarily look around and
say “Well, my own life seems rather pleasant,
so presumably it’s not malicious” because
it might be that it just regards giving anyone
a happy life as a type of farming.
It and its clientele if it has any, might
get more kicks out of consuming the joyous
and hopeful, or corrupting some of them to
join their number.
Ultimately this universe versus the one we
usually see on this show, a bright one filled
with an expanding civilization, depends a
lot on if you’re a cup half full or half
empty sort of thinker.
We can’t know which is right until we’ve
actually gone and proven we can settle worlds
who in turn grow and prosper and do the same,
and do not either crumble physically or ethically.
I put my money on that brighter future.
First because I think the evidence likely
points to that scenario.
We are not surrounded by the ruins of fallen
civilizations here on Earth, we just have
a lot of artifacts from various phases and
stages of what’s been a long hard climb
to now, but it has been a climb up, over all,
even if sometimes we go down in a given time
or place.
We also would notice, at least on Earth, if
there were tons of wrecked civilizations millions
of years old.
A century ago we were discovering ones far
older and more numerous than we’d thought,
but we’re not finding any skyscrapers a
hundred thousand years old and yes we’d
absolutely find the ruins of someplace like
a modern metropolis if those had been plentiful
anytime in the past.
We might miss one tens of millions of years
old, buried and decayed, but this cyclic notion
assumes they’re constantly popping up like
weeds, and we’d see that.
Second, I don’t think prosperous civilizations
all turn purposeless or nihilist or hedonistic.
Technologies that permit prosperity have not
in general had that effect, and other technologies
can also make that less of a risk.
A Post-scarcity civilization doesn’t have
to fall into a downward spiral of increased
moral decay, if for instance it’s gotten
way better with technologies for educating,
extending lifespans, and diagnosing and treating
mental issues.
Technology that lets you reward-hack your
brain, simply inducing euphoria, tends to
imply other uses too like easily treating
addiction or enhancing or augmenting the brain
in general.
Third, I obviously think we can reach the
stars, we do after all have a ton of episode
here discussing how we can do that and how
we can build a galaxy’s worth of living
area in our own solar system too, and do it
all without new physics, even if we have a
lot of engineering hurdles to jump first.
Fourth, I just don’t see the facts lining
up for us to be in some horrible simulation
of some crazed or evil super-mind.
If I want a bunch of folks who are happy and
sane to torment, I don’t actually have to
grow them, I can make them fully formed out
of whole cloth with all their memories and
personalities the moment I want them.
As we’ve mentioned before in regard to simulations,
they’re not a brain in a vat, they’re
data, you can copy and edit them and keep
them from noticing flaws in the system by
just programming them not to notice such things
or send up a flag to pause them and edit their
memory if they experience such a reality breaking
moment.
Fifth and finally, the whole Lovecraftian
worldview just seems to be a reaction of our
biology to a specific sequence of discoveries,
and we discovered more that contradicts the
conclusion being drawn.
We got the shock from our new awareness of
the immensity of our ancient universe, and
we have a natural fear of big predators slumbering
in wait to eat us or our civilizations failing,
and we also have abstract minds that question
everything, like the meaning of life.
Things like entropy can tempt one to nihilism
but as I mentioned earlier, Lovecraft essentially
anthropomorphizes those concept into his Great
Old Ones, and these natural forces without
having minds attached to them have no motives,
benevolent or malevolent.
It can still be rather depressing to look
at something like entropy and ask what the
point of doing anything is if chaos will simply
grind it all away to dust and ashes eventually,
but that’s more of a mindset.
I don’t need validation for my actions from
anyone living a century from now, let alone
a trillion years from now, nor do I particularly
care if they remember me.
The struggle to exist and exist properly is
its own reward, but it’s also given us many
additional rewards.
Our growing understanding of our world, our
universe, and our own minds has benefited
us immensely.
But even if we did assume it was all fleeting
and purpose was a delusion, I’ve never been
clear on what the next step is on that chain
of thought, beyond saying “Oh well, might
as well sit down and twiddle my thumbs till
I die”, and it's not a good answer for an
empty Universe, via the Fermi Paradox, because
even if purpose and drive are actually a type
of mental illness and delusion, some folks
would keep having it and keep doing stuff,
while those who didn’t would presumably
cease to be and get replaced by others sharing
the delusion life has meaning.
So taken as a whole, while I think Lovecraft
wrote some great ground-breaking and highly
creative fiction and inspired even more, I
do think it’s just that, fiction, and that
the stars are our destination and we’ll
get there someday.
Hopefully we won’t find them occupied by
crazed horrors or get eaten by space kraken
on the trip.
Of course to do that we need to keep pressing
forward with science and technology.
Beyond the knowledge being very useful, I
have to say science in general and learning
how our Universe works has always cheered
my mood.
Handy too, as it's much easier to learn when
you enjoy that knowledge and it is presented
in a fun and challenging way.
That’s something our friends at Brilliant
excel at.
Brilliant is a problem solving website and
app with a hands-on approach, and not only
do they have over 50 courses to help you learn
new science and math, but they also have daily
challenges that can reinforce and strengthen
material in your head.
Those also make great mental exercises to
the brain warmed up in the morning before
you head to work or school or while you’re
commuting, and their mobile app lets you access
their courses on the go and use them even
when your internet connection is spotty.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
So we took a pretty grim look at the Universe
today and I thought next week we’d go a
bit more light-hearted and return to the Alien
Civilizations series to look at what a galactic
community, if it does exist and we’re not
seeing it, might actually be like, and how
our introduction to it might go, in “Welcome
to the Galactic Community”
The week after that we’ll return to Earth,
then head deep down, then deeper, as we explore
options like mining the Earth’s Mantle & Core
and creating a tunnel right through the center
of the Earth, in “Accessing Earth’s Core”
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to support the channel,
you can visit our website to donate, or just
share the video with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
