This episode is brought to you by Skillshare.
Science fiction has taught us to be skeptical
if aliens claim, ‘we come in peace’.
But what if they actually meant it?
Quite a few tales in science fiction and theories
among UFO watchers involve rather sinister
aliens, or those that appear nice but are
not as benevolent as they seem, but occasionally
we do get examples where those aliens really
are nice and enlightened folks.
I suspect their relative rarity tends to come
from them being a bit boring from a story
writing perspective, no conflict or conspiracy,
no fun.
I thought we would ask ourselves what a benevolent
group of aliens would be like, what they probably
would not be like, and what we might be like
to other civilizations if we got to be nicer
people and encountered some fledgling alien
civilization ourselves.
We must start though by acknowledging the
obvious, benevolent is a bit of a subjective
term, to say the least.
As we discussed in “The Fermi Paradox: Zoo
Hypothesis”, an alien race might think they
were doing us a favor by keeping us tucked
away from interference by others and ignorant
of their existence.
Indeed as we noted there, a post-biological
race might flat out kill us all for our own
good, simply because they thought we’d be
a lot safer if they came in, scanned our brains,
turned us off in real life, and rebooted us
in some nice safe simulated reality somewhere
and time.
That would be an example of where a civilization
with high-minded intent literally committed
genocide, from a certain point of view, and
it’s not the only one.
You might see some fledgling species as so
innately dangerous to the wider galaxy that
you felt obliged to wipe them out.
Though you might instead alter them so they
were not a potential threat, like making them
less aggressive, and depending on how they
did that, and again, from a certain point
of view, it might be effectively wiping out
a civilization.
Many would view the wholesale alteration of
a person, so they acted very differently,
against their will or without their informed
consent, to be a type of death and maybe a
fate worse than death.
But much like brainwashing people versus raising
children, the line can be rather murky.
However, this is a pretty common thread in
science fiction with more enlightened aliens.
They either try to help us achieve enlightenment
or refuse to help us or have any dealings
with us until we evolve to be more enlightened.
Or grow to be more enlightened anyway.
Science fiction writers have a bad habit of
using the word ‘evolve’ to describe non-natural
developments, when an ancient and powerful
race or entity showing up to change and improve
your species would be more appropriately called
Intelligent Design.
Personally I don’t subscribe to the non-interference
policy advocated in Star Trek and its Prime
Directive, with the motivation that it is
for that civilizations own good, and we examined
the problems with that back in “Smug Aliens”,
but there’s a lot to be said about non-interference
simply from the standpoint of not wanting
to get dragged into someone else’s problems.
Benevolent though is pretty much by definition
someone who does get into other people’s
problems, in order to help, whereas not getting
involved at all is more of a distant well-wisher.
These are the civilizations we’re focusing
on today, the ones that actively help.
This doesn’t mean they help with everything
or that they do it openly, nor does it mean
they have no self-interest in doing so, just
that their main goal in dealing with us is
to help us and by action rather than inaction.
As we often say in regard to Aliens and the
Fermi Paradox, it’s the motivation that’s
key to figuring out how they would operate
and how we might detect them.
So, if aliens are somehow helping us, we can
assume they did not think the best course
of action for dealing with modern humanity
was to openly land and start teaching, since
they clearly are not.
Though we might do that if we encountered
some aliens when we get out there.
There is a caveat though, a given benevolent
agency might not act openly not because they
were worried about it messing with our civilization
but for fear of action by another agency.
As an example, if you have some restrictive
interstellar empire out there that doesn’t
tolerate interference in civilizations like
our own, for whatever reason, other groups
inside or outside that empire might covertly
sneak in and help.
There’s also the matter of why and how they’re
helping us.
A common theme in science fiction is aliens
showing up to basically lecture us on our
evil ways.
Back in early sci-fi this was generally on
how militaristic we were or how we’d nuke
ourselves into the dust, these days it’s
often on environmental and ecological disasters,
a good example of which is the original and
more recent remake of “The Day the Earth
Stood Still”.
The former made a bit of sense, if folks are
aggressive and destructive, and you are not,
showing up to talk to them about being nicer
people fits as a way of engaging in your goal
inside your own ethical constraints.
The alternative might be an enforced peace,
which they might be fine with doing too, but
it takes a lot of effort to enforce peace
and can border on being a Police State, so
even if they are ethically okay with that
they would presumably try the diplomatic and
instructive approach first.
Either way, this motivation, making us peaceful,
makes some sense and again is common in sci-fi.
It also fits for waiting if you don’t really
want to actively intervene till forced, so
you don’t need to step in until the civilization
has developed an ability to destroy itself
or maybe others on other worlds, thus partially
avoiding the usual first contact issue of
why now, and not a thousand years ago.
However, more modern versions, like the reboot
of “The Day the Earth Stood Still”, suggest
they are motivated by wanting to save us from
our environmentally destructive ways and that
does not make sense in any format requiring
force or lecture.
It is very unlikely that any civilization
is actively trying to wreck their planet,
and presumably your civilization has figured
out various technologies and methods that
permit ecologically sound industry and production,
particularly as these are essentially prerequisites
to actually engaging in interstellar travel…
see our Generation Ships series for discussion
of that, but fundamentally you need a pretty
impressive power supply to move spaceships
around and that pretty much eliminates all
the environmental concerns of power production
and also issues like clean fresh water supplies,
agricultural land and deforestation, mining
and recycling and some others too.
Now you might need to encourage them to certain
behaviors so they were continuing to pick
ecologically sound options even while it was
not always the most economical path, but that’s
a lot easier to do when you just eliminated
a vast amount of their existing problems and
gave them a massive economic boost while you
were at it.
Sort of like meeting a primitive civilization
and introducing them to antibiotics and vaccines.
You still encourage them to the habit of washing
their hands and other hygienic preventative
measures, but they’ll be listening a lot
more attentively when you just swept in and
saved millions from the threat of this or
that pandemic, even if you are being a bit
condescending and smug about your explanations.
The basic notion is that you don’t teach
people how to behave better if the bad behavior
stems from a problem you can simply eliminate,
or at least massively limit, and folks are
more receptive to your reasoning if you just
gave them a hand.
If you’ve got the technology to fix a problem,
or at least change the specifics and expiration
date, you are best off giving them that technology,
then you can give the lecture.
The exception being if the tech causes a new
problem, like a better weapon, but while an
assault rifle can kill people more effectively
than a bow and arrow, either one gets the
job done and which you’re both using doesn’t
really matter if both parties are intentionally
trying to kill each other and won’t stop
till the job is done.
A far smaller percentage of people die nowadays
in war than used to, even though we have better
weapons.
The why is debatable, and there’s probably
not a single cause, but simply having better
weapons doesn’t mean more destruction, and
that is something any species that is flying
around interstellar space and talking about
living peacefully is going to know and believe,
else they wouldn’t exist.
So, a benevolent species aiming to change
our attitude on something isn’t likely to
be averse to giving us technological aid,
at least for the reason of self-destruction.
That might not be universal though, it would
apply to modern humans it would seem but maybe
not prior human civilizations and maybe not
to some species that was hyper-aggressive.
Now we can come up with some special exceptions,
but we have to keep two things in mind.
First, while they might be very averse to
giving folks technology, it’s pretty unlikely
that would be a universal view among all civilizations,
or even all the members of such a civilization.
Second, they’re going to know that, and
know that technology is likely to seep out
anyway, and that’s likely to impact their
decision-making process.
If you know other civilizations hand out technology,
or that members of your civilization will
covertly give it out from good intent or sell
it or even just that it will get accidentally
exchanged, what’s the point of putting the
effort into concealing it if its doomed to
fail?
When alternatively you can control its release
to minimize negative impact.
Keep in mind, scientific and technological
progress don’t happen like portrayed in
Hollywood, a lot of invention is just about
it occurring to someone that a device should
or could be made to do something, it’s a
lot easier to get there if you see a device
doing its job and how that’s handy, or reverse-engineered
it from folks seeing it in action a lot and
knowing some of the new principles involved.
I couldn’t have invented a refrigerator
nor could anyone living in a bronze age culture,
but even having never made much of a study
of it, ignoring the language gap, I could
easily sit down with some bronze or copper
smiths of that era and show them how to make
one, especially an Einstein Refrigerator which
has no moving parts and runs on fire.
I know what it does, I know that it works,
I know the basic principle, that’s all it
takes with a little time and tinkering.
That sort of approach could lead to Cargo
Cults, folks with no understanding of the
principles who simply mimic what they see,
but Cargo Cults appeared when a civilization
was busy doing something near another civilization,
not with them, like airdrops of supplies to
remote islands in World War 2, that isn’t
likely to apply to interstellar visitors as
you don’t really bump into a planet and
regardless it assumes the civilization is
contacting the other civilization with help
in mind and actively involving themselves,
not some big war going on.
One could imagine two interstellar empires
having a shooting war in a solar system with
a primitive civilization observing it but
that’s a different situation and scenario
than today’s topic.
Of course, speaking of religions and keeping
in mind technology isn’t the only way to
help, there is a good chance you’d see a
lot of folks worshipping aliens who came bearing
gifts, and indeed that is a common notion
in sci-fi too.
It’s got two problems though.
First, if we’re assuming they are benevolent
then they aren’t likely to be propping themselves
up as false gods, with an exception we’ll
get to in a moment.
Second, such a civilization either has its
own religion, or religions, or does not.
If not, they presumably aren’t encouraging
folks to worship them if their goal is to
enlighten us, as they’d presumably view
that as counterproductive.
If the former, that they are religious, then
it’s very unlikely they’re trying to impersonate
deities, instead they’d either be trying
to convert us for what they considered our
own good, and that would probably be their
top priority, essentially a missionary civilization,
or they would not if they thought that was
wrong ethically.
However, they might be pragmatists, especially
if they’re a small group dealing with an
early civilization and one they don’t want
to disrupt too much and pose as existing benevolent
gods or simply as enlightened teachers who
later were deified by history.
That’s also a popular one in science fiction
too, suggesting this or that historic scientist
or teacher or religious figure was an alien,
and not a bad one either from a strictly logical
perspective.
If you’re posing as a human, odds are good
you’d be giving off a lot of telltales of
abnormality in your behavior, the eccentric
scientist is a pretty good cover story for
that, and that applies to big thinkers in
general.
It’s not a terribly accurate stereotype
incidentally but eccentric behavior is hardly
uncommon in such folks and accurate or not,
it’s not unexpected, which is what matters.
This one fits pretty good too, because they
are probably going to want to do more than
just give us technology.
I mean if I were going back in time to help
farmers or smiths learn how to rotate crops
or make cheap steel, I really doubt I’d
be able to avoid making commentary on some
things I thought they might find good, like
abolishing slavery and instituting some human
rights and due process, particularly as I
wouldn’t have any moral qualms about that.
That obviously gets into murky territory but
as I said, once you get into the benevolent
intervention game, that murk is unavoidable,
you’re just trying to be mindful of the
pitfalls and abuses that can accompany such
behavior.
Or not.
A given civilization might be heavy handed
with their intervention because they subscribe
to the ‘for your own good’ school of thought
in a major way.
That would depend a lot on the culture in
question, both the folks giving the help and
the ones getting it.
As an example, we have a notion called Uplifting,
which is enhancing a species either technologically,
physiologically, or neurologically, or two
or all three, see that episode for discussion
of the specifics but if I find a race of pretty
intelligent critters, like dolphins, chimps,
or elephants, I might give them a little genetic
tweak to mind or body to make technological
development easier.
I’m obviously not asking them since they’d
have no clue what I meant, so it’s not exactly
voluntary.
That is another way they might help us too,
improving us, in their eyes at least, physically
or mentally.
Now if they’re showing up overtly and giving
us technology, they might simply offer this
as an option, mind or body alterations, but
this path of help applies more to the covert
approaches.
And it can be very minimalist.
As an example, if I encounter a fairly aggressive
species I might need only do something very
tiny, like tweak genes for their gland that
produces their hormone for aggression to produce
1% less, or tweak the rate of growth of their
equivalent of a pre-frontal cortex for making
judgements to develop just a little faster
or larger.
Not even something outside their current bell-curve
distribution, just something like the equivalent
of tweaking average height by 1 centimeter
or IQ from 100 to 101.
Civilizations are statistical in a lot of
ways, and that can show up a lot in your outliers.
If you find out half your murders and fights
are involving the 1% that have the highest
of some given hormone or trait, moving that
little average and distribution over just
a little bit could drop that number in the
outlier down to a fraction of what it is.
If you find that 99% of your discoveries are
coming from the folks occupying the top 1%
of your IQ distribution, moving that over
a couple points might massively increase how
many were of the same intelligence as that
1% were.
Or they might give us just a few little tweaks
so we lived a bit longer or had better immune
systems.
This is obviously morally grey too but would
seem to occupy lighter shades of grey than,
say, culling folks with a given trait or outright
engaging in major physiological or neurological
enhancement.
That might happen too, you might get some
species that thought it was perfectly fine
to show up and infect everyone with an engineered
virus or nanobots that turned us into some
sort of alien-human hybrid.
That alien hybrid notion is popular in sci-fi
too and the genetic alteration approach is
a lot more plausible than interbreeding I
imagine.
The whole half-human, half-alien thing is
pretty dubious from any sort of biological
standpoint, especially when it’s an alien
and human getting married and having kids
like Spock from Star Trek.
When it’s just the classic sci-fi alien,
who for limitations of makeup or CGI basically
just has a few minor cosmetic changes of appearance
and behavior from humans, it seem plausible,
but you’re way more likely to be encountering
something that resembles you about as closely
as a squid does and differs from you genetically
by more than a tree does.
I can’t really imagine us finding lots of
folks who wanted to go marry and breed with
a tentacular horror and I’d imagine they’d
feel the same way about us.
Although if the internet has taught me anything,
it’s that someone, somewhere, probably would
think that was fun and to each his, her, or
its own I suppose.
It's also entirely probable some advanced
alien species isn’t exactly a species.
It might be some federation of many alien
races or it might be that they’ve just diverged
a lot internally, as we discussed recently
in the episode “Genetic Divergence and Civilization”,
given several thousand years and access to
a lot of high-end genetic or cybernetic technologies,
they might easily have a widely varying number
of limbs and eyeballs even from folks who
were distant cousins or even not-so-distant
ones.
There’s also the psychological differences
too, both those hard-wired into us biologically
and those that are cultural.
A lot of our ethics follow from logical reasoning
but often derive from paths influenced by
arguably arbitrary cultural events that impacted
us strongly.
For instance, we worry about the dangers of
colonialism but that’s from effective isolation
of cultures leaving very large technology
gaps and cultural differences, some planet
that was a single big continent with easily
navigated coasts and rivers, or more wanderlust
prone inhabitants – which ought not be a
strange trait for evolution to produce – might
never have that particularly issue crop up
and not come away with the same perspective
or the dangers we associate with that.
If your civilization was one where young folks
routinely went on long journeys to find a
new home or a mate and was expected to carry
news and innovations along with them, you
probably have a culture that is predisposed
to just wander in and say hi and start airing
their ideas and views rather casually, everybody
is an anthropologist in their youth and none
of their anthropologists ever developed a
non-interference restriction.
That’s a pretty minor difference, and so
too, a civilization that developed on a world
where a lot of plants had developed major
narcotic properties, where one made folks
more docile and suggestible, might have very
early on gotten in the habit of dosing people
with that whenever they misbehaved even as
kids, their equivalent of spanking or telling
a kid to go stand in the corner or hitting
a troublemaker with community service for
misdemeanors.
They are likely to have a very different view
on brainwashing than we do and be surprised
if anyone objected if they mass-brainwashed
us all to be less troublesome in their eyes.
And again, ‘benevolent’ is pretty subjective.
If you encounter a society that is pretty
Darwinian in some regards, they might think
it a genuine kindness to regularly attack
primitive civilizations with just enough force
to damage them to toughen them up, and do
it periodically.
Indeed, that’s the implied reasoning of
the aliens known as the Shadows in the Babylon
5 TV series from the 1990s.
We take that attitude to a degree too, that
hardship and challenge bring growth and strength,
and we would assume Darwinian concepts were
known to almost every advanced civilization,
so some might take it a bit more extreme than
us.
Same, if they’re a lot more interconnected
than us, not even going into hive minds or
the assimilationist Borg of Star Trek, they
might think wiring us all up so we could hear
or feel each other’s thoughts or moods was
a great kindness.
We see something similar in Alastair Reynolds
Revelation Space series in terms of the Conjoiners,
a partial hive mind who, while later switching
to voluntary membership, start off as grabbing
people for involuntary membership.
It brings to mind the old saying, “With
friends like these, who needs enemies?”.
Personally I think it more likely than not
that aliens we’d meet one day would be more
prone to benevolence than exploitation or
conquest or extermination, but we might find
their gifts a bit less than desirable, and
if we end up in their shoes instead, helping
out some civilization we encounter, we might
want to keep that in mind.
A theme for today was that while aliens are
often thought to be reluctant to share their
knowledge and skills, that doesn't really
make sense, and certainly our own modern civilization
doesn’t tend to feel that way.
I’d tend to suspect a society based heavily
around advancing knowledge and technology
would tend to also be one that would lean
toward wanting to share at least the basic
and intermediate skills of any craft with
everyone else.
Of course a willingness to share skills isn’t
the same as doing it well, and while a great
blessing of modern times is that everything
is out on the internet, it’s often not collected
and presented in an ideal form for folks to
find and learn.
That’s where Skillshare comes in.
Skillshare is an online learning community
for creatives, where millions come together
to take the next step in their creative journey,
and Members get unlimited access to thousands
of inspiring classes, with hands-on projects
and feedback from a community of millions.
Skillshare offers thousands of classes to
improve professional and creative skills,
but also a lot of simply handy life skills,
like Michael Phillips class on how to brew
an amazing cup of coffee.
I suspect I’m not alone in being a big fan
of coffee and he does a great job not just
explaining the method of brewing but a lot
of background and knowledge involved.
If you’re a lifelong learner interested
in picking up some new skills, I’d recommend
Skillshare.
Whether you’re a beginner, a pro, a dabler,
or a master, Skillshare has thousands of classes
on a wide variety of topics from experts to
help you learn.
If you’d like to give it a try the first
1000 of my subscribers to click the link in
the description will get a 2 month free trial
of Premium Membership so you can explore your
creativity.
Act now, and start learning, today.
So we were talking today about how a benevolent
alien species might act if it came across
a younger species, and it stands to reason
if they found someone younger to help or visit,
someone older probably found them and acted
likewise.
That can only go back so far though, until
you get to that first civilization… and
maybe that civilization is us?
Maybe we are the firstborn civilization in
the Cosmos.
In two weeks we’ll explore that notion in
“The Fermi Paradox: Firstborn”
Before then though, we’ll be returning to
Jupiter to look at the possibility of turning
it into a second Sun, a notion popularized
by Arthur C. Clarke in his 2001: Space Odyssey
series as something done by an ancient benevolent
alien civilization.
We’ll look at why and how we might be able
to do that or something equivalent next week
in “Summer on Jupiter”.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And if you’d like to support future episodes,
visit our website, IsaacArthur.net, to see
ways to help out or see our catalogue of episodes,
book recommendations, and SFIA Merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
