This episode is sponsored by Audible.
When humanity first encountered the Brains Slugs  
of the Puppetmaster Nebula there were concerns 
over reports they were hostile and controlling.
We sent an Ambassador and his report back was 
that “All is Well”, so we agreed to a summit  
for all our world leaders hosted at Wellness 
beach resort on the Brain Slug homeworld.
On their return, all of our dignitaries and 
leaders universally agreed, “All is Well”, and  
that as a further gesture of friendship, any human 
could take a free vacation to the Wellness resort.
So, welcome to another Sci-fi Sunday here on 
SFIA, where we take some time to look at a  
notion popular in science fiction and ask how 
realistic it is, or how we could make it work.  
And probably one of the best known 
tropes in sci-fi is the Doppleganger,  
the impostor, pretending to be someone else, often 
through some ability to shapeshift or mentally  
confuse those around them. It’s hard to think of 
a TV Show or franchise that hasn’t done this plot,  
the evil twin or impostor or even the stand-in a 
person clones of themselves to handle boring jobs. 
Indeed, this trope is so popular that even its 
sub-trope, alien impostors, shows up in virtually  
every science fiction show and tons of non-sci-fi 
too. The alien shapeshifter or hidden brain  
parasite acting as an infiltrator is so common it 
has plenty of its own subtropes, like You are Who  
You Eat, for shapeshifters who consume their prey 
to mimic them, often also to steal their memories. 
And that’s an important place to start, because 
for any infiltrator to last very long they need  
to be able to mimic more than appearance. There’s 
a classic episode of The Tick animated series,  
“The Tick vs the Uncommon Cold” where the Tick is 
fooled into thinking an extra-dimensional alien  
clone of his sidekick, Arthur, is the real deal, 
even though all it can say is “I, Arthur”, because  
the Tick is not terribly clever. His smarter 
sidekick has no difficulty later differentiating  
the Tick from his own clone. There’s a thousand 
little ways an impostor would reveal themselves  
to the close companions of the original, even 
if they were a perfect mimic of appearance. 
Eating or scanning the brain of your target 
also has some symbolic power as a story element,  
you’re not just mimicking your target, you are 
becoming them and stealing their very identity.  
This, in some ways, seems like the ultimate 
violation and an act of theft, but also  
generates a potentially sympathetic villain in 
that they might know and understand the target  
so well that they truly become them. Indeed, such 
a doppleganger might not even know they are one,  
possibly by design, possibly by simply preferring 
to think of themselves as a sympathetic human  
rather than a vile monster 
and coming to believe it. 
Today, we’ll be exploring a lot of the 
sub-varieties of dopplegangers and impostors,  
along with technological options 
for it, such as deep fakes,  
but our principal focus is on what such an 
alien civilization or element might be like. 
Now, could an alien race evolve that were 
dopplegangers by nature? Yes. Much as we  
explored in Parasitic Aliens, we have the examples 
of chameleons and other mimic creatures in nature,  
and even mind-controlling fungi and viruses. 
It’s a very logical pathway to be able to  
sneak in and prey on other creatures, though 
often, the purpose isn’t to use them as direct  
food but rather to replace their eggs with your 
own, like the Cuckoo does, and this is called  
Brood Parasitism. This results in an evolutionary 
arms race between the parasite bird and the hosts,  
to improve hiding and rejection methods, 
and that could lead to very good mimics. 
The sub-types of this are where the mimic eats 
its parents or siblings, or the mafia hypothesis,  
where the brood parasite doesn’t mimic its host, 
it just shows up regularly to check on its eggs  
and smashes up the nest if they aren’t there, 
as appears to be the case for the brown-headed  
cowbird. Or the host might raise the offspring 
too, completely aware that the offspring are not  
their own, but be unwilling or unable to say no. 
And this may be an emotional and voluntary thing,  
one could argue a cat or dog could prey on 
humans by leaving their young on our doorstep,  
since we will tend to care for them, that’s 
how I’ve gotten most of my cats over the years. 
However, today we’re focused on mimicry and 
it is worth noting that a species evolved  
on this line might not possess a natural ability 
to trick a human by shapeshifting, but rather,  
just be predisposed to use this tactic and 
therefore went on to develop technology  
and techniques for doing so. After all, we are a 
predatory species but not really good at hiding,  
biologically, but we are smart and inventive. And 
just as we would expect human agencies to become  
masters at impersonation and infiltration, 
an alien race with no special skill at it  
might develop sub-groups that were masters.
This is always a key concept in our discussions  
of alien civilizations, as, by default, we would 
assume that any race that’s been on the galactic  
scene for a while, likely outnumber us 
by many millions to one, if not more,  
and have had a lot of time for divergence 
among its own peoples. So, where we might  
have a spy agency of tens of thousands who might 
employ a few hundred dedicated infiltrators,  
they might use a smaller portion of their 
civilization for that purposes but still have  
a dozen worlds principally focused on intelligence 
and hundreds of millions of master infiltrators,  
each of whom is probably more skilled and 
better equipped than anyone we currently have.  
And they could be considered their own 
civilization, even if part of a greater one. 
So, today I mostly want to ask what a civilization 
would be like that was a mimic by nature,  
and the technological pathways to it otherwise.
Note that I say ‘technological pathways’ because  
there really won’t be a biological one able to 
fool any technological civilization for long.  
As we discussed in our episode on Smart Matter, 
you could make a being entirely of tiny cells  
or catoms able to be rearranged into any shape, 
and it’s possible to imagine a colony organism  
evolving to be such a creature – indeed, we 
even see this with the shapeshifting Founders,  
of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine, who are 
not only composed of ultra-tiny bits  
that they can move around and reshape, but are 
themselves a partial hivemind, often dwelling  
in a vast sea of each other, with no dividing 
boundary between individual consciousnesses. 
Problem is, outside of sci-fi, this isn’t 
really something that could ever be done  
fast or without clearly detectable signatures. 
It is easy for folks to forget that while we  
are composed of trillions of cells, individual 
cells can be composed of trillions of atoms,  
and an atom is to a cell what a brick is to a 
city. Cells aren’t visible to the naked eye – by  
and large – especially as most are tucked under 
skin cells, but they are close to it, and it’s  
not coincidental that the discovery of the cell 
happened very early in the history of microscopes. 
Just like something built out of lego blocks, 
movable cells, even ones with color-changing  
ability, might fool folks at a distance 
but not when zoomed in. In this example,  
our lego block is our catom, a name derived from 
claytronics and the original notion of an atom,  
which means ‘indivisible thing’ or ‘that which 
cannot be divided’. Catoms are the smallest  
object inside such movable or programmable 
systems that represents a basic unit.  
Note that they do not need to 
be identical in form or purpose,  
you might have hundreds of different catom 
types in a system, just as you have hundreds of  
different atoms and isotope types on the periodic 
table of elements, or with biological cells. 
They also have to have mechanisms for moving 
and holding themselves in place, which add to  
the necessary cell size, as does them needing 
to be generalists since a lot more of the basic  
functions needed for life that are outside 
individuals cells in a larger organism,  
like a liver or lungs, have to be off-loaded 
onto those individual cells now. And the bonds  
holding catoms together are generally much weaker 
than those inside metals or other solid objects,  
so a shapeshifter isn’t forming some steel-hard 
shield off its arm to repel gunfire or such,  
nor do effectively-liquid materials like this 
simply ignore being shot and simply seal over  
the hole. Every catom hit by that bullet is going 
to be damaged, same as the cells in your body are,  
nor would ones blown out the back of you by 
the blast be able to just easily ooze back in.  
That’s an example of how science fiction concepts, 
minus any practical consideration of the how-to’s,  
can run away on us to produce something seemingly 
invincible or preeminent that, in reality,  
is actually going to have tons of unavoidable 
weaknesses, each of which might be corrected or  
mitigated but at a cost of making the thing 
bulkier, slower and overall less amazing. 
As an example of that from a more conceptual 
direction, fiction often shows us impostors  
of unbelievable skill, and skill that honestly 
should imply such infiltrators were already in  
your organization, or were your civilization’s 
actual leaders. If you are so good at  
impersonating people that you can even do their 
job while mimicking their behavior, and can and  
have done this many times, probably frequently 
for folks engaged in various military, economic,  
or political strategy roles, often experts, then 
why the heck aren’t you in charge back in your own  
civilization? Particularly considering impostors 
like you should have no problem slipping into  
those roles, given what they’re trained to do.
And if we’re just talking about allocating  
people of high talent to jobs, why use them up on 
risky infiltration work when you can use them for  
strategic & policy roles instead? Especially 
given that you really only need to infiltrate  
and mimic when there’s some parity of resources 
or ability in the target, otherwise you can win  
by numerous other less risky means. Which tends to 
imply the folks doing this are either engaged in  
anthropology – which is very plausible – or their 
civilization is just prone to trying this tactic  
even when objectively it’s not optimal. Folks who 
are incredibly fast learners and very observant of  
behavior definitely are well-represented among our 
ruling class, and acting is a learnable skill too,  
and not without its value to potential 
leaders, albeit a bit less admirable than  
being fast-learning and observant of people. So 
you’re wasting your potential leaders on risky  
assignments of infiltration. Or maybe you just 
use the ones who you wouldn’t trust as leaders,  
but then they might imbed themselves as leaders in 
the place you sent them instead, and not turn the  
keys over to you when it's time. There’s always a 
fear infiltrators might turn traitors themselves,  
especially given that by default they’re 
not very honest and trustworthy types. 
I ended up planning and writing this 
episode because both a novel I’d picked up,  
Kingmaker by Robert Rath, and an old cartoon I’d 
caught a rerun of the same day – the Tick in this  
case – had impostor shapeshifters in them and some 
genuine effort was made in the novel to point out  
how important it was for an infiltrator 
to not just do their research on a target  
and the target’s culture, but also pick a target 
to impersonate who would have had some reason to  
act strangely to those they’d encounter. They’d 
been away for years having life changing events,  
like being off at a war, or they had gone into 
mourning over the loss of a close family member,  
or even got fired and moved.
The downside of course is that  
such folks also tend to be less likely to 
be trusted or more likely to be watched,  
not because they’re necessarily suspicious 
but because the guy you haven’t seen in years  
just isn’t in your real inner circle anymore, 
even if you would like them to be. We’ve all had  
friends and relatives or work colleagues we were 
super close to and then they or we went away and  
on their return, for the best of intentions, 
things can get a little awkward and the  
relationship never returns to the previous state. 
Such folks would be ideal to nab and impersonate,  
because little changes and things which seem off 
or misremembered have an obvious reason, but those  
same reasons mean you tend to be hesitant to 
divulge secrets or share access with them. 
There’s also no realistic way to get life details 
off everyone of everything but that’s not always  
seen as a big concern. It really is normal for our 
good friends to not remember something we thought  
important, or to remember it differently, or get 
that puzzled look which says they remember no such  
thing but they figure that either you’re right 
or they don’t care to make a big deal out of it.  
The reality is, the trick for dealing with 
impostors, of asking something only the  
real person would know, is only going to come 
up if you have reason to expect an impostor  
and otherwise a casual reference to some prior 
event the impostor doesn’t know of is likely to be  
met by a casual shrug or the usual comments we 
all make when someone is recalling something  
and we’re not sure we remember it but don’t want 
to upset them, and even if you press the memory,  
it’s unlikely to follow that that conversation 
will end in anyone doubting who they are. 
Nonetheless, there are some things a person just 
isn’t going to plausibly not know or forget,  
and missing a couple of those could trigger worry 
that there’s deceit going on, especially if you  
have any reason to suspect dopplegangers might 
be in play. These aren’t always obvious though,  
“Do you remember that time you burned your hand at 
the campfire we had?” could be followed by a head  
nod, but then you could go ‘ah-ha, you’ve never 
burned your hand at a campfire with me!” and they,  
being a skilled impostor, will give you a 
weird look like you were being a loony and say  
“I’ve burned my hand on campfires before man, I 
don’t really keep an inventory of when and who was  
there.” And we also have to remember that social 
media and selfies give big inventories of memory  
on a lot of folks and that’s likely to expand 
down the years, so it probably needs to be a  
genuine secret you wouldn’t report, like “I think 
your spouse might have found out we had an affair” 
Now, the typical sci-fi work around on this is to 
assume they’ve been brain-scanning or torturing  
someone for info, and that latter would not really 
work well. Torture will get folks to tell you  
things and so long as you have real info to catch 
them out on the occasional lie so that they’re  
afraid to say untruths, then it probably will be 
true things, but that’s not really working for a  
quick fishing expedition and they are likely 
to wonder what purpose you’ll use it for,  
and guess it’s going to be used to deceive 
people or organizations they care about. 
Odds are, if they are the sort of 
person you want to impersonate,  
they are considered trustworthy by those people or 
groups, and that tends to imply they’d be willing  
to risk some and suffer some to keep back stuff 
or lie about something you probably wouldn’t know,  
like their duress code, if they had one. They 
probably are making the logical deduction that  
you are going to suck them dry for information to 
use against those they care about then dispose of  
them, so unless you can make a good case for how 
they should voluntarily cooperate, they are likely  
to try to spoke your wheel wherever they can. 
On the other hand, desperate people in pain are  
predisposed to be a bit gullible when it comes to 
offering them reasons to cooperate, especially as  
you’ve probably been depriving them of sleep 
and otherwise screwing with them. The memory  
is associative though so trying to ask someone to 
think of major but private moments and recall them  
to you while you’re putting the thumbscrews 
on them, doesn’t seem a recipe for success. 
A Brain scan would presumably work better, 
and that is a technology you could probably  
rely on existing more, in the future. Indeed, 
there’s likely to be so much audio and video of  
folks in the future that a Deep Fake would 
impersonate them more plausibly than they  
themselves could. After all, our friends 
only know us by our outward behaviors,  
things they’ve observed and seen, and in a 
civilization where more is recorded and posted  
there’s more to replicate of that public 
persona. Of course that could trip folks up too,  
I don’t know how many hours of recorded episodes 
and interviews I’ve done down the years but it’s  
got to be around a thousand by now, especially 
when you throw in multi-hour live interviews. 
A quick Deep Fake of me just compiled from 
my episodes might be more convincing to my  
audience than one including my livestreams and 
interviews, but neither would likely convince  
my close friends. I put on no false façade when 
I write these episodes or do those interviews,  
I’m no actor playing a role, but I definitely have 
my game face on, so to speak, and it involves not  
using curse words or foul language. My friends are 
a little more used to me having a salty tongue,  
as one might expect from an old army sergeant, 
which I suspect most of my viewers don’t really  
envision when thinking of me. But I try to watch 
my tongue, and even in my personal journals,  
which are hundreds of hours of recorded audio 
too, generally don’t have much casual swearing,  
and I try to watch my topics and tangents a bit, 
even in those, and thus might fool even my closer  
friends, but also might be less believable 
to those who only know me through the show.  
Either way, I suspect I’d be easy to deep 
fake just from the sheer volume of visual  
and audio material available.
And an impostor or shapeshifter  
doesn’t necessarily have to take your physical 
place either. In an increasingly virtual world,  
just being able to simulate someone’s audio and 
video while the person themselves is away probably  
works too. They go on vacation and you abduct them 
and the vacation gets extended for a while but all  
is well because they keep sending back messages 
and audio and video that fit, and fifty years  
from now, folks might be pretty unreal in most 
of their activities anyway, doing a lot of social  
events and even work in virtual spaces where their 
actual appearance might not be real to begin with. 
These are just additional factors for the 
potential impostor, benefits or challenges, but we  
need to remember that only in the case where those 
being infiltrated have no real reason to suspect  
it, or how it is done, can we really just have a 
casual shapeshifter succeeding for long or at all. 
And eating someone’s whole memories, while 
plausible as a technology, also means you’re  
either just making a near perfect copy or 
something mentally superior to the original.  
If we’ve got an actor so good they can literally 
absorb minds, which is definitely plausible as  
a technological and post-human path, then 
we get that same problem earlier of using  
a precious resource to impersonate when it could 
be doing better things. Some superintelligence,  
able to copy minds onto its own, repeatedly, 
while maintaining its original goals and needs,  
implies a society so superior, they shouldn’t 
need to bother with infiltration. And if the  
minds needing to be mimicked are superhuman 
themselves, the mimics must be even smarter. 
Life isn’t a comic book, Tony Stark doesn’t 
get to keep his Iron Man suit to himself  
and Captain America’s super soldier serum doesn’t 
get lost after one use and never rediscovered or  
improved on. A society doesn’t have one iron man 
or captain America, it has millions, and a society  
composed of super-intelligent entities able to 
read minds and store them to impersonate people,  
is one where everyone has the ability to 
read huge skillsets of geniuses and experts.  
No civilization composed of lesser or singular 
minds is going to pose any threat or benefit to  
them where infiltration would seem to make sense.
Alternatively, if we’re just making an evil copy,  
so to speak, of the original, one that just has 
orders to do something for the infiltrators,  
or to activate on command, then why not just 
brainwash the target to do the job? That’s  
probably way easier. Now, that might leave 
marks, metaphorical or otherwise, but even if  
that involved putting a chip in someone’s head, 
folks need to be aware to look for it, and in a  
society where everyone has chips, it might be less 
obvious, since such technology exists and would be  
valuable for other purposes, sinister and worthy.
The Bene Tlieaxu of Frank Herbert’s Dune  
also gives us an example of the problems with mind 
absorbing. They have a quasi-human clade called  
Face Dancers who can shift appearance through 
methods not really detailed well in the book,  
but basically muscle control. That really 
shouldn’t work but is a decent enough handwave  
and one also used by Dan Abnett in his excellent 
novel: Ravenor Returned, except there, the  
character doing the disguise is also a telepath 
and telekinetic, and the process is a very rough  
job and the person it was done on describes the 
process of recovery afterward as quite agonizing,  
like pulling your jaw, only over your whole face. 
The Face Dancers though, are just very observant  
and excellent actors, but a few thousand years 
later in the series, they’ve developed an  
ability to absorb minds too, multiple of them, and 
Herbert discusses the possible downsides of both. 
For mimics, the necessity of them having a deep 
understanding of the person they are mimicking,  
may have the unwanted effect of the mimic then 
developing some (or a lot of) sympathy for both  
the target and the person they are mimicking. The 
organization that ordered the infiltration to take  
place always has to consider that this can happen 
in some cases, and so, there is always the concern  
that your impersonator might suffer an emotional 
collapse or turn traitor on you. And that’s a real  
worry with things like Sleeper Agents, and that 
concern often dampens the desire to use them.  
You plant some operative in a group or society, 
with the intent of having them spy for years, or  
even just wait patiently for a trigger moment, and 
they end up becoming unreliable or even turning  
on you. You have asked them to do something 
terribly hard, risky and unethical, so, long  
term impersonation to work a mimic ever-deeper 
into a group, over the course of many years, or to  
await that one special moment, is a real gamble.
That’s presumably even worse if they’re getting  
a copy of that person’s mind planted into their 
head, and it would be very easy for a real flesh  
and blood person to come to convince themselves 
they were the genuine article and the other prior  
memories are some weird dream or madness. 
Alternatively, as Herbert explores in his  
last Dune Novel, Chapterhouse Dune, there is the 
impression that these more advanced Face Dancers,  
in absorbing countless minds during their 
various infiltrations, have become superhuman,  
indeed, they appear to be the nominal 
semi-secret antagonists of the last novel,  
as we encounter a duo of strange entities 
who seem to take an ambivalent role toward  
the protagonists of that book and seem 
to be the puppeteers of events unfolding. 
For major Dune fans, yes I’m aware those 
two, Marty & Daniel, are often seen to be  
analogs for Herbert and his wife, and that in 
the expanded Dune, written after their deaths,  
they are revealed to be the evil ancient 
robot overlords from the Butlerian Jihad. 
Anyway, it would seem like you could anticipate 
such things and put safeguards in place,  
but it really depends on your technology. 
If your society is completely digital,  
in the brain augmentation and uploading way, these 
sort of mind copy and replace tricks won’t work,  
as folks would likely have various 
authentication measures built in.  
If you’re more organic or analog, so to speak, 
then you are in position to have a lot more  
unintended or unavoidable consequences.
There are also lots of ways to catch  
impostors in the act that folks tend 
to overlook, if you’re expecting such  
problems. One example would be taking a book out 
of the page of spotting adulterated gold coins,  
the density was off for the volume. Easy 
to spot for coins but harder for people,  
or a weirdly shaped object like a crown, but 
they can be submerged and their volume measured.  
This is the trick Archimedes is said to have 
shouted “Eureka!” about, when he discovered it. 
Shapeshifters might be able to get around problems 
like this by taking in extra mass of water or air  
to cover their shift in volume and mass but an 
X-Ray is going to spot any atypical lungs or  
bladder analogues meant to rapidly do this and if 
you’re shifting that ability to individual tiny  
cells, well, as I said earlier, every extra 
function you want a catom to perform adds to  
its mass and complexity, and slows the overall 
function. And again, while we can also suppose  
that a vastly superior technology exists that 
can make them practically impossible to detect,  
this runs into the usual wall of why the 
alien invader is making such an effort to  
do covert things when they have such 
an enormous technological advantage. 
And there are some legitimate reasons you would, 
anthropology comes to mind. However, while  
sneaking into a tribe or culture to experience 
and record it firsthand, or even give it nudges,  
seems reasonably ethical, actually replacing 
someone really does not. Morality might not matter  
to alien anthropologists but it always strikes me 
as unlikely you would study a primitive culture  
simply to understand it while also having ethics 
that allowed for abduction, mental extraction,  
and presumably murder. At best, I could imagine 
picking someone who was near death anyway  
and suffering something like a bad fever, 
you sneak in and replace them and blame  
differences of personality or new quirks 
on the fever and life and death experience.  
This is still pretty unethical at many levels.
Or maybe you cure the target and have them live  
among you, or upload their mind into a virtual 
paradise while copying the mind for necessary  
details, though I don’t know how good a paradise 
it would be if you still need to study their  
culture in person for details, but maybe you 
keep the uploaded brain on ice till you can  
provide that paradise simulacrum. Regardless, 
if you can find a morally comfortable reason  
and method for doing this, then anthropology 
would be one plausible case for alien impostors. 
This is also plausible then for getting 
details on a culture before you invade,  
though it runs into that big problem of why you 
are invading rather than exterminating an alien  
civilization, but being willing to do one doesn’t 
imply an automatic willingness to do the other.  
Sending in agents to agitate or prepare for an 
invasion makes sense, and we do see this as a  
regular tactic of the Alpha Legion during the 
Great Crusade in Warhammer 40k, where they are  
often coming across lost human colonies that are 
less technologically advanced than the Crusader  
elements. And presumably, it’s less important to 
mimic a specific individual for general agitation,  
but getting people into the local government 
or military as spies or agents certainly helps.  
Though, I’ve always thought it a bit strange 
that 8 foot tall super-muscular genetically  
engineered space marine would be prone to this 
style of infiltration tactic but they do tend to  
use regular human agents in this role a lot too.
The 40k setting has a fair number of infiltrator  
groups, and one of those is a cult 
of assassins called the Callidus,  
who are shapeshifters due to a very powerful, 
painful, and addictive drug called polymorphine.  
During a very painful process of several minutes 
you can make outward physical changes if you have  
the control and willpower for it, and the Callidus 
also have extensive augmentation and surgery to  
allow things like height changes. I could imagine 
either flat-out cybernetic bones that could alter  
in length and thickness or some organic bones 
able to include small bladders and ligaments,  
to alter size and shape a bit. This is a far 
cry from altering shape into anything at all,  
like Odo from Deep Space Nine and his race 
could do, but impersonating other humanoids  
is a little more plausible. They also 
have telepaths in both those settings so  
scanning brains to help mimic the original, 
makes it easier to mimic than not doing so would. 
So too, we can imagine entirely technological 
paths like an outer membrane made of material  
able to mimic colors and textures over an 
inflatable and changeable body and skeleton,  
or simply a body-covering suit. That would 
work at a distance I’m sure, or for casual  
inspection. We hit that problem that whatever 
cloaking technology you’ve got, it's probably  
only going to work a handful of times before the 
opposition finds out it exists and gets a look at  
the tech, in which case they can probably build 
near-foolproof detectors far cheaper than you can  
build impostors. Of course, you could scare the 
heck out of their civilization by them knowing  
you had this, as they try to find out who the 
impostors are, and Star Trek: Deep Space Nine  
has some brilliant episodes in its middle seasons, 
showing how a clever changeling can cause chaos  
inside their enemy without even needing to 
impersonate anyone, just with the fear of it. 
Of course, the downside to this is that they 
will know you exist and be working to figure  
out your tricks for disguising yourself, better 
they not know how you do it or that you even can. 
Now, the last impostor role we’ll consider 
for today isn’t a shapeshifter at all,  
but rather a body snatcher. This is probably 
best known from Robert Heinlein’s classic novel:  
The Puppet Masters, where we get the alien slugs 
who get in people’s heads and take over, but it's  
been borrowed from by many others and maybe best 
known in recent years from Stargate SG-1, where we  
get the Goa’uld, a serpent-like creature that gets 
into people and takes over their mind. We explored  
that more in our Parasitic Aliens episode, but I 
wanted to mention it to close out today in more  
of the technological approach. X-Ray is going to 
pick up any critter big enough to have its own  
brain hiding inside someone and such a creature 
would have had a tricky evolutionary path,  
though possible, as we explored in that episode.
That brain implant option is more likely, as we  
expect we could stuff a human mind into something 
smaller than a pea, maybe a lot smaller, if we’re  
talking about a non-organic computer mind. And 
as I mentioned earlier, in a society with lots  
of brain augments and chips, sneaking another 
in or hijacking it to store an invader’s mind  
is probably a bit easier. In such a case, it 
might be a lot easier just to sneak in some  
brainwashing implants that store something smaller 
than a full mind, like a second hidden personality  
that secretly watches and only comes out at 
night, mostly. Babylon 5 played with that  
with one of their main characters being 
an infiltrator throughout season 1 and 2,  
no spoilers who it was today though. Of course, 
in the movie: Aliens, we hear about the parasitic  
xenomorphs only coming out at night, mostly, too, 
and they infiltrate a society in a less covert  
fashion in that film and its original, Alien.
But we also see human impersonation by monstrous  
aliens in another great film from that time: John 
Carpenter’s The Thing, which is also based on a  
great sci-fi classic, John Campbell’s novella, 
“Who goes there?”. I love both of those but they  
stretch to assume a more animalistic alien could 
copy a human, I think it would take something a  
good deal smarter and with technological aids to 
pull that trick off, especially on short notice. 
So, that’s the good news, you probably don’t have 
to worry about landing on some alien planet and  
getting nabbed, and having some alien impersonate 
you to others just five minutes later, as good a  
defense and intel method as that would be to leave 
on some remote outpost. So too, you probably don’t  
need to worry about some alien slug arriving on 
Earth to invade your brain and take you over. 
So if one arrives in the mail from Amazon at 
your house in the next few days, don’t worry,  
it just wants to helps exfoliate your scalp 
and massage your head in a gesture of goodwill,  
but they’re shy creatures, so unpackage it in 
quiet and don’t tell anyone else, all is well.
So it's time again for our Audible Audiobook of 
the Month and we mentioned a number of good shows  
and books that dealt with the notion of alien 
imposters, including John Campbell’s legendary  
classic The Thing or who goes there and the 
new novel Kingmaker by Robert Rath, but as  
I mentioned a few minutes ago, the source for so 
many elements of this trope we’ve discussed today  
is The Puppetmasters by Rober Heinlein, one of the 
greatest scifi writers of all time, who gave us so  
many classics like Starship Troopers, Stranger 
in a Strange Land, and Puppetmasters. Heinlein  
was one of the most influential authors of 
science fiction and all of his many dozens  
of amazing stories are available on Audible. 
As are so many of the other novels and short  
stories we mentioned today or in other episodes.
In fact, Audible has thousands of audiobooks  
available and literally centuries worth of content 
for you to pick from, and more being added every  
day faster than you could listen to all of it.
But they don’t just have audiobooks, they also  
have many excellent podcasts, such as 
Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur,  
where we have every single episode on Youtube, 
plus several audio-only exclusives I’ve made  
over the years. That’s just some of the 
great content in the Audible Plus Catalog,  
which also has sleep & meditation tracks 
available, as well as guided fitness programs,  
and Audible Original’s like Roadkill, the 
newest work by my friend Dennis E. Taylor,  
who many of you know from his awesome Bobiverse 
series, which are also available on Audible. 
The whole Audible Plus Catalog full of free 
books and other content, comes as a bonus when  
you join Audible, in addition to your usual 1 free 
audiobook each month and big member discounts on  
additional ones, and as always, new members can 
try Audible for free for the first month, just go  
to Audible.com/isaac, or text isaac to 500-500.
It hard to believe sometimes how long we’ve  
been doing episodes, scifi Sundays and our 
monthly livestreams are still fairly new,  
just 4 years now, but we’re in our sixth year of 
having audiobooks of the month now and the same  
for having a weekly Thursday episode, every single 
week since March 2016. The show itself though  
actually dates back to the early fall of 2014 
when I did a video called “Megastructures  
in Space” that we finally updated earlier this 
year with our 2-hour MEgastructure Compendium  
episode. But next week is the 8th Anniversary of 
our original episode, Megastructures in Space,  
and we’ll commemorate that occasion by examining 
the barriers to becoming a Kardashev Civilization. 
Then we’ll continue September with a 
look at Post-Science Civilizations,  
who have discovered everything there is 
to know or abandoned future research,  
and then onto the Grabby Aliens perspective of 
the Fermi Paradox, and what Grabby Aliens are  
and if we will become an example of them. 
We also have our Monthly Livestream Q&A,  
Sunday September 25th at 4 pm Eastern, and then 
we’ll head into October to look at the idea of  
colonizing planetary rings, like Saturn’s, and 
if life might be able to evolve in such places. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social media  
forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
