This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. Get 
access to my streaming video service, Nebula,  
when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
It might sound pretty cool to be frozen for a 
century or two and then thaw out to see what  
the future holds. But of course if everyone did 
that, the future wouldn't hold anything.
 
Today we’ll be examining the science and 
technology of freezing people and asking  
what the ramifications of it would actually 
be, if it became a regular and easy process.  
Of course at the moment it’s neither regular 
nor easy. Even freezing people isn’t very  
easy and that’s supposed to be the easy part. 
Freezing people for later thawing and revival is  
a bit of a misnomer, what we’re talking about in 
modern times is taking the corpses of the already  
deceased and trying to freeze them before too 
much damage sets in and in a way that doesn’t  
cause too much more damage during freezing itself. 
Indeed the main process focused on these cases is  
vitrification, essentially turning the subject 
into a non-crystalline solid like glass, but  
we’ll treat that as freezing today too, as we’re 
not too interested in the specific procedures,  
just their impact on society if done successfully. 
For a given value of the word ‘success’.
 
The procedures are utterly lethal to anyone 
still alive during it, and it frequently involves  
decapitation too. The intent is to preserve the 
brain well enough that we can repair or recreate  
it at a later date with access to superior medical 
technology. Since the alternative is death,  
if that gamble is wrong you’re not out much, 
but it’s also probably a good gamble. Medical  
nanotechnology able to engage in cellular repair 
should be an invention in the 21st century.
 
Of course, that’s the issue with cryonics, 
it’s a technology that depends on assuming the  
invention of a future technology and one that 
would render it redundant. Cryonics is likely  
to be a growing industry as we get better at the 
procedure for freezing brains and more confident  
that medical nanotechnology able to engage in 
cellular repair will be successfully developed.  
Once it is though, your reasons for freezing 
dead people pretty much cease, as it’s more  
likely the nanotechnology will be developed 
on and for the living first, significantly  
shrinking the cryonics customer base. 
This episode isn’t too interested in the procedure  
itself, but the critical challenge for that is 
the complexity of cells. I think there tends to  
be an assumption that a biological cell is bigger 
than an atom but in the same way a tree is bigger  
than a shrub. I’ve occasionally asked folks how 
many atoms they think are in a cell and they  
tend to answer hundreds or thousands, and rarely 
hundreds of thousands or even millions. However,  
even the smallest cells are composed of more like 
a trillion atoms and often a lot more, a human  
neuron can mass as much as a microgram, thousands 
of times more than a red blood cell for instance.  
In context, if we think of an atom as a 
brick, a cell is not a house made of bricks,  
rather a small cell would be a large city, 
while a larger cell would be an entire  
nation’s buildings and infrastructure. Each of 
our cells is essentially a world to itself.
 
If you flash froze a city, you would not 
expect it to thaw out and be operational,  
but you would expect to be able to look at it 
while it was frozen and see what got damaged,  
like water mains exploding, pipes breaking, 
bridges and roads cracking and falling apart.  
You would figure you could repair that when it 
thawed out if you threw enough manpower at it,  
very different then if the city gets hit by an 
asteroid for instance. Key notion, freezing does  
damage but once frozen that damage ceases. You 
can put humpty-dumpty back together again after  
he falls if he shatters into clean pieces and 
you don’t give those too much time to scatter  
or wear down, you can’t if humpty-dumpty was 
incinerated and his ashes scattered to the winds.
 
This is essentially the notion of cryonics, 
each cell needs major repair, but you know what  
those cells should look like and they also aren’t 
rearranging their location relative to each other.  
The task of repair is huge but doable, though of 
course it has to be done at the microscopic level.  
What you need is trillions of little 
workers who can get in and do the work,  
and that’s where medical nanotechnology comes 
into play. There may be ways to freeze people  
with minimal cellular damage and to thaw them 
and revive them so their own regular healing  
mechanisms can finish the job, we’ve had limited 
but growing success freezing and thawing out other  
organisms, but the core of current cryonics 
is the assumption we can eventually repair the  
frozen person with all those little robots.
Critical thing though is that if you’ve got  
all those little medical robots that can repair 
cells, your society really doesn’t have nearly as  
many untreatable medical issues, so you don’t 
need to freeze many people. And it’s also a  
lot easier for such robots to fix existing 
living but damaged cells than repair ones  
frozen or vitrified, particularly since your 
cells already have very good repair systems.
 
So cryonics might grow very popular as we get 
closer to that point and more folks feel like  
it represents a plausible way of extending life, 
but once you get to the point you can thaw people,  
you don’t really need to freeze 
them for that reason anymore.  
They should effectively be able to self-repair 
any type of damage which wasn’t overwhelming.
 
So what does that leave as a reason for freezing?
Well interstellar spaceships is a popular  
suggestion, but we looked at that before in 
our Sleeper Ships episode. One critical note  
on that is that I’d have a hard time imagining 
us sending ships full of frozen colonists out  
unless we already had the revival technology 
well-developed. Space is immense, and while  
there may be a push to colonize quickly 
that might result in some risk taking,  
I can’t really see anyone trying to claim the best 
worlds by getting to them first by sending out  
frozen colonists without a proven way to revive 
them yet. Though you might do that if our solar  
system was in imminent danger, as a last desperate 
gamble, and even then only if you thought the  
thawing process you already had would work, since 
no one would be around to continue researching.
 
If you have that technology you don’t 
really need to freeze them as they’re  
probably biologically immortal, and that same 
sort of technology tends to fix most of your  
supply issues in terms of producing, repairing, 
and recycling material on an interstellar ship.  
You might freeze folks to avoid boredom or to 
lower power usage, but you might just put them  
all into some non-frozen hibernation, especially 
since for really long voyages you have to worry  
about radiation damage to the frozen body 
from the radioisotopes in your own body,  
like potassium-40, and if you’re frozen there’s 
no repair going on, certainly not biologically,  
but probably not by the little robots either. 
Indeed if you did have the robots working on your  
frozen body you would probably need to add extra 
cooling to make sure you stayed frozen, all that  
energy from them moving and drilling around your 
frozen cells is likely to thaw you out otherwise.
 
Right now we freeze people’s heads and discard 
their bodies in most cases. But You might do  
the opposite for ship hibernation, render the 
person brain dead or close to it while keeping  
the rest of the body pretty alive, so that 
they didn’t experience much time passing but  
their body was repaired and ready for rapid 
re-awakening. See the Sleeper Ships episode  
though for more discussion of using freezing or 
other types of stasis for interstellar travel.
 
What about other uses though?
Emergency medicine is a possibility, and it is  
worth keeping in mind those tiny little robots 
aren’t magic. A repair crew can fix a damaged  
building, even rebuild it from scratch if needed, 
but they can’t do it in the middle of a fire or  
hurricane, and you can’t fix a dam when it 
just burst during a flood. Your cells repair  
minor damage as-is, but a majorly damaged cell 
is replaced by another dividing itself. Those  
little robots supplement the existing processes 
by augmenting or fixing the bits of our internal  
repair mechanisms or speeding some processes 
up. Freezing someone so you can prepare major  
replacements is an option, so too those bots can 
do repairs while you’re just very cold, to slow  
damage, and while the ones in the regular human 
body probably wouldn’t be designed to function  
at ultra-low temperatures, we probably could make 
some that were and put those in someone we froze.
 
Or have some in a person already that could 
operate like that. This episode isn’t about  
medical nanobots or self-replicating machines 
but a point I often make about those is that  
the same as we have tons of different species 
of microorganisms inside us of varying types,  
sizes and purposes, you can build your 
nanobots the same way and probably would.  
The notion of a tiny and universal robot assembler 
is a popular one but probably overly simple.  
There’s an advantage in specialized species 
of robots. Such being the case you might  
have some that existed especially for 
trauma operations or during freezing.
 
We said such robots largely made cryonics 
irrelevant even as it made us able to revive  
the frozen, but at the same time it makes it far 
easier. You could potentially be putting yourself  
on ice for a long weekend vacation, depending 
on how good the robots are, but then if they  
are that good you’ve probably got easier stasis 
methods available in terms of avoiding boredom.
 
That again is one of the reasons we often consider 
cryonics, to leap frog through time and avoid  
boredom, but there are probably much easier ways 
to avoid boredom. For instance , given that a  
lot of what we think of as boredom is chemical, 
all those little robots able to repair cells can  
probably also play with the neurotransmitters 
responsible for boredom to just decrease it,  
one example of what we call neurohacking.
Of course that presumably has its limits,  
the ability to remove the sensation 
of hunger doesn’t remove hunger, and  
presumably being able to dial down the sensation 
of boredom doesn’t alter boring circumstances,  
so this might be one reason why a civilization 
had large numbers of people go on ice, emerging  
every few years or centuries based on predefined 
triggers, like if that book series they loved was  
finally done. Hopefully they have a contingency 
trigger in case the author goes on ice too.
 
We should also note that experiencing huge 
swaths of time beyond the normal lifespan is  
likely problematic beyond just figuring 
out how to extend youthful physiology  
indefinitely. I genuinely do not think anyone who 
had a full memory of having lived a million years  
could qualify as even vaguely human 
anymore beyond the biological sense.
 
So why else might we use cryonics in mass?
One example I’m fond of from fiction is the  
planet Hubris from Dan Abnett’s Eisenhorn 
series. The planet was settled by a colony  
ship full of frozen colonists and they didn’t 
realize till after arriving that the planet was  
on a wildly elliptical orbit that left it an 
ice ball for eleven of its 29 month long year,  
so they adapted their stasis pods to keep 
99% of their population on ice during that  
period. As a sociological consequence of 
that the caretaker population during the  
Dormant Season tends to live in places where the 
lighting is on all the time, a perpetual noon.
 
I love the notion and the book, however it is 
not a terribly likely scenario for a planet,  
you could put artificial lighting and heating 
in place by many means, such as orbital mirrors  
around the world to add light when you need 
it, and that would seem a better approach  
than freezing your population. Though if your 
planet’s orbit is elliptical enough, you might  
try the other approach, and if life evolved 
on such a world it might do that naturally. 
 
Artificial lighting and heating would seem 
the better path for a technological species  
though. But not so much from 
a cost savings perspective.  
Freezing people is rather cheap, in terms 
of the storage equipment and the coolant.  
It’s not terribly expensive even now and 
that’s with most of the cost going into  
research and into the efforts to get someone 
frozen on short notice after their death.  
If a culture has refined this process it might 
be about as easy as we often see in scifi,  
where you just get in the tube and pull the 
door shut after setting a timer. It might be the  
routine approach for ambulances to have freezers, 
or combat medics too, to just have some bag with  
an endothermic chemical in it ready to freeze an 
injured person. Folks might have them in their  
own home and household robots ready to just haul 
you into your cryo-vault if you were injured.
 
Indeed it’s quite possible such a cryo-vault 
might not only be no larger than a bed  
but no more expensive either. I really could 
imagine them as a standard feature on board  
spaceships or in people’s normal homes, the ice 
closet, as it were. There is a distinct cost  
for keeping things ultra-cold but it goes 
down when you pack the stuff in together.  
At a minimum your cost drops with the cube-square 
law as heat exchange is about total surface area,  
so a freezer ten times bigger on each side, has 
10-squared or a hundred times the heat loss on its  
expanded surface, but contains 10-cubed or 1000 
times the storage space, so your coolant cost  
drops to a tenth in terms of cost per person. But 
it’s not really prohibitive even for individual  
pods in personal homes and with only modern costs 
for coolant, liquid nitrogen is dirt cheap.  
 
Still not free though, except in deep space. 
Now any spaceship is probably going to need  
some active parts that are kept warm, 
but you can keep them frozen for free,  
it is heating them that costs power. This is part 
of their appeal for interstellar space travel. 
 
We recently discussed interstellar trade and one 
of the concepts we discussed was the Interstellar  
Cycler, giant spacecraft that are essentially 
on long circuits around a collection of stars  
that other ships rendezvous with. It would 
not be hard to imagine such ships having huge  
sections of them that were powered down and frozen 
during those voyages. You dock with the Cycler,  
disembark, and check into your freezer, leaving a 
wakeup call for when you near your destination.
 
Given the potential enormity of 
those vessels, they would qualify  
as civilizations all on their own, and ones 
that might spend much of their time dormant,  
like our example of Hubris only even more so, 
spending decades asleep and perhaps a year awake.
 
This implies the crew might be awake and 
the nominal passengers engaged in the trade  
efforts or traveling would be asleep, but it 
might be the other way around sometimes too.  
The interstellar cycler is a trade ship that 
makes a circuit of centuries between its many  
destinations, but we have another vessel 
we call the Gardener Ship that visits many  
worlds but only to drop off colonists. 
The Gardener Ship uses the premise that  
any realistic interstellar colony vessel needs 
to be essentially self-sufficient and able to  
manufacture any spare parts it needs from raw 
materials, and that means it can keep producing  
colonial gear, not just ferry the gear to a 
single planet one time. And given the length  
of the voyages, decades, they can breed up new 
colonists too. It is the opposite of the classic  
sleeper ship, you need your colonist awake for 
the journeys, living and manufacturing and having  
families, but the crew maybe not so much. Indeed 
a big part of the crew’s job is making sure the  
ship stays on the same task from beginning to end, 
and as we saw in our Galactic Gardeners episode,  
that end might be a million years down the road 
as some gardener ship leaves Earth and goes to  
world after world on its way to the galactic rim, 
settling thousands of new systems on the way.
 
With a task that long, your biggest barrier 
to success is losing the will to continue,  
and that more than boredom might be why certain 
people or groups go on ice. They have a goal that  
will take a very long time to happen, and they 
want to be around for it to make sure it happens,  
so they go on ice for periods, waking up 
occasionally. Civilizations might sometimes  
do the same, after all it may be that the 
best way to achieve cultural stasis, if  
that’s your goal, is to put the people in stasis.
However it is a dangerous play, which makes sense,  
hibernation is always a risky strategy in nature. 
Isolated on a colony ship, your sleeping crew  
would still be very vulnerable to hijacking by 
anyone still awake, be it colonists or whatever  
bit of the crew was awake, and the risk of such 
hijacking may be nearly as great as what risks to  
the mission would be entailed by generational 
drift of goals and ideals by not freezing. 
 
On the other hand, freezing part of your 
civilization while leaving part unfrozen  
places the unfrozen portion in charge of 
it. We usually assume that’s intentional,  
the caretaker crew who hopefully were 
selected for stability and trustworthiness.  
This is a gamble all on its own, but mutiny 
by your caretaker crew may be secondary to  
the risk of takeover from outside groups, rebels 
in the hills so to speak or a foreign invader.
 
If the majority of your population goes on ice, 
for whatever reason, whoever is left unfrozen is  
in a pretty good position to have things their 
way. Assuming they don’t die anyway, after all  
if everyone is going on ice there’s probably a 
good reason for it and one of the more obvious  
ones is that normal life won’t be viable soon. 
Though why it would be viable down the road is  
unclear. A civilization that decided that it had 
damaged its planet and was continuing to do so  
might decide to go on ice while the world 
recovered but would probably be better  
off devoting efforts to figure out how to 
fix that damage or at least do less of it.  
You don’t get much work done while you’re asleep, 
and little new work gets done if most folks are,  
so if your civilization is full of bored people 
hoping to leapfrog forward and see new things,  
not many new things will develop if almost 
everyone is on ice. I suppose if there was a set  
cost to staying frozen folks might opt to sleep 
for as long as their personal wealth permits.  
The very richest might be able to go on 
stasis long enough to go hang out at the  
Restaurant at the End of the Universe. This would 
be a rather bizarre economy that would give a  
whole new meaning to the phrase ‘Time is Money”
Trying to skip ahead into a bright new future, or  
the end of the world, is one motivation for going 
to sleep on ice. Or to be a frozen corpse anyway,  
it's customary to call folks on ice asleep 
in fiction but they are thoroughly dead,  
and nowadays they are dead even before we freeze 
them. However, that might not be true either,  
which takes us to our last and maybe most 
plausible example of a frozen civilization.
 
In Alastair Reynolds’ classic scifi novel, 
Revelation Space, we have a faction of humanity  
that spends a lot of its time on near-light-speed 
vessels, called light-huggers, and spend most  
of its time in frozen stasis too. That may be a 
very common way to leapfrog forward through time  
and those interstellar traders might be their 
own civilization, and the longest lived one,  
and indeed we see an example of that in 
another of his novels, House of Suns,  
but I have a different example in mind today. 
In Revelation Space the captain of one of those  
ships, the Nostalgia for Infinity, is infected 
with a virus that causes severe and gross mutation  
in flesh and machine, indeed it's really 
machines it seems to go after, people’s  
cybernetic implants, and the captain is very much 
a cyborg. They put him on ice, and very cold too,  
down to below a Kelvin, whereas most cryonic 
freezing assumes to be more like 100 Kelvin.  
Incidentally there is no set temperature you 
have to freeze people to, the two key bits  
are the Arrhenius Equation, the formula for 
the temperature dependence of reaction rates,  
of which decay is one such reaction, and 
the desire to keep the temperature constant.  
No fluctuations to cause cracking from repeated 
expansion and contraction. You could build a  
cryonic facility in Antarctica or Pluto but you 
still need some active equipment to make sure the  
temperature stays put, no seasonal variance.
Anyway the captain is Ultra-Cold,  
appropriate since his faction’s name is 
the Ultra’s, and yet he is still able to  
be conscious because his brain is a mix of the 
organic and the computer. We often discuss the  
notion of replacing damaged neurons in our minds 
with something more synthetic, and that seems to  
be the most preferred approach to mind uploading 
and augmentation as well, to simply replace our  
billions of neurons and their connecting synapses 
gradually as each one starts wearing down.  
A person who went that path probably could 
be placed in stasis and remain conscious in  
whole or part if those synthetic neurons were 
able to keep firing at sub-zero temperatures  
and could function as a brain without the rest. 
Indeed there are many advantages to computing,  
or thinking, at low temperatures, as we discussed 
in the civilizations at the end of time series.
 
This raises an interesting option, not just that 
those on ice might be able to continue in some  
dream-like slumber, but that civilizations 
that decide to embrace cold-computing and  
post-biological existences, as we often look at 
in our Civilizations at the End of Time series,  
might make the transition by freezing themselves. 
I think a lot of folks would prefer to keep their  
body around if they went digital anyway, 
as opposed to the usual suggestion it be  
destroyed in the upload or discarded afterward, 
and so I could easily imagine finding some world  
full of nothing but frozen tomb vaults full of 
computers of minds expanded beyond their bodies,  
with a frozen body in the center of each one. 
Their inhabitants slumbering away in artificial  
virtual worlds, or very awake and possibly 
existing at a far higher subjective time rate.  
Such a frozen civilization might not be waiting 
around at all, not pausing out of boredom, but  
gone onto ice to gain the advantage of ultra-cold 
computing efficiencies and be very busy indeed. 
 
One of the most common applications suggested 
for Cryonics is as a way to extend lifespans,  
and as we saw today it really only does that in 
a short-term context of potentially letting us  
take advantage of such technologies in the early 
21st century when they will probably be more of  
late 21st and early 22nd century sort of thing, 
and outside this specific period of history we  
won’t see freezing people as a way to extend 
life. There’s an excellent video, “Waiting for  
Immortality” that does looks at Cryonics as well 
some other methods that might be more useful for  
extending life like cloning, age-reversal, 
and mind uploading over on Curiositystream.
 
Curiosity Stream has thousands of fun 
and educational videos, but they’ve also  
partnered up with us at Nebula, our Streamy-Award 
Nominated streaming service, to offer Nebula’s  
content along with their own, if you sign up 
at the link in the episode description. That  
means you will not only get Curiosity Stream, 
and at a 26% discount, but also lets you catch  
SFIA episodes early and without ads, and help 
support our show while you’re doing it, as well  
as see our Exclusive Coexistence with Alien Series 
and other great content from our sibling shows.
 
Again you can get a year of both 
Curiositystream and Nebula for less than $15,  
get to support the show and see our episodes 
early, and get all that for less than $15 by  
using the link in the episode’s description.
Last year I got into the habit of doing not  
just one episode a week on Thursdays but also a 
monthly bonus episode and a monthly livestream,  
usually on the middle and final Sunday of each 
month respectively and I have decided to keep  
that up this year even though I’ll be devoting 
a lot of time to writing a book after years  
of audience demand. I am loosely calling that 
mid-month bonus episode SciFi Sundays for now,  
as I’ve noticed I tend to write them more with 
a focus on science fiction tropes and concepts  
than the average episode. This year's first will 
be “Machine Overlords & Post-Discontent Societies”  
on Sunday, January 17, then we will return 
next week to the Alien Civilizations series  
for a look at Oceanic Aliens, before looking at 
Zero-Gravity Civilizations the week after that.
 
If you want alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to the  
channel, and if you’d like to help support 
future episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are 
linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media forums 
where you can get updates and chat with others  
about the concepts in the episodes and many other 
futuristic ideas. You can also follow us iTunes,  
Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our 
audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
