This episode is sponsored by Raycon.
“Only those who will risk going too far
can possibly find out how far one can go.”
– T.S.
Eliot.
In last month’s episode, Surveying for Habitable
Interstellar Star Systems, I mentioned that
as soon as I started the topic, I knew it
was going to require more than one episode;
so we briefly discussed interstellar probes
and manned scouting missions down to a planet
in that episode, but we focused on distant
astronomical techniques.
Today, we’ll be taking a deeper dive into
interstellar probes, both flyby-missions and
long-term orbiters.
However, we’ll follow up the next two weeks
with a look at slow-boat colonization of the
galaxy at less than 1% light speed, what we
call “Crawlonizing”, and the week after
that we’ll be asking what life as a Planetary
Explorer will be like.
Today our focus is on those probes though
so don’t forget to subscribe and hit the
notifications bell if you want alerts when
those and other episodes come out.
In our Surveying episode, we pointed out that
the nature of telescopes and probes at the
interstellar scale meant that you could always
get a probe to park itself around a world
a little bit quicker than the time it would
take for a colonization fleet to arrive, but
that a flyby probe, since it can use all of
its fuel for accelerating and doesn’t need
to save any for decelerating, can get there
in half the time, and, of course, a telescope
can actually get there backward in time, seeing
the world not when your probe arrives, but
as it was when light from it left and got
to us back here.
Let’s create an example to give this some
context, with a system about 100 light years
away, where we’ll imagine that we detect
an anomaly right before the start of the 22nd
century.
After short discussion and the New Year’s
celebration, its decided to investigate.
A flyby probe launched in the year 2100 AD,
sent out to achieve 10% of light speed to
a system about 100 light years away, Epsilon
Fornacis, one of the dimmest stars visible
to the Naked Eye, an ancient binary system
composed of both a star that’s a bit less
massive than our own, and its medium-distant
binary neighbor, about half our Sun’s Mass,
estimated to be in excess of 12 billion years
old.
This is not a great place to be hunting for
rocky planets, being so old that it predates
most supernovae, but we got a ping, not much,
just a brief bit of signal that might have
been natural or might not have been, in that
hazy “Wow!
Signal” range of uncertainty, and when we
examined it with an available telescope, some
of the spectrography and infrared didn’t
really match what we expected.
So, right away, 6 things happen: First, a
signal is sent out to that system, initially,
several loud attention-getting signals, then
a lexicon, and a general greeting, along with
informing them that probes are en route and
their ETA and trajectory are given, along
with a self-destruct code.
They are then told that manned missions will
follow and that if either a specified signal
is sent or the self-destruct alert signal
from the probes is received, that mission
will abort.
In this way, not only have we said hello and
established a method of communication if anyone
is there, we’ve made every reasonable attempt
to avoid giving the impression of being reckless,
neglectful or threatening, but without including
unnecessary delays.
Of course, if we don’t get a response, we
may wait until hearing back from the probe
before deciding to send a manned probe, but
in this case we won’t those two centuries.
Second, Epsilon Fornacis gets a telescope
dedicated to staring at it, with a variety
of instruments, which is nicknamed Nicolas,
in honor of Nicolas-Louis de Lacaille, the
astronomer who first documented the Constellation
Fornax, during his time at the Cape of Good
Hope in the 1750s, though he originally named
it the Chemical Furnace.
The telescope Nicolas sees the system as it
was in the year 2000, a century back, when
the light left.
They will be monitoring this system for the
next few thousand years.
Third, the flyby probe, Louis, is launched
to reach 10% of light speed, and will arrive
in 1000 years, the year 3100 AD.
This would actually be a little over 1100
years after the initial anomaly was detected.
Some additional probes are sent out towards
plausible colonization candidates in that
same general trajectory.
Fourth, the probe carrier Lacaille is launched,
carrying squadrons of various planetary and
solar probes at 5% light speed, and able to
accelerate and decelerate at 100 gees, they
need about 9 hours total to speed up and slow
down, and they will arrive January 1, 4100
AD.
Fifth, the Firefly, a vanguard manned vessel
is launched that will move at 5% light speed
as well, but will only accelerate at 5 gees,
and thus they will arrive on January 3, 4100
AD.
The crew will exist in suspended animation,
having received prototype augmentation and
nanotechnology.
The volunteers have been informed that this
is high-risk.
Sixth, Musketeer, an armed colony fleet of
three Super-Orion-Drive vessels, the Athos,
Porthos, and Aramis, will be launched and
will also travel at 5% light speed, but it
will use a classic ark ship approach, a big
rotating habitat drum, and will not exceed
a tenth of a gee of acceleration, thus will
arrive July 1st of 4100 AD.
No significant construction times are needed
as everything has been re-tasked from other
colonial ventures and there is heavy automation
in 22nd century manufacturing.
The colony ship will be able to send information
and directives to the probes and receive information
from them, and thus will be able to redirect
the second wave of probes off the flyby data.
Similarly, the Vanguard team will gain consciousness
a bit later, by January 4th and review the
first 4 days of second-wave probe data, while
having just under 6 months before the colony
fleet arrives.
Complicating factors are numerous, hence Louis,
the flyby probe and the second-wave probe
on board Lacaille, if they determine the system
is unexpectedly hostile, natural or by alien
artifice, can send an abort code to the Firefly
or Musketeer to divert to another of the potentially
habitable worlds further out that would require
minimum delta-v to redirect to, that we sent
those other flyby probes to.
But the efforts of the Firefly and Musketeer
will depend entirely on what the Louis and
Lacaille probes will achieve, and it’s the
efforts of these two probes that we will consider
today.
Firefly and Musketeer will have to wait a
couple weeks for their episode.
Now, Louis is no simple camera on a power
supply with a transmitter, he is a 50-ton
probe, shaped like a needle, now wrapped in
his cloak, the remnants of the vast solar
sail he powered out of the Sol System with
that now serves as radiation shielding, where
before, it was a kilometer-wide sheet of slowly
self-healing reflective foil, designed to
be targeted by lasers to push him up to speed,
then retracted to minimize interstellar collisions
and reduce wear and tear.
Louis can spin this back out to serve as a
massive parabolic dish, both for communication
back home and for serving as a mirror for
its own telescopes.
This may also be used as it approaches a star
to slow or redirect it, and to funnel light
to a solar panel for recharging its graphene
batteries.
Louis is not a complex AI, he knows his job
and very little else.
He has a number of smaller probes he can detach
and give a tiny shove to the side, and he
plans to do this as he approaches Epsilon
Fornacis and can combine information from
Telescope Nicolas back home, and his own sensor,
to get locations for planets or any other
objects of interest.
Louis is aware he has a small thermonuclear
device on board, that can be triggered by
himself or others with the right code, and
this does not bother him.
Given that he is a 50-ton object moving at
10% of light speed, and thus has a kinetic
energy equal to over 5000 megatons of atomic
weapons, more than existed during the Cold
War, Louis would not assume this nuclear bomb
was intended as a weapon of aggression.
Louis’s protocols include a number of self-destruct
failsafes, for scenarios like him finding
himself on an intercept course with a planet
or clearly artificial structure, or if he
loses the ability to determine this, such
as instrument failure.
It is designed to shred him down to the molecules,
where his fragments, moving at 10% of light
speed, wouldn’t be big enough to harm anything
they collide with eons later.
Fragments need to be small though, even a
tiny sliver of metal, no bigger than a pencil,
weighing maybe 10 grams, would carry about
a kiloton of explosive power.
For this reason, like most of the probes in
his class, Louis also includes a number of
small spikes he can send out to hit objects,
causing a nuclear-level explosion, whose dust
and debris clouds could be analyzed by his
instruments to tell him more about that object’s
makeup, however, these have been explicitly
disabled for this mission.
Mission control does not expect to find anything
alien, but it considers this much more likely
than normal and is intent on making sure it
doesn’t accidentally blow up any aliens
or start a war.
With that in mind, no AI will have any capacity
for doing damage and even the manned missions
have strong controls in place.
This is an important thing with any interstellar
probe, you need to contemplate any reasonably
plausible way the thing might inflict damage,
particularly if it suffers damage itself.
So if Louis can no longer see his surroundings
clearly, he can no longer be sure he’s not
on a collision trajectory and will need to
self-destruct once a reasonable effort is
made to repair or restore those, if unsuccesful.
Same for if his beacons go out, because he’s
cruising along at 10% light speed and that
means, without a beacon, he’s not really
very easy to see in time to react if you just
happen to be some small outpost or vessel.
His actual odds of running into anything are
virtually nil, even if his trip was across
the whole galaxy, but sending a probe into
a system where there is a suspicion there’s
a civilization means raising those odds immensely,
as does sending it on a straight-line path
between any two star systems, where, if there
are ships traveling between them, would be
where those ships are most likely to be traveling.
Space is huge but those straight corridors
between stars are much smaller and thus you
have better odds of encountering someone traveling
between two planets, especially two with bio
or technosignatures.
Sending it into where there might be a lot
of spaceships and space habitats makes that
even worse, and while our telescopes will
have picked up every planet and maybe even
every dwarf planet or larger moon by then,
space habitats or ships might be harder to
pinpoint.
And an unknown alien beacon is likely to be
something that people, or aliens, would want
to rendezvous with and dissect.
With that in mind, you need to make sure the
self-destruct goes off only when the probe
is disabled but before a lack of sensory data
could cause it to unknowingly detonate within
range of someone who would be damaged by the
blast.
Which is to say, if it goes blind from sensor
damage, it needs to detonate itself before
someone could plausibly have gotten into range
of it or its own path unknowingly wandered
of course into something.
After that, it can't know if someone has rendezvoused
with it or its veered toward a colonized system.
And its giant detonation also tells anyone
watching it that it has detonated and need
no longer be worried about.
There’s a second aspect of this too, because
we need to contemplate any reasonably plausible
way that the thing might inflict damage, and
that includes psychological and diplomatic
damage, like them worrying the message and
detonation was a ruse and the probe is still
coming toward them on course to hit their
world.
Any probe is a two-way street when it comes
to information, at least if those the probe
goes to look at are aware of its existence.
If they’re a technological civilization,
they likely will have the ability to spot
anything moving into their system at dangerous
kinetic energies.
Stealth is very difficult in space, especially
when trying to stealth something threatening,
because that’s exactly what folks are going
to build their detection gear to find and
its not likely to be hard to get a budget
through your alien congress or parliament
for detecting 5000 Megaton bombs headed into
your colonized system.
If your aims are peaceful and you want to
build a relationship with aliens, it helps
to make it clear that you were thoughtful
when you built your probes, and that means
assuming they will either dissect your probe
or do a public records request to get the
schematics and mission planning one day.
First impressions are probably as important
to aliens as to us, and while science fiction
likes to show us horribly misunderstanding
a peaceful alien who merely ‘seemed hostile’,
so that we needlessly attacked them, we don’t
want to stick aliens in a similar situation
where they thought our intent was hostile
when it wasn’t.
We want to build trust from day 1, as well
as an incentive to work with us, and that
means making it clear we not only have good
intentions, but are also competent and thoughtful.
Thus good potential partners and allies and
dangerous enemies.
That means that even though we’re anthropomorphizing
Louis the Probe here, we didn’t send an
advanced AI on our probe that was smart enough
to even vaguely qualify as human, for four
reasons: First, we don’t need that much
brains on a camera.
Second, we don’t want to be throwing artificial
intelligence out into the galaxy, far from
where humans can check up on them and see
that they’re not mutating horribly, which
means not sending probes out to where we’ll
never follow or will be centuries following
up, that have high intelligence and any sort
of capacity of self-replication, which a self-repair
system might be jury-rigged to work as.
That’s how you get von Neumann Berserker
Probes, or grey goo, in the galaxy.
Third, we don’t want aliens thinking we’d
casually do that either.
And fourth, we don’t want our first interaction
with another intelligent species very unlike
us to involve them seeing us using an AI – an
intelligent entity very unlike us - as a disposable
slave with orders to commit suicide.
It might give them the wrong impression about
us.
Or, it might give them a bad impression anyway,
and hopefully a wrong one.
The critical concept is that, before we ever
send an interstellar probe out, we need to
have a good idea how it might be viewed by
others, especially if we have any plausible
expectations that there are going to be other
sentient lifeforms at its destination.
This is just as important as all instruments
we’ll be using to view those star systems,
to help make sure what we see isn’t an alien
armada packing up and heading our way to discuss
the 5000 megaton bomb we slammed into one
of their worlds or artificial habitats.
So, Louis is very much built along the lines
of being a harmless probe, but without forgetting
that he also looks like a giant doomsday device.
Of course he still has a real mission, which
is providing us with intel on what’s assumed
to be an uninhabited solar system, just maybe
less guaranteed to be one than normal.
While he’s been traveling towards this system,
Louis has been continuing to get updates from
home, and realistically, that will include
every planet in that solar system’s approximate
orbital path and timing.
In this particular case, it’s actually got
three different solar systems to be looking
for, as the primary and secondary are far
enough apart to possibly have stable orbits
in their habitable zones while also potentially
having habitable worlds orbiting around both
stars, circumbinary, at least in terms of
what is habitable to technological civilizations.
This is complicated because the primary star,
while less massive than our own Sun, is much
older, and is now a subgiant that’s grown
brighter as it has aged, and is four and half
times brighter than our Sun is today, with
a habitable zone that’s 212% the width of
our sun’s, but would have been only 60%
as bright as our sun during its main sequence,
and its habitable zone only 77% as wide as
ours.
Meaning, if anyone evolved on a world here,
billions of years before, they either had
to migrate or do some serious planetary engineering
to keep their homeworld livable.
The secondary star is only a few percent as
bright as our Sun, and even a world that’s
a fifth of an AU away might be too cold to
live on.
But, of course, that’s not what we’re
really looking for, because we’re looking
for either a place that humans of the 42nd
century will be able to colonize, or a place
that emitted a technosignature in the year
2000 and either has survived for another 1100
years when Louis arrives, or has died off.
None of those scenarios really care about
naturally habitable worlds.
So, Louis can redivert a little bit, but essentially
has to pick a straight-line path through this
system that gives it a chance to photograph
one planet decently up close, and the rest
at distances of billions of kilometers.
Those other planets will get a smaller probe
detached from Louis, but they’ll basically
be 20 kilogram cameras with a little guidance
and solar panels and a charged up battery.
They are going to detach if, and only if,
Louis’ pre-programmed criteria, when he’s
about a light year out, are satisfied that
sending those probes on flybys isn’t going
to cause a Kessler Syndrome event or any other
kind of would-be catastrophe.
Louis himself has a number of more detailed
missions that will begin with that detaching
and with spreading out his sails as he enters
the system, at about 60 AU, for his window
of roughly one week for useful observations.
He’s been repairing or re-melting his sail
during his voyage so that it’s nice and
smooth, and now configured as telescope mirrors,
making it part of one giant telescope that
Louis is transforming into, with a host of
sensors that exceed his smaller, older cousins,
Hubble and Webb.
Louis will be passing by a world that’s
half again as massive as Earth, that was almost
an AU out from the primary, and is now quite
hot and nearly airless but which may have
been habitable millions of years ago.
He will be taking pictures of many other things
as he passes through though, being far more
powerful than the smaller drones he dispatched
to flyby each planet.
These probes are going to tell us far more
about each world than the Voyager probes could,
but moving at 10% of light speed, they will
have less than a minute where they will be
as close to their planet as the moon is to
us.
After that, their only remaining job will
be to leave the sensors on for any other useful
readings they might offer and to try to rendezvous
with Louis, who will seek to either reabsorb
them or send them their own detonation code
once they’re back out to deep space, and
their components would have lightyears to
drift and fragment before encountering anything
else.
Louis will be attempting to use his sail to
swing toward his follow-up star.
Those lesser drone probes will not be as powerful
as Hubble was and not have long to image,
and Hubble could not see the Moon Landing
Site in any detail from orbit of Earth, so
we are not expecting zoomed in photos of alien
lifeforms.
But they will see every continent and mountain
and larger lake and island, and they would
see a city.
Louis will do even better, though fundamentally
his focus is really the whole system, and
collecting and transmitting that data homeward.
Nonetheless, he detects some interesting anomalies
on that world as he passes closely, which
we will now designate as Louis Epsilon Fornacis,
or the planet Lef.
In a millenia, armed with Louis’s data,
which it will receive in 3150 AD, the Lacaille
Probe carrier will arrive, then slow, and
will begin sending probes to orbit those worlds
of interest.
It will go and park itself in orbit around
Lef, and begin taking detailed readings as
good as our entire modern orbital surveillance
grid can produce in terms of spysats, weather,
infrared, and more.
They will even be able to begin setting up
ground-penetrating radar and microwave detectors
to help look for signs of underground caves,
tunnels, buried ruins, or bunkers.
Though it will have only a few days to gather
data before the Firefly arrives with its Planetary
Explorers, but we’ll save that discussion,
of Lef, its anomalies, and its intrepid human
and robot explorers, for another day.
Now, how realistic was our tale?
Ignoring my shoehorning-in a probable alien
civilization?
Well, it has a couple breaks with reality,
though it’s hard to say where.
For instance, I’ve made a big point of saying
how a flyby probe can get away with traveling
twice as fast as practically identical probes
and ships meant to stop there, but that specifically
has to do with propulsion systems that operate
on the rocket equation, whether that’s chemical
fuel, fission, fusion, or antimatter.
In our case, its real speed would be about
whatever speed we could achieve during the
window back home where we can keep a laser
focused on that probe, and the amount of energy
we are willing and able to spend.
Project Starshot thinks it can get probes
up to a third of light speed with a ground-based
laser, using essentially modern tech.
Having gotten to meet its director, Peter
Worden, and chat about it in person, I believe
this will be possible, and in this century.
Truth be told, and for folks who remember
our prior videos on laser propulsion, I already
believed this, but Peter Worden is a compelling
and expert speaker, and he burned out any
lingering doubts I had.
In such a setup, your flyby probe like Louis
has only maneuvering fuel, and its speed has
no relation to the other vessels that need
to slow down using some sort of rocket, even
if they were also laser propelled, and probably
to a lower speed since the faster a laser
can accelerate you, the more gees, the higher
your speed when it loses contact at its maximum
distance.
In this case, I think flyby interstellar probes
will be moving at a minimum of a third of
light speed and maybe much higher, even 99%
light speed, it will depend on how well we
can absorb or evade interstellar dust collisions.
Those other ships may be able to leave at
the same speeds, though often would require
a longer launch period and distance to avoid
super-high acceleration routes, and unlike
a flyby, they have to be able to slow from
whatever speed they reach, which means they
can’t go much faster than they could have
without that light sail initial boost, though
we discussed some tricks for that in our Exodus
Fleet Episode.
I also assumed everyone launched at the same
time, to emphasize the time difference that
acceleration rate makes, which you wouldn’t
expect to be the case with that colony ship
at least.
You might scramble a dozen explorers off for
a hibernation ship on a few days notice, to
prep the ship and give them time to say goodbye,
as they’ll awake 2 millenia later, but that
colony ark ship is not just going to be sitting,
waiting with prepared colonists, and I can’t
imagine rediverting a colony ship set to launch
elsewhere without at least giving folks a
chance to think on it and opt to wait for
another ship.
Though diverting a colony ship already part
way toward another system and on a close enough
path to be able to divert is also an option.
There’s also that big question if you should
be launching probes and scouts, let alone
colony missions, before you have even given
your signal time to reach them let alone receive
a reply.
In practice though, I think you would because
two centuries is a long time to wait when
if the answer is ‘abort mission’ it means
you either redivert to another empty system
or have on hand ambassadors ready to go.
Keep in mind, we probably would not be offended
by having an alien colony fleet show up, if
they had pre-messaged us their friendly intent
and offered to either redirect or settle some
asteroid and serve as an embassy, to trade
cultural knowledge and technology.
And as we discussed in Hidden Civilizations,
there’s an expectation that you post clear
no trespassing signs if you’re capable of
doing so.
I suspect you’d wait but not two centuries,
just in the context of giving yourself more
prep time for the colony and scout missions.
Also if there are alien ruins, you don’t
need a scout team of a dozen explorers, you
need many thousands of archeologists and an
infrastructure to supply them, there’s no
villagers to buy food from on this planet
and there’s an entire planet, or even solar
system, that needs digging up.
Still, the key concepts are there.
Once you park things in orbit, the difference
between a simple probe taking photos can begin
blurring as we contemplate artificial intelligence
and manned missions.
How much AI you’re willing to give a probe
matters a lot, and whether or not you want
to give it self-repair and replication, and
the ability to land on a planet.
If you do, then you’d probably first send
it to an asteroid to eat the thing up and
gain the resources needed for a major deployment
system-wide, to orbit and down to the ground
and potentially even acting as not just explorers,
but colonizers, as we looked at in our seed
ships and self-replicating robots episodes.
Now, AI on interstellar probe missions is
often regarded as a necessity, but I don’t
think so.
Reckless deployment of high-intelligence or
self-replicators is dangerous, and if you
trust the AI and it’s human smart, then
I think that, practically and ethically, we’re
talking about a kind of ‘manned mission’
the term just lacks some accuracy, but then
it already does, which is why the term ‘crewed
mission’ is often preferred.
Today we were only contemplating sub-human
intellect or none at all, I don’t really
think the term ‘probe’ is really appropriate
if it does have a real mind onboard it, natural,
artificial or some blend of both.
To me that’s a scout.
What else is missing?
Well, we’re not just surveying that whole
system because we suspect it might have techno
signatures and thus might have a presence
off a habitable planet.
The normal job of these probes in any case
where it’s not about some anomaly of scientific
interest, like a tech or bio signature, is
scoping for all those minor worlds and asteroids
and nailing down their orbital paths during
the week or so of flybys of the whole system,
because to colonists, those low-gravity objects
are the first point of interest in their chronology
of colonizing a system.
They’re not planning to go and orbit one
planet and dump everything down on its surface,
they want to get their orbital and interplanetary
infrastructure started before descending down
into a gravity well, and so they need a map
of the best candidates for exploitation.
We’ll examine both of these topics more
in the next couple weeks though, as we look
at slow colonization of the galaxy, crawlonizing,
and find out what the anomaly was as Lacaille
and Firefly arrive at Lef.
So a fairly critical concept to interstellar
probes is that they let us get up close to
an object, and that circumvents all the noise
and signal loss.
This same thing applies to listening to music
or audiobooks and podcasts, and is why you
want a nice pair of noise reducing or isolating
earbuds, and I’ve been using my Raycon earbuds
now for over 2 years to listen audiobooks
while mowing my lawn or taking a nap and the
other thing I love about them is that don’t
fall out of my ear, whether I go over a bump
or sleep on my side.
Raycon’s Everyday Earbuds have optimized
gel tips for the perfect in-ear fit, so they
are comfortable and they will not budge or
fall out, and they give you high quality audio
at half the price of other premium audio brands.
That’s probably while Raycon Everyday Earbuds
have tens of thousands of 5-star reviews,
including mine.
The individual earbuds have a 8 hour playtime
battery life and they recharge in their compact
carrying case, for 32 hours of listening time
without needing to plug into a wall, and they
have a wireless charging feature for the case
too you can try out.
Raycon Everyday Earbuds are also Siri and
Alexa compatible, and their noise isolation
feature can be turned on for total immersion
or you can go into awareness mode if you need
to be able to hear the world around you while
listening.
They’ve also got three sound profiles, pure
sound, for those of us who like to listen
to podcasts and audiobooks, a bass-boosted
mode for music with a lot of beat, and balanced
mode.
And they are water resilient and tough, mine
have even survived being left in my pocket
through the washing machine.
They won’t fall out of year but if you drop
one in a puddle accidentally, it’s usually
going to survive.
They’re just all around great earbuds in
terms of quality, versatility, comfort, and
cost.
So if you’re looking for a great and affordable
listening experience and want to help support
our show while you’re at it, just click
the link in the description box or go to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur
to get 15% off your Raycon purchase!
All right, that wraps us up for today but
we’ll be back next Thursday to look at the
concept of Crawl-onizing the Galaxy, how humanity
can still settle the stars even if we are
limited to spaceships moving at less than
1% of light speed, and what that will look
like.
Then we’ll have part 3 of today’s episode,
as we join the scout missions down to Lef
and see what Life as an Interplanetary Explorer
might be like.
We’ll also have our livestream Q&A coming
up Sunday, June 26th.
Then it is on to July for a look at Deep Space
Habitats, then Extragalactic Sanctuaries.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like help support future episodes, you
can got to our website, IsaacArthur.net, which
we’ve recently relaunched new and improved,
and check out our donate tab for ways to help,
and all those other options are linked in
the episode description, along with our social
media forums like facebook, reddit, and discord,
where you can chat with others about today’s
episode and many other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
