In the future humanity might settle 
and create countless new worlds,  
but will we also create new types of humans?
 
Today we are going to be discussing Transhumanism 
and Post-Humans, and whether this is an inevitable  
path for humanity, or something we should 
actively avoid or willingly embrace.
 
The first point to acknowledge though, is that 
Transhumanism isn’t a specific single agreed  
on path, and indeed isn’t even an agreed on 
definition. It tends to be rather big-tent  
and so can only be loosely defined. Generally, 
Transhumanism is the notion that use of technology  
to extend human lifespan, intelligence, and 
physical ability would enhance the quality  
of the human life and should be actively pursued. 
In this context a transhuman would be someone who  
has had some of those changes, what we will 
call augmentations for today’s purposes.
 
There’s a lot of great thinkers and arguments 
on the topic, for and against and in between,  
from philosopher Nick Bostrom, who is probably one 
of the most well-known advocates of transhumanism,  
to Leon Kass, who believes these technologies 
will dehumanise us in a negative way. We’ll  
try to give a balanced view but I should say from 
the outset that I tend to feel cautious usage of  
augmentation can be a good thing, and strongly 
favor usage to help those who are disabled  
in some fashion, but not limited to that.
In contrast, while there are those who would  
object to using technology to fix impairments or 
deficits, relatively few folks are opposed to that  
basic principle even when it often gives them and 
many of us a feeling of unease. And someone who  
objects to giving a blind person mechanical 
eyeballs might not object to giving them a  
pacemaker or hearing aid, or prosthetic arm if 
they needed one. So too, the reason enhancements  
are done matters a lot. I think few folks would 
support banning hair dye or hair plugs or makeup,  
even though some consider their use a bit vain and 
unhealthy, and they would likely not object to a  
cancer patient wearing a wig or someone getting 
cosmetic surgery for facial scarring or damage.
 
And those are moving goalposts too, if you go 
back and read material from several decades ago,  
fiction and non-fiction, you would have worries 
about this or that procedure dehumanizing people,  
like a mechanical heart or prosthetic hand, 
and yet these worries are far less common now,  
and so we also want to keep in mind that 
natural and often healthy human caution at  
the strange and new is not necessarily bad, 
but it might be a poor gauge for how folks  
will feel about something a generation later. 
Indeed, sometimes reality turns out bad and  
opinion grows less accepting, not more.
So, we are sticking today with the term  
augmentation as meaning the use of technology to 
alter a human away from that person’s perceived  
natural state or away from the normal human bell 
curve. That leaves a lot of gray area, like if  
altering someone to be taller is transhumanism, 
particularly if they’re aiming to go from outside  
the normal range into the normal range, such as 
someone who is 4 foot tall seeking to be 5’9”,  
a very average height, in contrast to someone 
who is 5’9” seeking to be 6’4”, on the high  
end of normal, let alone 8’11”, the height of 
Robert Wadlow, the tallest recorded person. 
 
Augmentation could also be genetically changing 
someone’s natural hair to one already in the  
standard human template. Transhumanism could 
also include the ability to change skin color,  
or gender, and each of those is variously 
controversial, but mostly we are interested  
in its use today in either how it improves the 
overall human condition or in how it's seen as  
moving outside the normal human template, for good 
or ill. Obviously changing gender or skin colors,  
say a black male changing to an Asian female, is 
inside the normal human template and your mileage  
may vary on how that option is beneficial to the 
human condition and both represent topics that  
are pretty charged at the moment. I’d rather 
not dig into those today, so much as use them  
as examples of both how complex the matter can 
get and how viewpoints can shift with time.
 
We will for simplicity’s sake assume 
anything already considered acceptable  
to most people is not in the transhuman 
range, like pacemakers or the typical  
limb prosthetic. In that case a prosthetic arm 
that had heat sensation and touch equal to the  
typical human arm would not seem likely to 
be controversial, though that could change.
 
Not that if something is or isn’t controversial 
should be the standard for transhumanism either,  
but much as we don’t call people with pacemakers, 
hearing aids, and eyeglasses cyborgs, we don’t  
really need to include those in transhuman 
discussions either. We will be trying to  
keep morally neutral on the various topics today 
too, so we’re not really interested if someone  
has the right to become smarter than normal by 
technology so much as the technological means  
to do so and possible positive and negative 
consequences. And we deep-dived the specific  
means of Brain enhancement in our episode 
Mind Augmentation, a couple years back.
 
We also have concerns about transhuman or life 
extension technologies adding social inequality,  
which we discussed in more detail in our recent 
episode on Automated Economies and Unemployment,  
where there’s concerns folks who own robots 
will own everything, or in this case,  
that only the rich or powerful would get the best 
augmentation or life extension, and be able to  
keep and grow any advantages over others. Concerns 
over that are hard for us to discuss or address,  
especially as this show tries to stay away from 
political or ideological discussions, but those  
concerns can’t be ignored or easily dismissed 
either, we’re just bypassing them today.
 
Lastly, before we jump in, we need to be mindful 
that there is both the change that occurs and  
the means by which it is done, for us to consider. 
Loosely speaking, we are okay with people becoming  
smarter by study and good health habits and 
exercise, but drugs or brain chips might  
achieve the exact same thing and be considered 
bad. Four people might bench lift 400 pounds,  
one from having a nice genetic package and 
shape plus some hard work, one from vast effort,  
one from heavy steroid use, and lots of effort 
too, and one with a bionic arm. Our view of  
all four of these people is different, and 
our reactions can be knee jerk sometimes.
 
And speaking of knee jerk reactions, we have 
to be mindful of unexpected consequences to  
an enhancement. The man able to use his bionic 
arm to lift a car is likely to hurt his knee,  
or rip out his spine, if those aren’t enhanced 
too. This is a common joke with comic books,  
and includes other examples like superman grabbing 
a plane that’s crashing and the thing ripping in  
half because the Man of Steel’s indestructible 
fist just hit two palm-sized bits of the thin  
air frame, or he caught it on the ground and 
landed and ripped the road apart with his feet. 
 
Having eyeballs able to shoot laser beams, but 
being otherwise human, like Cyclops from the  
X-Men, ought to dissolve his head. We have no 
100% reflective materials so his head has to be  
absorbing all that destructive energy and heat. 
And for that matter a society that’s not too  
fond of mutants ought to find an excuse to drag 
him in for tissue samples to find out what this  
miracle material is that reflects light, so we can 
grow it and use it for a million amazing things.
 
Transhumanism tends to draw parallels to comic 
books a lot and there’s the other big thing to  
remember: In a society able to make a superpower, 
be it by genetic alteration, random mutation,  
or something like Iron Man’s suit, other people 
will have it too. It might not be something so  
common you can pick it up at the Dollar Store 
or have it covered by your insurance. These  
alterations might be rare, but so are tanks 
and jet fighters and rockets and nukes and  
racecars and there are still tons of them. 
Spiderman and Batman and Ironman and Superman  
are mostly shown working in their home city, 
and that begs the question of why all these  
major crimes and world-shaking plots get planned 
under their nose rather than some other place,  
as well as what happens to every other city that 
presumably gets just as many accidents and issues,  
but has no superhero. In a transhuman world 
though, even if not everyone has some special  
ability, every town likely has its Batman or 
Spiderman, and they are probably wearing a uniform  
and complaining about getting stuck with the night 
shift this week, like so many police, fire, EMS,  
hospital workers, and other first responders. In 
this kind of a world, getting saved from falling  
off a tall building becomes normal, as do the 
superhuman abilities of people who do the saving.
 
This does not mean things stay the same, just 
that they renormalize. It’s not a zero-sum game.  
A world full of folks with superhuman abilities 
or magic or giant brains is very changed, see our  
Superpowers episode for more discussion 
of that. Incidentally I tend to think a  
pill or treatment that enhances everyone’s IQ 
by 20 points or strength by 20% is unlikely,  
it’s more likely it would tend to change the 
shape of the bell curve, not just its center.  
The effects aren’t likely to be uniform and of 
course many might refuse it entirely or take  
different versions, but the impact on society 
will be huge and in unpredictable ways.
 
A society where everyone sleeps 6 hours a night 
on average and wakes fully refreshed is a very  
different society than one where people often 
find themselves awake till nearly dawn trying  
to get to bed and feel exhausted after the full 
8 or 9 hours of sleep. This is a reminder that  
transhumanism is not limited to superpowers or 
superintelligence or even to various cybernetic  
or genetic enhancements, and that little things, 
when global, can be enormous. A society in which  
diabetes or Alzhiemer’s is simply eliminated 
is a very different one in so many ways, and  
while that’s not something that we traditionally 
think of in the realm of Transhumanism, so many  
of the more near term goals of Transhumanism 
are those less flashy but very real outcomes,  
not just the big bionic arms and brain implants.
Consider this: You don’t get sick,  
don’t get tired, never feel low on energy. 
You can still experience normal emotions but  
the brutal strikes of depression or other more 
hormonal or chemically imbalanced overwhelming  
emotions go away. Not involuntarily, I might add. 
You can choose to experience it or not and to the  
degree or circumstance you want, but it removes 
the crippling aspect. That’s a hyper-productive  
world and one where people still presumably 
get mean and sour but less from chronic aches  
and pains or exhaustion and emotional fatigue.
That’s also a very attractive world to a lot of  
folks, and I think a point needs to be restated 
that there is the method and the result, and we  
want to be careful not to assume we’re fighting 
old battles again. For instance, a person can  
certainly make a case that genetically enhancing a 
child in the womb is immoral, but we must remember  
that people have been engaging in selective 
breeding with the intent of producing superior  
kids for a very long time. Emphasis on “Intent”, 
because they did know all about breeding for  
traits and routinely did it with animals. Also, 
Intent matters more than effectiveness, because  
some lady drinking a bizarre brew from a local 
witch or herbalist that she believed was going to  
make her child be born handsome or healthy differs 
from some advanced technology doing it only by  
our assumption that the latter is effective 
and the former was as useful as a placebo.
 
While we have often banned procedures, like 
witchcraft or potions, we’ve never banned  
people seeking to have their kids come out 
better, and I’d have a hard time imagining we  
would. So we probably need to take for granted 
that as genetic engineering becomes available,  
it is going to happen. I think we’ll skim over 
the concept of designer babies, and the challenges  
ethical and technical involved, in favor of 
giving that its own episode down the road,  
but we probably need to ask How would you 
stop it? All you need is one country willing  
to let the science and procedures be conducted, or 
even just decriminalized, and suddenly it becomes  
a tourist stop. Ban travel there and suddenly 
their neighbor becomes a tourist stop,  
especially the border towns, and they figure 
they might as well help because there’s money  
to be made and if they don’t make it, another 
neighbor will, but with the same result.
 
I think the legal justification for banning travel 
to a country solely based on medical procedures  
they perform there would be pretty iffy. After 
that, well, if someone travels to some resort  
island, by themselves or with their partner, and 
comes back pregnant, what could be said or done?  
Assuming folks even know about the trip, what 
next? Mandatory genetic screening of fetuses?  
That’s a hard one to sell, but if so, then what. 
Mandatory abortions or euthanasia for genetically  
enhanced children? I’d imagine the lifespan of the 
career of any politician who suggested that would  
be measured in hours, same as if they suggested 
it for children with genetic disorders. 
 
This all assumes there’s any need for folks to 
travel to anywhere to get a procedure done by  
someone else. It might be a pill you can 
order in the mail or just the encrypted  
data for a 3D printer available by 
crypto currency on the dark web.
 
Anyway, that leaves you a child who, through no 
fault of their own, is genetically enhanced – or  
cybernetically for that matter - who society 
now needs to deal with. Star Trek dealt with  
this plot, and badly, though I enjoyed the 
episode, in “Dr. Bashir, I Presume”, where  
the federation is stated to not allow genetically 
engineered children into Starfleet and is kind  
enough in the end to let the Dr Bashir, who was 
genetically altered by his parents as young child,  
to remain in Starfleet, saving lives, so 
long as his father took a plea bargain to  
spend a couple years in prison, for his crime 
of producing a heroic and magnificent doctor. 
 
Their reasoning is that back in the 20th century, 
in Trek Canon, some genetically engineered people  
tried to take over the world. I find that absurd 
as a reason but plausible as something people  
might argue for, your mileage may vary. But I’m 
really not expecting modern courts to be kind to  
laws or rules preventing a kid with a genetically 
enhanced IQ from attending school or having to  
have a proverbial scarlet letter on their head 
or being banned from employment or forcibly  
sterilized. At least going forward, we have had 
some tragic historical cases. That is essentially  
the path civilizations need to be willing to go 
down to prevent such engineering being done once  
such technology gets discovered, and I don’t 
think most will choose to embrace such bans,  
which is why I tend to assume it will get normal 
fast. Kids smarter, healthier, stronger, faster  
than prior generations, probably just a little 
bit, incrementally, many of us would argue that’s  
been our open goal for countless generations.
Fortunately, genetic engineering in the womb isn’t  
the only route to such things, so we do have 
other options. Nanotechnology or options like  
gene-editing and CRISPR might make it possible 
to alter every cell’s DNA in an adult organism,  
not just an embryo, and enhancements which adults 
can choose for themselves or which can be reversed  
alter things immensely. Technology can bring 
problems – nanotech brings many itself – but  
it also offers solutions. Many of the concerns 
of altering ourselves are about people doing it  
both irreversibly and when the subject is not 
an adult of sound mind. Obviously that excludes  
children but we often worry if someone wanting a 
radical change to themselves is mentally healthy,  
and being able to both make and reverse changes 
cheaply and safely alters things a lot.
 
So what does the transhuman landscape 
look like in the coming century or two?  
And of course, is everyone going to become one?
The second is easier than the first to answer,  
but it still has to be vague. I don’t really 
expect humanity thousands of years from now to  
be identical to now. ‘Human’ is more likely to be 
a family rather than a species in the taxonomic  
ranks, maybe even an order or class, like Mammals. 
That’s likely to include artificial intelligences  
that never had DNA, uploaded human minds, 
uplifted animals, and ten million flavors of  
genetically and cybernetically altered humans. I’d 
imagine that would include a lot of people who are  
identical to modern humans and what we normally 
call ‘baseline humans’ in these discussions,  
which would be you or I, those folks 
some centuries back might disagree.
 
For my part, I’m not really expecting some sci fi 
style clash of the supermen and baseline humans,  
especially as it’s likely to be very much 
a spectrum kind of thing, a sliding scale  
of what qualifies as baseline or post-human 
rather than a binary state. That broad range is  
probably including people who some might view 
as augmented yet are the loudest opponents of  
some other change, then get angry when folks 
from their own side call them augmented too. 
 
But what does this look like? Well implantation 
is already here, it’s just limited in options. We  
essentially have artificial eyeball technology 
for instance, and I don’t mean cameras,  
but artificial eyeballs constructed along human 
eye conventions. Our problem is getting them  
wired in and it’s the issue we have with brain 
implants on mice and apes too. We essentially  
have to build a robot surgeon who can work at the 
microscale to accurately connect huge numbers of  
nerves. That is not just on-the-horizon tech these 
days but close enough we’re knocking on the door,  
and eyes are probably the hardest organ to 
attach to the brain with a replaced prosthetic.  
Just giving someone telescopic sight or infrared 
vision though is likely, for a long while to come,  
to be about having either a pair of goggles 
with you, possibly carried by a drone,  
or just to have computer software ship 
the image to those nerves rather than to  
the eyeball, but again from some other camera. 
A thing to remember on transhumanism is that not  
many of us really relish the notion of getting 
our arm cut off even to be replaced by a better  
one or our eyes gouged out, even for corrective 
surgery. Medical technology advancements that  
help folks who have suffered such a loss will 
go on and probably with the open and approving  
support of the public. Down the road when it's 
gotten mundane and safe, folks will incorporate  
some cool new features into themselves, as 
a blind person with an artificial eyeball is  
just as likely to want the ability to see in the 
infrared as someone normally-sighted. Cool color  
changing abilities or zoom features and of course 
camera snapshots would be common. Eventually this  
might get to be a common minor change for people 
like getting an ear piercing, especially if we  
have regenerative technologies to replace the 
original organ with a cloned or grown one too.
 
For the rest of us though, that drone option is 
an example of how technologies might be adapted  
for baseline humans, to run them parallel to 
directly augmented ones. You just have peripherals  
rather than implants, much as we carry gear in 
our pockets, or wear them around our wrists,  
rather than swallowing them. But we’re 
limited in what we can carry and hold,  
so anything light we can carry is great, but 
so is a posse of robots that carries our gear,  
and follows us around. Or so 
could an exoskeleton instead. 
 
We have this impression technology like this must 
involve penetrating your body, at least a little,  
with some sort of brain jack but there’s 
no particular reason you can’t go wifi,  
or even brain-scanner in a hat. Generally 
speaking it’s going to be a lot easier if  
you’re fine with adding a few strains of nanobots 
to the countless thousands of bacteria and viruses  
already hanging out in your body doing work, some 
vital to you living, without sharing your DNA.  
You are not just your DNA, you’re an ecosystem, 
and adding some bits and pieces which aren’t  
classically organic could be viewed as adding 
some fire detectors and cameras to a wilderness,  
it’s not totally unchanged but the 
addition benefits that wilderness,  
as we can now intercede against disasters. 
The obvious analogy, or rebuttal, is that  
some people might pave that ecosystem 
over and put in a city or a strip mall,  
the equivalent of going very cyborg with 
extensive and visibly metallic body parts. 
 
For that matter though, we can probably tailor 
some existing organisms to serve as nanobots. We  
tend to assume organic is inferior to machinery 
but that’s a very binary and limited point of  
view, especially in the classic sci fi context of 
what Isaac Asimov, in his robot novels, called a  
C/Fe civilization, with carbon based humans and 
iron based robots. He wrote those in an era of  
vacuum switches before we had semiconductors, 
since then we tend to think of computers as  
silicon, but humans contain a lot of iron and 
steel robots would include carbon among the iron,  
so even then the notion of blending was there. 
Carbon fiber is very strong, as is diamond. Both  
are made of carbon and indeed the miracle material 
of the last decade, graphene, is made entirely of  
carbon. So don’t think organic and think ‘weak’.
Instead, think that there are around  
a hundred elements in this Universe and only a 
fraction are involved in life. By mass you’re 65%  
oxygen, 18% carbon, 9.5% Hydrogen, 3.2% Nitrogen, 
1.5% Calcium, 1.2% Phosphorus. 0.4% Potassium,  
0.2% Sulfur, Sodium, and Chlorine each, 0.1% 
Magnesium and every other element in nature  
makes up less than a thousandth of your mass, and 
most of that being iron, fluorine, and zinc. Would  
it be a bad thing for your body to contain some 
additional elements? It already does, including  
radioactive bits like Uranium and precious ones 
like Gold and ultra strong ones like Titanium  
and Tungsten, just from our natural environment. 
So would an engineered or artificial nanobot or  
microbe that was a bit heavier on those really 
change anything to the ecosystem that is you? 
 
The answer of course is yes, we’re not pumping you 
full of little machines or microbes for no reason  
after all. What is or isn’t natural is a question 
folks raise a lot but one which always seems  
peculiar to me. Artificial is generally defined as 
man-made and that essentially includes humans too.  
Oh, I don’t mean in the trivial sense that your 
parents gave birth to you and were presumably  
both human. Rather, they raised you and did so 
with at least one of several entirely made up  
languages we created that influences all of your 
thinking, placed in your entirely artificial crib  
with your artificial walls and pictures and 
bottle and clothes constantly surrounding you  
in the literal physical sense while they 
poured a culture into you that we made.  
You’re about as ‘natural’ as a wooden chair and 
part of your current ecosystem involves a vast  
artificial dataweb in which you live and breathe. 
We joke about unplugging ourselves from the world,  
or world wide web, on vacation or downtime, 
but we’re only half joking… and it's too  
late anyway, because we’ve got wifi. 
I generally tend to feel that trying to  
draw an official line between what’s not 
natural but acceptable, and what is not,  
gets kind of weird, with no generally agreed 
on definitions. My glasses, my belt, my watch,  
these are fine. Okay those don’t pierce the 
skin, but piercings certainly do, so do tattoos,  
which I suspect will start including circuitry and 
electronics sooner than not, so does a pacemaker.  
And these things are part of you. I think though 
that everyone will draw the lines in different  
places, not just on how much tech but of what type 
and so on. I myself would feel really weird at the  
idea of being uploaded entirely to a computer 
somewhere but wouldn’t have an issue with being  
composed of a trillion tiny machines that happened 
to be artificial as opposed to the trillions I’m  
already composed of that are evolved, which 
is to say, a product of trial and error,  
especially if that was a gradual shift.
But when it comes to shifting your entire  
mind around, just uploading it to a computer for 
instance, it's not really a cut and paste thing.  
You’ve got your brain stored on cells and you can 
presumably copy that onto a harddrive then emulate  
those. Your brain is still there with “you” 
still in it. This tends to favor the gradual  
approach then of replacing failed neurons with 
something artificial but that level of nanotech  
also just lets you replace that neuron with 
another identical neuron or just repair it,  
all while keeping a copy of the stage it was in 
for restoration if you get gross brain damage,  
like being shot in the head. And people do survive 
and recover from that sometimes so the fact that  
machines are stitching you back together rather 
than the classic repair technique wouldn’t seem  
any different then sewing you up with a needle and 
thread rather than letting it scab over. I freely  
acknowledge though that we are bringing up a lot 
of slippery slopes and stretching some analogies.
 
This is generally why I don’t like the term 
post-biological anymore than I like the term  
transhuman, because it implies that there’s 
some real line or space between human and  
post-human or biological and artificial. 
I don’t have good replacements for either,  
mind you, but then I don’t really ever expect many 
folks to regard themselves as transhuman anyway,  
any more than a cyborg. Personally I rather 
expect the first real human-intelligent AI  
will prefer to think of itself as a human too, and 
my hunch is we would be wise to encourage that.
 
So what is life like in a transhuman society?
You don’t get sick anymore, you might not age in  
any meaningful sense. You’re probably as strong 
as a horse and able to jog or run all day long  
and maybe don’t need to sleep. You might 
have carpentry as a hobby, but your garage  
is missing a lot of tools like measuring tapes, 
because you’ve never needed one, you just know  
distance and angles. Your hand wields a knife or 
chisel with a steadiness any surgeon or sculptor  
would envy. You aren’t really capable of panic 
or terror or deep depression beyond when you  
choose to experience these things intentionally. 
And some might question if you’re really human  
anymore without these, or already post-human.
Your mind might be able to speed up, what we  
call framejacking, so that you could watch a 
hummingbird’s wings flap, or watch a backlog  
of movies one day by just leaning back against a 
tree and closing your eyes. Or leaving them open,  
and you might be able to see out the back of your 
head or from a dozen cameras around your body,  
and in infrared and ultraviolet. You don’t know 
how to do arithmetic really, you know higher math  
and could work it out, but you just never had to 
think about any problem because you no sooner see  
two numbers and think add or multiply before you 
know the answer. You can choose to remember any  
moment of your life in crystal clear detail, and 
anytime you look at an object and feel puzzled,  
the whole basic entry on whatever it is comes up 
in your mind. You’ve never played darts because  
it’s like tic-tac-toe, nobody ever wins or 
loses because none of you ever miss except  
by random fate, so you might as well toss 
dice. Not that any of you do that either  
since you can make them land as you want.
And that’s not really particularly superhuman  
either, except Speed Superintelligence, one 
of the three types we contemplate along with  
Networked Intelligence, like a Hive Mind, 
and Quality Intelligence, which is a bit  
vague but the difference between a human brain 
and ten chimps with more total brain power.
 
See our cyborgs episode or superpowers episode 
for more extreme versions or a deeper dive on  
these possible abilities, but I want to close 
for today by emphasizing that none of those  
aforementioned abilities is necessarily 
outside our current lifetime, none really  
are very high-tech and most wouldn’t even require 
putting machines inside you, there’s almost always  
a work around to grant a given ‘ability’ without 
getting invasive, except to modify the brain. 
 
And even that would have non-invasive exceptions, 
like transcranial stimulators or some peripheral  
brain augmentation that was scanning your mind 
and doing lots of the extra work. It recognizes  
you contemplating a math problem and displays 
the answer or stimulates it back into your head.  
I sometimes refer to mind augmentation as 
something akin to a shadow assistant or a third  
lobe of your brain, just computerized, even though 
we’d expect it to be distributed throughout your  
head, but an external computer tied into your mind 
by non-invasive scanning might qualify as that. 
 
One could argue that we already do brain 
augmentation through language, relating problems  
to others to bring their mind in on it, and that 
having an assistant or secretary or accountant or  
even a specialist you visit like your doctor 
is already brain augmentation, a networked  
mind but done simplistically and low bandwidth by 
speech and writing rather than wiring, and a basic  
model we can expand and improve on with computers 
wired into or scanning or stimulating your brain,  
rather than wholesale altering it.
And that’s a good point to close out on,  
because while we often discuss brain augmentation 
and how it might make you so far beyond human as  
to view each other nowadays like insects, I’ve 
noticed that by and large folks don’t really work  
that hard to improve their intelligence even using 
known techniques, so I’m not thinking folks will  
race out to do that. Especially as you probably 
need to ask if you can actually radically increase  
your own intelligence. Are you even you anymore if 
your mind is so far beyond human that it no longer  
relates to what you used to be? I’d imagine not, 
maybe gradually over time you might make minimal  
improvements and relate to a baseline human like 
we do kids, but I’m also not sure folks would feel  
much need to. Greg Egan’s 1994 novel Permutation 
City gives some interesting examples of this.
 
So, the fastest scenario for us to colonize 
the galaxy would be essentially 100,000  
years, with a new planet being colonized 
roughly every second on average, and we’ll  
be talking about that more next week. That means 
a lot of elbow room for those wanting to go play  
God to head off and grab a whole solar system 
and build a massive supercomputer around it,  
what we call a Matryoshka Brain. But outside of 
a specific Technological Singularity Scenario,  
which grows ever less likely, see that episode 
for details, you always have a wide landscape of  
various massive AI and post-human and transhuman 
minds of various types who are probably not  
big fans of genocide or wiping out the other 
clades of humanity, including baseline humans,  
anymore than we feel like wiping out other 
primates or mammals. It probably doesn’t pay  
to have your other neighbors see you picking on 
and stealing from the less augmented folks and  
there’s a big question of why you would need to. 
Neither you nor any human, even a baseline human,  
living in a transhuman era, is desperate 
for resources or starved. What exactly do  
you need the bigger brain for? Of course, I can 
think of plenty of reasons I wouldn’t mind one,  
but none that I’d risk my own identity to get, or 
for lack of a better word, my humanity. That might  
be my optimism talking but I’m just not seeing a 
world where most people alive now, or at whatever  
point we figure out radical life extension, are 
going to feel like they need to seriously alter  
their own mind outside their comfort zone in order 
to survive comfortably. More brains is only a  
survival advantage in a very technological society 
when not having them means folks try to hurt you  
or steal from you, and I’m guessing a lot of 
people won’t want to make that exchange, at least  
not quickly, maybe incrementally over millennia.
It’s an interesting aspect of Transhumanism  
and posthumanism, that it’s mostly focused on 
improving the human condition, and so I think  
for many folks, the transhumanist future, for 
them at least, will be about embracing their  
humanity better through technology, rather than 
trying to move beyond, alter, or abandon it.
 
As a reminder, this is our last episode 
for the year but we will still be having  
our Monthly Livestream Q&A, this Saturday 
Afternoon, December 31st, at 4 pm Eastern,  
to answer all your questions about the show and 
our episodes before we head into the New Years.  
Today’s episode on humanity’s future was about 
ways we might become smarter or longer lived but  
hopefully we’re also be becoming kinder, 
wiser, and more generous too. Many of us  
open our hearts and make donations during 
the holiday season. But when you donate,  
how can you feel confident that your donations 
are really making a big impact? You could do  
weeks of research to find charities, figure 
out what they do, how effective they are,  
and how the charity might use additional 
money. Or you could visit GiveWell.org: there,  
you’ll find free research and recommendations 
about the charities that can save or improve lives  
the most per dollar. Let your brain and data help 
do what your heart wants, for instance they worked  
out that it cost about a dollar to give a child 
vitamin A supplements while vitamin A deficiencies  
have a drastic impact on mortality rates, making 
it one of the most efficient ways to save lives.
 
GiveWell spends over 40,000 hours each year 
researching charitable organizations and only  
directs funding to a few of the HIGHEST-IMPACT, 
EVIDENCE-BACKED opportunities they’ve found.  
Over 100,000 donors have used GiveWell to donate 
more than ONE BILLION DOLLARS. Rigorous evidence  
suggests that these donations will save over ONE 
HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND lives AND improve the  
lives of MILLIONS more. And using GiveWell’s 
research is free! GiveWell wants as many donors  
as possible to make informed decisions about 
high-impact giving. They publish all of their  
research and recommendations on their site 
FOR FREE, no signup required. They allocate  
your tax deductible donation to the charity 
or fund you choose without taking a cut.
 
If you’ve never donated to GiveWell’s recommended 
charities before, you can have your donation  
matched up to ONE HUNDRED DOLLARS before the end 
of the year or as long as matching funds last.
 
To claim the matching funds, just click in on 
the link in the episode, Givewell.org/Isaac,  
or on the donate page, when asked where you heard 
about Givewell, select Youtube and Isaac Arthur,  
to make sure your donation gets matched, or again, 
just click on the link, Givewell.org/Isaac.
 
So today is the last episode of our eighth 
season here on SFIA, and as mentioned,  
we have a livestream coming up Saturday December 
31st at 4pm Eastern to finish up 2022. But we’ll  
leap right into 2023 next week by returning to one 
of our favorite topics, interstellar colonization  
and the strategies for claiming the stars. The 
week after that we’ll ask what happens if all  
our dreams of a post-scarcity era of abundance 
never comes to pass, and what options humanity has  
in such a future. Then it is on to Scifi Sunday 
on January 15th to explore the possibility that  
we might live in a hostile galaxy and some of 
the fermi paradox scenarios that discuss that  
like Dark Forest Theory or Berserker Probes.
As always if you want reminders and notifications  
when those and other episodes come out, 
make sure to hit the subscribe button and  
notifications bell. And if you would like to help 
support the channel, just head to our website,  
Isaac Arthur.net for all the ways to help, like 
supporting us on Patreon or joining us on Nebula.  
Hopefully you’re enjoying our new episodes 
in Ultra HD 4k resolution, but you can also  
catch all of SFIA’s episodes in audio only podcast 
form, for free, on all the major podcasts hosts,  
from itunes to spotify and audible.
As always, thanks for watching,  
thanks for another wonderful year hosting 
this show, and have a Happy New Year!
