
This episode is sponsored by Audible
 
We generally think of spacefaring civilizations 
as being very technologically advanced. 
 
But what if some species have to settle 
for doing things the old-fashioned way?
 
Today we’re going to contemplate some 
scenarios in which a civilization might  
begin engaging in space travel 
even though they’re at a lower  
level of technological development than 
might seem ideal for that undertaking.  
And in the process ask what the minimum 
technologies really are for space travel.
 
We’ve got 4 basic paths we’re 
going to look for that purpose.  
One will be a civilization that arose in 
circumstances where space travel was easier,  
another will be a case where they had higher 
technology then lost it or opted not to use it,  
and we’ll also look at a case where there 
just isn’t any new and useful science and  
technology beyond what we essentially have 
now. We’ve one more too, which is where they  
are forced to get into space in the face of a 
looming disaster like a giant asteroid headed  
toward their planet that they can’t blow up or 
divert, and need to get some remnant of their  
civilization off world before it hits.
Of course Low-tech is a subjective term,  
because science and technology don’t really 
lend themselves to easily defined levels.  
A civilization might have mastered making fusion 
reactors but never explored genetic or cybernetic  
enhancement. They probably would need to have 
equaled us at least in computing capability  
to have achieved fusion, given that our own 
research on the matter is very computer intensive,  
but might later abandon higher computing out of 
fears of artificial intelligence while retaining  
the knowledge of how to build a fusion reactor.
For today we will go ahead and define modern  
humanity plus maybe a couple decades as 
essentially our borderline. For today’s purpose,  
Low-Tech will include everything we currently 
have either in active or past use, or very firmly  
on the drawing board, technology where there’s 
no debate it can be done, just minor technical,  
economic, or other practical issues to resolve. An 
example might be a nuclear rocket, that technology  
is very solid but since we’re hesitant to use 
radioactive engines we don’t really know its  
specific performance values like we do for the 
various rocket designs we’ve actually tried.  
Similar concept applies to solar sails, we can 
calculate with ease the performance a specific  
solar sail would have based on its solar 
cross section and mass, but since we haven’t  
been mass producing and using them day to day, 
the practical issues of building, maintaining,  
and using them are completely speculative.
So what is the absolute minimum technology  
needed for spaceflight? The answer, as 
so often is the case, is “It Depends”,  
because in theory you could have life evolve in 
space itself, and we explored that notion more  
in our episodes Void Ecology and Space Whales.
Ignoring that sort of scenario though, we have  
to recognize that Earth might not be the normal 
case for getting into space. Many tiny changes  
could permit a much easier pathway to orbit. 
As an example, there is no particular reason  
to think mountains on a planet couldn’t be high 
enough to extend up to the edge of an atmosphere.  
Now we have something called the glacial buzzsaw, 
as glaciers are far more erosive than rain,  
but this maximum height where sheer weight of rock 
piling up combined with glaciers piling up on it  
and eroding it is going to be very dependent on 
the planet’s gravity, tectonics and atmosphere.  
As we saw on Mars, because gravity is about 
40% of Earths, mountains can get bigger.  
Indeed Mount Everest is only about 40% as tall 
as Mars’s tallest mountain, Olympus Mons. 
 
We have workable designs for a device called a 
mass driver that is basically a long rail gun  
that can shoot spacecraft into orbit, see our 
episode on it for details, and its ideal place  
to build is up along the side of a nice tall 
and wide mountain, and Olympus Mons, which is  
not much smaller than France, makes a very nice 
gentle slope for a mass driver to pick up speed.  
Combined with the low atmosphere, especially at 
the top, and lower gravity and orbital speeds,  
a civilization on Mars equal to us in technology 
and infrastructure could throw together a mass  
driver on Olympus Mons with great ease and be 
moving thousands of tons of payload into space  
every day for not much more cost than we move 
thousand of tons of freight around on rail lines.
 
Now there’s pretty good reason to assume no 
civilization would naturally arise on Mars, but  
planets with atmospheres and gravities in between 
Earth and Mars are plausible enough and might have  
very easy access. Nor is gravity really the big 
control factor on having an atmosphere that folks  
tend to assume. It helps, but it’s more about 
having a magnetosphere to help hold the atmosphere  
on. If our Moon had the same magnetosphere as 
Earth, it could hold an atmosphere and oceans,  
albeit probably not over billion year periods, 
as it is much less massive than even Mars. 
 
However, assuming you do need an atmosphere 
and surface oceans for advanced life to emerge,  
moons of gas giants are options. It 
is entirely plausible you could have  
a Jupiter – or larger – sized planet near as we 
are to a Sun like ours to be warm and with some  
large rocky moons who would be inside its own 
protective magnetosphere. Those could even be  
as big as Earth, and the tidal forces of orbiting 
a gas giant provide plenty of tectonic activity  
to make mountains and generate an atmosphere 
to help with higher leakage to space. Moreover,  
if a gas giant has one big moon, it probably has 
a ton of other ones, Jupiter has over 60, and it  
might have large rings too, like Saturn, so that 
you would have an awful lot of earlier and easy  
targets for space development. Easier than our 
own Earth-Moon, since all those objects, probably  
including your home world, are much easier to 
launch from than Earth and far closer than Mars.
 
So even a moon much smaller than Earth 
might have Earth-like conditions but  
benefit spacefaring civilizations by having not 
only potentially taller mountains but much lower  
escape velocities, potentially those well inside 
the range of hypersonic air-breathing vehicles.  
Additionally, civilization arising on such 
worlds, as we looked at in our episode Life  
on a Low Gravity Planet, might be far more 
inclined to be avian, either technologically  
or even biologically evolved that way.
Which is another way space travel might  
be easier even on more massive planets than 
Earth. Thick atmospheres can be your enemy  
but also your friend. Earth has little hydrogen 
and even less helium, in spite of them being the  
most abundant elements in the Universe, because 
they most easily escape from a planet. All of our  
current helium comes from radioactive decay of 
Uranium in our core, and a more massive planet  
not only would probably have more Uranium, and 
thus more helium production, but also be much  
better at retaining Helium compared to Earth, 
where only about 5 out of every million atoms  
in the atmosphere are helium, and we generally get 
our helium from underground deposits as a result,  
whereas they might be able to just suck tons 
of it out from the air if they had more. 
 
If Helium were even just an order of magnitude 
higher, which might be the case on a planet even  
just 10% more massive than earth, you might have 
abundant cheap helium to use for launch assist,  
floating rockets or even runways high up into the 
atmosphere. This is also not super-high tech, so  
you might see a relatively primitive civilization 
already incorporating air travel or floating  
structures long before it was contemplating 
rockets. So too, we use helium for balloons  
because it is lighter than air, but air is a 
number of different chemicals of various masses  
so you can for instance just barely float a pure 
nitrogen balloon because while our atmosphere is  
mostly nitrogen, 21% of it is oxygen which is a 
bit heavier. Hypothetically you could have a world  
slightly less massive than Earth and farther 
from its sun have earth-like temperature and  
atmospheric pressure because of higher carbon 
dioxide concentrations and less atmospheric  
leakage, and thus be one with not only lower 
gravity and thus launch costs, but a thicker and  
heavier atmosphere you could float above easier.
Keep in mind, technology and development tend to  
snowball. Back in the space race days folks tended 
to assume we’d have moon bases and cities by now,  
and we probably would have if launch costs and 
efforts were even just half of what they were,  
as a sort of developmental 
equivalent of compound interest. 
 
The biggest hurdle to space development is 
actually getting into space, once you’re up  
there in a big way there’s really nothing all that 
high tech involved in day to day life or travel.  
You just need to be able to make air-tight and 
radiation-proof vessels, which isn’t too hard,  
especially when you’re not constantly needing to 
be super-frugal with your mass as modern launch  
costs require us to be, at thousands of dollars a 
kilogram. Using a solar sail example, at Earth’s  
distance from our Sun they generate around 8 
newtons of thrust per square kilometer of sail.  
Which isn’t a lot, enough to accelerate 
1000 kilograms, or about a ton,  
8 millimeters per second per second but over 
a month of acceleration, pushed on by the Sun,  
you’d be moving over 20 kilometers per second 
and that’s a respectable interplanetary speed. 
 
And a square kilometer of sail doesn’t need to be 
very heavy, one a micrometer thick – and we can  
do a lot thinner with modern tech – is going to 
give about a kilometer of sail for a ton of sail  
material. Folks were beating sheets of gold to a 
tenth that thickness over 5000 years ago in India,  
and we can do better nowadays with even lighter 
materials like aluminum or carbon fiber, which  
are much cheaper than gold of course. Spacecraft 
equivalents of sailboats then become possible,  
differing mainly in that the ship has to be 
airtight and the sails are huge but ultra-thin.
 
Air tight is relative too, you’re always 
going to lose some air and at a certain point,  
adding more hull thickness to cut down on air 
loss and radiation gets diminishing returns as you  
need to move that ship, and oxygen is hardly in a 
short supply. There’s a lot of ways to get oxygen,  
electrolysis of water or ice being one 
of the easiest, but we’ve got reactor  
designs that produce a kilogram of oxygen, 
or about the air in a cubic meter or yard,  
and about twice what you’d breathe in a 
day, for around 50 million joules of energy,  
which sounds like a lot but is parallel to 
running an air conditioner in terms of power draw,  
and electrolysis is cheaper it just requires 
water or ice, whereas virtually any rock can  
give you oxygen. Indeed, given that most stuff 
like iron, aluminum, and silicon are usually found  
as oxides, refining them into the pure element 
produces a ton of oxygen as a waste product.
 
Also in contrast, if you’ve got square 
kilometers of solar sails or some solar  
cells or nuclear reactors churning out megawatts 
to run your engines, a few kilowatts for air  
replacement is minimal and that’s probably 
more than a small spacecraft would leak too.
 
One can use organic approaches for 
air and water recycling of course,  
a room for growing plants with glass open to the 
sun will help with that, and if you’re keeping  
your reserve water as a fish tank, you’ve got 
air, water, plants for food, and some fish too.  
See our episode Life Support for more discussion 
of that topic but you can get pretty low tech for  
keeping life support on spaceships or space 
habitats. At least in the inner solar system  
where there’s a decent amount of sunlight. Though 
if you are using solar sails, kilometers worth of  
reflective sail is a lot of light and it’s pretty 
easy to divert a bit of that into concentrated  
form to be running photosynthesis or 
solar panels even out past Pluto. 
 
Low tech interstellar ships are a bit harder, 
because the Sun really isn’t available out in  
interstellar space, so you’d need to be 
considering nuclear options for power and drives,  
but if you’ve got some radioisotopes with 
decades to centuries for a half-life,  
that is a very low-tech power supply. We normally 
hook it up to a thermocouple to make power,  
such as by the Seebeck Effect, which is hardly 
high-tech since Thomas Seebeck discovered the  
process 200 years ago in 1821. This is a 
radioisotope thermal generator, or RTG,  
and they are stupidly simple and low maintenance, 
quite capable of lasting centuries with little or  
even no maintenance, their only downside is that 
such radioisotopes are fast-decaying so you have  
to synthesize not mine your fuel. But as we looked 
at in the future of fission, breeder reactors for  
making them are not terribly high-tech either 
nor is uranium or thorium in short supply.
 
However, thus far we’ve been discussing this 
concept from the perspective of folks getting  
into space easier or essentially trying to run 
with no more technology than we have right now.  
We should keep in mind that a 
civilization might be low tech  
even if more tech is available. If you had 
the equivalent of Space Amish, they might be  
fine with buying their RTGs or solar sails or even 
fusion reactors off some higher tech conglomerate.  
And just as an example, if we had two factions in 
the future, one a fairly high tech one but with a  
low population growth rate and non-expansionist 
tendency, and another that was very pioneering  
and into big families but not into big tech, even 
if the latter started out as a minority faction  
after a couple dozen generations of growth 
they’d outnumber the big tech faction  
who might be perfectly content to sell them 
durable low to no maintenance technologies.
 
We should also keep in mind technology can get 
expensive. It takes huge supply chains and other  
infrastructure like education to keep technology 
running, and a lot of small colonies might just  
not have that and prefer to go for lower-tech 
solutions. If your job is just running around an  
asteroid belt taking samples of mineral deposits, 
then some very cheap and durable big metal slab of  
a ship with an RTG powering your drive and 
life support gets the job done just fine.  
You might have nothing high-tech in there except 
some preferred personal luxuries and some core  
device for your job like a high-tech spectrometer, 
but otherwise be pretty contemporary tech. 
 
This might be an economical choice or a moral 
& ideological choice or just viewed as a safety  
feature. Low tech tends to be easier to fix, 
often more durable and easily understood to use  
and repair, and doesn’t try to rebel against you. 
As we say in regard to artificial intelligence,  
keep it simple, keep it dumb, or else 
you’ll end up under Skynet’s Thumb.  
Civilizations worried about 
artificial intelligence going haywire  
don’t want it out far from civilization where 
it can not be easily monitored or contained  
if it goes all “Kill the humans” and thus might 
not encourage or allow any really sophisticated  
AI or self-replicating technology like 
3D printers outside the core areas of  
the civilization where it can be managed better.
But rogue AI isn’t the only thumb to worry about.  
If you’ve got new technology, 
as we all know so well nowadays,  
you’re rather dependent on the various companies 
making constant updates, patches, repair parts,  
and fixes. At a certain level of advancement and 
utility a lot of folks, for a lot of applications,  
might decide the technology that’s been tried and 
tested for a century and is now open-license is  
what they want to use. We have a lot of technology 
like that and we get more of it all the time. 
 
Oh to be sure we make tiny little improvements 
in nearly everything, even stuff like how we  
make dimensional lumber for buildings or the 
windows in them gets new tweaks and improvements,  
but that is likely to plateau out and when 
you’re talking about interstellar civilizations  
who need decades just for the schematics for a 
given new improvement to disseminate to their  
nearest colonies via light speed transmission, and 
with voyages of centuries to those same places,  
you are likely to see a lot of tried-and-true 
technology come into play. Being a couple light  
years out from the nearest safe harbor and drydock 
isn’t a good time to find out that your awesome  
new drive has glitches or burns out some vital 
widget it runs on that nobody expected it to.
 
The other reality is that while more 
technology always helps for settling space,  
once you’ve got it decently settled you 
don’t need as much tech to keep it that way.  
A couple months back we were looking 
at the notion of Techno-Barbarians,  
low-tech civilizations living in the 
post-apocalyptic ashes of a higher-tech culture,  
and we previously looked at Techno-Primitivism. 
I’m generally of the opinion that any such  
civilization will return to high-technology 
fairly quickly – assuming it wants to – and  
thus don’t view these civilizations as very likely 
or stable, especially given that a few generations  
of stability is likely to result in technology 
being redeveloped. However that doesn’t mean they  
can’t operate, just that I can’t see them staying 
very low tech for long unless it was voluntary. 
 
Fundamentally a spaceship built in space 
for running around space is just a big  
metal can that shoots rocket flames, 
ions, or reflected light out the back,  
and a space habitat like an O’Neill Cylinder 
is just a big metal can you dump dirt, water,  
and air into and add some light, from a power 
plant or funneled in from the Sun. You may get  
very high tech with these but you also might be 
prone to keeping them very simple and durable to  
lower maintenance. Especially if you’re a low-tech 
group commissioning some company to build one for  
you. Buying something made by high-technology 
that needs little maintenance and all within  
your skills is much more attractive than having 
dependence on others for keeping it working. 
 
And we never want to assume, just because 
we’re all pro-technology these days,  
that future civilizations hold quite the same 
view. I doubt there has ever been an era that  
was more pro-tech than now and most folks 
are still a little queasy about the dangers.  
And not just from ignorance, heck I’m a notorious 
techno-optimist and I constantly mention how  
dangerous technology is. Someone sent me an email 
a couple days back linking me to the Wikipedia  
page with notable futurologists on it, and I was 
a bit surprised to be listed on there with a bit  
over a hundred folks, living and dead, but I knew 
most of the names and of those I could recall,  
most were techno-optimists and folks who I’ve also 
heard warn about the dangers of high-technology.  
That’s the most outspoken techno-optimists 
of an era with probably the highest amount of  
techno-optimism in human history, and we all think 
the stuff is like juggling live hand grenades. 
 
It isn’t hard to imagine how a civilization 
might change its view on this stuff,  
especially given that the more technology 
you have, the more comfortable life is,  
and the more picky you can be about which 
technologies you use to keep it that way.  
When we talk about post-scarcity civilizations 
I tend to mention that we’re already very close  
to being one, and that there are several 
different plausible technologies we might  
get in the next century any one or two of which 
would get the job done to make us post-scarcity.  
So if you’ve got all of them, you can opt 
to be picky about which you employ and how.  
And more comfortable civilizations probably 
are less prone to gambling, you might use a  
dangerous tech to save lives but you don’t flip 
on a dangerous AI because it means you can upgrade  
from your cramped 100-room mansion cleaned by 
simple robots to a nicer 1000-room mansion fully  
staffed by intelligent androids. We often assume 
higher-tech civilizations that are post-scarcity  
to be rather self-indulgent and soft from all 
the prosperity, but even if that were true,  
we shouldn’t assume they are reckless or stupid.
I suggested you might have lower-tech spacefaring  
civilizations who buy their stuff from higher-tech 
ones, but they could just as easily have some  
rigid rules about who is allowed to learn certain 
technologies too. If you need to have AI, but are  
pretty paranoid about it, you might seriously 
restrict its use and only allow the knowledge  
of making and maintaining it to be in the hands of 
a very small group of folks. You might need one or  
two people per space habitat to maintain some 
core bit of dangerous but necessary technology  
and pick them not by those most intelligent, 
curious, or interested, but rather from those  
most trusted. You rarely need to be nearly 
as smart to learn something as to invent it,  
so a space habitat of a million folks might have 
some huge psychological or democratic screening  
process for nominating apprentices to the existing 
maintenance crew entrusted with terrible and  
dangerous secrets of its function. In such a 
case, nothing is going to be higher-tech than  
it needs to be, because that means sharing 
those dangerous secrets to more people. 
 
Also always keep in mind the scale of things. Even 
if your civilization was continuing scientific  
research, and kept a million expert researchers 
for a given field, way more than we have now,  
in some Kardashev-2 Dyson Swarm that would mean 
only one in several trillion people worked in  
researching that field. That’s a lot of folks to 
be able to accept the best and brightest from,  
and still screen out those who were viewed as not 
psychologically suited for ensuring new science  
and tech development was handled very safely and 
securely so that when technology hit day to day  
use it was in some ultra-durable, simple, and very 
tested format. Also, despite how fiction often  
portrays scientists and engineers, as recklessly 
pursuing new technologies, in my experience they  
already tend to be more, not less cautious than 
most folks, I’ve never noted a correlation between  
genius and recklessness so you probably can 
screen out the more reckless ones from your  
tech development without slowing that down much.
A civilization might be very touchy about allowing  
any tech that wasn’t necessary to be 
in regular usage, especially on board  
small-crew spaceships. And it’s neat to 
think of some kilometer long leviathan  
of space freighter being run by a crew of a 
dozen because of vast automation and robotics,  
but if you’ve got tons of people they do need 
something to do to keep them occupied anyway and  
those same technologies are going to be available 
to make every facet of production easier too  
so you might see a lack of massive unemployment 
and idle hands and minds as a plus anyway.
 
Is it likely? Maybe. We looked at 3 basic 
ways you might have low tech spacefaring,  
those who developed it at lower tech because 
their world was better suited for it,  
those who basically couldn’t get anymore advanced 
than now because science and technology can not  
develop further or they don’t want it to, 
or those who essentially opted for minimal  
employment of higher-technology even though 
they had it, and either still had it or lost it.  
Each of those scenarios is plausible, but 
more so in the grand scheme of things,  
as when we’re talking about the endless 
quadrillions of people who might live in  
developed star systems across a whole galaxy 
there is a lot of room for variation. 
 
You might have a low-tech spacefaring civilization 
living around the moons of Jupiter who just bought  
their fusion reactors or radioisotope supplies 
off some high-tech conglomerate on Mars,  
while over on Saturn folks eschewed most 
types of technology in favor of genetically  
engineered plants that could grow in space and 
be grown or woven into solar panels or sails.  
And a few dozen light years away there was some 
star system that was nothing but asteroid miners  
who all worked in jury rigged ships with 
no AI, supplying metal for some automated  
mega-freighters that showed up to collect the ore 
and trade them high-tech manufactured super cheap  
but super simple goods, like RTG powered LED grow 
lamps that lasted for a century and you just hung  
them on the ceiling of your hydroponics facility. 
The galaxy and the future can potentially host  
virtually endless variations of civilization, 
in this or that place and time, so that an  
interstellar merchant visiting a system after 
a century might find they’d gone all low-tech  
or returned to being high-tech and flipped 
back around the next time they stopped there.
 
That is one neat thing about our 
future as a space faring civilization,  
the path to all those new stars offer a path 
to near endless options for civilizations,  
and while technology helps a lot 
for getting there, as we saw today,  
your spaceships don’t have to be all 
that high-tech to make the voyage.
 
Science fiction is full of examples 
of low-tech spacefaring civilizations,  
or those who went low-tech after colonizing 
a world, but one of my favorites is Anne  
McCaffrey’s Dragonrider of Pern series, and indeed 
it was the second fictional book series I read,  
right after Douglas Adams’ Hitchhiker's Guide 
to the Galaxy. Or I should say listened to,  
as what got me as a kid into fiction instead of 
just nonfiction books, was being able to listen  
to the stories as audiobooks. While masquerading 
partially as a fantasy series, right from the very  
first book written in 1968 - and there are dozens 
in the series now - we see a civilization that  
was built by science and still retains some higher 
technology. It also includes an alien invader that  
is so low-tech it doesn't even use spaceships.
Over the years a lot of books were written  
chronicling the planet of Pern all the way from 
the spaceships arriving to colonize the world to  
them losing their technology in increments and 
finally regaining it, complete with some novel  
approaches to spaceflight. It’s one of my favorite 
series and as we head into the colder months,  
if you’re looking for a good story to occupy 
many weeks, then the Dragonriders of Pern is a  
great choice, and the series is our Audible 
Book of the Month. You can choose to start  
with the first book written, “Dragonflight”, 
or head to the beginning of the chronology,  
with the more science-fiction themed “Dragonsdawn” 
and they’re all available on Audible.
 
Audible also has podcasts, guided-wellness 
programs, theatrical performances, and exclusive  
audible originals, indeed they have over three 
centuries worth of audio if you just hit the  
play button and ran it through every title.
If you want access to that massive collection  
of great audiobooks, like Anne McCaffrey’s 
Dragonriders of Pern, you can join Audible  
for a 30-day free trial, and Audible members not 
only get discounts on any audiobooks they buy,  
but a free book every month. Additionally, 
they are now giving unlimited access to their  
audible originals. You can start listening 
today with a 30-day Audible free trial.  
Just visit the link in the episode description, 
Audible.com/Isaac, or text “Isaac” to 500-500.
 
So we talked a lot about how a low-gravity 
planet like Mars might have an easier time  
getting into space than we had on Earth today, 
and next week we’ll be looking at the challenges  
of getting to Mars from Earth and setting up 
a Base there, as we continue our new series,  
Becoming an Interplanetary Species.
The week after that we’ll be having our Halloween  
special, “Terrifying Aliens”, on Thursday October 
29, but before that on Sunday the 27th we’ll have  
our Monthly Livestream Q&A, at 4pm Eastern time. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes  
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel, 
and if you’d like to help support future episodes,  
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website, 
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode  
description below, along with all of our various 
social media forums where you can get updates and  
chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for watching, 
and have a great week!
