We often worry that the reason 
we hear nothing in our search  
for extraterrestrial intelligence 
is that travel to other stars is  
just too hard, but what if a civilization 
decides it’s just too dangerous to allow?
Last year we released our Fermi Paradox 
Compendium, which was a staggering 3-hour  
long episode, and despite that we found that 
a lot of the entries in there had to get only  
surface detail discussions, and in there and 
other episodes I’ve suggested before that  
one of the more disturbing solutions is that a 
civilization might not permit space colonization,  
either from its own world, or from 
any others that might arise nearby. 
I’ve never heard this given a name before, except 
as a sub-type of Stay-At-Home Civilizations,  
and indeed we’re not actually thinking this 
would be a place where they just decide  
not to go settle the galaxy. We can imagine 
tyrannic empires that fear letting colonies  
slip away from them into distant interstellar 
space where they might escape their leash. 
However, a point I sometimes raise in 
our discussion of the Fermi Paradox,  
the big question of why our vast and ancient 
Universe seems empty of other civilizations,  
is that if you go out and colonize the galaxy long 
enough, you are going to find alien civilizations  
simply because every colony you plant is going 
to begin diverging so heavily from each other and  
you, that you'll eventually end up running into 
some unrecognizable distant cousin civilization.  
Centuries of signal lag and travel time separating 
planets, where colonists live under alien suns and  
strange environments is going to cause a lot of 
change, which is only exacerbated by options like  
transhumanism, genetic engineering, cybernetics, 
and uplifting. Not to mention AI, which might pose  
a serious risk to everyone beyond simply having 
different and potentially dangerous cousins. 
The issue seems to be not that some folks 
would fear their mutant cousins or their  
reckless experimentation coming home to 
harm them, but rather that it wouldn’t  
seem likely every civilization would take this 
attitude and do so indefinitely. Many would,  
but many wouldn’t, meaning it doesn’t hit 
the non-exclusivity condition of the Fermi  
Paradox and just becomes a minor filter.
I found myself thinking about the idea more  
though, and a disturbing scenario came to mind. 
Normally I assume once you start colonizing the  
galaxy, Pandora’s Box is open and you can’t stuff 
the genie back in the bottle. The cat is out of  
the bag, and you keep on colonizing. 
What if instead you had some colonies,  
and one or more posed a threat to their home world 
or seemed to, and the still vastly superior forces  
of that home world came by and obliterated 
them, then decided to keep on doing that. 
Even if later periods of their civilization set 
that policy aside, it was just a matter of time  
till a new colony arose, presented a threat, 
and the armadas once more went out to murder  
their settlements. And as I thought of it, I 
could think of quite a few other grim scenarios  
where homeworlds murdered off their colonies. 
We’ll cover some today and some down the road,  
including in next month’s look at The 
Fermi Paradox Interdiction Hypothesis. 
But the situation reminded me of the Greek 
God Cronus, from which the name for today’s  
episode arises. Cronus, whose Roman equivalent was 
Saturn, was the father of Zeus or Jupiter. Cronus,  
was the God of the Harvest and chief of the 
titans, and was one of the sons of Uranus the  
Sky God and Gaia the Earth Goddess. Uranus 
had drawn Gaia’s anger when he hid his sons,  
Hecatoncheires, the hundred-handed monsters 
and the one-eyed Cyclops, so they could not  
see the light. Gaia gathered her other sons and 
encouraged them to rebel against their father, but  
only Cronus was willing and was given a sickle by 
his mother to castrate and overthrow his father. 
Which he then did, and took leadership and married 
one of his sisters, as primordial deities seem  
prone to doing, but his father and mother both 
warned him that he was destined to be overthrown  
by his own children and he certainly had ample 
precedent to believe that, so he swallowed all his  
children when they were born. Zeus, also 
called Jupiter, was his sixth and last child,  
and evaded that fate because his mother wrapped 
a stone in swaddling clothes and Cronus fell for  
the trick and swallowed that instead. According 
to one story, he asked her to nurse the child  
one last time before he swallowed him, and she 
did and the milk that sprayed from her breast  
formed the Milky Way in the heavens, and indeed 
the word Galaxy simply means Milky Way in Greek. 
Zeus grew up and with his mother’s help got his 
father to take an emetic, whereupon he vomited  
up his other children, and with the help of them 
and some of the titans they overthrew Cronus and  
cast him and some other titans in Tartarus. Zeus 
went on to marry his own sister and rule over  
his older siblings and the remaining titans.
There is often an implication that Zeus too  
will one day be overthrown by his own children, 
and while accounts of all of these vary wildly,  
it is often implied Cronus ruled over a 
Golden Age and that his overthrow wrecked  
that. That the God of the Harvest, who 
was often depicted by a foreboding crow,  
might have been doing everyone a favor with his 
consumption of his children, and that all would  
have been better, had that Grim Harvest continued.
The correlation of the myth to today’s topic is  
evident, and I don’t think it's hard for any of us 
to imagine us coming to fear our future colonies,  
especially if they split off antagonistically. 
Indeed, the overthrow of deities by their  
children is incredibly common in mythology 
and while the usual interpretation is that  
this is the fear people have of being replaced 
or displaced by their own children, there is a  
wider element of fearing the next generation 
will do this to the one that preceded it or  
that a splinter of your civilization will grow to 
overthrow and replace you. Possibly a settlement,  
possibly just an ideology or movement 
that grew to push aside tradition. 
It is not hard to imagine that we could 
end up at odds with a future colony,  
indeed conflicts between Earth and Mars or Earth 
and the Moon are practically cliche in sci-fi and  
Space Opera often depicts Earth as the evil empire 
reaching out to crush its rebellious children.  
They presumably see it as self-defense, 
which might be accurate in some cases. 
The real question though is if you could stuff 
that genie back in the bottle and keep it there,  
or could and would keep stuffing it 
back in. And the answer is ‘maybe’. 
Science fiction loves to show us some colony world 
of a few million fighting off the forces of Earth,  
but in practical context an Earth that can send 
out self-sustaining interstellar colonies is one  
that can support a trillion in comfort on Earth 
alone and vastly more in orbital habitats nearby,  
many trillions if not more. If they can mobilize 
just one in thousandth of their population to crew  
warships or join expeditionary forces, even 
if they had a hundred of these fleets that  
they could ship around to handle a given problem 
in some star system, that’s implying that just  
one of those hundred fleets composed of thousandth 
their population contains more soldiers than every  
side combined fielded during World War 2.
And realistically, that’s not what some  
interstellar colony facing a unified solar system 
back here would face, that’s what rebellious Mars  
or Titan would face. Either a civilization’s 
population rises or declines or stays static,  
but if it isn’t rising there’s not a lot of need 
to contemplate interstellar colonies except for  
prestige or redundancy. If your civilization is 
convinced that those colonies are not a positive,  
possibly by previous colonies rebelling or 
unleashing some accidental doomsday device,  
then they’re not thinking of them as 
prestigious projects or ways to save  
your civilization from extinction, just 
rebellious, ungrateful, degenerate, mutant  
children who might want to help dig your grave.
Alternatively, if your population is growing,  
then while it is likely those interstellar 
colonists would tend to include a lot of  
your fast-growing elements, pioneers wanting big 
families, you are still going to find it cheaper,  
easier, and faster to build up space habitats 
on or inside or from all those other moons  
and minor planets in this solar system. On 
the higher end, such a growth of structures  
around the solar system could easily exceed 
100 billion-billion people, 100 quintillion,  
by assuming they need a similar amount 
of sunlight for their habitats as we  
do – though they could go way higher than 
this through greater efficiency, posthumanism,  
or simply adding power sources beside the Sun.
And this is a full Kardashev-2 civilization, a  
Dyson Swarm, and is very obvious if you happen to 
be looking at one astronomically but only if it’s  
reasonably close and you happened to be looking 
at it specifically. So, we could miss one fairly  
easily nowadays even if it was just a few thousand 
light years away. Which would allow thousands of  
such single-Dyson empires in our galaxy, scattered 
around, without us noticing. This will be a key  
point for next month's Interdiction Hypothesis.
We tend to assume that we spot them, expanding  
and doing that to every system they encounter, 
that’s the Dyson Dilemma that was the start of  
our discussion of the Fermi Paradox on this 
show about 10 years back. You could spot a  
civilization doing that to every star in a region 
of a galaxy, or a whole galaxy, very easily and a  
billion light years away or more, and we have not.
Now, you don’t necessarily get those population  
levels either, indeed unless you’re engaging in 
starlifting or importing materials from other  
solar systems – a point we’ll return to in a bit 
– then you are going to max out your habitats  
based on how much material you need per habitat 
or person and how deep you’re willing to dig,  
so to speak. If you’re just disassembling 
asteroids and smaller moons to make very  
comfortable suburban style O’Neill Cylinder 
Space Habitats, you are looking at somewhere  
in the area of 10 to maybe even 100 quadrillion 
people living in those and on the various larger  
moons and planets. Once you start looking at 
those bigger moons though, you’re going up 2  
or 3 orders of magnitude, into the quintillions, 
and more if you go for more urban development. 
As much as I like starlifting, or even mass 
harvesting planets other than Earth for materials,  
my suspicion is that those planets will 
already be occupied and that experiments  
with starlifitng would preferably be done around 
another star first, which not only provides vast  
raw materials but the energy to send them back 
to our star system. Starliftng itself is very  
energy demanding and resource intensive, it’s 
self-powered by the Sun so we tend to ignore  
how many joules get used pulling matter out 
of one, but it is in the same zone as shooting  
material back slowly through interstellar space 
and both are long term operations requiring very  
long term investments that you setup when 
alternative supplies are running lower. 
But I think this is your rough early 
peak for population in the Solar System,  
something in the quadrillions, and 
that until you get to that point,  
it will always be easier and cheaper to build 
habitats here than found an interstellar colony,  
and an easier way to handle a growing population. 
This doesn’t mean you’re not colonizing other  
stars, but it does mean you are probably seeing 
a much faster growth in raw numbers back here  
than on all your colonies combined until we hit 
that limit of somewhere north of a quintillion. 
There are tons of factors that affect growth 
rates, and a horrible tendency to try to over  
simplify them which has resulted in case after 
case of laughably wrong predictions over the  
last century. It could go up or down but I tend 
to assume improvements in longevity technologies  
and automation will see it increase while 
simultaneously improvements in birth control will  
see it decrease, on top of any number of cultural 
factors that will vary from culture to culture and  
generation to generation. And a civilization 
worried about overpopulation and Malthusian  
Catastrophes tends to see that manifest in a 
lot of its art, film, literature, and policies,  
which makes folks a little less inclined to want 
lots of kids too. There’s a thousand ways in which  
big or small families can be incentivized or 
discouraged, often just subconsciously. Too  
many factors, not enough true long term data.
It’s why I usually state the issue, in Fermi  
Paradox terms, as assuming any civilization 
that can grow comfortably will tend to over  
very long times, and am intentionally very vague 
about what ‘comfortably’ means. At the moment,  
using 2021 data anyway, Earth’s population 
grew 0.9% in that year while the GDP grew 5.9%,  
the year before that was 1% population 
growth and -3.1% GDP, thank you Covid,  
while in 2019 it was 1.1% population growth and 
2.6% GDP growth. Best estimates are that we topped  
8 billion people back in November of 2022 and 
should be over 8.1 billion when this episode airs. 
It is very rare that population growth exceeds 
GDP growth in recent times, even briefly like  
it did during Covid, which is principally 
the result of technological advancement  
and which I would expect to continue for the 
next few centuries or even millenia barring  
catastrophe and I think this implies a golden 
age that would be occurring even as the ability  
to affordably and practically colonize other 
planets and star systems was reached, removing  
the land limitation issue growth currently has, 
more people, same amount of land to live on. 
It’s a major reason for my optimism about 
space colonization occurring robustly in the  
not too distant future, but it’s the period 
after that which our Cronus Scenarios are  
more focused on. When you’re starting to see 
growth in our Solar System, the Sol System  
as it's called when discussing others, begin 
running out of runway while its colonies are  
just starting to hit their own stride. Let’s 
run through the numbers to clarify that. 
We’ve generally run around 1% population growth 
rate in recent years, and were that to continue,  
to get to a quintillion people would require we 
have 123 million times our current population,  
which would take us just under 1200 years, 
circa the year 3200 A.D. A 2% growth rate,  
which would be way short of the peaks 
we saw in the middle of last century,  
would hit a quintillion in a bit under 600 years, 
circa the year 2600. Half our current growth rate,  
0.5%, would get us there in about 2400 years, 
circa the year 4600, and a 0.1% growth rate,  
just a tenth of now, would get us there about ten 
times longer, 11,730 years to hit a population  
of a quintillion around the year 13,754 A.D.
Even if we assumed this very slow expansion rate,  
that’s probably still implying slow growth on 
those colonies too, but let’s go with the year  
4600 and half our current growth rate. Even if we 
were founding new colonies at 10% of light speed,  
and hit that full stride by 2200 A.D., that means 
we only have colonized out to 240 light years.  
There’s something like a quarter of a million-star 
systems out to this distance, and presumably the  
ones closer to home are a lot more populous 
though we shouldn’t be assuming their growth  
rate is all that much higher than back in Sol.
That means your population of a quintillion back  
home would massively outnumber all those 
other systems. Even if they had an average  
system population of a billion people, that 
would still mean you outnumbered all of them  
4000 to 1. And they’re not hitting those kinds of 
numbers that fast unless they’re arriving with a  
million-person colonial fleet and busting 
out the cloning vats once they settle in. 
So, they can literally throw more soldiers at 
the colonies than they have people. And at any  
time prior to this, the odds have been even more 
overwhelming. After this we see a slow tip the  
other way but it gives Earth and its allies in the 
system a lot of time to decide they need to act. 
On the one hand, this would seem like an 
unenviable strategic position, surrounded  
on all sides by potential enemies, but the other 
way to think of it is a stadium full of people in  
which some titan or dragon has suddenly emerged, 
and who can reach out hit everyone simultaneously,  
like that hundred-handed Hecatoncheires that 
Uranus locked away, and Cronus kept away,  
and Zeus unleashed to overthrow them 
and set as their guards thereafter. 
I think that might be an appropriate mythological 
reference considering the double-edged sword of  
unleashing a fleet like that, and assuming 
they will stay loyal to that cause and either  
replace the disloyal colonies with loyalists 
or burn all those planets out and come home. 
Now we discussed some defense scenarios in our 
episode Rebel Space Colonies last year and the  
idea of defecting fleets came up there along 
with options like brainwashing or using robots,  
but they key notion there is that you have a 
protracted period where your colonies are weaker  
than you are, collectively, and a longer period 
where you could crush many of them at once but  
not all. And the nature of communication and light 
lag means you do have a major edge coordinating  
such an option to launch out from Earth or some 
alien civilization’s home world on some terrifying  
expedition to wipe out your daughter colonies. 
That means there’s a very long time for sentiments  
to grow harsh toward those colonies and them 
to seem a growing threat before your homeworld  
has to make that effort. And quite probably it 
wasn’t at everyone at once but initially at this  
or that troublemaker and with mostly favorable 
reception by their own colonial neighbors. 
Let’s consider Wolf 359, best known to us 
as the place where Starfleet got it handed  
to them by the Borg back in the Star Trek: The 
Next Generation Episode “Best of Both Worlds”,  
though also the name of an Outer Limits episode 
from way back in 1964. Wolf 359 is a real place  
though, a red dwarf star system just under 
8 light years away and a M6 Flare Star,  
meaning it is about a thousandth as bright as 
our own sun normally and prone to rapidly and  
dangerously brightening for brief periods. We 
don’t think Wolf 359 has any significant planets  
and a habitable one would need to be much closer 
to that star than even Mercury and would have its  
self-roasted regularly to remove any atmosphere.
When Jon Meredith arrived there as one of the  
few scientists about their settlement and mining 
fleet, everybody understood this was going to be  
more of a mining colony than an occasion to build 
another new Earth. The system is rich in asteroids  
and minor planets, along with cometary matter, and 
their objective was to go there, set up initial  
operation along with a stellaser system to push 
freighters up to interstellar speeds to go back to  
Sol with metals, and slow down any incoming ships. 
After two centuries of build up and preparation  
they began being able to send shipments home 
and receive new colonists to help build space  
habitats and other megastructures there.
One rebellious movement got their hands  
on the stellaser system briefly and 
used it to send several megatons of  
relatively stealthy projectiles back towards 
Earth, which had they hit would have damaged  
Earth worse than the asteroid believed to have 
killed the dinosaurs off did. Thankfully this  
eventuality was foreseen, and the projectiles 
were mostly intercepted without harm, and those  
that did do damage were relatively limited.
Jonathon Meredith always had every intention  
of returning to Earth after he finished 
his work here, and was very much with the  
loyalist cause that helped to retake the beaming 
arrays and await reinforcements from Earth,  
which were able to arrive just over 40 years after 
the hijacking, with the beaming array available  
to slow them down, allowing travel at 25% of 
light speed to the system. The system until then  
had been in a 4-decade long state of protracted 
stalemate and saw many different factions emerge,  
with flare ups of fighting and conflict.
The force that arrived in system was immense  
and rapidly restored order, and not too long 
thereafter Jonathon and a few hundred loyalist  
engineers were hosted by the admiral of the fleet 
at a lavish state dinner that celebrated them as  
heroes and asked if they would consider future 
such missions, since their expertise and confirmed  
loyalty were invaluable. Most of them agreed with 
the caveat that they really were looking forward  
to seeing Earth again first and enjoying some of 
their hard-earned rewards. The admiral laughed and  
said that would not be a problem, and said that 
improvements to cryo-technology and nanotech meant  
journeys made in frozen stasis so as not to get 
as bored, very accurate brain scans also ensured  
any damage to memory the previous processes 
sometimes had were almost entirely eliminated. 
Jonathan awoke in the HD 110067 system, 100 
light years from earth in the year 4024 A.D.,  
and where several large planets orbit a bright 
K0 Orange Dwarf that’s over 8 billion years old.  
As a scientist he’s spent a good deal of his free 
time searching for signs of prior civilizations,  
and the incredibly synchronized orbits of 
the sub-Neptunian planets here fascinates  
him. He hasn’t got much free time as 
the big cargo carriers from Earth are  
en route to the system already and they 
must get their operation up and running,  
including their beaming system to slow down ships.
Security is tighter at this mining station, their  
comms traffic to other systems is limited to a 
very short list of pre-written statements and he’s  
fairly certain they censor what entertainment and 
news comes from home. But his work is done here,  
and he and the rest of his team are headed home on 
that first transport. New folks will presumably be  
taking on the work here which is mostly automated. 
The team consists of many old friends from Wolf  
359, as well as many volunteers from other early 
operations, and he was surprised what a great  
team was assembled for such a remote operation.
When the crack team of marines exited the bulk  
freighter and began methodically shooting 
everyone, their own lieutenant already  
knew why he had such a good team. Much like 
Jonathan’s team, they were all volunteers but  
after it was decided that leaving inhabited 
colony’s behind for resource extraction was  
more dangerous than leaving low-intelligence AI 
to run operations once setup was complete. He’s  
met the original Jonathan Meredith before 
and wonders how many of his duplicates he  
and his own duplicates have killed before.
Jon Meredith and the rest of the assembled  
mining teams, known as Alpha Team, were 
duplicated thousands of times and sent  
to systems with the goal of getting them started 
for future colonists. Now the new plan is to mine  
every system they can reach for resources to send 
home to Sol. In this way Sol can expand and grow,  
while the removal of easy resources makes it ever 
harder for any rogue element to reach a system and  
access resources in a practical and viable way. 
The lieutenant and his crew will return on ice  
for thorough debrief and scanning as soon as 
they confirm every member of Alpha Team 7342  
is accounted for, and the Lieutenant suspects, 
correctly, that there are measures implanted into  
them to ensure his team either returns or dies.
Having grown up in the 35th century where it  
seemed like one colony or another of Earth’s 
was rebelling every year and his home Cylinder  
in Kuiper Belt barely survived an attack by 
some berserker AI fleet, he is content with the  
strategy Earth and it’s interplanetary alliance 
have chosen for protecting humanity from the  
treacherous children it seeded the interstellar 
neighborhood with before adopting this tactic,  
even though he suspects he may not wake up 
once he goes back on ice from this mission,  
some sacrifices are worth it, but 
he’d rather not know for sure. 
It’s hard to say if a strategy like that could 
continue in perpetuity but the interesting  
thing is that it doesn’t need to. Stars are not 
static, so new ones will be entering or leaving  
your stellar neighborhood on long enough time 
intervals but these are very long even on the  
interstellar travel & colonization scale, 
and if you’re mining out every star system,  
starting with the lowest hanging fruit 
like asteroids, you can pillage all your  
neighboring systems to the point that eventual 
colonization of them would be very difficult,  
especially for anyone seeking to avoid scrutiny 
and lacking a ton of resources to begin with. 
At a certain point of depletion, it would be hard 
for you to colonize those neighboring systems even  
if you decided to change the policy and actively 
pursue colonization again. It also is a bit of  
scorched Earth or scorched Galaxy policy, if ever 
you encounter some alien civilization or some  
colony did manage to escape far away, they might 
have some thousand light year volume around your  
home world that was depleted of all but dumb but 
well-designed machines that monitor and booby trap  
that system. There’s just not a lot of motivation 
to try to push a beachhead through there,  
especially given that you know the folks 
at the center are glutted with resources  
to defend themselves with and you’ll have to 
extend your supply lines through hundreds of  
light years of systems that they’ve sucked 
dry already and probably filled with traps. 
And while you could just abandon those 
systems entirely after you looted them,  
it would be more logical to leave some monitoring 
and simple automated defenses behind. It would not  
be that hard to make sure fleets sent in by you 
in stasis to check those automated systems only  
had the ability to go to a desired system and 
back, were packed full of vetted loyalists,  
and stopped in those systems only long 
enough to make sure the large number of  
lobotomized machine minds weren’t showing signs 
of tampering or mutation. And it is much easier  
to ensure copy-fidelity in self-replicating 
machines and digital information than with DNA. 
And even if someone did jump the rails, way 
back at your home world you’ve got something  
bigger than a full Kardashev-2 civilization that 
can react with the sorts of forces and firepower  
that would make your classic space opera galactic 
empire whimper and weep in jealousy. This region  
of depleted systems might still be home to any 
number of survivor colonies and ragtag pirates,  
potentially untold trillions of people, but they 
always have to worry they will get swatted if they  
raise their head up too high, because they are 
few and scattered compared to the inner sphere. 
If all the big resources leftover are gas giants 
and stars themselves, for all that this is 99.9%  
of the resources in that system, the effort 
and apparatus needed to get at those is major,  
time consuming, and not even a little covert. 
You’ll pick them up from your monitoring,  
while alternatively we could be within a few 
thousand light years of some alien empire that  
sucked a region dry of easy metals, and not 
see them. Indeed, we might easily miss them  
even nowadays by assuming they were an 
old cluster of lower metallicity stars. 
To a civilization that knew what to look 
for they would stand out like a sore thumb,  
but the Fermi Paradox isn’t about what others 
could see, it’s about what we can see right now. 
It’s also not about what we would do, but what 
the overwhelming majority of alien civilizations  
would do. And when it comes to behavior, that 
non-exclusivity issue gets very limiting. We can  
make a case that there’s no pan-galactic empires 
because there’s no Faster Than Light Travel and  
everyone is limited to sub-light travel, we 
could make a case colonizing space is too hard  
and no one does it, but when it comes to a chosen 
behavior, that they can colonize space but don’t,  
it a very hard lift and uphill to show 
why every alien would do that, or such an  
overwhelming percentage that it doesn’t matter.
The Cronus Scenarios are an example where a  
convergent behavior is plausible. Colonies your 
planet is far away from do not offer you a lot of  
new trade and resources, and once you’ve done a 
few, they no longer offer much prestige either.  
The further out you go, the less prestige 
you get because it is getting to be old hat,  
the more resources the effort takes, and 
the less control you can exert on them,  
and the harder it is to get resources from them. 
All the same time, the more divergent they get,  
the more different and alien to you, so 
that they are not a redundant civilization  
in case your sun goes nova. Simultaneously, the 
further you go out, the more of them there are,  
loosely rising with the cube of distance, ten 
times further out, a thousand times the systems,  
and a thousand times the systems that might turn 
hostile or invent some doomsday device that can  
avoid detection or being dealt with while the 
threat is still embryonic because of the distance. 
At a certain point, a civilization 
starts realizing this is getting to  
be far more dangerous than beneficial and begins 
actively discouraging colonization and perhaps  
hard feelings escalate with many colonies, and 
potentially it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.  
Maybe they just send out the armadas to blow 
everyone away, or maybe they are just inviting  
everyone to come home or else. Realistically, 
despite our fears from science fiction,  
resource harvesting by robots can be done by a 
machine smart enough to do the job but far too  
dumb to ever rebel and which is less likely than 
not to ever mutate randomly even over astronomical  
timelines and astronomically expanding numbers.
They don’t even to necessarily go the full Cronus  
route of eating their existing colonies, just 
take out the worst troublemakers and convert  
the others to the idea that they are inside the 
accepted bubble, maybe twenty light years across,  
and the area outside of there will be actively and 
aggressively depleted of resources automatically  
and patrolled thereafter so no one else can settle 
them. They might agree with your reasoning and  
breathe a sigh of relief, glad they don’t have 
the same issue of hostile children popping up on  
their own frontier, hostile to them or to Earth 
but happy to plow through them on the way there. 
Indeed, even if starships did escape undetected 
and unpursued – which is a lot harder than it  
sound like as an accelerating spaceship is 
as subtle as an erupting volcano – their  
most logical strategy is to burn very nearly 
all their fuel to get as fast as they can and  
aim to slow down for low cost at some distant 
nebula or cluster thousands of light years away. 
When they get there in ten thousand or more years, 
by the time they’ve had time to grow a colony of  
any size themselves that might be a threat, they 
have the very same issues to deal with and may  
decide on the same spectrum of solutions. Carve 
out a region of space, drain it all to the center,  
leave a buffer zone of dumb automated 
monitors, extractors, and defenses behind,  
and build some civilization more impressively 
big than a standard Dyson Swarm back at your  
capital system and possibly its nearest handful 
of neighbors. You could even migrate those  
stars themselves if you really wanted too.
It seems like a bleak picture, but as we’ll  
discuss in our look at Interdiction Hypothesis 
next month, there’s a lot of reason to think  
this could be a normal behavior out in the galaxy 
or wider universe. Giant fortress systems stuffed  
to the gills with megastructures and stockpiled 
resources surrounded by harvested desolation. The  
equivalent of building your fortress in the 
middle of a desert oasis surrounded by sand  
for thousands of miles in each direction.
This isn’t really that bleak of existence  
either. Indeed, it’s potentially how a 
full-blown Birch planet might get built,  
cramming a whole K3 civilization into a single 
star system’s volume, where you truly can hop on  
a spaceship and visit thousands or even millions 
of other worlds in a few hours or days. There’s  
a lot in this single solar system or small 
pocket of them, for all that it is compressed,  
which is a good thing since it removes the one big 
issue with interstellar empires of huge travel and  
signal lag. And it’s not like things are tightly 
packed in a Dyson Swarm, and its big brothers must  
be less dense for heat dissipation reasons.
It's definitely an attractive setup. It just  
suffers from feeling rather cannibalistic and 
depending on how you did it, that feeling might  
be more than metaphorical, but that’s the way it's 
bleak, not for the lifestyle or circumstances of  
those back inside the inner core. They’ve 
got untold quintillions living back home in  
comfortable and sustainable circumstances and they 
haven’t seeded space around them with potential  
enemies and any that pop up have little practical 
motivation to come after them. Though irrational  
hatred is a motivation that both alien empires 
and distant cousins who survived their purges  
to flee to distant clusters might retain.
For my part, while I do consider the Cronus  
Scenarios a plausible solution to the Fermi 
Paradox, in that it offers a reasonably  
convergent behavior civilizations might move 
toward and be able to sustain indefinitely,  
I think the case is decent but not particularly 
strong either. Much like its twin theory, the  
Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis, where everyone flees 
to the hills from a fear of central threat, I just  
have a hard time seeing everyone doing this either 
without exception or inevitably driven to it. 
I do not think the reasoning is inarguable, 
that you have to murder your interstellar  
children off or avoid ever having them in order 
to survive. I certainly hope it is not true,  
that such a grim harvest should never be thought 
either practical or ethical, but we can’t really  
speak to the variables involved until we actually 
have some interstellar colonies and see how  
relations and risks evolve. In a case like this, 
where our Grabby Aliens scenario tends to assume  
intelligent civilizations are rare but they 
eventually start colonizing outward at a decent  
fraction of light speed, simple hesitation about 
the dangers of neighboring colonies might not  
prevent them but slow expansion enough to allow 
that Grabby Aliens scenario to move from several  
thousand civilizations or less in the Universe 
to several million or even billion, without us  
spotting them yet. Again we just can’t speak to 
those variables yet, too many unknown unknowns. 
But for that same reason, I have a hard time 
seeing this as a better candidate than simply  
assuming intelligent spacefaring civilizations 
don’t evolve much, in part just because those  
unknown unknowns should seem to have different 
or differently weighted variables with vastly  
different alien species who followed very 
different evolutionary paths and social models. 
On the flip side, it does seem more plausible 
to me than the various Zoo Hypothesis scenarios,  
which tend to be the go-to most probable Fermi 
Paradox Solution after various Rare Earth or  
Rare Intelligence options. And as mentioned, 
we’ll explore the idea that such distant  
desert fortress civilizations might cooperate 
with each other more in our look at the Fermi  
Paradox and Interdiction Hypothesis next month.
Until then, since this is essentially a new entry  
on our solutions chart, I’d be curious what your 
thoughts are on the reasoning or evidence that  
would support or sink this set of solutions, 
probably appropriately for the topic, even  
if I did metaphorically give birth to the Cronus 
Scenarios, albeit with lots of prior inspiration,  
they paint a sufficiently bleak picture that I’d 
be just as happy to see them swallowed whole.
So as we head into spring, for a lot of 
our viewers the impending final’s week of  
the semester is approaching, and for many others, 
they’re trying to figure out where to go to school  
or what to do afterwards. The most important 
study habit you’ll ever learn is not to cram,  
do your learning in bite-size bits everyday, and 
keep doing it after school for the rest of your  
life. Establishing a daily learning habit is 
one of the most important things you can do,  
both for personal and professional growth. That’s 
where our friends at Brilliant can help. Brilliant  
helps you build real knowledge in minutes a 
day—with fun lessons you can do whenever you have  
time. It’s the opposite of mindless scrolling.
Brilliant focuses on fun and interactive learning,  
and is the best way to learn math, science, and 
computer science interactively, and if you watch  
this show, you know how valuable knowledge of 
statistics or AI or other areas of STEM can be in  
every aspect of your life. Brilliant has thousands 
of lessons on these topics including tons of  
interactive visualizations of neural networks and 
artificial intelligence. From simple to complex,  
whatever your skill level, Brilliant customizes 
content to fit your needs and lets you start where  
you should and improve at your own pace.
To try everything Brilliant has to offer  
for free for a full 30 days, visit 
brilliant.org/isaacarthur or click  
on the link in the description. You’ll also 
get 20% off an annual premium subscription.
So today we were talking about civilization 
being afraid of its colonies being a threat  
and this Thursday on April 7th we’ll 
talk about the various threats to Earth,  
mundane and strange alike, as we look at 
Defending Earth, be it from asteroids, aliens,  
AI, astronomical explosions, or just mundane human 
threats. Then it will be time for Sci Fi Sunday,  
where we’ll be looking at the idea of Stargates 
and parallel devices for bridging between worlds  
and ask if there’s any theories bridging 
between science and scifi there. Then we’ll  
take a look at a different type of tunnel, the 
immense lava tubes on the Moon, and what life  
in those might be like for lunar settlers.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early 
and ad free on our streaming service,  
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content like 
Galactic Beacons, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
