Many people fear the end is nigh, but 
often disagree on which end that is and  
why. Which is understandable, since there 
are so many to choose from. And who knows,  
we might not need to pick just one, when it comes 
to disasters you often get a bulk discount.
 
So, welcome back to another Scifi Sunday 
here on SFIA, where we focus on topics out  
of science fiction and try to discuss how real 
or unreal they are, and what our modern knowledge  
of science tells us about them including what it 
suggests as alternative approaches. It is hard to  
say what the most common scifi tropes are, since 
they change over time as new science fiction is  
written with new ideas and concepts. But right now 
anyway, they do include staples like evil twins,  
time travel, robots, aliens, and many more, 
with one of the big ones being trying to avert  
an apocalypse or surviving after one. 
And that’s the reason for today’s title,  
surviving an apocalypse as opposed to “The” 
Apocalypse, as we’ll be looking at a number  
of civilization-ending scenarios today and 
asking what the aftermath might look like and  
how to repair things afterward. We’ll aim 
for optimism but also realism, after all,  
there’s a light at the end of every tunnel, it’s 
just sometimes it’s an oncoming freight train.
 
We will mention in passing any obvious 
way to avert a given apocalypse,  
but today our optimistic focus is less on how 
to avert disaster than discussing what we can  
do afterward to rebuild, and how severe that 
disaster would really be. After our first topic,  
we’ll be moving through the other topics 
fairly quickly today and covering nuclear war,  
asteroid strikes, a supernova or gamma ray 
burst hitting Earth, massive climate shift,  
a Biowar, the concept of a Zombie Apocalypse, 
Artificial Intelligence, and an Alien Invasion.
 
Now, a lot depends on things we 
don’t necessarily know, which is  
possibly appropriate as the word Apocalypse 
comes from the Greek for uncover or reveal,  
and is popularized as a doomsday scenario 
by the last book of the New Testament,  
The Apocalypse of John, also known as the Book of 
Revelations. In that scenario the end is implied  
to be rather supernatural and that would be a 
great example of unknown unknowns, Black Swans,  
or Out-of-Context Problems or OCPs, the sort of 
totally out of nowhere unexpected shift that no  
one is really expecting. In this case, while we 
often talk of the end of the world, I don’t think  
most folks are really expecting an army of angels 
or demons to erupt onto Earth. We wouldn’t really  
know what to do other than pray, but at least 
in that scenario you can assume that that is a  
valid option. It’s probably a valid approach in 
any supernatural scenario like that too, such as  
if mountains suddenly turn out to be sleeping 
giants, or Cthulhu emerges from the deeps. 
 
Also, in cases like this, survival might be a 
worse option. Or you might not want to avert  
the Apocalypse, and in cases like the literal 
Apocalypse, averting or mitigating it isn’t  
really in your realm of control. 
On the flip side, things like Nuclear War,  
Artificial Intelligence going haywire, or Man 
Made Climate Change, are obviously in the realm  
of human control and avoidance, and should 
best be avoided, while a sudden super-strong  
volcanic eruption blackening the skies worldwide 
is really more about mitigating the fallout and  
getting civilization back on its feet. Same for 
Supernovae, Gamma Ray Bursts or even Asteroid  
Impacts. We may one day get the technology to 
prevent these events hurting us, but that’s not  
something we’re prepared for tomorrow while 
any of those options could happen tomorrow.
 
Of course, so could a Nuclear 
War, and let’s begin there.
 
Nuclear War has been on the table since the 1950s 
and was feared even before mass production of  
ICBMs, but that definitely colored the flavor of 
that Apocalypse. Before that, the assumption was  
the nukes would come on bombers you could shoot 
down or individual bombs could be snuck into ports  
on ships, or even a particularly terrifying 
version of trench warfare. Superfast missiles  
dropping from the sky from the other side of 
the planet came to dominate the way we looked  
at that possible event and you could do nothing 
against those, except maybe to strike first,  
which wouldn’t be your personal decision anyway. 
The event shifts to feeling outside your control.  
Ironically the scenario for ICBMs raining 
total annihilation down from a clear sky  
was never particularly probable or ruinous. 
You’ll hear folks say we had enough bombs  
to kill everyone or destroy the world 10 
times over but that was just hyperbole. 
 
There was no scenario during the cold war where 
everyone could be killed by the bombs unless  
everyone agreed to go gather in all the major 
cities and preferably stand outside. A megaton  
nuclear device – which is much larger than most 
of those built – has a kill radius of about 5  
miles or 8 kilometers, which is 80 square miles 
or 200 square kilometers of area. That’s a fairly  
loose number, and kill radiuses for explosives 
usually assume a person standing in the open,  
not under any real protection, and what’s 
more, merely are where death is reasonably  
plausible, not guaranteed, or even likely. 
I was once inside the radius of one of my unit’s  
own artillery shells during a training accident 
one time and in the open, and other than getting  
showered with dust, pebbles, and a massive ringing 
in my ears, I was fine. Another time in Iraq I  
had paused behind a barrier on base to shield 
myself from the wind while I lit a cigarette,  
I almost swallowed the thing when a rocket hit 
a moment later, and two of my buddies got purple  
hearts that day, though thankfully weren’t badly 
injured. I had quite a few friends during the war  
who were very much inside the radius of explosives 
but had their armor on or just didn’t get fatally  
hit by shrapnel, of course some did. A concrete 
wall is going to protect you quite well against an  
explosion too, conventional or atomic, at a much 
closer distance than standing in the open would.
 
So kill radius, besides not being very well 
defined anyway, is essentially the zone in  
which it or severe injury is likely. And while 80 
square miles or 200 square kilometers might sound  
like a lot, and is in terms of a dense city, it 
would take 50,000 such explosions to actually hit  
all the land area of just the United States, and 
peak Soviet stockpiles are estimated at around  
660-800 megatons total, around 1-2% of the 
total needed. And again, there’s going to  
be survivors even inside that radius, especially 
with any advance notice. It would be surprising  
if even a majority of people, equipment, and 
stored goods in the blast zone were destroyed.
 
Rather, the usual apocalypse associated 
with a nuclear war is fear of the Fall Out,  
and there’s a lot of debate over how potent that 
would really be, but it’s usually felt estimates  
from back in the 20th century were wildly high and 
the commonly reported figures were on the high and  
exaggerated side of those already high estimates. 
The simple answer is that no one actually knows,  
our models are pretty theoretical, especially 
when it comes to secondary effects like wildfires  
or panicked mob activity. Nonetheless, there’s 
not really a plausible Cold War scenario that  
results in endless barren wastelands populated by 
scattered surviving humans and mutants fighting  
for the remaining food. In practice your farmland 
isn’t really hit that hard, and only temporarily,  
but your supply, storage, and distribution 
networks are all mashed up after something  
like that. An extended and heavy fallout, which 
is getting combined with ash from the burning  
cities and forests, is not doing wonders for crop 
production to be sure, but your real production  
issue is getting fertilizer to your fields or 
diesel and spare parts to your harvesters.
 
Rather, there’s a temporary collapse because you 
lost a lot of your cities, many of your people,  
and lots of your centralized control. That’s 
the main reason why contingency shelters  
for a nation’s leaders are important. It’s not 
that we need a bunch of leaders in a world without  
any people, it’s that they are priority targets 
by the enemy and the vast supermajority of people  
would survive just fine, and a power vacuum, 
especially one that blows up state and provincial  
capitals too, is not a great situation to have 
during a catastrophe. Some might disagree, but  
the usual assumption is that the only thing worse 
than a bad leader in a crisis is no leader at all.  
So you aim to preserve the ones you had.
That’s no safeguard, and realistically you are  
going to have a massive power shift after an event 
like that. For a simple example, most countries,  
now and historically, are stratified politically 
by city versus rural populaces. So much as plagues  
or fires often devastated capitals or towns 
serving as local power hubs, nuclear bombs can  
erase cities, and will leave the buildings which 
are left over heavily-damaged, which will only  
be exacerbated by evacuations of the people 
who did survive or left before the strike.
 
I don’t think you’d have an easy time finding 
folks willing to move back into a city which had  
been that damaged and which was left to decay 
for a while, and in which radioactive isotopes  
are settling into nooks and crannies of steel 
and concrete buildings rather than some easily  
plowed-over field or wooden A-frame house. And 
that is going to move your political axis right  
away if there’s a disproportionate death toll 
but isn’t likely to move the folks currently  
in power themselves, and they could either be 
looking for scapegoats for the doom which befell  
or be turned into scapegoats themselves – 
rightly or wrongly – by political rivals  
or changing demographics, short and long term. 
Those changing demographics can have some weird  
secondary effects too, for instance in a lot 
of crises you’re going to see higher casualties  
among your elderly population and a sharp 
decline in services for them or others with  
chronic ailments like diabetes for instance. 
Stuff like that can have a horrible toll on your  
institutional knowledge and all sorts of 
secondaries like losing experts or losing  
the role grandparents often serve in childcare. 
Same, if you remember all the crazy supply chain  
failures of the Covid times and things people 
didn’t really expect like an absence of toilet  
paper or kids not being in school, then with any 
widespread disaster those are going to be worse,  
and nuclear war, much like plagues, carries an 
aftermath fear of infection or irradiation that  
something like a hurricane or Earthquake don’t 
leave behind, combined with the secondary effects  
you do see in those natural disasters, 
like looting, power vacuums, unrest,  
predatory behavior, hoarding, and so on.
Essentially this is potentially a  
civilization-ruining event, though depending 
on specifics, it might see a nation toppled and  
replaced with entirely new borders and factions, 
or it might be viewed as an extended rough patch  
like the Great Depression or Dust Bowl were. 
There’s also not enough actual radioactive  
material to be leaving giant swaths of radiated 
barren land behind either. You could literally  
plow your fields like normal and keep on growing. 
The question isn’t if civilization is coming to an  
end, but rather the degree of continuity to it, 
and how long and bad the post-apocalyptic period  
lasts, and it’s very hard to imagine that lasting 
even one normal human lifetime. Personally, I’d  
reasonably expect some degree of normality to be 
restored inside a year or two, though it’s a new  
normal of course, just not one featuring endless 
radioactive deserts and mutant cannibals. 
 
At the moment, the stockpiles of nukes are 
considerably lower than during the cold war,  
so this isn’t really a world-ender, and 
we’ve spent more time on it than we will  
others. Though it probably the merits the time 
both because nuclear war is a very realistic  
scenario and because many of our other scenarios 
will share similar problems and collapse cases.
 
Asteroids are another matter, as they can 
definitely be world-ending, it all depends on  
size. I mentioned in discussing Nuclear War that 
peak cold war armaments were in the hundreds of  
megatons, and pointed out that it really isn’t 
that much at a planetary scale, and asteroids  
are an example of something that could very well 
be. An asteroid around a hundred meters in radius  
hitting Earth would release more explosive power 
than the combined peak Cold War arsenal. We don’t  
have to ask what such an impact would be like, 
they’re moderately common and we have been hit by  
considerably bigger ones. Unless the asteroid’s 
diameter is at least 10 kilometers though,  
I don’t think we need to be contemplating any 
plausible end to humanity. Indeed we would  
likely survive what took out the dinosaurs 
and that was 10-15 kilometers across. 
 
Survival is a bit iffy and it depends on where 
you are. Folks in the other hemisphere of the  
planet wouldn’t really feel the initial impact 
till the dust and ash circulated around to  
darken the sky. On the flip side, most asteroids 
crash into the ocean, there’s much more of it,  
and there’s no real dust and fall out and fires 
from that, but the tsunami hitting the coasts is  
going to be terrifying. Or moderately annoying, 
again it depends entirely on how big the rock is,  
and how sturdy your coastal buildings are.
We think we got hit by one large enough to rip the  
whole planetary crust off way, way back and that’s 
where the Moon came from. You’re not surviving  
that, except by having a colony on another planet. 
On the other hand an asteroid a kilometer across  
slamming into the deep ocean, carrying a thousand 
times the energy of our cold war arsenals,  
is not going to have planet-wide effects if it 
hits the sea, not directly anyway, if New York  
or London or Tokyo disappears under a tidal wave 
you are definitely not going to have your stock  
markets rising, except possibly literally if 
they’re physically floating out on the tide.
 
I don’t think an asteroid that big could sneak up 
on us with no warning, but anything out past the  
moon is not guaranteed to be spotted, even if 
it is mountain-sized. Once it’s in that range,  
if it’s moving 40 kilometers per second toward 
us, for instance, we have about 10,000 seconds,  
or 3 hours to cope with that and that is enough 
time to get a decent estimate for the impact site,  
and to release a plan. You also probably have 
at least an hour after impact before the wave  
hits most places, as they generally move at 
passenger-jet speeds. There are ways to survive  
a Tsunami, or at least improve your odds, and the 
best of course is just to get inland. Tsunamis do  
not crash across entire continents, though a 
big asteroid impact might exceed the normal  
limit of about 10 miles, nor do they simply knock 
over steel and concrete buildings with ease. 
 
The water is going to flow back out to the ocean 
fairly quickly, in less than a day, but unless  
you’re pretty confident about your bunker being 
waterproof it’s better to go to higher ground,  
especially as it’s possible the flow of 
water is going to drag objects or mud  
over your entrance and bury you. It’s always 
a good idea to have a way to dig yourself out  
of a bunker before you run out of air or 
drown too. Though in point of fact, you’re  
really not running out of air so much as getting 
choked up on too much exhaled carbon dioxide. 
 
In a case like this rebuilding is similar to what 
we do after a hurricane but perhaps a bit wider  
scale. Asteroid impacts are too variable in size 
and result to speak of a grand plan for afterward,  
because if we see a 100 mile wide rock headed our 
way a few months out, that is a case of hoping to  
knock it off course with some nukes and otherwise 
just hoping some scattered and nuclear powered  
mega-bunkers might leave enough humans and other 
critters alive to repopulate afterwards. You would  
almost certainly have advance warning on something 
like that too. The Good news is that the odds of  
an asteroid a mile wide or bigger hitting 
us in a given century is much less than 1%,  
and nothing smaller than that plausibly exposes 
civilization to much risk of real collapse,  
even temporarily. Bigger ones are even rarer, 
and in another century we probably will have  
the space assets to be able to spot and track 
every asteroid of that size in the solar system,  
and to deliver as much explosives as we need to 
move it off course. We also likely would have  
off world colonies to survive us. 
Supernovae and Gamma Ray Bursts are  
another story as the damage they do to 
us is coming in at the speed of light,  
it explodes and we don’t see it till the shockwave 
hits us, and everything else in the solar system.
 
Now, the good news is that any star big enough 
to go supernova is incredibly easy to spot and  
we know every star close enough to do that… kind 
of. There are two major types of Supernovae,  
one is where big bright stars die of old age, and 
again those are easy to spot, even with the naked  
eye. The other is where a white dwarf – which are 
quite dim normally – absorbs enough mass off a  
binary neighbor to explode, and white dwarfs are 
way more common than big stars too, as are close  
binaries where one is absorbing matter from the 
other. So too, it need not be another star, which  
are pretty visible, a dim gad giant or brown dwarf 
might fall into a white dwarf and set it off.
 
Nowadays we can reliably spot any white dwarfs 
near us too, and are getting good at finding  
bigger exoplanets and brown dwarfs. There are 
six white dwarfs within 20 light years of Earth,  
close enough to hurt us if they explode, 
and 4 are binaries, Sirius B, Procyon B,  
40 Eridani B, and Stein 2051 B. They’re all B 
because they’re dimmer than the other star. 
 
Sirius A & B orbit each other at between 8 and 
33 times the distance Earth is from the Sun,  
not close enough for major and unexpected mass 
exchanges, and the others are not likely to  
explode either. Stein 2051B, for instance, is a 
red dwarf and white dwarf binary system 18 light  
years away whose combined mass is too low to cause 
a Supernova. We usually focus on supernova within  
about 30 light years of Earth as truly dangerous – 
and this is an atmosphere or ozone-layer-wrecking  
scenario, not a planet-exploding one – but 
even one several hundred light years away  
could impact us noticeably, and there are 6 
supernova candidates in that range, in terms  
of big stars, plus plenty of white dwarfs. 
Stars do move over time and it is likely Earth  
has been hit by Supernovae at various intensities 
many times in the past, and we do estimate one  
explodes within about 10 light years every quarter 
of a billion years or so, or once a galactic year.  
Obviously life survived that and deep sea life 
would probably survive even if you ripped our  
entire atmosphere off, though removing that much 
nitrogen might be devastating in the long term,  
whereas taking our atmosphere off would just boil 
water out into that vacuum, resulting in a period  
of high hydrogen and oxygen concentrations in 
the air. It might convert us temporarily into  
a Hycean Planet, see that episode for details.
There is a defense against supernovae, several  
actually, but the easier one is that you put a big 
thin piece of metal foil about Earth-sized between  
us and the candidate star. That’s neither easy to 
manufacture nor keep static but it is doable and  
probably viable sometime this millenia, whereas 
there are no plausible supernovae threats inside  
that timeline, except the fairly distant weak 
ones that we don’t expect to cause major harm.
 
Gamma Ray Bursts or GRBs are trickier as first, 
they can come in a cone shape off the poles of  
the star that generated them, meaning they hit a 
narrow area rather than a spherical blast zone,  
and thus are dangerous a lot further away. 
Second, we don’t actually know all their sources,  
most that we observe are billions of light years 
away and no threat to us, but they usually blow  
out enough energy in a few seconds to equal 
what our sun will in its entire 10 billion  
year lifespan. They can range hugely in power 
output though, and possible sources include very  
powerful supernovae, quasars, Seyfert Galaxies, 
neutron star mergers, and many other candidates. 
 
Since we don’t know what all the sources are, 
and many of the options are hard-to-see objects,  
and they have a much wider potential range 
of lethality, we can’t really say if we’re  
in the threat zone for one, nor could we 
employ that shield technique I mentioned  
for Supernovae. Though you could arrange for an 
array of very high-orbit shields all around the  
planet except where the Sun was and indeed 
future worlds might employ this technique to  
protect against weapons like Nicoll-Dyson 
Beams or Relativistic Kill Missiles. 
 
If one did hit us, it would be basically Ozone 
Layer damage, and if sufficient, would result  
in mass extinction and lots of humans getting 
cancer even if we were pretty good about putting  
on sunblock and staying inside or under shade. 
Many plants just couldn’t survive that big a jump  
in the Ultraviolet B spectrum radiation hitting 
them, and they can’t hide their leaves from the  
sun of course. If it were bad enough we could 
see all or most land-based life sterilized and  
a century or two before the ozone layer recovered 
enough for marine or cave-dwelling life to make a  
reappearance on the ground under the Sun. 
For an individual looking to survive that,  
first it won’t be an instant thing, and second we 
could take to the oceans for fishing and farming.  
I think you could also get away using shade cloth 
or UV absorbent transparent plastics to keep some  
farming and gardening going. But this one, while 
probably not a threat of extinction to humanity,  
is definitely an option that would have a 
good chance of wrecking the whole planet,  
and depending on intensity, maybe mass extinction 
and a recovery in a few years or decades, or for  
more extreme versions, millions of years for the 
remnants to restore and diverge to the point of  
having truly diverse land-based ecosystems again. 
Some scientists have suggested that a Gamma Ray  
Burst was the cause of the Late Orovician 
mass extinction event 443 million years ago  
that killed over half of marine genera, and took 
as much as 10 million years to recover from. 
 
In a case like this, off world colonies 
on Mars or the Moon might recover faster,  
being already self-contained dome habitats with 
an industry and culture built around that. And  
our technology could be a big help to recovery. 
We can keep DNA samples or create preserves to  
prevent various lifeforms from going extinct. I 
can’t see collecting DNA samples really happening  
at this point, after the cataclysm, since it's not 
just about acquiring them, it's about preserving  
them until you can use them, and ensuring that 
you have the means to do so, if and when the  
time comes. I can definitely imagine lots of raft 
cities with big sea farms like we contemplated in  
our Seasteading and Colonizing the Ocean episodes, 
but only a fairly narrow and improbable range of  
events would be likely to cause just the right 
amount of ecosphere damage for that future.
 
Massive Climate Shifts, whether we’re 
talking something natural or artificial,  
are also an example of where we might see 
a lot of geoengineering projects or simply  
ocean colonization, like artificial islands, 
which might be piles of dirt near the coast,  
or floating island ships. The key thing about 
these is that anything that really shifts our  
temperature for multiple years can cause 
a large dip or rise in ocean level. Now,  
this gets exaggerated wildly in fiction, most 
of the planet’s surface area is too high to  
be submerged if the ice caps completely 
melted, not just a few rare mountains,  
but a lot of that area is not where people 
live, or particularly want to live either,  
and a high tundra plateau somewhere doesn’t 
just become magically livable and promising  
just because it gets a little warmer 
and the seas rise. Eventually, yes,  
but many decades at least if left up to nature, 
and expediting that is possible but one does doubt  
the eco-engineering skill of any civilization that 
got themselves in this predicament to begin with.
 
Our own climatic effect isn’t an overnight 
sort of thing, but an asteroid or some mega  
volcano under the caps could definitely 
produce a rapid and drastic effect,  
and one we’d have problems mitigating 
since it would be a two-prong catastrophe,  
climatic shift combined with an asteroid or 
volcano. These are not the sorts of things that  
end the world or humanity though, but they could 
wreck things, especially at civilization-level.
 
The flip side is massive cooling and the 
chain reaction to cause a Snowball Earth,  
and this is harder to survive in many ways because 
a full snowball earth is one with virtually no  
rain or places on land above freezing. You 
can retreat to under the seas or underground,  
we’ve examined that option, even in scenarios 
where the Sun goes out or Earth gets dragged into  
the Interstellar Void, in our episode “What If 
Earth Become a Rogue Planet?” and you can see that  
episode for the details on surviving that extreme 
scenario. However, if the planets just iced over,  
your goal to personal survival isn’t really 
a bunker for classic protection but to help  
keep warm, and you ironically don’t need 
a big farm to keep yourself alive because  
what you actually want is greenhouse space.
Small parcels covered in plastic or glass are  
going to stay warm and livable because Earth is 
still getting plenty of sunlight. This is a slow  
apocalypse so there’s lots of time to stage 
up manufacturing of plastics or glass and the  
amusing bit is that even in an icy environment, 
but one still getting mostly normal sunshine,  
you could actually grow more food under domes 
than we currently do. Since water gets trapped  
under domes too, this same trick works for 
anything causing a drop off in rainfall,  
and you can also turn seawater into 
freshwater by evaporating it under domes.
 
In this regard, Super-volcanoes are really the 
most dangerous plausible climate changer, as they  
can happen literally overnight and the worst of 
the effect is right away, as the ash darkens the  
sky and chokes the land beneath under a blanket of 
cinders. See Brandon Sanderson’s series Mistborn  
for a look at the sort of civilization 
and culture you might have afterwards,  
albeit a bit of a fantastic one. Eventually that 
ash converts into wonderful fertilizer and soil  
nutrient, but for a while, the Sun is gone and 
people are falling over from respiratory issues.
 
The Volcano Explosivity Index, or VEI, goes from 
1 to 8 with each increment 10 times stronger than  
the last. You get several VEI-5 and 6 events 
in any given century. A VEI-7 occurring in  
a given century wouldn’t be particularly 
remarkable, the year without a summer of  
1816 was caused by the last VEI-7, the eruption 
of Mount Tambora in Indonesia in April of 1815,  
which speaks to duration and severity, though also 
survivability. VEI-7 status incidentally requires  
a release of at least 100 cubic kilometers of 
material, VEI-6 would be 10-100 cubic kilometers,  
VEI-5 would be 1-10 cubic kilometers, and so on. 
It should be noted that at global scale,  
the idea of being blanketed in ashes is a bit 
of hyperbole, 1000 cubic kilometers of volcanic  
eruption would take you to the edge of VEI-8, the 
last known occasion of that being Lake Toba 74,000  
years ago and the Yellowstone Caldera eruption 
600,000 years ago, and if all that landed in a  
circle 2000 kilometers wide around that explosion 
– covering much of a large continent – it would  
only be about 8 centimeters or 3 inches deep. 
Spread over an entire planet, think millimeters.  
Though spread throughout an atmosphere, 
think months-long twilight. Incidentally  
we have a few other mega-eruptions that were 
probably VEI-8 more recently than Yellowstone,  
it’s just hard to confirm their exact strength. 
The scale does not go up to VEI-9, as there’s no  
confirmed occasions of 10,000+ cubic kilometer 
eruptions and the few possible candidates just  
barely scrape into that range on the upper margin. 
Probably they happen on other planets, but I don’t  
think a strong case can be made for an eruption 
significantly stronger being possible on Earth  
and thus I think we can say volcanoes don’t really 
have a path to wiping humanity out, and they are  
definitely the sort of catastrophe the planet has 
a path of recovery from, though they could set off  
a snowball Earth scenario with enough cooling. 
Ironically, they could also end a snowball Earth  
scenario by covering the white, sun-reflective 
snow in black, sun-absorptive ash.  
Surviving this is mostly about keeping enough food 
to make it through a year and plant in the next,  
and we would expect harvests to be decreased 
rather than non-existent during the worst of it. 
 
To me, this is the sort of catastrophe that 
seems least likely to end existing civilizations,  
as it’s a slow rough grind where everyone has 
lots of advanced notice that it's going to be  
a hard year and our technology makes us a lot 
more famine and crop failure resistant. So I  
would expect global efforts to dig in and endure, 
and that tends to be when stability is most handy,  
so I wouldn’t expect tons of separatist movements 
or revolutions. You could probably debate that  
historically, the Probably-Volcanic Winter of 536 
AD began a very brutal period to live in and is an  
example of where you can get lots of secondary 
disasters rippling out from the first one,  
that bulk discount on calamities I mentioned in 
the intro. The Plague of Justinian being one of  
those, and the first recorded plague pandemic. 
One catastrophe can weaken you for another  
unrelated one to kick you down, or even directly 
cause a second one. When it rains, it pours.
 
We don’t know if that calamity of 536 AD was 
a volcano, as we don’t have a decent candidate  
available, and a comet has been suggested too, 
though it is hard to imagine that such a close  
pass by a comet wouldn’t have been historically 
remarked upon, but it would have required an  
atypically large amount of sulfate for an eruption 
too, based on layers we can examine. For now, an  
interesting mystery and a reminder that the buried 
dagger might come from unknown directions too.
 
Speaking of plagues, Biowar is a scenario that 
definitely comes to mind, all the more so after  
Covid, and I remain optimistic that this will 
have ended up as our last true pandemic. We had  
a century since the last one and our growing 
knowledge of medicine and science doubtless  
helped with that, and will only have grown in 
the aftermath of this most recent pandemic.  
Either way there’s no calamity right now 
that people better know how to survive,  
and I don’t think many nations, even 
fairly morally grey ones, are really  
looking to develop bioweapons right now. If 
they did, survival techniques remain viable,  
lots of social distancing, sterilizing, 
and so on. Given that this one is pretty  
fresh in our memories, I think we can keep it 
abridged, but especially as technology improves,  
our options for quarantine, early detection, and 
sterilization to minimize spread will only grow,  
and thus probably minimize the disruption to 
our lives that would otherwise be going. 
 
We generally don’t expect intentional efforts to 
make bioweapons designed to wipe out humanity,  
historically militaries hate biowarfare as 
they tend to lose more troops to infections  
and plagues than swords and guns. So too, they 
tend to disproportionately hit the young and old,  
which means your gerontocratic leaders – which is 
the case in most cultures – would be authorizing  
research into something likely to kill them in 
particular, and painfully too. We also are not  
really in an era where people can do much research 
and experimentation in a vacuum. One lone lunatic  
is still very likely to get caught and very 
unlikely to come up with anything that will  
pose a real challenge to the thousands of other 
sane scientists in that field. Nor is a major  
state really likely to want to invest a lot 
of time and research into it, in my opinion,  
for what that is worth. Which basically leaves 
accidents, though there are variations like  
gray goo from biowar-like nanotechnology run 
amok from an experiment gone terribly wrong.
 
Zombie Apocalypses tend to epitomize those sorts 
of accidents, some effort at extending life or  
combating a possible plague or whatever results in 
people shambling around half-rotting and wanting  
to eat other people. I enjoy the zombie horror 
genre as much as the next person and don’t really  
care about its realism much, but there are some 
pathways to options like this. Most presentations  
don’t work, the zombies would be rapidly 
obliterated by all the gun-wielding citizens,  
and there are a lot more bullets than there are 
people, they are not hard to make, and all of that  
would be irrelevant anyway as even a fairly badly 
equipped and trained military should simply blow  
through hundreds of times their number in classic 
shambling undead, barring unrealistic portrayals  
and plot contrivances common in such films. 
Your most likely scenario would probably be  
something more like a flubbed attempt at 
brainwashing turning large chunks of the  
population into berserk homicidal morons, and 
as usual, your goal is to hole up somewhere with  
food, thick walls, a radio, and lots of ammo, 
and wait till all the monsters starve to death,  
and all that’s left over is their diminishing 
number, and the survivors who are very good  
at killing them or avoiding being killed by 
them. They might grab the occasional convert  
but probably after that person took 
out several times their own number. 
 
A civilization arising after this from those 
survivors might be a bit brutal, but many earlier  
civilizations were, and for that matter Richard 
Matheson explores that very notion in his novel  
I am Legend, the story that spawned the whole 
zombie genre, as well as what things might look  
like if that surviving and rebuilding civilization 
turned out to be the zombies, not the humans.
 
When it comes to Robots, this same approach holds 
for dumber examples of Artificial Intelligence,  
or myopic ones. It often seems it is a lot less 
likely we would be plowed under by a human-like  
artificial intelligence than by something 
more task-driven, Paperclip Maximizer style,  
where it is very easy to either outthink it if 
you have some time or breathing room, or just work  
around it. If some AI got unchained and crazy, 
whose main goal was just to repair roads, and  
it would blow up, attack, or pave over anything 
that got in the way of that effort, including  
cars trying to drive on those roads, and thus 
damage them, then you would eventually find the  
holes in its monomania and survive inside them. 
It also raises the whole notion of if you can’t  
beat ‘em, join ‘em, because in a lot of cases, 
the reason why your zombies or mutant cannibals  
in the postapocalyptic rad-wastes aren’t going to 
do well is that they are not attracting willing  
and skillful converts – the latter is more of a 
vampire-style thing – and that’s because folks  
don’t want to join them and don’t like them. A 
lot of times, if some great new power is growing,  
it’s got at least some appealing qualities 
compared to the alternative, and in the case  
of artificial intelligence of the more general 
type, that might be how they view humanity. As  
we’ve discussed in other episodes, the notion of 
a snowballing technological singularity going from  
human intellect to god-like critter, able to face 
off against all of humanity in a toe-to-toe fight,  
and from an evolution of days or even a few years, 
is really about as realistic as zombie hoards. 
 
More likely that AI is going to want to chose 
the more survivable path of friendship and  
cooperation, and while it is true that AI can 
be more alien than any alien who shares with us  
a Darwinian origin and shaping, it is plausible 
that one that’s focused on its own survival would  
be more human than an alien since it shares that 
Darwinian focus of self-survival and was raised  
around us, and probably read our philosophy and 
fiction too, not just our technical manuals.  
We should not assume a power-hungry AI can 
just slip by hidden and undetected until it's  
in a position to take on and defeat the combined 
resources of humanity, especially a state of  
humanity which successfully created that machine 
to begin with and understands AI fully. See our  
episodes on Machine Rebellions and Technological 
Singularities for more discussion of that, and our  
episode After AI for more on what a world after a 
human-robot conflict might be like, also something  
examined in Frank Herbert’s Classic Dune series.
As to survival though, in brief, we shouldn’t  
assume EMP weapons are particularly helpful 
against AI & robots or that we can kill them  
Captain Kirk-style with logical paradoxes 
or our ultimate weapon of compassion,  
but we also shouldn’t assume we somehow 
enter such a conflict at a disadvantage.
 
Where an Alien Invasion would be concerned, 
that is absolutely not the case, at least  
for some centuries to come. The nature of the 
Universe where the speed of light is a limit on  
travel and communication means you don’t really 
expect to have massive galaxy-sprawling empires,  
and probably not much beyond loose alliances of 
goodwill, defense, trade or federation between our  
nearest neighboring stars. This probably means 
it's just us versus one star system’s forces,  
and probably only a fraction of 
those, not some galactic navy. 
 
However, anyone with the technology to 
reach us right now would win, period,  
just from the energy advantage they’d need 
to have to get here. Assuming that our  
annihilation was their goal anyway, and your odds 
of victory in such a conflict are nearly hopeless,  
even before you include the likely odds that 
they’re a K2 civilization, which, while only one  
star system in size, still effectively makes your 
classic space opera galactic empire of a million  
worlds look like a badly organized county trying 
to take on the combined open might of all NATO. 
 
We’ve explored that more in our Fermi Paradox, 
Space Warfare, and Alien Civilization series  
though, and as we found there, the game changes 
a lot if they aren’t aiming to wipe us out,  
which we would know was the case if we even were 
aware they were invading, since the easiest ways  
to sterilize a planet are to send unmanned ships 
without troops on board to just ram into the  
planet rather than slowing down to conquer it. 
Which would mean Space Command might get a radar  
blip a second or two before we all got atomized.
So, if they are invading, it ironically is a good  
sign, and since time can erase the technological 
and tactical advantages they have, giving us a  
better chance of emerging alive & free from 
a protracted occupation, my advice would be  
to cheerfully seek terms of surrender, and I, for 
one, would welcome our new alien overlords.
 
One upside about surviving the end of the world is 
that you probably have plenty of time to catch up  
on your reading, learning, and hobbies, unless 
your reading glasses break like what happened  
to bookworm Henry Beamis in the classic 
Twilight Zone episode “Time Enough At Last”.
 
In the meantime, for the rest of us, even though 
we know learning is a great long term investment,  
it can be hard to balance learning new 
skills with everything else going on in life,  
but if you are not staying ahead by building 
new skills, you’re falling behind, especially  
in the tech fields. That’s why Brilliant builds 
its lessons for busy people, with a bite-sized  
approach that breaks down important concepts into 
understandable parts. With Brilliant, you can  
start at any level and gradually master topics in 
as little as 15 minutes a day, anywhere, anytime,  
on phone, tablet, or computer, and without 
spending years and a fortune on a degree. 
 
Brilliant is designed for high-velocity 
learning of math, science, and computer science,  
with guided learning paths to help you 
stay focused and reach your goals fast.
 
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own pace, 
learn on the go, and learn a little something  
new every day. To get started with a 30-day 
free trial, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur  
or click on the link in the description, 
and the first 200 people will get 20% off  
Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
So for anyone who missed the announcement  
on Thursday, I was recently asked to become 
the President of the National Space Society,  
and was very honored to accept. It’s a chance to 
help promote space exploration and settlement,  
and one I’ll discuss more, along with the NSS, 
as I settle in and hopefully live up to honor.
 
Needless to say discussing space, our future 
in it, and how we’ll get there are topics we’re  
fond of here on SFIA, but next Thursday we’ll 
be turning our eyes downward and to the past,  
as we look at the Future of Archeology and 
some of the amazing technologies that will  
help us learn more about humanity’s history. 
Then the week after that we’ll take a look at  
the concept of simulated universes, and how 
we might hack or escape them if we’re inside  
one. And two weeks from now, on Sunday, March 
26th, we’ll have our Monthly Livestream Q&A,  
before closing out the month of March on March 
30th with our 2-hour special, The Advanced  
Spaceship Drive Compendium, where we will take a 
look at nearly a hundred different star drives,  
from existing tech to the entirely hypothetical.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can  
also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting our website, 
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s  
episodes early and ad free on our streaming 
service, Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
