This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
One day humanity might not just have homes
that stretch up into the heavens, but farms
and forests which rise into the sky too.
So today we are going to be looking at Arcology
Design and we have to start by asking what
arcologies are.
This is trickier than it sounds because Arcologies
are a concept that’s crept into public awareness
with two parallel but distinct meanings.
The first is the original meaning, where arcology
is a portmanteau of architecture and ecology,
coined by architect Paolo Soleri, who conceptualized
it as essentially communities that were mostly
self-sufficient and sustainable.
But the definition popularized by science
fiction writers has been more like a very
large building that is a city unto itself,
complete with farms and factories and living
spaces.
As is always the case with fiction, peaceful
and prosperous civilizations tend to make
for boring stories, and giant super-buildings
that dwarf any skyscraper obviously have an
appeal to sci-fi authors.
So, I think the view of them as mega-skyscrapers
is probably the better known one.
Nonetheless a more originalist view of them
is probably to include any city or town that
is at least moderately populous, mostly self-sufficient,
but not techno-primitive.
Portrayals can run from the not-quite-utopian,
in which an impeccably engineered and maintained
arcology houses a society that’s just as
regimented and controlled as their habitat
and turns out to have a sinister side -- to
the explicitly dystopian visions, often set
in run down and decayed arcologies leftover
from better times.
Needless to say a rundown mega-scraper where
the only flora and fauna are humans, rats,
and mold wouldn’t seem like ecological architecture
but that is technically an ecosystem and if
everyone is eating recycled garbage and waste
as nutra-paste it is arguably agriculturally
self-sufficient.
We played with some of the more dystopian
scenarios, like morlocks and cannibals in
the sewers, in our episode Mega-cities.
So as we discuss design today I’m going
to try to look at both perspectives, the big
super-building that contains a mostly self-sufficient
city and the more rural but technologically
advanced options as well.
To begin with, let's acknowledge that total
self-sufficiency may be an option and is in
some contexts a necessity but is probably
not a desirable goal in and of itself.
For instance, a Mars Base or O’Neill Cylinder
might be rather self-sufficient by choice
and an interstellar colony self-sufficient
by necessity, being years from us in travel
and communication, nonetheless total self-sufficiency
is presumably only a goal as either a reserve
of security or for those who are very isolationist.
You might want to be able to produce all you
need but you will generally have at least
some items you wish to import or export even
if as luxuries, be it physical goods or video
entertainment or tourists or what have you.
We will try to discuss how self-sufficiency
can be obtained across the board, but we will
not assume ideal arcology design means total
independence from outside trade and interaction.
A town running on solar power, even if they
manufacture the panels locally, is still importing
sunlight, so too it must still export entropy
or heat, though we could imagine some super-advanced
technology indistinguishable from magic – what
we call Clarketech on the show – which circumvented
both needs, like a city in a pocket universe
with perpetual motion machines and something
akin to a Star Trek Replicator.
We probably will never have those, but 3D
printers are getting ever better and do offer
paths to self-sufficiency for smaller communities.
They could get good enough that an arcology
might be applicable to very small communities,
or even families or individuals.
Someone might have a rural log cabin in the
woods atop an underground facility producing
all their food and power and personal goods.
Or we could go even larger than the arcologies
of big skyscrapers up to megastructures of
planetary scale, not simply O’Neill Cylinders
but the bigger version, the McKendree Cylinder
Continent Sized Habitat.
Fundamentally a terraformed planet qualifies
as an arcology so long as it is both high-tech
and ecologically sound.
Nonetheless we’ll keep our focus on the
self-sufficient technological town and the
city-in-a-giant-building versions.
Let’s start by looking at what they need.
This is going to include things like schools,
hospitals, police, fire, and emergency personnel,
and so on but let's contemplate the main staples
first.
Obviously producing the vast majority of your
food on-site is needed, as is stable water,
air, and waste management.
For a town on Earth there is no special need
for advanced technology to achieve this, but
for a building it requires options like artificial
lighting, vertical farming, massive networks
of air ducts and plumbing.
It’s a challenge too because if you are
using natural sunlight, the areas most desirable
for residential uses are on the outer edges
of the structures where agriculture is also
most easily done.
A recurring problem with a lot of fictional
portrayals of food production tends to be
way off about the scale of agriculture.
While greenhouses, hydroponics, or some gardening
focused on intense calorie per area production
can really let you squeeze food out of small
spaces, though usually for large investments
of other resources like time or money, the
agricultural area of Earth is about 5 billion
hectares, or 12 billion acres.
With about 8 billion people, that’s about
.6 hectares or 1.5 acres per person, and hundreds
of times what the residential area per person
is.
Very intense use of climate-controlled hydroponics
in artificially lit vertical layers can potentially
allow you to grow all of one person’s food
needs in as little as 100 square meters, a
hundredth of a hectare.
And for that matter ‘food’ might not necessarily
need to be grown, as in the case with Star
Trek Replicators or food printers using a
base stock of something like algae or even
chemically synthesized amino acids, carbohydrates,
and fats.
Neither should we discount the reduced calorie
needs a post-human or cybernetic civilization
might have, or even that an arcology might
be a big computer covered in solar panels
in which a vast virtual civilization lives,
like those we contemplated in Virtual Worlds
some years back.
Those folks might be entirely digital themselves
or very adulterated humans living in sensory
deprivation tanks with tubes bringing in nutrient
or even just blood and air, inside some giant
building with vats growing artificial blood
and a mega-heart pumping it around, getting
very literal with our tendency to discuss
transport inside buildings or cities as analogous
to veins and arteries.
For the moment though let’s assume relatively
modern crops and growing methods, being grown
for contemporary humans to eat.
If they wish to do this with Sunlight, this
still allows much compaction.
Very approximately, good food crops where
photosynthetic conversion of sunlight to food
calories is concerned runs about 1%, not terribly
efficient, but a typical human needs the equivalent
of roughly 10 million joules of food energy
per day, or one billion joules of sunlight.
Which probably sounds like a lot, indeed it
is the equivalent of a bit over 30 liters
of gasoline, or a bit under 10 gallons.
However, while it varies by time of year,
weather conditions, and how far north of the
equator you live, the average sunlight falling
on a given square meter of Earth is 21.6 million
joules, so 46 square meters or 500 square
feet per person would hit that needed sunlight
input assuming you were able to make sure
virtually all of it was hitting leaves or
algae or what have you, possibly by clever
use of large fibre optics and mirrors and
reflective foils on those surrounding surfaces
that were not photosynthetic, like putting
a reflective film on the wall of a growth
chamber or on the dirt the plant was in.
Such being the case, a building whose effective
solar absorption footprint was a square kilometer
could support 20,000 people, depending on
latitude, and assuming minimal losses or uses
for other things like regular power generation.
10,000 would probably be on the upper end
of plausible though.
In this case by footprint we could either
be talking about a big rooftop - a giant building
can be short and just very wide, like a bunch
of connected domes in a tundra or on Mars
- or a tall structure whose sun-facing sides
were principally windows to let light in,
or some combination thereof.
If they are very good with light, they might
split the incoming sunlight into those wavelengths
and ratios optimized for photosynthesis, mostly
red and blue, while diverting most or all
the green and infrared parts of the spectrum
into power production.
And by the way, if you’re surprised that
plants don’t use the green light, remember
that leaves and all green things are green
precisely because they reflect green light.
So we see the part of the spectrum that the
plants don’t use.
And a lot of the spectrum that plants do not
use for photosynthesis is also in wavelengths
we can not see either.
We often contemplate artificial lighting from
nuclear fission or fusion, or even energy
beamed in from orbital power collectors.
Though the latter is much more of an external
jugular vein than sunlight or deuterium or
hydrogen for fusion, or materials for fission.
Fission and fusion fuels could be mined in
deep subterranean levels of the super-scraper
or externally sourced but stockpiled abundantly.
They don’t take up much room.
However we need to keep in mind that for every
joule of heat you bring in, your arcology
needs to radiate off a joule or it will heat
up until you fry yourselves.
So just as your super-scraper needs a large
bank of solar collectors expanding around
it, it will also need a big bank of radiators
too.
In the absence of a big liquid supply on hand
like an ocean, the radiators might be as space-consuming
as your sunlight or power collectors, indeed
you might use arrangements that utilized a
space for both power collection and heat radiation,
collecting sunlight or heat during the day
and pumping waste heat away at night.
The radiators might be more useful than you
would expect though.
If the arcology is located in an area that
gets cold in the winter, that waste heat might
be piped under the surrounding streets and
highways, keeping them free of snow and ice
all winter, or it might be sold to heat smaller
surrounding buildings, or you might heat vast
swimming pools, or even be used for farming
greenhouses as alternatives to vertical farming
or open-air agriculture.
During the summer or in a hotter climate the
waste heat might be used to convert seawater
to fresh water.
Alternatively, this tremendous excess of heat
could be used to maintain agriculture and
comfort in an area that is normally much too
cold such as Antarctica, the Atacama desert,
or the Kamchatka peninsula.
Due to the high density and self-sufficiency
of an arcology, it would minimize the environmental
impact on these locations while moving people
out of areas with higher natural biodiversity
such as the temperate and tropical zones.
A natural location for at least some of the
radiators would be to have them project from
the structural beams between exterior windows.
If you make the radiators transparent, and
use algae-filled water for your coolant fluid,
you might also use them to grow agricultural
feedstock, reducing your lighting bill without
meaningfully impacting the amount of window
space available to residents.
Key notion though, when we’re talking waste
management for arcologies, it’s a broader
subject than normal.
A large structure, potentially one so tall
it may reach into another region of our atmosphere,
needs to be handling waste of all types including
exhaled air and excess heat.
As an upside, the key concept of the arcology
is that it is aiming for a mostly-self-contained
ecosystem so things like exhaled carbon dioxide
or human waste can be recycled by the plants
you’re growing for food.
This though is problematic in off Earth environments,
because when it comes to human food crops,
the amount of the carbon dioxide they need
is not going to match what humans produce
without careful coordination and balancing.
So too you can probably always use machines
that scrub CO2 more efficiently than a plant,
or have plants that optimize for some sort
of task - producing calories, recycling air,
water, waste, etc but not the others, so that
balancing is vital.
Arcologies are going to rely on masterful
understandings of both biology and human psychology
as much as more physical technologies.
While a giant skyscraper on Earth is what
is often envisioned in fiction for future
arcologies, it would seem more likely that
Earth will be the last place the architectural
style catches on.
On the other hand it may be the first place
it catches on, given that it’s the only
place humans live right now, and also given
that we have to get decent at this technology
before we can make a serious go at off-world
living.
I would also guess almost every arcology is
going to have a few inputs or outputs that
are viewed as exceptions to self-sufficiency,
either out of necessity or the opposite, hyperabundance.
An arcology on the Moon is very likely to
think of oxygen as a waste product they can’t
get rid of fast enough, rather than its usually
envisioned role in scifi of being the thing
they rely on importing, with the oxygen supply
train as the colony’s big vulnerable jugular
vein.
To the contrary, they should be over-producing
it, which might make for a good trade item
but also might be something they have to give
away or even pay folks to take or just dump
on the Moon’s airless landscape.
We’ve discussed that in greater depth in
our various episodes in the Moon playlist,
but in summary form: The biggest apparent
resource of the moon besides abundant raw
sunlight is all the minerals that we can access
and refine and ship off for a tiny fraction
of what it takes to source material for space
from Earth.
However the biggest ingredient in almost every
rock, mineral, and ore is oxygen and is often
accompanied by water, which is 89% oxygen
by weight.
Smelting a ton of a given mineral will produce
roughly the amount of oxygen a human needs
for a year, and given that your food plants
on-site generally can scrub CO2 out of the
air and restore it as oxygen, means you hardly
need constant new inputs except for expansion.
Indeed, generally the material used for building
a structure is going to produce more oxygen
when being made than the structure will need
to contain, assuming you plan to recycle it.
And oxygen has very little export value, as
it is the third most abundant material in
the Universe and is plentiful wherever you
find rock or ice, which tends to be where
humans would set up shop anyway.
One of the critical concepts of arcologies,
sustainable economies, and efficient energy
in general is that one man’s garbage might
be another man’s treasure, or at least something
you can offload at a lower cost than burying
it somewhere.
It is strange to think of oxygen as not having
a lot of value, this thing we can only live
a few minutes without, but arcologies being
built on airless worlds are likely to regard
it as such.
Interestingly this might assist in a slow
terraforming, since they might just vent it
onto the landscape, especially the superhot
byproduct gases of refining a metal.
And the same is true of heat, you can generate
power with heat, especially with large temperature
differences like molten metal compared to
room temperature, but doing so is often viewed
as more expensive or complicated than its
worth, and technologies that alter how easy
that is to do might impact arcology design
a lot.
Which is true of many technologies.
In a fusion-powered economy, it would seem
likely you would run all your lighting for
agriculture on artificial lights and pack
your agricultural into the central region
of any given floor of the arcology, leaving
the outer layer for residential usage as people
like windows, or the lower levels, potentially
growing all your food very deep down.
You can use abundant power to fix almost any
problem by sheer effort, as we say on the
show, “If Brute Force isn’t working, you
are not using enough of it”, so you might
build an arcology next to a river or ocean
and use that for cooling and just use fusion
to power your way to self-sufficiency.
Alternatively, efficiency is always desirable,
so you might run your lowest levels as mineral
extraction, delving ever deeper or outward
as you create endless tunnels and lower levels,
above that would be your power production
and smelting, above that, either automated
factories or hydroponics, which are resistant
to heat or enjoy it, then human-staffed non-automated
factories above that, possibly all still underground,
then possibly a big tower rising up to the
sky whose outer skin was residences, mid region
was parks and commercial regions for each
level or block of levels, and maybe in the
central core a giant shaft to move heat up
serving as a huge thermal power tower.
Or maybe a way for launching things directly
to space, like a big space gun, though probably
only using a rail gun or mass driver type.
Speaking of levels, one of the issues with
supertall buildings is what we call the Elevator
Conundrum, something we discussed before in
our original arcologies episode many years
back and our more recent episode, mega-cities.
This is the issue of elevators taking up the
same amount of space on each level for elevator
shafts.
A building 5 stories tall with one elevator
shaft might have a shaft footprint of roughly
5 square meters or 50 square feet, per floor,
for 25 square meters for the building over
those five levels, but one 10 stories tall
needs twice as much for that one shaft, 50
square meters, while at the same time it presumably
has twice as many residents needing twice
as many elevator trips, or twice as many elevator
shafts, so now its 100 square meters, not
25.
However the elevator trips take longer if
everyone is going mostly from their residence
to the ground floor, loosely speaking twice
as long for going to the 8th floor than the
4th, you would need to double your elevator
once again to account for the longer trips.
Before long you are using a lot of valuable
floorspace for elevators, and this is a real
bottleneck on residential high-rises and skyscrapers,
as they also tend to cost more to build and
maintain per square foot of internal area
than shorter structures.
Given the option of building twice as high,
you might find it costs not double, but four
times as much, and that elevator space is
costing you half of your new space anyway.
Though, living in the same building you work
in will reduce elevator demand compared to
modern skyscrapers, and careful design of
other facilities and their proximities to
each other can reduce travel times and distances.
Stairs may even prove to be desirable features
not just to reduce elevator congestion, but
for opening up interior spaces and exercise
too.
Cities are valuable real estate so it can
sometimes be worth it to build pretty tall
in them, but arcologies are seen as cities
in and of themselves, so the location-location-location
angle doesn’t seem to apply as much.
When built in the middle of nowhere, there’s
the question of why you bothered building
tall, when building in a larger city, there’s
the question of why you devoted internal floor
space to food production instead of moving
it to the outskirts, and even if you were
doing vertical farming it would be hard to
reason why you weren’t doing it in high-rises
on the edge of things, especially given how
heat intensive lighting is.
You go much over ten layers of plants, vertically,
and your total irradiance per area is going
to exceed natural sunlight even if you’re
being very optimized with your lighting usage
and spectrums for photosynthesis.
Which means it's going to get hot.
Presumably you can use your own hydroponic
plumbing for cooling but I’m not sure that
seems very economically plausible, as opposed
to just building sideways above a certain
height.
Alternatively having a secure supply for your
vital resources is worth a lot, if you need
to have some product, paying more to produce
it locally does circumvent issues about exposed
jugulars, and the very real costs of shipping.
It also lightens the load on elevator issues
in an arcology, as presumably large and mostly
automated growth chambers require minimal
elevator service.
More importantly though, if we think of each
level of the tower as its own semi-arcology,
or each slice of maybe ten levels, then most
elevator trips are not to the ground floor
anymore, there to something located on the
same floor or one closely adjoining.
Incidentally the elevator conundrum is not
limited to the up and down, in the broader
sense it applies to side-to-side motion, like
busy roads and pedways.
And if your arcology is big enough you probably
do need to be considering internal roads or
mass transit.
So while to some degree it is beneficial to
make each level of an arcology, or each wedge
or region, almost a mini-arcology of its own
in terms of self-sufficiency, I think that
would principally benefit us in the sense
of having short commute times for those things
people have to commute to a lot.
Which incidentally might not be those factories
or hydroponics facilities, which may be very
automated, or even their schools or other
jobs.
As the Covid-19 crisis taught us, remote schooling
and work are often viable, not that everyone
didn’t think it might be an option in the
future before that, we’ve done episodes
on the topic long before the pandemic, but
it definitely put a highlight and urgency
on the notion.
Plagues tend to be a particular concern in
dense areas too, and an arcology needs to
have options for quarantine and for handling
the cleaning of air that’s recycling through
to everyone carrying airborne germs.
Or shared spots for standing and touching
– like elevators and the buttons that summon
them.
This is one reason why the grimdark version
of arcologies – dark, decrepit, mold-stained,
garbage littered slums crammed with people
and despair wouldn’t seem very realistic.
Plagues would tend to spread through them
quickly if left in that sort of state, which
makes for good dystopian fiction but not good
management.
Unless your leaders are being evil for evil’s
sake, just to twirl their mustaches, or are
rampantly incompetent, they’re going to
make sure the arcology’s main traffic areas
are getting cleaned regularly for a host of
reasons, one of which is that having your
habitat’s demographics alter into a mix
of terrified citizens, infected ones, corpses,
and presumably plague zombies, is not likely
to be advantageous.
Unless you are a full-on mustache-twirling
villain, in which case recruiting an army
of plague zombies for fun and profit might
be appealing.
Archvillainy aside, the classic mega-skyscraper
arcology image is something of a logistical
nightmare, but I have a lot of friends who
are village, city, and county executives and
even the ones running fairly sedate and small
towns seem to live on a diet of coffee and
aspirin in trying to manage their places,
so an arcology might not be much worse, though
I’m betting it would be.
On the other hand the whole point of the things
is for streamlined efficiency so if you did
it right then it probably ought to run like
a smooth machine unless gears seize up.
Speaking of that, on the physical side of
arcology design, we might shape them like
gears.
I mentioned tall cylinders rather than the
more standard rectangle shape for skyscrapers,
and partially that’s because arcologies
make me think of cylinder habitats, but also
because they minimize surface area of the
structure relative to internal volume or square
footage of living area.
However while that minimizes building material
and heat loss out the sides, that may not
be desirable.
People like windows, and so a big cylinder
shape whose outside was more gear-shaped,
with many protrusions, might be better, allowing
more desirable living space.
We’ve talked about doing something similar
when discussing geoengineering large coastal
embankments or dykes against potentially rising
ocean levels, by using a long wavy seashore
with more coastline for people to use for
homes than a long straight beach would have.
Same concept here, we can sacrifice the advantages
of a minimized surface because that surface
area is so desirable for homes.
That can be advantageous too, for instance
in an arcology in most situations you will
want to be purging heat more often than keeping
it in, and a big sprocket shape is better
for that than a cylinder or rectangle build.
You also have the option of hollowing out
the center to make a big shaft down the middle,
probably cog shaped too.
They could be big and well lit and formed
into parks and plazas, maybe as big tall shafts,
though probably one divided into vertical
segments even if you had fewer of them than
total floors.
This area might make desirable exteriors for
residences too.
And maybe better ones for all that, a nice
garden park in the middle is preferable to
looking out on an airless barren world like
Mars or the Moon perhaps, and arcologies are
often shown as occupying brutal post-apocalyptic
worlds which probably don’t make for nice
viewing from a balcony either.
Such central shafts lets you add a large new
layer of exterior-bordering residences, proportional
to how wide it is.
Of course it need not be down the middle and
arcologies not only do not need to have vertical
symmetric exterior walls, like a pyramid rather
than a cylinder, they need hardly be symmetric
at all.
There are a lot of reasons symmetry can be
handy, so too it is often easier to make a
building narrower as you go up, but no symmetry
is required.
So too, you could jetty each level out to
be a bit wider than the one below it, an inverted
pyramid or cone look.
This just depends on your material strength
but is much easier on lower gravity worlds.
We do tend to think of material strength as
the hard limit on building height and it is
vastly higher on airless worlds with low gravity
and no tectonics, and it would be very easy
to do with buildings growing wider as they
got taller on places like the Moon.
But you can do them on Earth too and another
thing arcologies might often want is direct
access to space.
Which they might do by being very tall but
could also do by having a long strong wire
reaching up to space, like the classic geostationary
space elevator.
Or Orbital Ring, the active-support structure
hanging stationary in a planet’s upper atmosphere
we often discuss building, see that episode
for details, but that same technology would
make it very viable to construct towers tens
of kilometers high, or even hundreds, that
directly connected to an orbital ring, or
which ran between the rooftops of many supertall
arcologies.
Indeed you could circumvent some of the issues
with orbital rings needing to be circles around
a planet by making your arcologies essentially
two shafts ending at the top as an upside-down
U, like the hypothetical “Big Bend” Skyscraper,
as that’s quite ideal for an active-support
structure like a space tower, and then serves
as a pylon for building a long horizontal
runway for spaceships or mass drivers.
Personally I love the classic cyberpunk image
of vast pyramid arcologies or huge rising
mega-scrapers, but when it comes to arcology
design and shape, it's not only hard to say
what’s most efficient, but we have to keep
in mind that sacrificing some structural efficiency
for beauty is likely.
A new arcology should always be considered
a bit of a luxury property to move to, even
if it is just newer and bigger than neighbors,
and it is likely great effort will be made
to make them pretty or visually distinct,
unique, and special.
Maybe more like an upscale shopping mall with
offices, restaurants, hospitals, recreational
facilities and residences all mixed in.
There are many options and your biggest control
factor, whether we’re talking a small town
or a big structure, one on Earth in an existing
city or in some barren desert or tundra in
Antarctica or Pluto, and a lot will depend
on what characteristics you need to optimize.
So the sky is the limit on arcology design
options, except of course that since most
probably won’t even be on Earth or constrained
to our atmosphere, the sky is clearly not
the limit.
So I mentioned the Elevator Conundrum in today’s
episode and it’s an example of one of those
tricky and unexpected math dilemmas that shows
up in architecture and engineering.
It also has all sorts of variations that would
apply in the future to things like how many
spacecraft could enter or depart a planet's
atmosphere in a given day before overheating
the atmosphere, which is definitely a concern
for planet’s covered in arcologies, what
we call an Ecumenopolis or planet-wide city,
like Coruscant from Star wars or other Galactic
Capitals in science fiction.
These sorts of problems are interesting as
both possible future concerns and as fun examples
to help demonstrate concepts and make learning
more fun and engaging, and that’s something
our friends over at Brilliant understand all
too well.
Fun problems, games, and interactive learning
are the keys to learning, and not only does
having fun make learning more enjoyable, it
improves how well the material is absorbed.
Learning should be fun, cultivating a love
of knowledge, and Brilliant’s courses, quizzes,
and daily challenges emphasize that, like
their course on Scientific Thinking and Puzzle
Science
Brilliant has something for everybody — whether
you want to start at the basics of math, science,
and computer science, or dive into cutting-edge
topics like Cryptocurrency or Quantum Computing,
and they do it all in a fun and interactive
way.
If you'd like to join me and a community of
8 million learners and educators today, click
the link in the description down below or
visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
So that will wrap us up for this Thursday.
Then we will close the Month out with a look
at how Solar Flares might impact the Fermi
Paradox and then on Sunday May 30th we will
have our End of the Month Livestream Q&A at
4pm Eastern Time, hopefully from our new studio.
Then we will head into June with a look at
the concept of two alien races both evolving
civilizations on the same world, and if they
might share it in peace, then we will look
at some Future Manhattan Projects, which might
be handy for those who can’t share their
world in peace, and will follow that up with
a look at Death Rays.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
