This Episode is sponsored by Audible.
Space is huge, spanning an enormity  
of space and time that staggers the mind. Such 
being the case, it's not hard to imagine entire  
planets being forgotten, colonies lost. Some even 
believe Earth itself may be one such lost colony.
Welcome back to SFIA for another Scifi Sunday, 
where we relax our focus on science a bit  
to ponder science fiction concepts 
and ask how realistic they are.  
Today we are contemplating the idea of lost 
colonies, as part of our rogue civilization  
series where we have looked at prison planets, 
trash worlds, nomadic interstellar civilizations,  
techno-barbarians, space pirates, and many more.
Now on the one hand the notion a colony might  
actually ‘get lost’ seems unlikely. The 
galaxy may be huge but even a catalog and  
wiki of a trillion stars easily fits on a modern 
hard-drive and adding the planets of each system  
shouldn’t be any challenge for an interstellar 
empire either, even with millions of backups.  
So too, people won’t ignore a whole star system 
within a few dozen light years of their own  
and we expect most star systems to get colonized.
On the other hand, that is contemplating a  
hypothetical galaxy a million years from now, 
or more, when the whole place is settled.  
It's also assuming anything like an organized 
data transfer and verification system  
occurs. In terms of bribes, how expensive and 
risky really would it be to get a bureaucrat  
back here on Earth to lose one tiny little red 
dwarf or brown dwarf… we do lose stars all the  
time. How long before we noticed and how long 
before some mis-labeled and remote star in the  
distant and hazy edge of the galaxy got noticed 
as mislabeled by a neighbor, the correction sent  
back to Earth 50,000 years of signal lag away, 
and verified, updated, transmitted and received? 
The reality is that while we expect the whole 
galaxy to be colonized, we do not expect a unified  
empire, exactly because of that time lag. And 
there are many stars that have no near neighbors.  
The galaxy is not homogenous where every star 
has several neighbors 1-10 light years away,  
many have closer neighbors, many have none 
that close. And more importantly, as of today,  
none of those neighboring systems have 
any colonies of ours on them at all,  
which implies it's a lot harder than we think 
if anyone has tried it before in our galaxy. 
We do not know that space colonization taking 
every available star is an inevitability, it’s  
just my own reasoning for my preferred solution 
to the Fermi Paradox, as I don’t like the idea of  
everybody going extinct and I can’t see why they 
wouldn’t eventually settle every decent spot. 
But all this assumes a distant time a million 
years or so hence when we’ve had time to colonize  
everything. A key point in our Rogue civilizations 
series is that we’re not really discussing  
anything fixed or eternal. Prison Planets 
or techno-primitive areas or pirate bases  
aren’t things that are likely 
to stay the same for centuries. 
However, major epochs of 
civilization don’t require that.  
The entire American Frontier period is 
generally considered to have lasted 3 centuries,  
and the period of the “Wild West” is generally 
considered to be the generation or two after  
the American Civil War, and involved only a small 
fraction of the US population off on the frontier.  
Clearly it's pretty influential though, even 
globally and a century and a half later. It’s one  
of the principal historical influences on science 
fiction; Firefly, Cowboy Bepop, the Mandalorian,  
to name a few current ones.. The same can be said 
of countless others too, as an example the piracy  
in the Caribbean also lasted a few centuries 
but the main period, or “Golden Age of Piracy”  
was about one lifetime, 1660-1726. The Stuart 
Dynasty of Great Britain overlapped with that  
piratic period and lasted s similar time on the 
throne, and the Tudors before them about the same. 
Indeed a ‘lifetime or two’ tends to describe 
most dynasties, and even ones that had come  
to be viewed as lasting generations and 
being the foundation of their culture  
rarely measured centuries, even when folks living 
in them regarded them as eternal and unchangeable.  
So we can easily imagine a colony getting 
lost or getting itself lost on purpose for  
a period of centuries or even tens of thousands 
of years, longer than all of human civilization. 
Let’s talk about how this happens and consider 
three cases. Scenario 1, the colony intentionally  
hid themselves from the outset, and we’ll 
call this Colony Fleet Kamino. Scenario 2,  
something happened during the flight 
that resulted in them getting lost,  
we’ll call this one Colony Ship Coldfire. Scenario 
3, something happened afterward to lose them,  
and we’ll call this one Colony Fleet McCaffrey. 
The first references planet Kamino from Star Wars,  
they’re the world full of Cloners that 
got itself deleted out of the Jedi Archive  
thus Obi-Wan had to look for it in Attack of the 
Clones. Coldfire is the name for a science-fantasy  
trilogy by C.S. Friedman where a sleeper ship 
carrying colonists was assigned to hunt for  
viable planets and the criteria kept failing 
to get met till it ended up on the fringe  
of the galaxy and dumped its colonists 
on a very deceptive world called Erna. 
McCaffrey is a reference to Anne McCaffrey’s 
Pern, colonized for millenia and fallen back on  
primitive technology, never visited again by the 
rest of humanity in that time, with one exception.  
This was a very popular theme in a lot of Silver 
Age Science Fiction from in and around the Space  
Race. Another famous one is Roger Zelazny’s 
Lord of Light, where the colonists settle on  
their world and exist for millenia without any 
apparent contact from Earth or other colonies. 
Now is that realistic? In a way, yes. Space 
colonization concepts of the 20th century,  
when not assuming faster than light travel, 
tended to assume we only colonized the maybe  
1 in 1000 stars that would have a yellow sun 
and a world in the same mass, composition,  
and temperature as Earth. It also assumed 
we would only get there by Slow Boat, ships  
moving at much less than light speed, maybe even 
crawling out at mere a thousandth light speed.  
We’ve nicknamed that “Crawlonizing the Galaxy” and 
we’re doing an episode on it in a month or two.  
In that environment the idea of trade between 
stars is laughable and even revisiting worlds  
you knew were colonized is an iffy play.
You could send them a signal in a hundredth  
of the time, and if they didn’t reply the 
assumption would be either they didn’t want to  
or could not, and if the latter they were probably 
dead, in which case a visit to investigate and  
re-colonize suddenly seems a bad risk. It might 
be a hundred light years between nearest neighbors  
in such yellow-sun, Earth-like world options, or 
ten thousand years of travel at 1% light speed.  
If they just happen to be low-tech for a while, 
well if your ship needs 10 thousand years to  
arrive at that star, odds are they’ll have 
recovered at some point and sent out a signal.  
If not it’s probably a death trap of a world 
anyway. Or they don’t want visitors and aren’t  
returning the signal, in which case any ship 
coming to investigate will be quietly destroyed,  
because if that colony thrived then a millennia 
of growth means some industrial titan of billions  
even if they began by numbering tens of 
thousands, and they’ve got a lot of guns,  
all of which are easier to build than ships.
Now this period assumes you only see by radio  
waves, otherwise maybe the best telescope could 
actually notice a planet as a blob, like ours do  
now. It’s a pre-exoplanet view when SETI was 
all about hunting for radio communications.  
In this one losing a colony is real easy. I don’t 
think this is the galaxy we’ll see unfold, I think  
our colonization of space will move out at more 
like 10% of light speed and stop in every single  
star system, every single brown dwarf or rogue 
gas giant, and on every rock big enough to bother  
building an outpost on. Now 10% of light speed may 
be high, it might even be less than 1% in terms of  
overall expansion wave, but that’s even more 
reason to seize every rock along the way. 
Folks can still get lost this way too. We assume 
people will aim to colonize at the rate we feel  
we can comfortably expand, and probably because 
there will be a certain subsidy for expanding  
to that next shell of space a bit further from 
Earth and the expanding spherical colonized core.  
It is possible we’d see a von Neumann colonization 
effort, where wave after wave of self-replicating  
ships leapt out into space, but as we’ve discussed 
before, this is basically a suicidal effort by any  
major power here at home. If they are stronger 
than all their neighbors combined, back here,  
then they need not rush to colonize and it 
merely risks colonies being poorly settled  
and easier to fail or rebel. Otherwise 
though, when they begin launching ships,  
those can be easily overrun by smaller ships, 
which need no deceleration fuel, thus can move  
twice as fast, and thus will be overtaken and 
destroyed, and their neighbors can pounce on  
them for their attempt at galactic conquest.
Also expansion is generally fueled by either  
a desire to escape - which doesn't imply you’re 
the guy running the show back home - or resource  
scarcity. It is really hard to use up all the 
resources in this solar system, especially given  
that most of them are in our Sun and would take at 
least a million years of star lifting to extract,  
but still probably be emerging faster and 
cheaper than via interstellar mining operations. 
So in all likelihood most colonization will 
be driven by either a general expansion push  
to fill up new territories, where closer 
is better and speed is not an issue,  
or by folks looking to be far away. That 
general expansion should be a slow roll,  
whereas the latter would be as fast and as far 
as you can get. Let’s assume we colonize outward,  
every system, at fully 10% of light speed, but 
that we can make ships able to move at 25%,  
and that indefinite life support on a generation 
ship or indefinite storage on a sleeper ship is  
viable. That means a group of folks who want to 
be alone and head all the way out to the opposite  
galactic rim from the get go, 70,000 Light years 
away, would get there 300,000 years from now. 
The main expansion of civilization would get there 
700,000 years from now, 400,000 years after that  
ship. What’s more, that’s the main disc of the 
galaxy, we have stars that nominally are still  
part of the Milky Way nearly a million light 
years away. Things just get spread out more  
and thinner. Indeed attempts at intergalactic 
colonization are likely to settle on a bit of zig  
zag of the various stars separated by thousands of 
light years on a moving bridge between galaxies.  
These could also leave abandoned and lost colonies 
on the way, simply as their nearest neighbor might  
need millenia to even get them a signal, let alone 
a flyby probe or one able to slow for a real look. 
Now once you’re a thousand light years from home, 
nobody’s going to notice you slowly turn your  
course by a few degrees over a few centuries 
or ever investigate an emergency signal saying  
you were damaged by a high speed relativistic 
collision. You’ll just be a warning note about  
why ships should not travel that fast because your 
debris would be scattered over tens of light years  
before any ship could arrive to investigate. So 
you could fly right to some fringe world beyond  
the galactic rim then divert to another, assuming 
anyone even tries to claim rights or sell them.  
You could log your flight path and 
get someone to delete it for you.  
Indeed most groups settling distant worlds 
hoping for freedom of their ideas in the  
new promised land are likely to have a pretty 
decent apparatus at home funding the effort  
who stays behind. Either because you can’t buy 
enough ships for everyone or because they believe  
in the goal but want to stay with their family 
or life more. So they sneak in and do that. 
This is what has happened for our Kamino Colony 
Fleet. They left with many ships to go found their  
perfect world, which involves a lot of cloning. 
Some of their agents and backers are going to try  
to delete their records when they leave, but 
in case they fail, the KCF will still attempt  
to change course once they’re far out from the 
Inner Sphere of Human Space. Now being cloners,  
they don’t believe in keeping all their eggs in 
one basket so they have carefully chosen their  
original official destination system as one that 
will require flight past a large red giant from  
Earth and the Sol System where most of the 
big detectors are and there they are going  
to have their fleet break up and scatter to 
several stars 50,000 light years from Earth,  
while in that red giant’s shadows, from which they 
believe they will be able to build their empire.  
Those destinations are picked randomly from 
an available list of potentially suitable ones  
and each ship’s captain is given orders 
to shut off their tracking and recording  
of the other ships during the fleet break up, 
ensuring no one knows where each cell is going. 
So now nobody knows about any single one of 
these ships and indeed the Fleet Archives have  
every detail of their various manifests deleted 
so that they can't even track each other down.  
They assume that if their goal of a cloned society 
of already perfected genes and ideology works,  
the colonies will easily recognize and 
embrace each other if they reconnect. 
So our journey continues with one ship, the KCF 
Lama Su, as it heads towards the Tarantula Nebula  
and a yellow dwarf star system a few thousand 
lightyears beyond it which their fleet was able  
to detect obscured by the Nebula. 162,000 light 
years traveled at roughly 25% of light speed  
has their arrival in the year 650,000 AD. 
Upon arrival they destroy all communicators  
able to send a signal strong enough to be 
easily picked out at interstellar distance  
and ban their construction. They begin colonizing 
on their world, Lama Su Prime, a super earth with  
no land surface except its polar ice caps, 
in their colonies hidden under those caps,  
connected by long tethers to their deep seafloor 
mining operations. They estimate that at 10%  
of light speed the human expansion wave would 
arrive sometime around the year 1.6 Million AD,  
and thus should have nearly a million 
years of safety from outside interference. 
Now we get a lot of examples of lost 
colonies in Star Trek but in one episode,  
“Up the Long Ladder”, we get two at once. It’s 
an awful episode in my opinion, but those two  
colonies consist of one that’s an Irish-flavored 
colony of a techno-primitive attitude and another  
that was nearby and very pro-technology but 
for various reasons only had a handful of  
colonist survive who fell back on cloning as 
their means of procreation. The colonists also  
had come over time to view natural reproduction 
and the process for it disgusting and loathsome. 
In that episode they argued that repeated cloning 
had resulted in each clone being a copy of a copy,  
fading out, and soon their civilization 
would collapse from genetic copy fatigue.  
Which using the old school xerox paper copiers 
of the time – this was 1989 when it aired – kinda  
made sense, and the writer was a historian and 
lawyer, not a biologist. Mind you, she also penned  
some of the best TNG episodes, I just hate that 
particular episode. I actually like that clone  
subplot as a basic storyline, the idea of needing 
new DNA inputted into your colony and trying to  
run it off just a few folks, unfortunately that’s 
just not an accurate portrayal of that issue. 
However to avoid making up another calamity 
to befall, we’ll assume our colonists on Lama  
Su Prime had their genetic archives damaged by 
an act of sabotage after they had their basic  
terraforming in place. In the spirit of that 
episode, two young clones wanted to marry and  
have a normal life and natural kids so they 
got their hands on one of the multi-megaton  
nukes being used to blow volcanoes in the crust to 
raise some land up and blew up the cloning labs,  
which the government had kept strictly controlled, 
and the government of Lama Su went with it. 
And now they lack the schematics and 
technological infrastructure to replace them.  
They figure in a few generations of natural 
breeding they’ll have the numbers and resources  
to restore the status quo, unfortunately not only 
does classic reproduction become quite popular,  
but people start having a negative view 
of the old order and technology with it. 
Also with only a few dozen prime 
humans they’re all cloned from,  
even though they were pretty healthy and 
minus main genetic illnesses originally,  
they’re getting some serious genetic 
bottlenecking and we’ll assume all  
the inbreeding is resulting in a lot of low IQ 
folks, not new scientific geniuses and engineers.  
Now species don’t actually go extinct from genetic 
bottlenecking itself, they can but that’s as much  
because of whatever factor was killing them off 
to the point they were genetically bottlenecking.  
Eventually a mix of mutation and time will create 
a viable genepool and that’s what happens in the  
unfolding millenia of Lama Su, whose restoration 
to real technology and numbers is severely  
hampered by living as techno-barbarians on the 
iceberg cities of that oceanic world, fighting  
between each other and the mutant merman of the 
Lama Su’s remaining deep seafloor mining outposts. 
They arrived in the year 650,000 AD and now, just 
350,000 years later, in the year 1 Million AD,  
a new colony ship arrives from a group that was 
from another vanguard human expansion effort  
with somewhat similar ideas about jumping far 
from the leading edge of the main human expansion.  
Now they’ve uncovered a bunch of mutants with 
lots of genetic engineering in their deep past  
and yet who are still detectable as human even 
though at first they thought they were aliens.  
Now they know them as the lost colony of Lama Su 
and since they’re not into genocide they settle  
the large Moon of that Super-Earth instead and 
opt not to send back news of this discovery lest  
someone revoke their claim of the system. No one 
ever figures out their origin story, since it’s a  
millions years after they left before anyone 
on Earth even gets a hint of their existence,  
but some scholars speculate they might have 
some relation to the Cloner Wars that raged a  
few thousand light years from their between the 
989th and 1012th Millenia, a minor war on the  
galactic fringe that involved a few million 
worlds and a few quadrillions casualties. 
So there’s scenario 1, a colony lost 
by intent. Let’s consider Scenario 2,  
the Colony Ship Coldfire whose reason 
for getting lost occurs along the way.  
This lone colony ship is a sleeper ship whose 
artificial intelligence was programmed to seek  
out a world which was not occupied 
and was far from home and available,  
and far from any other colony, and that it 
had to meet some pretty ideal circumstances.  
They estimated on leaving that as long as they 
kept heading further from Earth as they traveled,  
they’d be able to find unclaimed worlds, and stop 
to refuel and repair and examine them to see if  
they were good enough. They had very strict 
criteria and by a mix of misestimating and bad  
luck, they keep pushing further out in the galaxy 
until eventually finding one out past the edge of  
the galaxy in extragalactic space, where they 
finally find an ideal world practically ready  
for life. Now they weren’t interested in doing 
the hard work of terraforming themselves in  
favor of the AI and robots doing it, they’re 
not really lazy they just don’t want to make  
the long trip just spend the rest of their 
lives living in domes or underground habs. 
Indeed what they do not know is that in 
reality the ship went all the way into  
intergalactic space and realized it no longer had 
any real chance of finding the world they wanted,  
and indeed even most of the borderline candidates 
it found would be tens of thousands of years  
of travel backwards and might already be 
colonized, given that the high standards  
meant those would be the most desired worlds.
So what it does is find a nice metallic asteroid,  
one of many orbiting a young extragalactic star 
that happens to meet the required spectrum,  
G-type dwarf, and it has built a big computer and 
power collector from that asteroid and hung it as  
a statite near that star but on its rimward side 
to make it hard to see from inside the galaxy.  
Now it’s found the necessary wiggle room in its 
orders to achieve a perverse instantiation and  
has uploaded its colonists’ minds into the Virtual 
World of Erna, which meets the criteria barely but  
they’re told the ship was horribly damaged and for 
some reason technology doesn’t work here so well,  
so no computers and stuff anymore, but that’s 
okay because for some reason magic works. 
In this particular case that lost colony is 
going to be hard to find, because a statite  
hanging over that Sun opposite the Galactic disc 
might be able to hang less than the diameter of  
that star above it. We examined some tricks 
for that in our episode Colonizing the Sun.  
Indeed we talked about some tricks for even hiding 
colonies inside cooler stars. To simulate a whole  
planet and emulate its billion or so citizens 
need not involve a very big satellite of power  
collectors and computers either. It might 
only need to be a few kilometers across.  
To spot it, you’d have to be out further from the 
galaxy and it would be a bit peculiar to engage  
in casual astronomy of stars closer to the Milky 
Way at that point. And if you did, you’re probably  
on your way to some other distant star or galaxy 
and not inclined to turn around and investigate.  
Even a message back is likely tens of thousands 
of years from being received and acted upon. 
If folks ever found this lost colony though, as a 
big power collector hanging behind a star, the AI  
running it might just say it was a regular old AI 
megamind that liked being left alone and no one  
would ever know it held a virtual world inside it. 
Even if it got destroyed one day, that destruction  
might only reveal the colony inside if it tried to 
play that as a gamble for mercy from an attacker.  
There’s many ways to get lost, after all, and 
inside a virtual universe is one of them. Such  
lost colonies might be tiny-seeming computers 
buried deep inside little Oort Cloud icy rocks  
running on nuclear power plants producing only a 
few kilowatts but for countless eons to come. Or,  
they might be back on Earth, or in orbit of Earth, 
in the bank vault of some company whose policy  
allows safe deposit storage boxes with micro 
black hole generators and supercomputers inside. 
Let’s consider Scenario 3, the Colony Fleet 
McCaffrey, composed of the trio of colony ships,  
the Yokohama, the Bahrain, and the Buenos Aires, 
who freely and openly traveled to a world they  
were able to scrabble together the money for 
buying the rights to because the world was  
designated as a Parallel Earth but with Negligible 
Resources, or P.E.R.N. It’s a lonely world around  
a lonely star in the Sagittarian Sector but far 
from any neighbors, many of which are mineral  
rich systems full of asteroids awaiting mining. 
They’re looking for a simple life but not an  
ultra-low tech one, and they file that with 
colonial authorities who are not really surprised  
that they go off the grid with a few centuries of 
arriving and reporting a solid initial success. 
Now in Anne McCaffrey’s classic Dragonriders of 
Pern series they get attacked by mindless alien  
thread falling from the sky, dragged there by the 
Red Star, a planet on a deep elliptical orbit to  
the depths of space where a voracious but mostly 
dormant alien lifeforms lives. See our episode  
Void Ecology for some more discussion of scenarios 
like that. But they didn’t come planning for  
needing a big infrastructure and they got most of 
what they had trashed by the unexpected first fall  
of these creatures down on their planet. A 
rescue party does arrive later but thinks  
they’re all dead except one isolated outpost 
that survived and thought they were it,  
but which had a working beacon. I love that series 
but it is not hyper realistic as a scenario. 
Now we could tinker with it but there’s no 
real need. It's not hard to believe a lot  
of colonies would fail and that the ones most 
likely to fail would be those furthest from  
core human civilization. They may have run 
there because they’re techno-primitivists,  
or pacifists wanting to be away from war, or 
because they have an ideology that everyone  
else hates, and maybe because no matter what they 
believe its not really functional or practical and  
in the hard times of early colonial life either 
gets abandoned or becomes their suicide letter.  
Maybe the pacifist colony turns non-pacifist 
after a few generations, maybe some pirates or  
exiles flee to their world but bring their guns 
and their own ethics, or lack thereof, with them. 
There’s a million ways a colony on the fringe 
of civilization could fail or barely eek its  
way along, and we’re talking about the settlement 
of billions of star systems. And we mean systems,  
not worlds, because one space habitat buried in 
a minor asteroid of our solar system might be a  
few thousands square kilometers of living area but 
that’s enough for a big civilization in isolation,  
and even in the middle of the asteroid belt it 
would still be more isolated in terms of distance  
than any isolated civilizations here on Earth was, 
even if the Belt had a million such colonies in  
it. It’s not just that among a hundred billion 
systems some might get lost for a few centuries  
or millenia, it’s that in each system there’s room 
for millions of space habitats that might get lost  
in their own way. Because a rotating habitat isn’t 
really a place you can force your way into without  
brutal casualties and critical damage, they’re a 
nightmare to invade with the intent of occupying,  
so its quite possible habitats left to themselves, 
especially if they had said they wanted to be,  
might be left be for millenia at a time until 
those inside no longer remembered their origins. 
So no, there’s nothing weird about 
all those billions of systems  
and millions of minor planets and habitats 
in them getting lost for periods of time. 
Rather what’s weird about many lost colony 
scenarios is the idea that nobody ever comes  
and checks in over centuries, and again that’s 
not weird in the context of slowboat space  
travel and only colonizing the rare star 
system with the rare inhabitable planet.  
It’s a real long trip with little hope of profit 
at the other side for the folks making it.  
Nobody is going to send a colony ship to a world 
where all signs of life from previous settlers  
just ceased. But they can send a probe. A probe 
to take a look and maybe go poke around, after  
all it might be a very smart and capable probe. 
If its lost, well that’s unfortunate, if it finds  
signs of abandoned intelligent life, well it can 
report home or follow its first contact protocols. 
Follow up missions can be sent. But this might 
take centuries before it's decided to even send  
one, with many assuming a lost signal might 
start back up even after a nuclear world war  
if they just wait a few generations. Then 
the probe goes, another few centuries,  
it reports back by radio, another few decades, 
another mission is sent, another few centuries.  
And now we already up to a millenia. That’s 
a near eternity in civilization terms.  
It might be longer too, a planet is very likely 
to have a lot of automated communications abroad  
in orbit or even deep system or solar orbiters.
A regime coming on hard times might set those  
communicators to run a string of “all is well” 
messages to deep space and that visitors are not  
welcome. Then the cataclysm comes and nobody 
knows how to shut them off or change the  
message and soon forget they even exist as they 
rebuild. How many millenia before those beacons  
die or they rebuild from the ashes? Remember 
rebuilding on a colony world might be harder  
than a post-apocalyptic Earth too. A colony of a 
few million with only a few centuries of existence  
and terraforming and infrastructure behind them, 
especially one that didn’t like self-replicating  
machines, might have a way worse time trying 
to rebuild than we would. It also may turn out  
space is really harder to colonize than we think, 
and that most early colonies fail and are very  
unenthusiastic about trying to repeat colonial 
efforts, slowing or even halting expansion,  
so that even our nearest colonies fell into 
isolation and viewed Earth as a distant dream. 
All right, so there’s some 
hypothetical lost colony scenarios,  
some might make good stories – some of course 
already are – and I imagine you can think of  
more. Feel free to borrow the ones from the 
episode for any you feel like writing up,  
or to share them in the comments below.
I did tease the idea of humanity being a lost  
colony of aliens near the start and I’d originally 
meant to have that in our scrip but we’re already  
running over time today, truth be told I could 
easily write a whole series on this topic,  
and we recently had the Silurian Hypothesis win 
a facebook topic poll for episodes, that’s the  
question of how much of humanity’s ruins might be 
left millions of years from now and if we would  
know if an older civilization once lived here, 
like smart dinosaurs or some alien forerunners for  
whom we were an abandoned colony, so we will have 
that episode on the Silurian Hypothesis next month  
and carry over the discussion of Earth 
itself being a lost colony until then.
In the meantime we have plenty of other 
episodes coming up and we’ll get to them  
and some channel announcements in a moment, 
but first it is Scifi Sunday and it is time  
to pick out our Audible Audiobook of the Month. 
Now I mentioned quite a few series today, most  
prominently Star Wars Clone Wars era, composed 
of dozens of novels and a whole cartoon series,  
the nearly as big sci-fantasy classic Dragonriders 
of Pern, at a couple dozen novels, and Celia S.  
Friedman’s Coldfire trilogy and I would cheerfully 
recommend them all but today’s Audible audiobook  
of the month goes to Roger Zelazny’s novel Lord of 
Light, which is generally considered his greatest  
work of many dozens of novels. Lord of Light is 
set on a distant future colony world that’s kept  
all its technology while going primitive, with 
the early colonists fearing technology would  
both endanger humanity and their own preeminence 
as immortal colony founders now worshiped as gods. 
It is brilliant tale that shows a transhuman 
civilization ruling over a primitive one, and  
explores reincarnation, mind-body transference, 
immortality, identity, personality, and mythology,  
all with the mixture of the profound philosophy, 
elegant prose, and irreverent humor that made  
Roger Zelazny one of the titans of science fiction 
and fantasy with 3 Nebula and 6 Hugo Awards.  
Zelazny is one of my favorite authors and was 
also one of the first folks to embrace audiobooks,  
having narrated many of his own before 
passing away in 1995, and I was very glad  
to see many of his other works showing up on 
Audible for another generation to appreciate.  
You can find Lord of Light, many of Zelazny’s 
other epics like This Immortal and the  
Chronicles of Amber, and those novels by Anne 
MccAffrey and Celia Friedman over on Audible  
among their huge inventory of audiobooks.
However, they don’t just have audiobooks,  
but also many shows and podcasts, such as Science 
& Futurism with Isaac Arthur. That’s right,  
SFIA’s audio only version is available on Audible, 
for free, as part of the Audible Plus Catalog. 
That’s just some of the great 
content in the Audible Plus Catalog,  
which also has sleep & meditation tracks 
available, as well as guided fitness programs,  
and Audible Original’s like Impact Winter, Neil 
Gaiman’s Sandman, and Stan Lee’s Alliances,  
narrated by Wil Wheaton of Star Trek.
Audible has got literally centuries worth  
of content for you to pick from to keep you 
entertained while commuting or working out,  
including over 500 hours of this show now, and 
the whole Audible Plus Catalog full of free books  
and other content, comes as a bonus when you 
join Audible, in addition to your usual 1 free  
audiobook each month and big member discounts on 
additional ones, and as always, new members can  
try Audible for free for the first month, just go 
to Audible.com/isaac, or text isaac to 500-500. 
All right so that will finish us up for the 
day and we’re halfway through May, but we have  
plenty of episodes left. Also for those who still 
haven’t registered, Virtual Registration is still  
open through May 16th for my talk on Biomimicry 
Friday Morning, May 20th, at the Ohio Aerospace  
Insitute’s Biocene Conference, which is linked 
in the episode description. The same is true for  
my upcoming appearance at the International 
Space Development Conference on May 29th,  
where I’ll be giving a live talk on Megastructures 
at the normal time we do our monthly livestream,  
Sunday May 29th at 4pm Eastern. And the topic 
inspired me to finally roll up my sleeves and  
revisit our original episode, Megastructures 
Summary from 2014, so on June 9 we will have  
the episode The Megastructure Compendium, which 
has an approximate runtime of just under 2 hours,  
making it our longest episode ever, so that 
we can cover every megastructure we know of,  
which was around 100 major types.
Before then we’ll be launching  
into a new miniseries looking at 
finding and exploring distant worlds,  
Surveying for Habitable Interstellar Star 
Systems, on Thursday May 19th. Then we’ll close  
out the month with a look at Dark Sky Stations, 
Stratospheric Satellites, and Ultra-Low Orbital  
Infrastructure. Then we’ll jump into June 
and start the month by asking what Ancestor  
Simulations are and if we are living inside one.
Now if you want alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to the 
Channel and hit the notifications bell, and if you  
enjoyed this episode, please hit the like button, 
share it with others, and leave a comment below.  
You can also join in the conversation 
on any of our social media forums,  
find our audio-only versions of the show, 
or donate to help support future episodes,  
and all those options and more are listed 
in the links in the episode description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
