This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
We often say that space is empty, but in truth
it’s full of things, like micrometeors,
cosmic rays, perpetual sunlight, lethal radiation,
and tons of other things waiting impatiently
to kill you.
Honestly, it’s really just missing air to
breathe, firm ground to stand on, and any
sense of which way is up or down.
Nothing to stress over.
Earlier this year, I was attending a conference
on Space Development and there was a fascinating
talk on psychology in space and I ended up
chatting a lot during the conference with
its presenter, Logan Smith, and a lot of what
we spoke about was on the challenges any psychologist
faces just trying to work with astronauts,
especially if we introduce light-lag into
the mix.
Waiting hours or even years to get a message
back from home during a crisis is not great
for raising confidence that help is available.
Currently, we have an advantage in that we
can really screen folks for mental health
before a spaceflight and that we mostly have
had very few astronauts – we just don’t
send many folks to space – so we haven’t
had anyone flip out or break down yet, but
not for lack of reasons why.
I’m reminded of the famous moment on Apollo
13 when their oxygen tank explodes and Jack
Swigert says “Houston, we’ve had a problem”.
It’s basically become the legendary statement
for keeping calm under pressure, in a situation
where you’d expect people to be cursing,
screaming, or begging for divine intercession.
Those are the kind of people we currently
pick for space, they have got to have ‘the
right stuff’, because there’s just so
much that can go wrong with the situation
in general.
Right now, we only send the best of the best
to space, and that’s after years of training.
And yet, as highly trained, and hand-selected
as they are, they can definitely still break,mentally
and emotionally, and there’s so many more
ways to do that than them just going ax-crazy
on your ship, indeed, odds are, many astronauts
have had mental health issues from space,
or have at least come very close, even if
officially reported incidents are minimal.
Perhaps Cosmonaut Valery Ryumin said it best
when he wrote in his journal onboard the Salyut
6 space station: “All the conditions necessary
for murder are met if you shut two men in
a cabin measuring 18 feet by 20 and leave
them together for two months.”
It isn’t hard to imagine how much worse
that could get on some two-year mission to
Mars, or two decade mission to a neighboring
star.
I once spent 14 consecutive months living
in a desert during a war alongside over a
hundred folks I knew well, and for several
months of that, we were getting hit with rocket
and mortar attacks daily; in the places we
would eat, sleep and try to relax, and that
was in addition to everything we encountered
whilst away on missions.
It frayed nerves and tempers, and degraded
performance and reaction.
The stress hit everyone differently, and everyone
was tough but to different degrees and in
different ways.
No one is immune, I’ve even been on missions
with Special Forces and they deserve their
reputation but they still feel the stress.
The life conditions themselves just slowly
ate away at us, and we see something similar
on the space station, as we do in submarines,
shelters or refugee camps, prisons, or isolated
research or military outposts, and in a lot
of other different environments that just
push people to each of their respective limits.
Probably the most stressful protracted stay
in my life would be my 14-month deployment
to Iraq, so I’ll be drawing on that for
analogies a lot today, but even garrison life
in the barracks, overseas in a country with
a different language or living in the dormitories
away from home in college can show some strong
analogies for space.
Stress is stress and its causes vary in origin
and severity but a lot are universal, and
again no one is immune.
Today we’ll be discussing how to deal with
this in space, both what the stressors are
and what the supportive measures are, and
many will be familiar, because a lot of stress
is part of humanity and life, not necessarily
Earth vs In Orbit.
Maybe you’ll hear some stressors you know
and others that you might not, and maybe you’ll
hear about methods and ideas for dealing with
stress that could help you with your own.
Everyone’s got stress in life and while
this episode wasn’t made for helping the
audience with their own stress, it certainly
would be a nice icing on the cake.
Speaking of which, don’t forget to get a
drink and a snack, as we’ll be here for
a bit, and you may as well hit those like,
subscribe, and notification buttons whilst
you’re at it.
Now we want to be a bit categorical about
this, so we’ll be looking at categories
of Spaceflight Stressors – Physiological
& Physical Stressors, Psychological Stressors,
Human Factor Stressors, and Habitability Stressors.
We will also be drawing from categories of
Supportive Measures for dealing with these
stressors, which can include: Lifestyle Interventions,
Social Interventions, Psychological Interventions,
Habitat-related Interventions, and Mission
Structure Interventions.
Medication is certainly an option but it would
fall inside those categories just mentioned,
and is also not casually to be resorted to,
particularly as, in space, it can be hard
to carry an entire pharmacy with you – and
also to keep it safe from damage, decay, or
abuse by the crew – and you also have to
worry about atypical side effects and chemical
interactions from many environmental factors,
whilst also taking great care to be acutely
aware of any new factors that may be introduced
by being in space; not an easy task by any
means, when you’re looking at the truly
huge lists of medications prescribed regularly
down on Earth.
They may even have to go as far as conducting
the same trials and studies that are done
on Earth, but in space, and for every medication
they could possibly think they might need.
It would be an understatement to say that
it’s not going to be easy ferrying all those
people up for the trials.
Of course, it might also be the case that
we have to streamline the use of many other
interventions too.
As a quick example, air pressure and composition
have a huge effect on taste buds, but humans
can handle much lower air pressure than what
you normally find on the ground on earth.
The lower your air pressure, the slower you
leak air if something were to happen, so airplanes
and spaceships like to keep their air pressure
lower than what it is at sea level, and as
a result, the food often needs to be drastically
altered so that it doesn’t taste awful at
those lower pressures.
So, even an intervention like good food, which
can make folks feel better and feel more kindly
disposed to those who prepared the meal or
shared it with them, can go awry if everything
just tastes bad because someone overlooked
that the perception of the taste might be
altered at those lower pressures.
Especially if the stress they were seeking
to counter was a slow leak requiring even
lower pressures than normal on the station,
and thus lacking good data.
A problem we also see with military food,
where the need for compact and shelf-stable
items makes for meals ready to eat or MREs
that are often not great at providing emotional
relief, even when nutritionally sound.
MREs are one of those areas of heavy interest
to NASA and also an area where the US military
has wisely invested vast resources and efforts
into, and could probably use more, since at
its core, it’s a disaster food too, for
warzones and refugees, and meals aimed at
relieving stress can save a lot of problems.
Technology matters a lot when it comes to
relieving stress and it is important to note
that our current approach to spaceflight is
extremely primitive compared to where we are
going as a species.
We have terrible ways to get into space, at
an exorbitant cost, and in almost an entire
lifetime of spaceflight now, we still haven’t
sent anywhere near a thousand people to space
yet and their combined stays only add up to
a couple individual lifetimes.
That is abysmal compared to where we are going
as a species and where we need to get to make
that journey, and a lot of these problems
are going to be solved by just getting better
at spaceflight in general.
Cheaper acquisition of the mass already in
space, or cheaper means of driving mass into
space and more experience at using it, will
solve so many of these problems, or should
at least mitigate them; those we’ll mention
in passing or as examples of easy fixes, or
what we call low-hanging fruits, but we’re
a bit more interested in ones that will be
harder to solve and are more about space rather
than simply our need to do things on a budget,
low in both mass and experience.
But those will likely still be in play on
things like distant new colonies or asteroid
mines where budget and resources might be
lean eve in the future.
So I quickly mentioned known spaceflight stressors
and interventions, as general categories,
and I thought we would go through these in
more detail now with some examples.
None of these are exhaustive either and some
we’ll give more time to than others.
But let’s keep in mind: while we will mention
our current methods of dealing with stressors
in space, our approaches will radically change
when we have millions of people living and
working in space.
In the next 100 years, going to space will
probably be about as accessible as it currently
is for most US citizens to take a trip to
Europe.
You might not have done it, but chances are
you know somebody who has, and you probably
could make it happen if you really wanted
to.
So, if we have many more people going into
space, and the journey from Earth to space
doesn’t require the cherry-picking of select
candidates, who then receive years of training
and preparation, then we need to be prepared
for people who might find that they have a
difficult time staying sane in space.
First, as a quick aside: we care so much about
reducing stress in space for many reasons.
Besides wanting people to enjoy their time
in space, increased stress leads to decreased
productivity, increased interpersonal conflict,
and a drastically increased risk of developing
a serious psychological problem, which can
obviously lead to all sorts of mission catastrophes.
When you’re far from home, and the environment
wants to kill you, we do not want people developing
psychological problems.
So, let’s prevent that wherever we can.
Let’s begin with the Physiological and Physical
Stressors.
We’ve got: Radiation, Altered Sense of Time,
Altered Circadian Rhythms, Decreased Sunlight
Exposure, Microgravity, Environmental Sensory
Deprivation, Sleep Disturbance, Space Adaptation
Syndrome or SAS, Limits of Performance, Cognitive
Decrements, Physical Fatigue, Spatial Illusions,
Prolonged Deviations from Normal Body Posture,
changing Magnetics Fields, Pain and Sickness,
claustrophobia, and Decreased Motor Coordination,
digestion issues and trapped gas, disorientation,
loss of bone and muscle mass, unnatural distribution
of blood in the body, gut microbiome that
didn’t evolve in microgravity, strict food
and water rationing, no hot showers (at all),
feeling like there isn’t much time in the
‘day’ for themselves, and even if there
is, being bored, with nothing to do and nowhere
to go.
I’m sure you can think of several examples
yourself.
It’s a category that comes with some low-hanging
fruit; for instance, most of the issue with
Sleep Deprivation – which is huge with astronauts
– can probably be laid at the feet of the
Circadian Rhythm and would largely be down
to not only inadequate sunlight, but - using
the ISS as an example - from the astronauts
experiencing daylight and nightfall multiple
times over a 24-hour period.
All of the space stations and shuttles have
orbited Earth about once every 90 minutes
or 16 times a day, meaning even if you could
put in windows everywhere for natural sunlight,
they’re getting that at 16 times the rate
of change we see with our normal 24-hour day.
Humans are very, very attuned to that 24 hour
day and sunlight appears to be the single
biggest regulator of that.
Windows in spaceships that are further away
from Earth wouldn’t have day cycle either,
they’d have perpetual sunlight.
Indeed, even just up at geostationary altitudes,
where you have a 24 hour day, there’s no
real night anymore, Earth is only eclipsing
the Sun for about 70 minutes, not half the
day, and only at the equinox.
Amusingly, Night time isn’t universally
natural, it’s unique to planets and moons,
and space isn’t dark, the sky just happens
to be black rather than blue, there’s plenty
of sunlight, there’s just no air for it
to scatter off of.
So, on a spaceship bound for Mars, or simply
a spaceship that’s far enough away from
Earth that Earth is not casting its shadow
onto it multiple times a ‘day’ we have
the option of just putting windows on one
side and giving the ship or station a very
gentle spin on an axis perpendicular to the
sunlight so it turns once a day.
Assuming you trust your structural materials
to let windows be an option.
But that still doesn’t really give you those
morning and evening light levels and compositions
though.
We also want to be able to rotate stations
and ships to produce spin-gravity and that
usually involves rotational periods of on
an order of a minute, not a day, which would
be very nauseating to watch through a window
even ignoring the sunlight changes.
That window would also tend to be in your
floor, not your wall or ceiling, and I don’t
think folks would find a giant hole in the
floor, where they have little choice but to
observe alternating bright sunlight, and whirling
trails of stars, that alternates between the
two - each and every minute of the ‘day’
- to be very comforting for them.
Another factor to consider would be that any
glass, or other transparent substances would
need to be built to withstand being hit by
punishing levels of radiation and not to let
dangerous levels through.
Ultraviolet light is mostly removed from sunlight
by our atmosphere before it hits the ground
but what little remains is brutal on most
materials and all known lifeforms.
So, we’re not super anxious to use natural
sunlight.
It’s easy to forget that even back when
the ISS was built, starting in 1998, light
bulbs came almost exclusively in incandescent
and fluorescent forms, and those were awful
at mimicking natural daylight.
Even early LED bulbs left a lot to be desired
but Modern LEDs can pretty much perfectly
mimic natural daylight and alter the brightness
and composition inside a room over the course
of a day.
They are much more power efficient than their
predecessors, and even though they still require
plenty of energy, solar is hyperabundant in
space.
It’s a little ironic perhaps, to skip windows
in favor of solar panels converting light
to electricity and back into light, at a great
loss of efficiency and effort, and maybe some
form of filtration via mirrors and windows
or fiber optics will work better, but going
the solar panels route does solve the problem
for now, with enough electricity.
You can see how complicated this becomes.
We know that 78% of space shuttle crew members
have taken some form of medicine whilst in
space, and the most common complaint was insomnia.
When you can’t rely on the sunlight to regulate
your circadian rhythm, you have to use artificial
lighting.
But that requires power and creates heat,
two of the biggest issues with any space habitat.
Helping astronauts sleep better will probably
get easier as future space stations and space
habitats get larger and have more mass allowances,
but for now the options aren’t great.
Having more power at your disposal tends to
fix problems like smell, too.
Space stations smell bad; astronauts and cosmonauts
have long complained about the smell of everything
in their habitats.
Sterilizing and filtering your air in space
to get rid of smells and disease is mostly
a matter of raw energy.
A lot of habitability stressors come down
to power and mass limitations for instance.
Those are Limited Hygiene, Chronic Exposure
to vibration or noise – which is ironic
since noise doesn’t transmit in the vacuum
– limited sleep facilities, lack of privacy,
lighting issues, all the unnatural, dirty,
but antiseptic aspects of the habitat around
you, its three dimensional build and your
interactions with it, lacking an actual up
and down, bad odors, bad ventilation, toxic
agents, food restrictions and limitations,
bad aesthetics, and instrument displays everywhere
you look, that can’t be blocked off or shut
down or taped over, and many more.
An awful lot of that is fixable through simple
resources and simple raw power.
Gravity is the huge one and ironically requires
no ongoing expenditure of power, you just
spin the vessel and centrifugal force minus
any friction outside to slow it down does
the rest, though that’s oversimplifying
the difficulties involved a bit, but you get
spin-gravity from this.
Then you stop needing weird and humiliating
plumbing just to use the bathroom and having
to deal with, or be anxious about crumbs and
dead skin cells floating everywhere.
A little gravity, not even Earth normal, combined
with artificial lighting with a little ultraviolet,
would do wonders on any space station or ship
to make them stink less and be less filthy.
That’s a huge one psychologically and is
actually what inspired the title today of
Staying Sane in Space.
While I was deployed to Iraq, our unit moved
around a bit and was spread around too but
our longest stay was at a barracks in Ramadi
where, amusingly, a couple of my brothers
had previously been stationed at earlier in
the war, back when they originally seized
the place from the prior regime.
I remember someone hearing that and quipping
about homecoming and them getting quite the
dirty look, followed by the sort of language
we don’t use on this family friendly show.
This barracks featured a dark room without
windows, to respect folks needing to sleep
all hours of the day and divided into bunk
bed cells by plywood.
It always smelled horrible, it was also too
dark but not dark enough, it was a place of
whispers but always too loud, and as the months
ground-on, hearing people swear how they were
going to beat someone or other to death if
they didn’t take a shower or clean their
area up were commonplace and it was sincere.
Half the unit, myself included, smoked like
chimneys, a couple packs a day, and non-smokers
often hung out by the smokers just because
the smell was better.
The US Military has always had a no nonsense
policy about the importance of hygiene of
individuals and campsites that’s served
it well down the years and which has been
a deciding factor in many wars over human
history, and it’s not just about plagues,
which have defeated more armies than combat
has.
Filth and stink demoralizes people and cuts
into other areas of mental wellbeing.
Keeping yourself and your environment clean
and tidy and pleasant, is right up there with
getting enough sleep, staying hydrated, eating
right, and getting proper exercise.
Do all of the above to the best you reasonably
can and your overall mental and physical health
will be a lot better and it will generally
reflect into your mental and physical productivity,
social life, and everything else.
Let one of those slip and things degrade,
and it will require extra effort to compensate
for it or get back into a proper habit.
Addressing those problems in a team environment
can often help with morale, cohesion, retention,
and productivity too and obviously are must-dos
in long-range space situations, like Mars
missions, outposts or bases, asteroid mines,
or colonies.
So, you’ve got a spaceship floating billions
of miles from home, far away from anyone who
can rescue you, there’s no easy resupply,
no 24-hour store, no amazon delivery.
Now, on the one hand, it is worth noting that
all the prep for stuff like that can be a
very effective treatment for stress too.
Prepping for an unlikely zombie apocalypse
or any other kind of doomsday scenario, does
tend to make folks gain a degree of self-sufficiency,
physically and emotionally, and that really
does make them better at handling other crises
when it comes up.
But on the other hand, over-prepping can get
pathological of course and I tend to tilt
that way at times myself, but training and
preparation themselves are usually good for
stress management in addition to just making
a stressful situation less likely to happen
and easier to manage if it does.
So, your spaceship needs to have a huge archive
of how-to videos on it, not just because light
lag makes getting real time instruction or
help nigh impossible, but simply knowing it’s
there and having skimmed through it will help
your crew a lot.
You’ve a lot of situations you can’t prepare
for or simulate but simply just having general
life experience and the right resources on
hand will help in all those other situations.
Being well-prepared and trained for most of
them, at least means they’re not causing
stress or distraction while some new and weird
problem is occurring.
And it rains when it pours.
Murphy’s Laws seem about as ironclad as
the Laws of Thermodynamics.
In any field of endeavor, anything that can
go wrong, will go wrong.
Left to themselves, they will always go from
bad to worse, and if multiple things can go
wrong, they will most likely do so at the
same time.
There’s some real truth to that too, because
the more distracted and stressed out folks
are, the more things get missed, done half-right,
or delayed, and the more likely you are not
to catch a teammate’s slip up or vice-versa.
Automation doesn’t get distracted and it’s
also a good reason for getting into the habit
of making checklists, not just because people
do better off a checklist than from memory,
but because they don’t get offended by a
checklist the way we all get touchy when someone
reminds us of something, often even when we
did actually forget.
I mentioned that I got the idea for this video
after talking with a presenter at a conference
about space psychology, and one of the things
that Logan had been talking about in his presentation
was automated counseling and therapy options
for space, where a psychologist isn’t likely
to be on hand and real-time live, and when
he was discussing it I found myself thinking
how hard it is to take advice or counsel from
a soulless and impersonal machine… then
I found myself thinking how, often, it is
easier to take advice or direction from a
soulless impersonal machine.
It’s not keeping a scorecard or getting
smug at correcting you, and you don’t think
it is either.
If it asks you to say yes or no to a bunch
of symptoms, you’re not worried it about
secretly judging you or going to be mocking
you or call you a liar, or gossiping about
you, and you know it’s just cross referencing
those symptoms and severity with tables of
what it might be and when it tells you to
go to bed or get some exercise or drink some
water it feels different than another person
saying it to you.
This becomes especially helpful when you imagine
an authority figure, like a captain of a ship,
needing therapy.
How could he tell anybody on board, or anybody
back home, that he needed psychological help?
That’s a recipe for mutiny.
But an unjudging automated assistant?
That’s an actual option for someone in authority.
Emphasis on authority here because that’s
going to be very strained.
A few months back we had our episode Life
as a Planetary Explorer and the captain of
the explorer spaceship, which I dubbed the
Firefly for good cause, is mulling over who
is currently paying him or his crew and what
exactly they could spend money on or why they
should be continuing their mission or following
his orders.
Every order you issue is going to be affecting
your overall authority with the crew, and
same for every order from home, but impersonal
automated things don’t really do that as
much.
We can get irritated by instruction manuals
or how-to videos or maintenance checklists
but we don’t really feel bossed around by
them.
Procedures and protocols help with that too,
even when it is a live person, when you’re
a soldier, a lot of the time you’re taking
an order or issuing one, it’s really the
protocol or tradition issuing the command,
not the individual.
People don’t really have to make as many
decisions about what to order people to do,
or whether or not to obey that person, as
one might think.
Protocols and checklists also minimize decision
making and that’s a huge one for stress.
Every decision you make burns out your willpower
for the day, and that isn’t automatically
refreshed by some sleep, let alone bad sleep.
You’re aiming for everyone to have just
enough decisions on day-to-day life not to
feel shoved around while also never having
to stress out deciding minor stuff, and having
personal routines are handy for that, though
have their downsides too of course.
We’ve barely scratched the surface of the
stressors associated with spaceflight, and
why staying sane in space is so hard, and
we’re already nearing the end of the episode.
Let’s try to summarize a few more stressors
just to give you a better idea of what mission
planners have to deal with now, and will have
to deal with later as we prepare to go into
deep space.
The Psychological Stressors of spaceflight
are incredibly relevant here.
Things like isolation, confinement, and loneliness
will be a chief concern, but those are easy
to think of.
Less apparent psychological stressors are
things like mission complexity, mental fatigue,
information overload, changing career motivations,
and a sense of a loss of control.
We also can’t forget about boredom - being
in space for months or years on end will tend
to get monotonous and boring.
Staying busy will be crucial here, but you
also don’t want to give an astronaut so
much work to do that they feel micromanaged
or as if they don’t have any freedom or
free time.
Another psychological stressor that can’t
be overlooked are transcendental experiences.
Astronauts and high-altitude pilots have long
spoken of the Overview Effect - where being
high above the ground can give you a new perspective
on life on earth, spirituality, and what it
means to be human.
Folks can feel this way just reaching a mountain
peak and overseeing the vast landscape below.
In fact, most astronauts who return to earth
report some degree of spiritual changes in
their worldview.
But aside from these positive transcendental
experiences, there is also the very real risk
of an astronaut becoming so overcome with
euphoria that they threaten the safety of
themselves or their crew.
In fact, there was once a Russian Salyut mission
where a Cosmonaut became so mesmerized with
the beauty of earth that they attempted an
unscheduled spacewalk without being tethered
to the spacecraft.
He was only saved from disaster when another
cosmonaut realized what was happening and
grabbed his foot at the last second.
As you can see, even the “good” psychological
effects of space can be a stressor and a real
hazard.
PsychoSOCIAL stressors are also worth mentioning.
Things like disruptions in family life, leadership
challenges, personality differences, multicultural
differences, and differences between careers
or specialities can all fracture group cohesiveness.
We also have no idea what will happen when
crew members engage in sexual behavior in
space.
There is no data on this; NASA has forbidden
any research of this - but it seems inevitable.
Can it even happen?
Is it medically dangerous?
Will it harm group cohesion?
We can only guess.
Okay, so we’ve covered the fact that space
is stressful, and we touched on the idea that
there are a lot of different categories of
stressors.
We also know that there are different categories
for supportive measures to reduce that stress,
and oftentimes, one supportive measure can
reduce multiple different stressors.
For example, providing virtual reality environments
to see Earth, and have virtual visits with
family or friends, can reduce loneliness,
reduce isolation, improve general happiness
levels, and reduce general stress levels - this
makes everything better.
For another example, providing better nutrition
in space can not only boost an astronaut’s
mood directly, but it can also improve their
mental health indirectly by easing aches and
pains, improving energy levels, improving
their sleep quality, and helping them have
more mental clarity.
You fix one thing, you fix many others.
However, the opposite is also true.
When you break one thing, you can break many
others, as we say, when it rains, it pours.
While we have no known instances of actual
mental health disorders in space, we have
come awfully close.
For example, the crew of an American Skylab
mission once ceased all work for a day and
cut off communications with mission control
after stress boiled too high.
Similarly, a Soyuz mission once had to end
60% earlier than planned due to behavioral
issues with the crew.
These are examples of mental health problems
due to stress while near earth - so what happens
when a crew is in deep space?
Needless to say it might be very costly to
find out.
Another question often asked is: what happens
if someone finally does snap and tries to
kill other crew members, or themselves?
There are countless examples from science
fiction of this, and it’s something that
space agencies have thought of.
Currently, the International Space Station
has powerful psychotropic medicines to sedate
someone, along with restraints, and the standard
procedure is for there to be an emergency
return to earth as soon as possible.
But what if earth is far away?
Medications and restraints are one option,
but returning that person back to mental stability
would be much more preferable than simply
throwing them in the brig or shoving them
out the airlock.
Not only does that lose you a crewmember,
but it would be brutal on the morale of the
other crew.
That’s why reducing stress is so important.
Feelings of anxiousness, left unaddressed,
could become an anxiety or panic disorder.
Feelings of depression could become a depressive
disorder, or worse.
We haven’t experienced a psychotic break
in space yet, or a suicide attempt, but it
could very well happen.
Space is stressful, and people’s mental
health can deteriorate when they are under
too much stress for too long of a time.
And that’s not even getting into the complete
unknowns about deep space.
How will the human psyche handle not being
able to see earth at all?
Or seeing an alien planet, or alien life?
Or if they do see earth, realizing it’s
just a pale blue dot?
What will happen when it starts to dawn on
you that you will not see earth for 3 years,
8 years, or ever again?
We just have no way of knowing.
That’s why it’s so important that we pay
attention to space psychology now, work out
the kinks, and find ways to reduce stress
and improve mental health at all stages of
spaceflight.
Finding the answers now will help humanity
venture into the stars faster and with fewer
tragedies, and greater success, and maybe
help us back here at home too, as other space-based
technologies and techniques have done.
I mentioned Apollo 13 earlier and how its
become a legendary example of grace under
pressure, as well as ingenuity and determination,
and if you’re curious to learn more about
one of the most catastrophic and inspirational
moments in the history of spaceflight, you
will love Crisis on Apollo 13, over on CuriosityStream,
that chronicles the event fifty years later.
Also one thing that came to mind while prepping
this episode was if sanity and space might
be a Fermi Paradox filter so we are going
to have an Extended Edition of today’s episode
over on Nebula to take some time to examine
the notion of alien psychology as a fermi
paradox filter for spaceflight, what traits
are needed or beneficial to reach the stars.
I often write our episodes a few months before
they air then make the video a couple weeks
before they come out, and we often do extended
editions of our episodes over on Nebula, our
streaming service, when I’m doing one of
those videos and have some extra thoughts
on the topic.
And thank you to Curiositystream for sponsoring
so many of those, as they give me a chance
to expand on topics and sometimes they even
turn into full episodes here.
Nebula, which is now the largest creator-owned
streaming service, was started by a handful
of us as a way to give creators more options
for their work and a platform designed for
creators and their audiences, not ads, and
every new episode of SFIA comes out there
a few days earlier and without ads or sponsor
reads.
We also have an audio only-version of our
show available there too, early and ad free,
as a podcast, as well as all our extended
editions and some Nebula Exclusives like Planets
vs Megastructures and the Coexistence with
Alien series.
Nebula is a great way to help support some
of your favorite channels while getting ad
free content and bonus material.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos like Crisis on Apollo 13.
That lets us offer Nebula for free as a bonus
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using the
link in our episode description.
Again, you can get Curiositystream and Nebula
for less than $15 a year, just use the link
in the episode’s description.
I wanted to thank Logan Smith again for his
help on this episode and for his work on the
topic in general.
With all the focus on building a better rocket
or better spaceship shielding from radiation,
we often forget to examine the mental component
and yet it's such a critical part of any mission,
reor in space, and to get into space we have
to be mindful of our minds.
Speaking of getting into space, next week
we will be exploring a new space launch system,
the Tethered Ring, which offers a potentially
cheap and practical way to get lots of people
and cargo into space and around the planet,
on Thursday, Sept 8th.
After that we have our Scifi Sunday Episode
on Sept 11th, Alien Impostors and Doppelgangers.
And after that we will be celebrating the
8th Anniversary of our original episode, Megastructures
in Space, by examining the barriers to becoming
a Kardashev Civilization.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like help support future episodes, please
visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways
to donate, or become a show patron over at
Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
