This Episode is sponsored by Audible
For thousands of years, humans have sailed ships through Earth’s vast oceans,
navigating by the stars.
Someday, we might sail the stars themselves.
So today we return to the Generation Ships
series to finish out our recent look at colony
ships of truly enormous size. As we mentioned
earlier in the series, in Million Year Ark
and again in Planet Ships, if you have to
contemplate truly long voyages, not just of
a few generations but potentially astronomical
timelines, you have to plan for a level of
redundancy that safeguards your colonists’
survival even if their society collapses and
rises again several times along the way.
A few centuries is a fairly fast trip to even
nearby stars, and it’s also a lot longer
than most civilizations have lasted, at least
in the sense of continuity of goals and focus.
Now there are exceptions to that, and one
is where the goal or focus is simply survival,
as civilizations replaced or mutated with
time keep basic goals like that and if you’re
on a generation ship, that mission is basically
survival. You aren’t necessarily limited
in options to only surviving the trip to a
new system and surviving that system’s colonization,
but close enough. That goal, colonization,
can be more easily maintained in the long
term because it so closely mirrors our normal
survival motivation.
In addition, we shouldn’t overlook that
we might have much longer lived civilizations
simply because, in the future, we might get
better at it, and have longer lives. Additionally
civilizations often collapse from external
pressures, usually intelligent ones, if they’re
advanced enough to be resilient to natural
disasters, and a colony ship has little external
pressure.
However, exceptions go both ways here, as
on Earth if a civilization buckles, its neighbors
can fill the gap, and its surviving remnants
can rise back up again. On a long enough timeline,
even a total species extinction might see
another one evolve intelligence and technology.
On a spaceship, both of these are less likely,
as the spaceship needs maintenance and is
generally too small for much redundancy and
diversity, at least in ecological and cultural
terms.
We discussed lots of workarounds to those
sorts of problems earlier in the series, but
last time we also argued that for truly long
voyages, to other galaxies for instance, which
might take many millions of years, or even
billions, you need a model for a spaceship
that can survive that long, and the only example
we’ve currently got is Spaceship Earth.
The closer you can get your spaceship to being
a planet, the more durable it is in virtually
every respect. Of course the Earth is not
strictly speaking capable of independent survival,
it relies on the Sun for power, and this of
course leads to part of the reason this episode
is named Fleet of Stars.
We have a lot of ways to move a star, and
a lot of reasons to want to move one, or several,
and we’ll look at those today, but there’s
a second aspect of the name I want to comment
on first.
A point we’ve made before, most recently
in Hitchhiking the Galaxy, is that transporting
people over interstellar distance is very
energy intensive; the amount of power needed
to push along spaceships that might hold several
thousand people at an acceleration rate of
1-gee is, depending on how spacious the ship’s
accommodation and cargo holds are, either
enough to easily power our entire modern global
economy, on the modest side, or enough to
light the entire planet up as a second sun.
As a result, not only might travel to other
worlds be frowned on as wasteful of energy,
beyond initial colonization, and because ships
with such energies are effectively doomsday
weapons, but also because of sheer light pollution.
If you’ve got thousands of big ships going
to and from your solar system on any given
day, it is going to look like a literal fleet
of stars. Science fiction often fudges scale
by letting us see spaceships from the cockpit
or bridge window of a ship they’re fighting,
which is highly unrealistic, but only in terms
of making them out, when they’d probably
just be radar blips. In terms of brightness
though they actually would look like bright
little blips when their engines were on, even
millions of kilometers away. Nobody would
ever need a telescope to see a bulk freighter
decelerating as it approached their system,
let alone their planet.
But getting back to the energy wastefulness
notion of interstellar travel, we often point
out that it’s enough energy to accelerate
one person up to relativistic speeds as it
is to keep someone alive and in luxury on
a planet or space habitat for a million years
or so. Thus a lot of cultures might frown
on casual travel.
As we’ve noted, this doesn’t apply to
colonization since you can grab orders of
magnitude more energy by going to a new and
unused system. It’s a huge investment of
energy, but for a vastly larger reward. There’s
an implicit assumption though that these trips
are way shorter than a million years, and
that life support on such ships is a tiny
fraction of their total energy budget, being
the same as what folks on a stationary space
habitat back home would use. Thus, while bigger
is better for spaceships, you also always
want to go as small as you can too, to save
energy, and not even colony ships or drone
fleets for harvesting distant stars are exempt
from this.
When we start contemplating really long trips
though, not only is the ‘bigger is better’
concept far more true, but that cost to get
up to speed is no longer an overwhelming factor.
The trips are just so long that the life support
energy costs are no longer a drop in the bucket
compared to energies needed to speed the ship
up or slow it down, and as we noted in Planet
Ships, for very large ships you don’t slow
them down, you just send fleets of colonists
out from that gigantic ship to nearby systems
as you fly by.
Now the obvious assumption, especially given
the title, is that it needs a power source
and Earth’s power source is the Sun, so
we need to send a Sun with a planet around
it instead, but realistically not so much.
We can do that and will get to explaining
how shortly, but when we say a planet ship,
we’re still talking about something very
artificial, even if for no better reason than
you need protection against all the radiation
and debris you’d be hitting at relativistic
speeds during your interstellar journey.
You might give these things sunlight and make
them spherical but it’s going to be an artificial
sun. We do have a motive for moving whole
stars as ships, but not just to move a planet,
it would be like picking up a mountain a house
was built on instead of just moving the house
to a new mountain, or just its occupants and
their prized goods. If you just want to move
a house, move a house, if you just want to
move a planet, move a planet. Channel regulars
of course already know we’ve got plenty
of motivations to move entire mountains or
entire stars too, and we’ll review some
of those and introduce some new ones.
First though, let’s get to the how to. The
first, simplest, best known, and worst method
is the Shkadov Thruster. For a given value
of ‘best known’ anyway, the Shkadov Thruster
is a decades old idea, but it’s only recently
gotten much attention. Of course the others
are even less well known, so much so that
I’m stuck naming them and am just assuming
somebody else thought them up before me.
We’ll get to those, but what is a Shkadov
Thruster and why is it both the simplest and
worst “Star Drive”? We’ll keep it short
since it does have its own episode and for
that matter one of the regular editors here,
Greg Leal, made his own video on the topic
last year too, and we’ve other material
to cover. A Shkadov Thruster works on a simple
principle, stars emit light, light has momentum
and can be used to push things, as we often
discuss here, but by default a star emits
light omnidirectionally, and even when that’s
not uniform, it tends to be symmetric, like
emitting more from the pole for something
like a neutron star, but both poles, so they
cancel out.
The handy thing about light is the photons
making it up are the absolute best rocket
fuel in terms of achieving the maximum final
speed. They are also basically the worst for
acceleration, and a star is already a very
heavy thing to be trying to push on, so Shkadov
Thrusters are slow as heck to get going, though
obtain a fairly decent top speed in the long
run. The advanced technology employed to move
stars, something most science fiction writers
would view as Clarketech, so advanced only
godlike aliens could do it, employs an ultra-sophisticated
device known as the Stellar Photon Reflector,
or more commonly, a mirror. Or actually any
fairly shiny bit of metal will do, it need
not be something good enough to shave in.
The two tricky parts are first, you do need
a lot of them, and second, you need to coordinate
them all so they don’t smack into each other
or fall into the star or off into deep space.
See the episode for the specifics but one
bit that often confuses people is why the
star moves. You have to add up all the forces
involved. Some of the star’s light flies
off in the right direction, applying force,
the rest flies off and hit mirrors, which
bounce it in the right direction and the whole
system gets its thrust this way. Those mirrors
are absorbing a lot of momentum, but they
are also being pulled by gravity, that star’s
gravity, and the balancing act is making sure
the light force on them, the radiant pressure,
is the same as the gravitational force on
them. Those mirrors, though vastly smaller
than that star, exert the exact same force
back on it, and so the mirrors are actually
gravitationally tugging the star toward them
too.
Amusingly, since gravity and light both fall
off with the square of distance, it doesn’t
actually matter where you put those mirrors,
so you presumably put them as close as they
can be without melting the mirror or slagging
the control mechanisms on it, to get maximum
reflection for minimum mirror mass.
If that’s all you’re doing, then any planet
around that sun can be dragged along but are
probably going to need pushing on too, but
the Sun is so much more massive than them
that it’s fairly simple to direct enough
momentum their way at the right times to keep
them attached to the star and in the right
orbital paths. The advanced technology for
this is in the accounting department, because
you’ve got to be constantly keeping an eye
on everything’s momentum and tweaking things
before they get perturbed and need bigger
pushes to fix them and everything else they
perturbed in turn.
So why is it slow? Well, in our discussion
of using solar sails or laser sail spaceships,
we’ve often noted that you need 3 gigawatts
a ton or 3 megawatts a kilogram to push an
object with light at an acceleration of 1-gee,
Earth gravity. Assuming your Shkadov was perfectly
efficient, all light eventually ending up
headed the right way, our own sun, massing
2x10^30 kilograms, would need 6x10^36 watts
of power, 6 trillion, trillion, trillion watts,
to accelerate at 1-gee.
The sun is hugely powerful, but nowhere near
that powerful, having a luminosity of 3.8
x 10^26 Watts. It would need to be 16 billion
times more powerful to get that 1-g or 9.8
m/s² acceleration, so instead will accelerate
16 billion times slower, or about .6 nanometers
per second per second, which is quite slow.
And the usual concept assumes you only get
to thrust with maybe half the total light,
so it takes you a million years just to get
our Sun up to 20 m/s. Of course in a billion
it could be doing 20 km/s, and would have
covered about a third of the galaxy.
A few notes, bigger stars than ours are far
more luminous per unit of mass, and thus accelerate
much quicker, but can’t accelerate as long
and explode. Smaller ones than the Sun go
slower but can achieve a far higher top speed,
as they burn all their fusion fuel up and
can live trillions of years. This means if
you need to move stars in a hurry, like a
nearby one is going supernova, you build your
thruster around that big star instead and
divert it, and if you want to travel to another
galaxy, you pick that smaller star.
Now you can potentially speed this up a bit
by directing light back down on the star too,
heating it up to produce more light, but the
better aspect is this takes us into a second
and faster way to accelerate, a type of Star
Drive which I’ll just name the Helios Drive,
as it’s more like a big Sun Chariot anyway,
and I’ve never heard another name for it.
The Helios Drive adapts the technology we
discussed in our episode on Starlifting, our
trick for mining stars. Here though, instead
of reflecting light down and magnetically
steering it to blow off the poles for collection,
we instead turn it into a big pair of rocket
jets, then we magnetically flip one of them
back down so it’s only shooting one way.
This is now a giant plasma rocket engine,
and it is going to let you accelerate far
faster BUT at the price of a lower top speed.
You’re shucking off matter to do this, not
just pure photons, and it is basically going
to follow the rocket equation for a fusion
torch drive. You’re starlifting so you can
throttle it too, getting up to speed in, say,
a million years, throttling it down or packing
it up till you approach your destination,
then unpacking or ramping it up again to slow
back down. Ideally you’d probably want to
entirely englobe the star and coming up with
material for that is no problem since again,
this is the same technique used for mining
material from stars anyway.
Interestingly the timelines involved would
mean a small initial colony could reach such
a star and grow to be a K2 civilization, one
that englobes a whole star, before it arrived
at its destination, presumably a very distant
part of our galaxy or another one. Also, since
you can use this technique to purge stars
of poisonous materials like helium, you could
be gobbling up material from other stars or
gas giants to use as extra propellant and
fusion fuel, and thus get a higher final speed
out of it, another fleet of stars.
We have a few more ways of doing it better
though. One, like the Helios drive, sacrifices
higher Speed for a faster acceleration, and
that’s the Nova Drive and its big brother,
the Supernova Drive.
If we take a stellar remnant, like white dwarf,
we can dump hydrogen on it and get some fast
fusion, dump too much too quick and you get
a nova, the regular old kind. Dump a lot more
on one, and you get the far more energetic
Type 1A Supernova. It’s a lot of energy
and released quite quickly, even just the
Nova version, containing and directing that
as thrust, and releasing it slow enough to
be thrust rather than smashing everything
is no mean feat, and we discussed how that
might be done in March’s episode, Civilizations
at the End of time: Dying Stars. Fundamentally
though, it’s the same concept as a pulsed
nuke spacecraft like the Orion, which shoots
nukes out the back and rides the blast. Obviously
scaled up a lot.
However, in Black Hole Ships, last week, we
discussed various ways to use black holes
as ship drives and even very big ones, and
one of those methods was what we think powers
quasars, thus giving us the obvious name of
a Quasar Drive. This method is truly the best
star drive, even if like the Nova Drive it
is technically using a Dead Star, because
it produces a vastly higher mass to energy
conversion ratio and is basically a giant
photon drive, and this is the behemoth we
will want to use to move stellar masses around,
it’s also the most massive and most efficient
of the types we’ve discussed, as the power
source is more efficient than fusion, allowing
a higher top speed, and can be throttled,
since you can add mass in or not. Needless
to say you don’t live very close to the
engine, but that’s true of all the others
and honestly normal ship drives too.
Handily, it’s also one we can accelerate
externally very fast too. We often talk about
giving things a speed boost by hitting them
with light or matter beams to give it a good
initial kickstart, and the handy thing about
a black hole is you don’t have to worry
about overheating anything by slamming energy
in too fast. Anything you manage to get a
dead center hit on the event horizon of that
black hole is not going to splash. And like
the Planet Ship, it can become a Gardener
Ship that never slows down and just keeps
speeding up, acting as a mother ship that
dispatches smaller colonizing fleets it can
easily slow down which stop on worlds and
build beaming stations to feed their Dark
Mother, who can obtain highly relativistic
speeds, zipping through galaxies and leaving
a thick trail of colonies in its wake.
Like the Planet Ship, you can always abandon
it if you don’t want to do the next long
voyage or can’t aim it to another galaxy
you can reach. Like the planet ship, it has
a huge on board power system that could support
a civilization for quite some time. Unlike
the Planet Ship, that ‘quite some time’
is orders of magnitude longer than the normal
star-forming life of the Universe, and you
can crawl down its gravity well, especially
if you been feeding it lots of stars, to slow
your own subjective time down.
This is a ship that can almost cross the Universe,
not just from side to side, but from beginning
to end. See the “Civilizations at the End
of Time: Black Hole Farming” episode for
details, though we’ll be expanding on that
concept next week in Colonizing Black Holes.
All right, so the quasar drive gives us basically
the ultimate generation ship, suitable for
colonizing other galaxies and fast enough
to get us to many millions of them while carrying
enough material and energy to support huge
civilizations for the better part of eternity.
Indeed it could be carrying whole stars along
with it, to use for propellant and living
area, if you don’t want to hug the thing
too closely. I suspect, though, you’d keep
the whole thing inside some Mega-Earth or
even Birch Planet arrangement. Build big enough
and you can even cheat some of the time issues
by a mix of special relativity from your speed
and general relativity from your mass, both
slowing time locally. Both of which are rather
handy when trying to cover intergalactic distances
without some form of FTL.
All right, so we’ve got the methods, but
what’s the point? I mean why would we ever
build this? Why would you be moving lots of
stars?
Well, we’ve got a few obvious reasons first.
We just mentioned the colonization aspect
but I suspect you would never need to go this
big even to colonize other superclusters,
an artificial small black hole of substellar
mass is probably something you can make and
is probably more than sufficient at planetary
masses. We’ve got moving stars so they don’t
collide or go supernova in places we’d rather
they didn’t, but to be honest you probably
have the computing capability to be figuring
out how to avoid such things with far less
effort by acting very early before you’re
thinking about using stars as engines.
Not all stellar engines are for engines that
move dangerous stars. The Matrioskha Brain,
a giant stellar computing engine able to simulate
a whole universe, offers you more than enough
computational power to be plotting stellar
motion and formation of a galaxy accurately
enough that you can intervene with minimal
actions to prevent novae and supernovae happening
anywhere near places that might hurt folks.
You might need them occasionally but not too
often, and of course, a Shkadov Thruster is
an innate ability of any of the other stellar
engines, a classic Dyson Swarm of habitats
or a Matrioshka Brain can reconfigure themselves
to direct some of their energy and produce
thrust. They also make phenomenal weapons,
but we’ll save that for next month.
So why would you do it?
Two key reasons. First, the big problem colonizing
our galaxy and others, and traveling around
them, is the sheer distance involved. But
a galaxy can be made far more compact, a thousand
lightyears across rather than a hundred thousand,
or even tighter, to allow far faster communication
or travel. If you’ve got all that calculation
and nudging ability, along with big engines,
you can slowly push everything into tight
stable orbits and make sure there’s no elements
likely to go supernova or ram into others.
A galactic Super Dyson Swarm, billions of
stars orbiting as tightly as you can get without
overheating everyone around a central black
hole. Or even some far cooler megastructures
we’ll talk about more next week.
The second is that they can reach other galaxies,
very distant ones, and they can move a lot
of mass. Whether you are sending them there
in the first place or building them in distant
galaxies, these are serious bulk freighters
that can achieve a large fraction of light
speed and carry or drag stars with them. You
could use this approach to wrestle many thousands
of galaxies worth of matter back home, not
as stars, only red dwarfs could plausibly
live long enough to survive the trip from
more distant galaxies and we wouldn’t really
want to pack stars in too tight for heat worries,
but as raw material for building or fueling
your mega-galactic civilizations. Of course
you might bring a lot of red dwarfs home from
distant galaxies, herded along by massive
quasar drives, and maybe so many of them that
they weren’t fleets of stars but whole armadas.
Or for feeding the giant dark monster in your
basement, but we’ll discuss that more next
week.
So throughout this series we’ve been looking
at generation ships, especially the impact
of them on the culture that might develop
inside one that is on a truly long voyage,
and there’s some great books on that theme,
like Gene Wolfe’s Book of the Long Sun,
Harry Harrison’s Captive Universe, Poul
Anderson’s Tau Zero, Arthur C. Clarke’s
Rendezvous with Rama, and many more. One of
the best of these is Robert Heinlein’s “Orphans
of the Sky”, our Book of the Month, sponsored
by Audible. Orphans of the Sky is one of the
first books discussing generation ships and
written well before the space age, and an
inspiration for so many later stories where
the crew forgot they were even on a ship.
Heinlein, one of science fiction’s grandmasters,
walks us through just how easy it would be
for a generation ship, by its very nature,
to get closed off from the outside world,
and indeed as we’ve seen, the best designed
generation ship, utterly self-sufficient for
incredibly long times, are where this could
happen the easiest.
You can pick up a free copy of “Orphans
of the Sky” today, just use my link in this
episode’s description, Audible.com/Isaac
or text Isaac to 500-500 to get a free book
and 30 day free trial, and that book is yours
to keep, whether you stay on with Audible
or not. And if you don’t enjoy the book,
you can exchange it for another book, no questions
asked. But if you do enjoy it, and you will,
there are many other amazing books by Robert
Heinlein, and you can find them there on Audible
too.
So we were talking a little about interesting
things you can do with Black Holes today,
and next week we’ll get into those in detail
and show some other advantages they have which
might make black holes, natural or artificial,
far more interesting to future space pioneers
than planets and stars, in Colonizing Black
Holes.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell. And if you
enjoyed this episode, hit the like button
and share it with others. You can also visit
our website, IsaacArthur.net, to see what
other books we’ve recommended and discuss
them on our forums.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
