This episode is brought to you by Skillshare.
Science fiction delights in showing us laser
guns and sword fights, but could this ever
be a real thing?
So today is another SciFi Sunday here on Science
& Futurism with Isaac Arthur, and it’s the
day we let our hair down a bit and embrace
our scifi roots. We’ll look at concepts
that normally would be considered more the
realm of popular fiction than possible futures,
while keeping at least one foot firmly planted
in the realm of known science. Today that’s
going to be looking at the large quantities
of fictional future weapons and trying to
see how they function and if they would be
usable in combat, and if not, what we might
substitute in.
And the good news is that for those of us
who grew up dreaming of a lightsaber, there’s
good reason to think that might be well within
the realm of the possible even in the near
future, not just in a galaxy long, long ago
and far, far away. If by some chance you haven’t
seen the Hacksmith teams’ real-life 4000
degree plasma lightsaber build, make sure
to check that out, and go give them a like
and a subscribe just for helping fulfill all
our dreams, and don’t forget to give us
a like and subscribe while you’re at it.
Now it needs a lot of refining, and we need
vastly better power generation for a hand-held
and truly portable unit like we see in Star
Wars, but it doesn’t help us solve the other
problem of why you’d bring a sword to a
gunfight, even if it is a flaming sword. We'll
try to see when and if such weapons might
even be practical, if not as a primary weapon,
then perhaps as a niche one, like as a breaching
tool during boarding actions or assaults.
Or potentially simply as a tool for non-militant
uses, like carving through debris in damaged
or dangerous areas like burning buildings
or collapsed mines to rescue someone.
And while the episode is titled laser pistols
and lightsabers, we’ll be looking at a lot
more options, everything from monofilament
hyper sharp weapons to grungy chainswords,
from plasma rifles to needle guns.
It’s a big list and it is both more and
less realistic than folks tend to think. First
let’s start with a common criticism of combat
in science fiction, which is that it often
seems like the weapons are no more powerful
than modern ones, or even less so, and that
they even have melee or close range battles.
Folks might ask why some futuristic soldier
has a blade and a pistol or rifle when spaceships
can blow up cities, and often that would be
the better tactic, but we also need to understand
that the same is true nowadays.
I’ve often heard folks refer to things like
assault rifles as military-grade weapons,
but they are not a frontline or main combat
weapon in the same way a tank is, a bomber
is, or an artillery gun is. Assault rifles
and pistols are principally personal weapons
for soldiers to use as either a backup when
their main weapon is unavailable or because
they themselves aren’t principally in a
combat role.
When my artillery unit was deployed to Iraq
from 2005-2007, we principally reorganized
to be infantry because 155mm howitzers are
not ideal weapons for fighting in cities when
the goal is to minimize collateral damage
to people and structures. Even then we principally
relied on the crew-served weapons we could
mount on armored Humvees. In high-intensity
warfare we would have used neither, we would
have used the giant cannons to provide support
to the tanks with infantry units advancing
behind them to seize ground. Most of the rest
of the units would not even fire a shot because
it’s not their job. Their job would be recon,
or getting ammo, fuel, and gear to the forward
units, or treating the wounded or inventorying
supplies or making dinner.
In theory anyway. In practice only an idiot
is going to openly attack a tank unless he
has something much more likely to kill the
tank than get himself killed while trying.
That is the First Rule of Warfare after all,
“Don’t Die”, and serving as target practice
is a good way to do that. The battlefield
isn’t a sporting competition, either, so
you’re not looking for a battle where things
are even, that’s a fight you avoid too,
in favor of waiting till circumstances let
you strike from an advantage. As a result
of this, the folks running supplies are much
better targets, because while a bunch of guns
full of ammo is a big threat, a truck carrying
replacement ammo is less of one. Asymmetric
warfare is often misunderstood to be an assumption
you engage in guerilla warfare because the
enemy has a big advantage. True enough, but
in practice you’re always trying to bring
the battle together where you have the edges
and they don’t, even if you could kick the
snot out of them in a “fair fight”. Never
Fight fair, that’s the first rule of warfare.
The only reason either side ever ends up in
a pitched battle is because they blundered
into each other and are worried that disengaging
will be even worse than going toe-to-toe,
that combined with bad intel, like you thought
the enemy only had X number of troops and
attacked, and they thought you were still
a day’s march away and paused to rendezvous
with reinforcements, and now you’re both
stuck fighting a battle you weren’t expecting,
generally the bloodiest kind. Or one of the
commanders is an idiot, which to be fair is
dreadfully common, but usually it's bad intel.
Wars aren’t like chess, it's not just that
you don’t know for sure what the enemy is
doing, most of the time you’re not even
sure what most of your own forces are doing.
Many folks refer to war as Organized Chaos,
this is often being generous.
As a result of all of this an awful lot of
modern combat goes on with what we call small
arms – which includes assault rifles, not
just pistols or bayonets – and a lot of
it goes on at fairly close range and short
notice, at least for one side. This may or
may not be true in the future too, but I can’t
think of any specific reason why it would
not be as true then as now. So there may be
a need for small arms and even hand to hand
weapons in the future, so that does leave
the door open for us to look at them today
as a thing we might need as opposed to purely
a tendency to make science fiction shows about
cowboys or samurai in space.
There’s a lot of caveats on this assumption
though. First a lot of close combat is happening
because you’re not engaged in what tends
to be known as Total Warfare. Also known as
Scorched Earth tactics, this is when you and
the enemy just want each other dead, and you
don’t care about civilian casualties, property
damage, or concerns about third-parties objecting
to what you’re doing. It’s a lot harder
to sneak small attacks in on an enemy that’s
burning down everything in sight and killing
everyone not wearing the right uniform.
We also have to consider how technology can
disrupt conventional notions of stealth. This
might include a suit that turned you invisible,
but it could just as easily be that the opposition
troops cannot be impersonated by copying one
of their uniforms as they all have friend
or foe transponders secured with biometric
signature readers. If something like that
is easy and cheap enough, you just have specially
coded ones you can give to local civilians
who are on your nominal green list for interaction
or passage so they can’t loan theirs out
or have them stolen either.
You probably can’t hack into such things
either. When I was in the service I sometimes
joked that if you wanted to know the password
to any piece of gear, you just needed to look
for the post-it note attached to it, but this
was only a handful of years after most of
the population was still getting used to Windows
95, and putting their coffee cup in the convenient
holder on their PC so they could use both
pointer fingers to type while hunting for
the ANY key. Generally organizations are much
better about cybersecurity these days and
regular old people are getting better cybersecurity
hygiene too, and I suspect hacking will be
a short period of human history like piracy
in the west indies was. Hacking isn’t something
you can always brute force, it relies on people
making mistakes.
Nevertheless in the future folks will want
to gather intel, be it a war or just some
company stealing some other company’s data,
and odds are the best way to do that will
still be to go sit down at someone’s desk
and read their mail or see what unintentional
secrets they’ve accidentally left lying
around. And odds are they’ll have some sort
of security be it a robot or a guard or an
elite strike team ready to charge in on you
and it's really hard to infiltrate someone’s
office with a tank, artillery cannon, armored
personnel carrier, helicopter, fighter jet,
or ICBM. So that’s where we get to small
arms, and that’s where something hard to
detect can be handy too, even if it’s pathetic
in firepower, accuracy, or magazine capacity
compared to other available gear.
Knives are popular for this notion, presumably
because they don’t go bang and stick out
less than a big sword, be it traditional steel
or something glowing. Ditto a small quiet
pistol, and this is where we tend to get notions
like monoatomic blades or needle pistols.
Monoatomic or monomolecular wires or blades
is the notion of a single strand of something
that’s incredibly strong, and can basically
shear thorough anything because it’s essentially
ultra-sharp by being so skinny, it’ll only
disrupt molecular bonds on a single tight
plane of a material its cutting, not mash
through a substance, which at the nanoscopic
scale is basically what even a surgical scalpel
does. Being around a nanometer in diameter,
such a thing can be very easily hidden. You
might be able to get away with keeping a kilometer
long coil of it concealed in a ring on your
finger and it might be made out of something
like carbon nanotubes.
Indeed given that carbon nanotubes are chemically
near identical to graphite, you could have
it concealed inside a mundane pencil that
would be very hard to detect on a scan, and
the stuff is harder than diamond, and in this
context, sharper than diamond too. A superstrong
and thin wire has issues with how you would
use it, and as strong as these things are
in terms of tensile strength, a single molecule
thick cord of it isn’t really very strong
in human terms either, plus in practical terms
there’s a lots of ways a real world example
might break or bond to things it was slicing
through and so on. This is very similar to
a lot of the issues we have come up with things
like lightsabers or adamantium claws or so
on, and I’ve heard a lot of geek-arguments
over what impossibly sharp items can do or
can’t do, and as you might guess, participated
in some too.
It’s a good weapon in the sense that it's
not only compact and concealable but also
has other uses, like a cord for climbing or
potentially a modified form as a fiber optic
cable for spying, not too mention that in
the case of graphene or CNTs such a wire might
have all sorts of interesting electrical and
thermal conduction properties, potentially
allowing options like electrically heated
superhot filaments. A pocket knife isn’t
much of a weapon but having one on you doesn’t
set off alarm bells because it is a handy
tool, and such a cord might be too. It might
be possible having a ring with monofilament
wire in it might be as common as pocket knives
in the future. I could imagine something like
the gemstone setting of a typical ring actually
being a tiny drone with the wire attached
that you could control by mental commands
or similar.
Weaponizing it is a part harder, you could
make a sword out of it by pulling it taut
on something, or make a big circular saw out
of it by having a weight at the end and whirling
it around. One downside though is that if
you can make the substance, odds are good
your enemy can too, and given that it is probably
pretty easy to weave a fabric out of, would
make for fairly impressive armor.
To defeat such super tough armor, once concept
that is frequently referenced in science fiction
is the needle pistol. This is a pistol that
shoots a very skinny needle to penetrate right
through armor. Folks sometimes write about
such munitions and extol their virtues by
saying it can fly right through someone and
leave a tiny whole in and out, which highlights
the downside of such a weapon. In real combat,
what you actually want is to drill a tiny
hole through the hard protective layer on
something and then have it explode around
inside, ideally not having any bit of it emerge,
not zip through and leave a hole no wider
than a needle. I’m not sure that would kill
someone even if you shot them in the brain.
We are perfectly capable of building guns
that fire skinnier bullets, indeed we had
the 2.7 millimeter caliber Kolibri or Hummingbird
round in production way back in 1910, about
a half and a third of the caliber of more
conventional 5.56mm or 7.62mm rifle rounds,
or a quarter of the typical 9mm pistol round,
and if you’re curious a .45 caliber, or
0.45 inch wide round is 11.4 millimeters and
a 50-cal, or half inch wide round, is 12.7
millimeters. These 2.7 mm rounds didn’t
catch on, and we can make them skinnier nowadays
and have materials like Teflon to make them
out of. Or I should say they haven’t caught
on for small arms. They are common type of
round used by tanks to kill other tanks.
Long skinny bullets more like darts that fragmented
might be very ideal but unless the bullet
was smart so it could detonate and fragment
when it was ideal, you’d essentially need
a bullet designed to go through a very specific
type and thickness of armor, which requires
an assumption of a lot of standardization
in the enemy’s armor and their willingness
to always have it on. Long skinny projectiles
also aren’t stable in the air, which is
why arrows need feather fletching or vanes.
Critically the main advantage of a smaller
caliber bullet is the higher muzzle velocity,
but that’s a byproduct of being able to
go faster on less energy.
But the key thing with a typical bullet is
trying to get it to expend all its kinetic
energy inside the target, not failing to get
in or punching out the back with most of that
energy intact. It’s energy that does damage
here, not withstanding munitions like toxic
darts.
This is where we start having the issue with
energy and with laser pistols or laser rifles
or rayguns. These predate science fiction
films and TV as an idea, H.G. Well’s War
of the Worlds had heat rayguns for instance,
and various beam weapons and disintegrator
rays were thoroughly popularized by the 1930s,
but they make for a very easy and flashy special
effect, thus were ideal for films and comic
books. Disintegration weapons especially are
good for film, as you could just remove the
person from the set and avoid needing to show
their body afterward.
Practically speaking, this is overkill, like
blowing up a planet instead of scorching off
the thin outer skin everyone lives on. However
you don’t want to poke a tiny hole through
someone either, as we just discussed with
needle pistols, and a laser beam isn’t going
to fragment exactly either. The energy expended
burning a hole through someone obviously will
radiate out, but it would be cauterizing the
wound in the process which is the exact opposite
of what you want to happen to holes you’re
poking into people while trying to kill or
incapacitate them. It also needs to be a very
fast shot too, nobody is going to sit still
while you burn a hole through them.
How much energy does it take to burn a bullet-sized
hole through someone? Well in the case of
a heat-ray approach, just vaporizing a cylinder
shape of matter through someone by sheer energy,
quite a lot. Bullet energies are generally
on an order of a thousand joules, vaporization
energies are general on an order of a thousand
degrees. A thousand joules of energy would
heat a kilogram of water up by about a quarter
of a degree Celsius. So if you’re looking
to punch a fist-sized laser hole through someone
you’re talking energies more around a million
joules, and for the same amount of energy
you could pump a thousand bullets through
them instead, this is usually going to be
fatal to anything you should not be screaming
and running away from.
Of course if you actually have a laser rifle,
or heat raygun, able to dump a million joules
into a single shot, there’s not much you
need to run away from. I would imagine at
least part of the appeal of laser pistols
and lightsabers is that you’re shooting
lightning from your hand and swinging a flaming
sword, weapons traditionally reserved for
gods and angels, and they would indeed be
potent weapons. This isn’t a type of weapon
that armor helps much with, at least in terms
of classic hardness. Raw thermal energy is
usually not the most efficient weapon, but
it's hard to counter, energy beats matter
every time.
Quantity has a quality all its own, and as
we say on the show, if brute force isn’t
working, you’re not using enough of it,
and you can foil any armor by just hitting
it hard enough. Even hypothetical materials
that could absorb insane amounts of energy
have to follow physics, so either the person
inside the armor is getting roasted alive
by the dissipated energy as heat or getting
killed by the acceleration of the suit of
armor being hurled backward by the impact.
As an example, that laser pulse carrying a
megajoule has the same energy in it as a car
moving 50 meters per second, or 180 kilometers
per hour or 110 miles per hour. If that hits
you, you’re going to feel it.
But it also tells us heat as a damage vector
isn’t the best approach, not by torching
holes through anyone at least. The average
human body needs a couple thousand calories
or around 10 million joules of energy a day,
and a lot of that is used to keep the body
at a very specific temperature, you don’t
need to deliver a million joules of heat energy
to someone to kill them, indeed just breathing
super-heated air into your lungs will generally
do the trick.
Now this mostly has to due with using photons
as your damage delivery mechanism, and much
like with spaceship drive, there are certain
situations where shooting photons out as your
main weapon or main drive is advantageous,
but usually you get more bang for your buck
using that same energy to accelerate something
with mass instead.
In terms of raw matter to energy, if we imagined
some perfect matter to energy converter or
a box lined with perfect mirrors we could
bounce light around inside to store it, then
yes sending out photons is optimal. Using
Einstein’s E=mc², a kilogram of photons
contains the same destructive potential as
215 megaton thermonuclear bombs. Alternatively
a kilogram of modern bullets, or rather the
cartridges containing the bullet and powder,
would contain only a few hundred thousand
joules of energy, roughly a trillion times
less energy than their mass energy or what
that light would hold, or what that weight
of antimatter would hold for that matter.
However, we don’t have energy conversion
or storage capable of doing that, our best
batteries - lithium-ion batteries - can only
do about a million joules per kilogram of
energy storage, older lead acid batteries
were more like a fifth of that, and gunpowder
is about a dozen times that, and gasoline
about 4 times higher than gunpowder.
Which might make you wonder why we don’t
use gasoline in guns if it’s more energy
dense. For bullets, or any portable power
source, storage and speed of use matters a
lot. Gunpowder burns in a lot less than a
second whereas gasoline takes longer and batteries
take a lot longer than even that to discharge,
so not ideal for tightening your finger on
the trigger and having a target hit with lethal
force an instant later.
This is where much better power storage systems
can come into play, and we detailed those
options in our episode Portable Power, but
the short form is gunpowder is pretty ideal
for its modern role compared to the alternatives.
It stores well, it's decently energy dense,
and it releases all that energy very quickly
in the form of an expanding gas we can shove
a bullet with.
Now a soldier’s layout is obviously going
to vary a lot from time to time and situation
to situation, but in my own soldiering era
a decade back, we usually went into the field
carrying seven to ten magazines of about 30
rounds each, which meant about 3-4 kilograms
of ammo for 5.56 mm ammo, the kind M16s and
M4s fire, 7.62 mm ammo like AK-47s fire is
about twice as heavy incidentally. The magazines
holding the ammo added more weight, and the
rifle itself weighs about another 3-4 kilograms,
but you generally are carrying at least ten
times that weight in armor and other gear,
so ammo weight isn’t usually your controlling
factor. For that matter only a fraction of
the ammunition weight is actually gunpowder
or whatever other propellant you are using.
Someone with that load out might be carrying
10 megajoules worth of chemical energy in
those propellants though, and our best modern
battery would need to weigh about 10 kilograms
to do that, and would still need the mass
for the gun and the bullets.
Now that’s not really a weight issue, a
backpack battery for a laser rifle or electromagnetically
accelerated slug is a real option, but it
would require a battery that can not only
hold that much energy but release enough to
sling a bullet out in a millisecond. We do
have some options on the table for batteries
with those kinds of energy discharge rates
and higher energy densities too, again see
the portable power episode. The hold on weapons
like this really isn’t the energy density,
though more is better, it’s the discharge
rate, but capacitors can help with that, as
can superconductors. Gunpowder and its chemical
brethren have ruled the battlefield for centuries
now, and probably will for decades to come,
but that may not be the case in a century.
Being able to slap in a new battery that weighs
half a kilogram and is only good for a hundred
bullets up to a kilometer a second is not
exactly a dream weapon but its not bad either,
and that’s modern lithium-ion battery densities,
and again you could use a backpack which helps
a lot. Now if we did get something with energy
densities a thousandfold higher than modern
batteries and chemical fuels, then yes things
like laser beams start making a lot more sense,
because it means you don’t have to tote
heavy ammo around. Needless to say it makes
sense in a long range context too, much longer
than rifle range, like in space, where a bullet
fired from a gun at a ship orbiting the same
planet as you, ignoring all other relative
motions, might need a few hours to arrive,
versus a fraction of a second for a laser.
Let’s keep on this notion though, and contemplate
a gun that didn’t require you to lug bullets
around, but still let you hit people with
massive objects accelerated by energy rather
than photons. This is the general notion of
things like plasma rifles or plasma cannons.
Plasma is a state of matter composed of ionized
atoms, ones too hot to hold together as molecules
anymore, and being ionized are easily controlled
with electromagnetic fields. Your classic
fluorescent lamp tube runs on plasma, and
looks a lot like a lightsaber – and yes
we’ll be getting to them shortly – and
those individual atoms are whirling around
at speeds a lot faster than a bullet. There’s
no real maximum on how fast they can go either,
up to the speed of light, just that plasma
is the state matter goes into when it's too
hot to even be a normal gas anymore and those
random speeds are generally on the order of
kilometers per second, at the bottom end.
That’s why we like the idea of using plasma
as a ship drive propellant.
Ignoring various issues plasma has while flying
through the air, if you could suck in a gram
of air and expel it out the front of your
gun as a plasma at a temperature of about
10,000 Kelvin, those individual particles
are moving about 4 kilometers per second and
that single gram of matter you sucked in and
shot out is carrying 16 Megajoules of energy
in a tight focused strike. And yes that will
ruin your whole day if it hits you, even if
you are a big armored tank. Plasma rifles
have a nice potential niche in weaponry if
you’ve got good portable power because it
lets you use a lot less mass for your ‘bullet’,
so to speak, and potentially not even need
to carry them. If you do carry the plasma,
rather than sucking it in, something like
a neon or mercury canister, then faster acceleration
and hotter temperatures is preferable but
it’s still a lower weight limitation than
a modern gun and bullets are.
The ability to source your ammunition from
the local environment shouldn’t be viewed
as much of a plus though. Mass manufacturing
bullets is easy, and resupply via drones should
be an option that allows even troops actively
engaged in a firefight to receive ammo.
Now this source of plasma notion is fairly
important where lightsabers are concerned
because the assumption is they are carrying
around a roughly 1 or 2 kilogram cylinder
that contains all you need to run that laser
sword or plasma knife or whichever for an
hour or more. There is no real-world equivalent
that’s going to match what they do because
what they do changes by film and author, but
what they probably would need to do, if they’re
just a nice plasma torch, would be to have
an atomic or antimatter power supply and a
powerful pump sucking air into the hilt to
shoot out as the plasma, the one in the famous
hacksmith video runs on propane and oxygen,
same as your grill, which means it’s just
carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, all probably
plentiful in any human-breathable atmosphere.
Again see that video for a detailed explanation
of how theirs worked.
The one they made is awesome, and it works,
but it isn’t a real lightsaber, because
you can’t parry with it to block strikes,
you can’t throw it around at people using
the force to control it, you couldn’t precisely
cut someone’s bonds without burning them,
and so on.
What could do it?
Options are very limited. Having something
like a plasma contained by a forcefield – or
magnetic field – would seem to suffer from
the problem that while the field is keeping
the plasma in a nice tight cylinder of a blade,
it ought to be keeping it from damaging things
it touches since the plasma can’t get out
of the field. This version has the advantage
of a parry of two such blades making some
sense though, since their forcefields can
presumably bounce off each other, and we might
hypothesize the fields containing the plasma
had some very specific characteristics so
they only bounced off each other not other
things, and only interacted with their plasma,
not another matter.
Another alternative is a beam, but a continuous
beam, besides seeming energy wasteful, would
be just that, a beam, not really any more
appropriate for a melee duel than wielding
a machine gun in one hand while depressing
the trigger and parrying your enemy with the
barrel.
Possibly we could do a weapon where the particles
coming out of it had a half-life, something
that came out at a speed that made it decay
after about a meter on average. That would
mean the blade would still be half as strong
at two meters, and it would also mean it needed
to decay into something harmless.
When would it be useful though? That’s very
hard to say because it is certainly handy
to have a portable welding torch that can
cut through titanium, but usually the only
reason for melee in a futuristic context – besides
that it looks cool, which is only a good justification
for science fiction, not reality sadly – is
if the target is somehow hardened against
long range weapons or unable to be hit by
them.
That is a bit more plausible in some ways.
As an example, we might come up with materials
that are much harder to pierce than modern
body armor, but be stuck with guns no better
than modern ones, or we could see forcefields
develop that were bulletproof but not air
proof or knife proof like we see in the Dune
novels. Or some of their equivalents that
we examined in our forcefields episode, like
using tiny drones to intercept bullets. Your
enemy fires a bunch of bullets at you and
your own smart and miniaturized point-defense
turrets lob a bunch of tinier bullets at their
bullets. Only at close range are reaction
times for intercept of attack too long to
work perhaps.
Scenarios like that might conceivably see
more melee combat in the future. Of course
just because you have armor a bullet can’t
get through doesn’t mean someone’s sword
or knife will, or their plasma sword or gun
too. Plasma for instance is very easily shoved
around by electromagnetic fields so objects
can be toughened against them by having an
electromagnetic force field, which could scatter,
deflect, or simply blunt them.
We do see other super sharp weapons in scifi.
I already mentioned monofilament blades and
wire, vibro-blades is another popular one,
though it's often unclear how they work, it
can be anything from some sonic effect to
basically mimicking an electric knife or chainsaw.
Power swords tend to be popular too and a
lot like the lightsaber only they either are
the whole blade, not just the hilt, or sometimes
have a retractable blade. This works, and
some extendable bit of super-heated tungsten
or super-heated alloy is going to glow like
a flaming sword and cut through things very
well, though still fundamentally not as well
as a lot of existing cutting devices that
focus on being hard, tough, and sharp. A powered
saw will probably cut most materials better
than a hot blade, in terms of energy per cut.
Indeed the very grimdark and grungy chainsword
of settings like Warhammer 40k probably have
the higher end of realism here.
Still, something very hot can cut well and
with a bit of handwaving a nice portable power
supply and a material even more heat resistant
than tungsten could be set into a hilt that
telescoped out and charged up to have a nice
and lethal plasma halo around it. It would
still be a physical blade so you probably
don’t want to be smashing it into thickly
armored stuff constantly.
One other type of weapon before we close out.
We see a lot of blades or bullets than can
just ignore armor, phasing right through them
– like the phase swords we see in some scifi,
and this one does have some basis in science.
We have particles, like neutrinos or neutral
mesons or whatever dark matter is, which by
and large don’t interact with matter much.
Neutrinos will go right through matter, including
armor, but also including humans, so not a
good weapon. However a meson is a very short-lived
particle and decays into more mundane matter
rather quickly, so you could potentially have
short range weapons that fired off ultra-relativistic
mesons that decayed after passing through
armor, and since a half-life would be translatable
into a distance they covered in which about
half of them would have decayed before getting
there, and only one in thousand would still
be around after ten times that distance, it
is pretty suited for something close range.
Obviously we can’t cover all the close combat
weapons we see in science fiction today, I
doubt we could even name them all in an hour,
but we begin to see both the difficulties
of improving weapons and some of the paths
that might take. As I said earlier, while
close range combat is usually not something
that represents the height of your technology
or martial might, it does tend to happen and
probably will in the future too, whether or
not its humans doing the actual fighting or
tiny robots or giant robots, or humans in
giant robots.
So there’s no extended edition for today’s
episode, as I’ve been busy moving and getting
settled into the new house and studio, and
it’s involved an awful lot of yard and house
projects. One of those is setting up some
new raised bed gardens. I’ve often recommended
Skillshare as a great place to go to learn
skills like writing or video production and
animation, but it’s also to home to a lot
of Lifestyle and Productivity classes, like
Sunny Green’s Easy Gardening, and I really
can’t recommend enough having some hands-on
and outdoor skills and hobbies. Gardening
is probably one of the best and it’s a great
example of Skillshare’s philosophy of having
classes for every skill level, whether you’re
a beginner, a pro, a dabbler, or a master,
there’s always more to learn or to get ideas
and inspiration from.
Skillshare is an online learning community
for creatives, where millions come together
to take the next step in their creative journey,
and Members get unlimited access to thousands
of inspiring classes, with hands-on projects
and feedback from a community of millions.
If you’d like to give it a try the first
1,000 people to click the link in my episode
description will get a free trial of Skillshare
premium so you can explore your creativity.
Act now, and start learning, today.
So that will wrap us up for our Mid-Month
Scifi Sunday episode, next Month though we’ll
follow this topic up with a look at Death
Rays. Until then we’ve got an episode on
Arcology Design, where we will look at some
of the critical concepts in these hypothetical
super-buildings meant to contain thousands
of people and their ecosystems, this Thursday.
Then we will close the Month out with a look
at how Solar Flares might impact the Fermi
Paradox, and return here two sundays from
now for our End of the Month Livestream Q&A.
Then we will head into June with a look at
the concept of two aliens races both evolving
civilizations on the same world, and if they
might share it in peace, then we will look
at some Future Manhattan Projects, which might
be handy for those who can’t share their
world in peace.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas. You can also follow
us iTunes, Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our
audio-only versions of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
