This Episode is sponsored by Curiosity Stream
Right now it requires multi-million dollar
rockets launched from enormous facilities
to take a person into space, but what if you
could fly there from your driveway?
I was quite the sci-fi junkie when I was a
kid, and I still am, but like many folks who
grew up watching the old Space Operas, I always
envisioned future spacecraft as something
you might have in a shoddy hangar owned by
a couple of regular guys, or a smuggler and
a Wookiee, that wasn’t much different than
an enthusiast’s boat or yacht.
Growing up then, with space shuttle launches
and the SR-71 Blackbird flying the skies,
there was always regular discussion of a concept
called a spaceplane, and I thought we’d
take a look at that option today and if it
could ever be a pathway for cheap and easy
travel, not just from ground to space, but
from your own garage right to another planet.
Now, nothing like that is on the drawing board
yet for actual deployment, and we’ll discuss
what’s needed for such an option and what
it might mean for our civilization if we had
them, but we do have quite a few experimental
spaceplane models that have been developed
over the years and they are quite viable.
Some of the original designs actually work
better now with new materials and more advanced
engineering.
While there’s always more testing, prototyping,
and improving to be done, we haven’t used
them mostly because we had options seen as
equal, better, or simply cheaper that we’d
already invested in.
But let’s start with the basics.
As we’ve discussed before, rocket propellant
is measured in its specific impulse, basically
how many seconds the engine could keep a craft
hovering before it ran out of fuel.
For that reason they need to get themselves
into space quicker than that since they have
to generate far more thrust to achieve escape
velocity than just hover in place.
Your typical rocket propellants have mere
minutes of specific impulse, 6-8 minutes worth
is very good for a modern rocket.
But jets do far better, and your typical turbofan
might have multiple hours of specific impulse.
The reason is simple enough, rocket fuel is
about burning a fuel with an oxidizer and
firing a propellant out the back.
The oxidizer, usually oxygen, is something
you only have to carry with you once you get
up into space, where there isn’t any to
pull out of the air.
Folks would wonder why we don’t just get
the planes up to orbital speed, and maybe
a bit higher, in the atmosphere so they can
just coast into orbit.
There’s some problems doing it, but at the
very least, why don’t we strap the rocket
on the back of a very fast plane then launch
it once that plane has peaked out?
We talked about that a little more last time
in the series with Sky Platforms, but I mentioned
there I’d explain how this whole air-breathing
jet thing worked and why it’s a problem.
A bit over a century ago the Wright Brothers
got us our first aircraft, which at its most
basic used an engine to turn a propeller.
This made the plane go, but not really all
that fast, and we introduced the jet engine
about half a century later.
A jet engine is actually a fairly simple concept
too.
You use a fan up front to suck air; that’s
not too tricky in some respects since once
you’re moving, a bunch of air is slamming
into it anyway.
Some of that is pulled inside while some goes
around to help with cooling and will rejoin
the flow in the last step.
The core of the engine consists of the compressor,
combuster, and turbine assemblies.
The turbine and compressor are joined by a
shaft.
The compressor draws air into the core, compressing
it up to 50 fold.
This air has a lot more potential energy as
it enters the next stage, the combustor.
The combustor is where fuel is injected.
The heat generated by compressing heats the
air to around 400 degrees celsius, sufficient
to ignite the fuel.
This burning high energy air slams into a
turbine and makes it spin, which powers the
fan and compressor on turbofans, which are
in most modern engines.
It then exits through the nozzle, where it
mixes in the last step with the cold air I
spoke about earlier that went around the engine
and blows out the back producing thrust.
This jet engine turbine concept is applied
to the turbojet, the turbofan, and the turboprop,
which are just a mix of the word turbine with
jet, fan, or propeller.
It’s easy for folks to forget that the word
‘turbo’, used so often in modern English
to mean something powerful and fast, originates
from this object, the turbine jet or turbojet.
Though turbine itself comes from the Latin
word turbo, which is a spinning top.
Counterintuitively, though, the turbofan is
common in modern planes not so much because
it makes the planes faster but because it
makes them more efficient at lower speeds.
This is why it tops out on lists of engines
and rockets in terms of specific impulse.
It’s actually not that fast, but it’s
way more efficient at subsonic speeds, which
is why it’s the main type used these days.
We also have the afterburner, very literally
named, where you spray more fuel in to burn
after the main phase through the turbine.
This is very inefficient but nice for a quick
boost of speed and saves you the weight of
another or larger engine.
Notice I said that jet engines aren’t all
that fast.
In fact, none of these are going to get you
up to anything like orbital speeds, and even
afterburners usually won’t let you get much
above Mach 3.
That sounds fast, but we need about Mach 23
to get into orbit.
Of course part of the problem with getting
faster is all that air slamming into you is
also trying to slow you down, and as you get
higher where it’s thinner it’s hard to
get enough air for that turbine.
So we get the Ramjet, also known as the flying
stovepipe, and these start working well once
you get to about Mach 3.
They don’t work at low speeds at all because
we need air travelling at about 400 mph ramming
into the intake for it to work.
Anything with a ramjet will always have normal
jets to get it up to speed first.
Moving parts in a jet at that speed are a
problem and not necessary so ramjets have
no moving parts: there’s no propeller, turbine
or fan in there.
They rely on the sheer force of air ramming
into a static cone while we burn fuel inside,
superheating it and the expanding burning
air pushes itself out the back even more forcefully
than the air coming into the ramjet from the
front.
This works very well as a second engine for
higher speeds.
The hotter the burning gases, the more push
they have and the faster you can go.
The downside, though, is that these hot burning
gases tend to melt things, like your ramjet.
So ramjets can boost our spaceplane to hypersonic
speed, up to Mach 6.
That’s fast, enough to circle the Earth
in around 5 or 6 hours, assuming you didn’t
run out of fuel first, which you would.
But, we’re still well short of that very
fast Mach 23 orbital speed.
We next get the SCRamJet.
While the ramjet sucks in supersonic air and
decelerates it to subsonic speed to compress
it, the Scramjet, or Supersonic Compression
Ramjet, works at even higher speeds and while
it slows the air on entry to compress it,
it never slows it below the speed of sound.
The speed of sound changes as we change altitude
and it isn’t linear either.
At ground level, it’s 343 meters per second
when dry and at normal temperature.
It drops as you go up, down to around 300
m/s between 10 and 30 kilometers of altitude.
Then it reverses again, sharply rising as
you approach the Stratopause 50 kilometers
up, where it’s almost as fast as on the
ground, then dropping again as you approach
the Mesopause, at about 85 and 100 kilometers
up.
Then it rises again as you basically leave
the atmosphere, shooting up to hundreds of
kilometers per second, though sound starts
being a fairly meaningless concept as you
approach vacuum.
That constant change in air pressure, temperature,
speed of sound and so on is a big issue with
aerospace vehicles in general and one of the
reasons we use multiple stages with different
engine types so much.
One of the ways around that is what’s called
an aerospike, where the exhaust forms a narrow
spike instead of the classic big bell-shaped
rocket nozzle.
Ideally you want your thrust coming out with
every particle moving exactly backwards, and
the bell shape basically sprays them out on
many trajectories, losing a lot of thrust.
The aerospike focuses them in as straight
a line as possible.
It’s the core concept behind the X-33 design
and it’s big brother, Venturestar.
Aerospikes are more fuel efficient but do
come at a cost: they need more cooling and
are quite heavy, which is never a good thing
for objects trying to fly or get into orbit.
Variations on them include the linear aerospike,
which looks more like a big wedge, and a toroidal
shape, and it’s hoped that improved metallurgy
or cooling technology might help with the
weight and heat issues, bumping the fuel efficiency
up .
Anyway, getting back to our scramjet, it is
very like the ramjet.
The difference is mostly about the geometry
of that intake.
We’ve actually got some designs for dual-mode
that would convert the ramjet into a scramjet
as it speeds up, and they’re good for speeds
beyond Mach 6.
Needless to say the dual-mode is very tempting
since you don’t need another heavy and inconvenient
engine.
These are also very appealing for spaceflight
because they get much better specific impulse
than a rocket, still much lower than a turbofan,
but generally about double what a rocket would.
The real limitation on them is mostly the
fuel and metallurgy.
We have other ways of heating things beside
burning chemical fuels, but we do still have
to worry about melting everything if we get
too hot, and we sometimes contemplate doing
all this inside a magnetic field with stuff
heated to plasma temperatures that avoid it
actually touching the housing and melting
it.
We’ll come back to that though.
Of course all this makes one wonder why we
don’t do this then launch the rocket from
the scramjet, and you can do that but keep
in mind the scramjet’s specific impulse
isn’t all that much higher than a rocket’s
and that’s a lot of extra mass and lot of
air resistance issues to deal with.
It would also defeat the notion of a space
plane, something that took off from the ground,
went to space, came down, refueled, and was
ready to go again, without discarding any
major bits or breaking into separate chunks
like a multi-stage rocket does, even the reusable
kind.
With this approach, you already still have
to deal with 3, arguably 5 chunks: your regular
turbofan, the turbofan and afterburner, the
ramjet, the scramjet, then the rocket.
Needless to say it would be awesome if our
material science and metallurgy allowed us
to have a turbofan that could fold itself
up to be a ramjet, convert into a scramjet,
then switch into a pure rocket, possible with
an aerospike, similar in concept to aircraft
wings that alter shape to adjust for speed,
but much more complex.
I should note that such speeds and vehicles
might be good enough all by themselves, since
they might be able to hook up to a skyhook
or rotavator at those speeds and just be lifted
to dock at a space station.
Moreover, the basic concept might work just
fine if we are using alternative fuels like
metallic hydrogen or an atomic source or even
beaming energy in, more on that later, but
if you got planes that can go hypersonic on
their own, that makes for very fast travel
around the planet and something that could
be linked up to a skyhook or even coast up
to an orbital ring or stratostation.
We’ve had a number of spaceplane designs
down the years, and not just on the drawing
board, five have successfully flown to date,
the first being the X-15, and one of those
is the Space Shuttle, and these are all considered
a type of rocket glider, same as the X-1 first
used to break the Sound Barrier, and the X-15
still holds the speed record of Mach 6.7 for
a manned powered aircraft set 52 years ago.
As for the fastest unmanned air-breathing
aircraft, the X-43 has flown up to Mach 9.6
using a scramjet, after being delivered to
test altitude by a conventional aircraft and
rocket.
None of them have flown all the way up to
space on their own.
Designs have improved of course and this is
where we get to the SABRE and Skylon.
SABRE, or Synergetic Air Breathing Rocket
Engine, is a hybrid air-breather and rocket
engine currently under development.
The approach here is to suck in air as your
oxidizer at lower speeds, an air-breather,
and switch over to a stored oxidizer at about
Mach 5 to become a normal rocket.
We’ll bypass the concept of pre-cooling
for today, which allows turbojets to function
better at higher speeds instead of using a
ramjet.
Skylon is the proposed spaceship for this
engine, and it runs on hydrogen and oxygen,
sourcing some of that oxygen from the air,
then as we mentioned, switching to onboard
stores at Mach 5.
Folks always wonder why we can’t keep sucking
oxygen in, at least until we’re up in space,
and of course you can but that causes serious
problems as you speed up and is exactly why
you need to switch to a scramjet, with supersonic
compression, when the ramjet can no longer
hack it.
Skylon estimates they’d sell each spaceplane
for about a billion dollars and they’d get
payloads up to orbit for a little under two
thousand bucks a kilogram, with each vehicle
able to take off, land, and be turned around
in a day or so to complete a couple hundred
flights a year.
This would have been awesome a decade back,
and the remaining technical challenges are
pretty manageable, but unfortunately for it,
though not for space travel in general, Space-X
has so lowered launch costs that this isn’t
super-attractive at the moment, especially
with wrinkles still remaining let alone a
prototype, the SABRE still hasn’t been built
which probably can be mostly laid at the feet
of funding delays, rather than technical limitations.
One other downside for development though,
while this series is about getting off Earth
and what we can do in orbit, Earth’s atmosphere
is a fairly specific thing, and rockets work
fine on Mars or the Moon, but obviously air-breathing
jets aren’t really ideal for an airless
planet, moon, asteroid, or the vacuum of space.
This is what makes a big mutating hybrid rather
appealing, it would be pretty awesome to have
a spacecraft with engines optimized to whatever
environment it was in but which didn’t have
to carry around tons of different engines
and exterior shapes, as they’d just quickly
reassemble to the right kind, as needed.
That seems pretty sci-fi, but it’s not something
I’d casually rule out either, especially
as we’ve already got example designs of
ramjets converting to scramjets.
The other approach is just sheer brute force,
if you’ve got a better fuel source.
We’ll skip the option of beaming energy
to our spacecraft as we’ll be discussing
that next time in the series, and that leaves
us only one current option, nuclear fission,
which we looked at in “The Nuclear Option”
episode.
Though we may also have metallic hydrogen,
which we also looked at earlier in the series.
If your fuel just offers way more of specific
impulse, as metallic hydrogen is suspected
to do, then it solves a lot of problems and
suddenly spaceplanes become easy, and actually
rather cheap if you’ve got an abundant energy
source for drawing hydrogen out of water and
compressing it to its metallic state.
Atomic power is obviously far more energy
dense than even metallic hydrogen, but a problem
with atomics is that whole melting issue.
Fundamentally it’s the speed, or temperature,
of the propellant flying out the back that
controls specific impulse and, regardless
of your energy supply, you can’t spit those
propellant particles out at super high speed
without them being superhot and melting your
engine.
This is what make ions such a nice propellant:
you’re moving them around with magnetic
fields rather than metal.
When it comes to onboard power sources, we’ve
got many things better than chemistry for
energy on the table, fission of course, but
fusion, anti-matter, and even micro-black
holes could potentially be powering spaceplanes
down the road, which totally solves the energy
issue, but except for fusion, these are generally
things you don’t want flying around in the
sky, or more accurately, crashing into the
ground.
Nobody wants a hypersonic plane crashing into
their house, let alone one full of uranium
or plutonium, and those look like minor incidents
compared to what a tank full of antimatter
or a micro-black-hole are going to do at the
crash site.
None of those really sound like something
you want your neighbor keeping in their garage
either, I mean a propane tank for the grill
is one thing, a bunch of uranium rods or pebbles
is another.
Even metallic hydrogen is kinda something
you don’t want people keeping several tons
of nearby.
Beamed energy is nice in that regard, though
again we’ll save that for next time, and
ideally fusion is nice too, some hypothetical
compact aneutronic Mr. Fusion that just makes
power as fuel is added and can’t really
explode.
If we have that, then yes we’ve got something
that will let you keep your spaceplane in
your garage and wouldn’t have any problem
getting you right from there to Mars, especially
if it incorporated some fairly quiet vertical
takeoff system, and we have been getting good
at making helicopters quieter, usually at
a big cost in fuel efficiency and power, but
again, with fusion and with spacecraft power
requirements in general, that would be a minor
concern and would let you do the garage with
a top that opens up so you can fly off to
work, or the Moon.
Obviously, while spaceplanes might be in our
future, I wouldn’t be expecting to see spaceplane
dealerships opening up in every town anytime
soon.
I’d say in our lifetimes but I’d rather
expect we’d have life extension technology
before that, which always makes that expression
a bit dubious for discussing the far future.
So maybe one day we will get to have our own
private spaceplane in the garage we can just
take out for quick Sunday Drive to space and
back.
As we talked about the future of spaceplanes
today we talked a lot about the history of
aviation along the way, and it’s an amazing
topic both from and science & engineering
angle, and from the human one.
That pioneering perspective of flight, from
early propellers planes to rocketry, is truly
inspiring.
If you’d like to find out more about that,
try out the documentary “Pioneers in Aviation”
on Curiositystream, one of many great documentaries
they have available for viewing on that topic
and others.
Founded by John Hendricks, the founder of
the Discovery Channel, CuriosityStream is
the world’s first streaming service addressing
our lifelong quest to learn, explore, and
understand.
Curiosity Stream is a subscription streaming
service that offers over 2000 documentaries
and nonfiction titles from some of the world’s
best filmmakers, including exclusive originals.
You can get unlimited access starting at just
$2.99 a month, and for our audience, the first
30-days are completely free if you sign up
at curiositystream.com/isaacarthur during
the sign-up process.
So we were looking at ways to get off Earth
today and out into the solar system, and next
week we’ll be going to the edge of the solar
system to look at Colonizing Pluto, and we’ll
contemplate some colonization methods for
other large icy bodies in Kuiper Belt along
with effective double planets, like Pluto
essentially is with its largest moon.
The week after that, we’ll continue our
recent look at black hole technologies and
the civilizations around them by looking out
how they might defend themselves with black
holes, in Weaponizing Black Holes.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to support the channel,
visit our website to donate or look at some
of the SFIA merchandise you can get.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
