In some of our greatest wars on this world we have 
seen entire regions covered in fortifications,  
but in great wars across whole regions of our 
galaxy, could we see entire planets fortified? 
One of the common themes we have on 
this show is that a future out in the  
galaxy isn’t one where most people live 
on planets, but rather in space habitats  
or deep inside asteroids or smaller moons. 
While I was pondering the topic for today,  
of Fortress Worlds, which is an informal sequel 
to our Hive Worlds and Forge Worlds episodes,  
I found myself confronting some of 
the classic flaws of science fiction. 
We have two key ones to begin with, and the first 
is that in sci-fi we have these big galaxy wide  
wars in which a planet is a mere minor battlefield 
and is taken by a few thousands troops in a few  
days. In reality it would seem like a battle 
for a planet should require millions of troops,  
potentially billions, and might take years or 
even decades. The two world wars of last century  
give us some context. World War 1 was mostly 
confined to Europe and the neighboring regions  
of Africa and Asia, and even World War 2 had many 
neutral parties or those with low involvement,  
and yet they both lasted several years and claimed 
10 million soldiers’ lives in the first war,  
and 15 million in the second, with far 
more wounded in mind or body or both,  
and civilian casualties beyond any count. 
Estimates put the total number of troops  
mobilized for WW2 by all sides at 127 million.
It is easy for us to imagine that more high tech  
wars would have fewer forces involved, but in 
reality, more high tech civilizations can stand  
up an even larger percentage of their population 
as soldiers, keep them fed and equipped longer,  
and sustain far more people overall. A 1% 
mobilization of all humanity these days  
would equal 80 million people, and we would have 
little problem maintaining that indefinitely. 
Except, presumably, that an alien invader 
would be pounding our infrastructure into  
the dirt by orbital bombardment. Which brings 
up the second big flaw of science fiction when  
it comes to planetary invasions, and one 
we’ve analyzed before, and that’s the idea  
that a bunch of ships up in orbit enjoy some 
sort of tactical advantage over those below. 
Which is true enough but spaceships are 
by their nature pretty thin and small,  
even something the size of a mountain, as we 
sometimes see in scifi for very large battleships,  
is still hollow and needs vast energy to move 
around, and more for every inch of armor. Whereas  
there are a million actual mountains on Earth, and 
they’re not hollow, and they’re just tiny bumps on  
the planet's enormous surface. You can lob stuff 
down at that planet, and enjoy gravity aiding you,  
while it hurts any return fire from below, but 
Earth’s gravity and escape velocity are pretty  
minimal compared to even slow interstellar travel 
speeds and a thousand spaceships hurling munitions  
with an advantage of gravity probably doesn’t mean 
much against a million ground-based mega-cannons. 
We might imagine them nuking us from above, but 
why aren’t our own missiles carrying warheads up  
to nuke them too? Those ships would be more 
fragile than our planet is. Generally even  
a megaton warhead can’t reliably take out 
a modest bunker less than a kilometer from  
it’s impact site, and Earth’s surface area is 
half a billion square kilometers. That’s a lot  
of nukes and you would need more to penetrate 
deeper and tougher bunkers, and you would need  
one heck of a huge fleet to absorb half a 
billion megaton nukes detonating near you. 
Obviously in a lot of scenarios in sci fi, the 
situation involves us at the present level of  
technology trying to fight off some huge alien 
armada, but for today we’ll be assuming a conflict  
between forces with at least some degree of 
parity. If not equal in tech or resources,  
then no more unbalanced than we might see between 
a modern superpower and a smaller nation state,  
not what it would be like if an interstellar 
civilization came at us right now, where the  
comparison might be more like the combined might 
of NATO kicking in the door at a daycare facility. 
We discussed this in more detail along with making 
planetfall with a ground force, and why you would,  
rather nuking everything, back in this Summer’s 
episode Dropships, and what we saw is that there’s  
a lot of scenarios where you might be doing 
the planetfall invasion without having space  
and air superiority established. And that planet 
might not be able to just blow your fleet away  
because they are very likely to have thousands, 
if not millions of large orbital facilities,  
which themselves might range from very 
damage sensitive power collector arrays  
or civilian-filled O’Neill Cylinders to huge 
asteroids converted into defense stations that  
could shrug off direct nuclear strikes.
Those themselves would be an example of a  
fortress world, and trying to seize one would be 
a nightmare, invading through unknown thousands of  
miles of tunnels and vaults. One getting smashed 
to pieces in orbit is potentially a nightmare for  
either side too. An invasion fleet can blow all 
your orbitals to pieces, although those orbitals  
probably vastly out mass any incoming fleet 
and may have way more tonnage of weapons too,  
so they might wreck your fleet. But if that fleet 
wrecks them, not only have they destroyed that  
planet’s valuable orbital infrastructure, 
which they might need to rebuild later,  
but they have also put trillions of tons of 
hyper-velocity shrapnel in orbit. Shrapnel which  
will persist and hamper their invasion effort, in 
an extreme case of Kessler Syndrome, and possibly  
wreck their ships and drop ships, with each wreck 
adding to the shrapnel. The planet below is better  
protected from that, both by an atmosphere things 
can burn up in, and thick rock to hide under. 
And as soon as you wreck all their orbital 
infrastructure they can start launching  
nukes at your fleet wholesale, which will be 
at top speed when they enter the debris zone  
and only there for a few minutes or even 
seconds, and thus are far less likely to  
be damaged by that debris then your fleet is.
So an invasion fleet and the defender both have  
good reason not to go crazy with the Super-WMD 
options. It’s not as effective as it sounds like,  
even if scorched Earth is okay with you. But 
that also means that you can be contemplating  
landing wave after wave of troops and decoy 
dropships, again see that episode for details. 
I should probably note that some kilometers 
long battlecruiser could also potentially be  
housing a hundred million shock troops, or huge 
tanks, mecha, or machine-minds in killbots. The  
volume of your typical sci-fi spaceship is often 
ludicrous to its mission and crew size. The Galaxy  
Class Starship, the USS Enterprise-D had somewhere 
around 10 million square feet or a million square  
meters of decks, and a crew of a thousand, 
several times the area of an aircraft carrier,  
which is far more packed since it has several 
times the crew. But when you consider options  
like stasis pods and food replicators, 
that ship might cram in a lot more crew,  
and the big ships we see in Warhammer 40,000, from 
which we’re borrowing the terms Fortress World,  
Hive World, and Forge World, ought to be able to 
pack millions of soldiers into one of those ships. 
Which is a long way of saying that there’s both 
potential motivation for a ground invasion and  
a realistic scenario for dumping tens of 
millions of invaders down the gravity well. 
But let’s take this a step further, and consider 
two other scenarios. First, to look at how a  
planet might be a warzone inside something like a 
Kardashev-2, Dyson-Swarm civilization. And second,  
how we might see a multi-generational war 
being conducted on a planet as it fortified,  
as well as a second attempt down the road after 
the invaders lost and coming back to that world  
a few generations later with another battlehost.
Now our first case is fairly straightforward to  
contemplate. We often imagine our solar system 
maybe a few millenia hence as the de facto center  
of a loose knit group of colonies spread over 
maybe a couple hundred light years by then,  
which would include somewhere around 100,000 star 
systems like our own, but probably only a handful  
of which would yet be sporting populations 
in the billions. Alternatively back here  
in the Sol System, Earth might have several 
trillion people living on and in orbit of it,  
with trillions more spread around the asteroid 
belt and all the various minor planets. 
This may be one happy empire of peace and love or 
it might be a million nations, many of which were  
scores of loosely aligned space habitats whose 
capital was a skyscraper-embassy on Earth with  
a smaller ground area than Vatican City. Earth 
might have thousands of nations of billions of  
citizens living on it, and ten times that number 
of little microstates on the ground that were each  
representing some interstellar colony system or 
some multi-billion person asteroid mining kingdom. 
That is not a place you want to be trying to pound 
your enemy into the ground with nukes or even  
artillery, when collateral damage might provoke a 
war with some empire of a billion souls. It sounds  
like a place for commando squads and urban-combat 
equipped infantry but we should keep in mind that  
still doesn’t imply hundreds of troops. The 
Vesta Compact of Asteroid Colonies, population  
one trillion, might try dropping a hundred million 
soldiers into the Arcology Cantons of Switzerland,  
5000 AD, and if you thought invading modern 
Switzerland was a nightmare, it’s got nothing on  
what Vesta’s stormtroopers faced. Numerous though 
they are, they’d have been wiped out if they  
weren’t already highly-trained in fighting inside 
tight tunnels in floating mountains in space. 
But what do we mean by fortified? And does this 
really only apply if the enemy isn’t using heavy  
artillery, orbital bombardment, and nukes?
In truth, no. Because an entire planet could  
be done up in trenches and bunkers like 
we saw during the World Wars and while  
mega-fortifications like the Maginot Line 
tend to get mocked as having not worked,  
it doesn’t really invalidate the idea or mean 
it wouldn’t have worked with some modifications,  
including extension to the entire land border.
There’s a ton of books and videos discussing  
World War 2 and most mention the Maginot Line 
but the one paragraph summary was that the French  
built it on the German Border between World 
War 1 and 2 and it was a daunting series of  
fortifications that no one sane would attack. 
It had underground railways for resupply of  
heavily fortified defense bunkers, and would 
be fairly resistant even to nuclear strikes. 
Most of my time in the Army was spent in artillery 
and infantry roles, and I was stationed in Germany  
for a lot of it, so armchair quarterbacking those 
wars was a common hobby in the barracks and yes,  
modern forces have some advantages there. 
Our weapons are very accurate, so we could  
drop a laser dot on a gunport of a bunker with 
a recon troop or drone and put guided missiles  
or artillery shells right through the window to 
get everyone, where a shell exploding right on  
it would just crack some concrete and rebar, but 
there are tons of way to screw with those sorts  
or technologies. But there’s plenty more. Smoke, 
your own lasers tricking the guidance package,  
GPS jamming, point defense systems, armored 
glass or just not having windows, and many more. 
The conclusion being that yes, we could 
wreck the Maginot Line in a direct attack,  
unless we were defending it and had some prep 
time too. Which is kind of the point, wars between  
roughly equal powers tend not to happen unless 
one side thinks it has some unbeatable edge,  
which also often has an expiration date before the 
other side finds out and figures out a counter,  
and so they go to war while they have this 
edge. No sane army fights another army that’s  
vaguely equal, that’s the first rule of warfare 
after all, never pick on someone your own size. 
This is especially true if they’re on the defense, 
had prep time, and have fortified the place. If  
that’s the case, go find another hobby for 
a few generations. If your enemy has built  
an invincible fortress, let them stay inside 
it, digging them out tends to be expensive. 
Of course, sometimes the attacked might 
feel they really need that symbolic win,  
and a lot of the times it made sense historically, 
they just lacked the full picture. Meat Grinders  
like Stalingrad come to mind, but even 
where strategic interests might be mistaken,  
they might really need that place as it’s their 
religious holy land or the current regime swore  
they’d take it back during their rise to power, 
or maybe it’s their traditional homeland. 
People might go to extreme lengths to 
retake that, or defend that, and that  
could be something like your whole population 
being willing to live as brains in jars in huge  
and efficient underground vaults, where they 
remotely pilot robots in industry and battle,  
or can be manually installed into them too. 
Everyone’s body might be on ice for eventual  
restoration when rationing ends – your brain would 
need roughly a tenth the daily calories you do.  
Indeed you might freeze the surplus population 
till then, it’s a very low energy process to  
maintain someone that way, and then your kids can 
– in theory at least – awaken to a time of peace  
and prosperity after the war. Those soldiers who 
die in it still don’t get to raise their kids,  
but the survivors get to return and thaw them 
out without missing any of that time with them. 
You might not need them to grow up to be 
soldiers, as you might use brain-scanning  
to replace your losses or be able to infinitely 
repair and regenerate your brains in jars in  
armored vaults. One day your citizens will 
re-awaken to a world free of war and rebuilt  
into a paradise, until then they’re safe.
And this need not be a war either, you may  
be fortified against an expected supernova of 
a neighboring star, or have decided to flee  
your own solar system and fortified your planet 
up to survive the eternal night of interstellar  
travel for a ten thousand year journey to a 
safe system, as your own star goes red giant,  
and when you arrive you unfreeze and 
rebuild. See our planet ships episode  
for how to go about moving an entire planet.
Now let’s consider an entire planet that’s  
been invaded, and in an environment where it’s 
part of a larger empire and under attack from  
another empire that’s willing and able to 
throw so many waves of troops at it that  
you could make a literal mountain out 
of their bodies. Which, incidentally,  
would tend to imply around a trillion bodies, 
more than a hundred times as many humans as  
currently alive and ten times the estimated 
human population over our entire history. 
Or a trillion war robots or cloned soldiers or 
androids with uploaded minds of super-soldiers  
on them. We’re not using actual 19th and 20th 
century soldiers in this even if the scenarios  
hearken to those conflicts. You can’t assume 
your nerve gas bombs or virus attacks are going  
to do anything to the enemy’s cyborg armies 
– see that episode for details – or regular  
humans in power armor. Or genetically 
engineered superhumans in power armor. 
And since we’re heavily borrowing from Warhammer 
today already – not to mention everyone from Terry  
Pratchett to Iain M Banks, let’s talk about the 
Planet Krieg for a moment. It’s one of many worlds  
in the fictional 40k universe that was never 
a great place to live on in the first place,  
but at one point Krieg had a rebellion from the 
wider Imperium and a counter-attack by loyalists,  
when they found out that reinforcements from 
abroad weren’t coming any time soon, and was  
basically ‘launch all missiles’. This reduced 
the planet to a toxic and radioactive hellscape,  
after which the Imperium assumed everyone was dead 
and didn’t bother investigating further till they  
got a signal 500 years later saying the rebels 
were finally dead and they wanted to join back up. 
In reality the two sides still had quite a lot 
of survivors after the doomsday event, especially  
their soldiers, many of whom had enough warning 
to get to bunkers, and now they were obsessed  
with killing each other off. Everybody fought in 
hazmat gear, never taking off their gas masks,  
and had carved out more and more underground 
facilities and factories for making guns and  
ammo. They grow the whole population in tubes 
since the lifestyle there doesn’t lend itself  
to long healthy lives, fertility, and safe 
childbearing, and their soldiers are basically  
indoctrinated on the idea that they live only for 
war, will do anything to win it, and that dying  
for the cause is a nice consolation prize.
This violates the first rule of warfare,  
which reminds us that the goal of soldiers is not 
to die for their country, but to get the enemy to  
die for theirs. So if your enemy is willing to die 
for their cause, you provide assistance with that  
goal, and since this usually involves crazed 
fanaticism, it generally isn't great compared  
to level-headed professionalism. Nonetheless the 
Death Corps of Krieg, as they are rightly named,  
excel at storming fortifications and surviving 
physically and mentally crushing battlefield  
conditions since that’s basically 
their whole planet and recent history. 
Could you do that?
Well, yes, I’ve worn gas masks  
for hours at a time in the Army and they’re worse 
than the ones most everybody wore during Covid,  
but probably something you can adjust to, and 
that’s assuming nobody came up with something  
more comfortable. But hazmat suits, space suits, 
and body armor have a lot of points of overlap,  
they all do each other’s job to some degree. 
After all, thicker armor is more radiation  
shielding and less air leakage out, or toxins 
from an external and dangerous environment. 
Also, it is very plausible that battle 
armor and spacesuits of the future would  
be ultra-comfortable affairs with built 
in heating and cooling, sweat collection,  
and crystal-clear audio and video, all with an 
internal power supply and strength reinforcing  
exoskeleton. We discussed that, along with the 
cybernetic approach, in our episode Cyborg Armies,  
and there’s a lot of options for keeping folks 
sane in conditions like that. Or at least, a  
decent approximation of sanity for the purpose of 
carrying on in a conflict. For instance, you don’t  
need a muddy trench full of rotting matter and 
waste, a metal vault would work better and could  
be kept clean by elbow grease and robots even if 
you’re restricted on AI use to modern levels. It  
could even have showers, comfortable lighting, and 
a decent bed, with access to vast archives of data  
and entertainment even if the internet went down.
Or potentially entire libraries of virtual  
realities, for entertainment and training, 
because if you’ve got good VR it’s likely to be  
invaluable for not just entertainment but skills 
and combat training, as well psychological  
assessment and treatment. I suspect there are a 
lot of folks who would be able to handle years of  
trench warfare if most of their time was spent 
in such a vault. So too, even ignoring the use  
of artificial intelligence for scanning an area 
with cameras and other sensors, and for picking  
out and aiming at targets, a big fortress network 
with lots of redundant and buried lines can  
have a lot of its sentinels and monitors way back 
from the front and operating remotely, so that  
forces on hand might be principally for repelling 
attacks till reinforcements arrive and providing  
redundancy for power or communication failures.
So much depends on the technology available,  
but for instance, while it would be awesome to 
have compact fusion reactors, any modest bunker  
could comfortably and safely run on an internal 
fission reactor and as we’ve covered elsewhere,  
if you’re comfortable using breeder reactors 
then any given planet has a very large and  
long-term fuel supply of uranium and thorium. 
Given that it’s a fortress environment,  
I’m thinking concern over nuclear proliferation 
is out the window, though I suppose they might  
be even more concerned about it than we are. 
Nothing like having your whole civilization inside  
fallout shelters to make one passionate about 
nuclear safety… or casually indifferent to it. 
But a fortress planet hardly needs to be a 
garbage heap, as compelling as World War 1  
trench environments are from history, and for 
fiction and storytelling, there’s no reason  
why you might not be having grass lawns and 
gardens all over your bunkers, especially if  
your fortifications were not built on the fly.
So too, if you have options like fusion power,  
even just basic deuterium fusion, then your 
underground facilities or hollowed out mountains  
can be both immense and green. You can grow 
food in underground hydroponics or even in  
elaborate gardens. And anyone fortifying an 
entire planet has some experience with such  
technology because it’s the default way almost 
every space colony got started, and you’re not  
having planetary invasions if you haven’t got a 
lot of space colonies already. We’ll be looking  
at options for Domes on Mars in a few weeks and 
one of the concerns there is always how fragile  
a dome is. And as we’ll see, it is entirely 
plausible the thing might be made out of diamond  
or other super strong materials, so that they 
survive meteor strikes or heavy-caliber gunfire. 
Even then you’re often going to want the 
protection of thick cheap rock and regolith  
overhead and in low gravity environments it’s 
very easy to dig out and buttress chambers bigger  
than a football field and light them like a 
normal day. Depending on automation levels,  
you might put domes made of diamond in a crater 
on some airless planet or moon and put huge blast  
doors over it instead of bulldozing tons of dirt 
over top in event of an impending attack. After  
all, a blast shield that can rotate over your 
dome sure is handy for any number of reasons,  
and on colder planets you could pump water 
or mud into the space between the doors and  
dome and let it freeze as extra cheap armor.
There’s an anime called Evangelion, best known  
for its giant mecha and very strange ending, where 
giant alien invaders keep trying to attack Tokyo  
specifically, and so all the buildings can retract 
down underground during these attacks to keep  
people safe. When I first saw that I thought 
it was crazy but when I considered it more,  
it actually is a doable approach and one that 
would fit well with options we’ve discussed  
elsewhere. For instance, we talk about how space 
habitats can move in their entirety if they don’t  
like their neighbors, but could also have plots 
or docks, like a marina for houseboats only for  
spaceship houses, where people attach their home 
to the outside hull and pop their house into the  
habitat, and can be retracted if they want to 
leave and be replaced by a new immigrant. But  
anyone with that setup and concerns of hostile 
actions might modify and piggyback that system  
so that everything withdrew into the ground 
for safety if there was a big hull breach or  
attack. Massive automation and AI leaves a lot of 
options open which would otherwise seem absurd. 
One of which is that people might be leading 
normal lives while trillions of battlebots and a  
relative handful of soldiers are engaging in huge 
land battles nearby. Safe in their underground  
bunkers with huge vaulting spaces and beautiful if 
artificial land, sea, and sky. Indeed this may be  
the normal life of an asteroid colony, of which 
we may have hundreds of thousands by the turn  
of the millennia. And it is worth remembering that 
proximity and stress are related more by a feeling  
of it than the physical reality, so a war on the 
other side of the planet nowadays doesn’t feel  
terribly proximate to us, in a sense of seriously 
disrupting our day to day lives, even if the news  
gives it center stage. A battle of the bots up 
above being fought mostly by AI and humans who  
are there remotely or as uploaded and backed up 
brain copies might not stop folks leading their  
normal lives, given that we often succeed in 
some normality even while living in a war zone. 
It is almost inherent to space settlement that 
they be built fairly fortified against attack as  
they essentially exist in a hostile environment to 
begin with, and many planets like Earth will still  
begin the same because terraforming a planet so 
people can comfortably live there is a process of  
many, many generations, even if that world is very 
Earthlike in lighting, gravity, and composition.  
They are bunkers, they are airlocked at every door 
and covered in thick layers of protectants. They  
are connected by large underground tubes and 
corridors, at least as soon as anyone finally  
makes a good robotic tunneling device. So too, big 
industrial worlds not only have the resources to  
rapidly fortify, but would likely already 
include a lot of fortifications or easily  
converted facilities. We see this with the planet 
Armageddon, another place in the 40k setting,  
that’s an industrial Titan folks fight over, on 
and off for 10,000 years too which is part of how  
it got the name change to Armageddon from Ullanor.
One thing common in sieges that is unlikely in  
any of these worlds would be a need for 
outside food production, though you could  
have planets that were nothing but farms and 
exported to such planets, so-called Agriworlds,  
that will be the next episode in this 
series. As we noted in Hive Worlds,  
even without extreme compaction technologies, 
the amount of food someone needs to eat in a  
year ought to easily fit inside a cubic meter and 
mass under a ton, even less if heavily dehydrated. 
A place expecting to be attacked and fortifying 
up could have huge underground stockpiles of food  
imported in advance, like a castle stocking up, 
and even 1 cubic kilometer would then contain  
enough food for a billion people for a year. 
Mount Everest, hollowed out, would be over  
a thousand cubic kilometers, enough for a trillion 
people for a year, and again it is one of roughly  
one million mountains, albeit the largest. Earth’s 
oceans alone have over a billion cubic kilometers,  
if that helps clarify the scale here. And it could 
be dual purpose spaces too. You could have backup  
supply tunnels between your cities just packed 
with extra food to be removed if you needed that  
corridor, or you could convert storage facilities 
into hydroponic or manufacturing facilities. 
I don’t think it would be that crazy to 
imagine converting entire mountains into  
huge gun emplacements, or having your command 
and control live on deep sea subs that prowled  
the ocean to make it hard for the enemy to launch 
a decapitation strike. We saw that in the film  
Terminator: Salvation, and it made a good deal of 
sense even if much of the rest of the film didn’t,  
though for the record, I liked that film.
Indeed on some worlds the surface area might  
be entirely under the sea, with no land not 
covered under kilometers of ocean, and that  
makes for one heck of fortification all on its 
own, especially if it’s got floating icebergs you  
can be using as surface bases and hiding arsenals 
of surface to orbit nuclear missiles in or under. 
Here's a few final quick examples 
to contemplate as we close out: 
On Europa, submarine cities a kilometer wide 
prowl the subsurface ocean while skinny tube  
installations pierce through its ten 
kilometer deep surface shell of ice,  
connecting the various Jovian-Galilean nations 
around Jupiter to the people of those oceans.  
The Subeuropaians are human-originated 
genetically engineered mermen and mermaids,  
and the trade cartels of Europa’s ice cylinders 
defend themselves from Galilean pirates and  
mermen raiders on both sides of the ice, and 
each tube is a long helix of downward ramps  
and stairs whose corridors also spin to give extra 
gravity to augment Europa’s own. They can rapidly  
reassemble into a maze to fool invaders and spies. 
Intelligence estimates say each of those ice-path  
cylinders has over 10,000 gun emplacements inside, 
spread roughly every 100 meters, at each airlock,  
and any given 100 meter segment can be rapidly 
flooded with water, or voided to space. 
At Gamma Crucis, a red giant 88 light years 
from earth in the direction of Alpha Centauri,  
the rebel government is said to keep its base 
inside a reflective tungsten shell inside the  
star's upper atmosphere. Inside it uses tungsten 
sails to cause it to randomly walk around that  
volume, arriving at prepared coordinates 
that its allies in the comet belt know  
so that they can fire near-relativistic 
supplies pods to them for capture. 
The subarctic colonies on Triton used to fund 
their expansion by using large rail guns to  
fire pods of ice and other volatiles to the inner 
system habitats needing supplies of air and water,  
many of those have now been converted into 
enormous space guns under the ice which  
slowly bore their way through like worms in an 
apple and have secret positions as a result,  
but can quickly melt to the surface to fire 
building size ordinance at invaders before  
retreating to the ice. The Guns are so enormous 
that their defense is countless bunkers built  
along the outside of the barrels, which also house 
a significant civilian population of entire towns. 
The old near asteroid mine of Eros was converted 
to a research lab after it was mined out,  
with over ten thousand kilometers of abandoned 
tunnels and storage facilities. The facility was  
quarantined after the technorganic lab experiments 
inside escaped, many of which look like monsters,  
even demons. Because the data inside is 
considered invaluable, strike teams of  
marines have been sent in to recover them, 
and everyone of them met their doom inside. 
Earth in the year 5000 AD is the capital of an 
empire controlling almost half the solar system  
and nearly a tenth of interstellar colonies, 
it’s been repeatedly attacked over the years,  
but any attempted invasion first must fight its 
way through the one million O’Neill Cylinders and  
like number of smaller asteroid converted into 
defense installations. Use of WMDs in or near  
Earth, humanity’s homeworld, or interfering 
with pilgrimages by those wishing to visit,  
violate treaties signed by nearly every nation 
in the settled regions of the galaxy. The last  
invasion attempt utilized 100 trillion marines, 
kept on ice from their home world, to seize  
enough fortification and habitats to serve as a 
beachhead to land at an orbital ring. They then  
managed to fight successfully down almost three 
thousand levels of an attached space tower before  
finally being defeated, 127 years after they 
first struck into Cislunar space. There are over  
a hundred smaller but significant invasions 
that occurred during this period as well. 
And lastly, in the sprawling megalopolis of 
Oberon, which is built into a pocket universe,  
attackers have to come through corridors which 
are impossible to map in just 3 Dimensions,  
where up and down change, and where time can 
flow strangely. There are after all, a lot  
of ways to fortify a place, and if you can make 
it unassailable to its neighbors by removing it  
from normal spacetime, that’s as good an option as 
hiding between galaxies, inside the event horizons  
of black holes, or at the end of the Universe.
One thing seems sure, as long as there’s  
people there will be conflict, and as long as 
there’s conflict there is a need for defense,  
and who knows what clever techniques for 
fortifying a world the future will offer us?
So we were talking about engineering and 
fortification today and one of my favorite  
things to do as a kid was to build, out of 
blocks, on paper, and sometimes just in my  
imagination if nothing else was to hand. There’s 
nothing like handson, interactive learning that  
way and it's one of the things I instantly loved 
about Upper Story’s new game, Spintronics. It’s  
a chance to learn about electricity through 
building and connecting gears, meaning you  
get to learn both in a fun and intuitive 
way that circuit diagrams just don't allow. 
Spintronics has wonderful gear equivalents of 
all electronic components that you can quickly  
and easily stick in place with magnets. 
My kids loved playing it with me and have  
steadily requested it since I first brought it 
out, and even in a short time have learned a  
lot. I also love that the instructions and 
puzzles aren’t just a boring pamphlet but  
a steampunk-themed graphic novel about a young 
clockmaster learning an alternative technology,  
electricity. There’s a clear dedication to quality 
design and craftsmanship from Upper Story about  
every level of the game that I truly appreciate.
As we go into the holiday season,  
if you’re looking for a fun and hands on 
educational gift for your family or friends,  
something that can be played in a group or 
solo, adults or kids, use the link in the  
episode description upperstory.com/spintronics to 
learn more, and don’t forget to use coupon code  
ISAACARTHUR at checkout to save 10% on your order.
So we’re done for today but join us this Sunday  
for our end of the month Livestream Q&A, on the 
29th. Then we’ll start November by visiting the  
idea of Rebel Space Colonies so often contemplated 
in scifi and futurism and exploring what they  
might be like. Then it will be time for our 3 
hour long episode: The Fermi Paradox Compendium  
of Terms & Solutions on November 9th. We’ll follow 
that on November 12th, with our Scifi Sunday,  
where we’ll discuss Human-Alien hybrids, like the 
famous Half-Vulcan, half-human science officer  
Spock from Star Trek, and we’ll ask if they 
could exist and even live long and prosper.  
Then we’ll head to Mars to look at using Domes 
and what they’ll be like and how we’ll build them. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
