This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. Get 
access to my streaming video service, Nebula,  
when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
The concept of folding space has been suggested 
as a means of traveling throughout our Universe  
faster than light, but what happens when you start 
putting creases in the parchment of reality?
 
Welcome to another Scifi Sunday here on Science 
and Futurism with Isaac Arthur, where we let our  
hair down a bit on scientific realism, put 
our Vulcan ears on, and explore concepts in  
science fiction to see how likely they are and 
how something similar might come about if not.  
So grab a drink and snack and let’s get to it.
Today we’ll be continuing our long running Faster  
Than Light, FTL Travel and communication series, 
by looking at the concept of Folding Space.  
This is a means of travel that’s been proposed 
in fiction quite a lot, probably most famously  
in Frank Herbert’s legendary Dune series, although 
few details are given there and not always  
consistently. Indeed as is often the case with FTL 
systems in science fiction, since they are usually  
a footnote to permit the story’s plot not the plot 
itself, details are often scarce and conflicting.
 
The basic form of folding space is that 
it is instantaneous travel – something  
even wormholes don’t really offer, 
being shortcuts not total bypasses,  
and indeed ones that might require months or 
even years for many models, not mere moments.  
This is accomplished by bringing two 
points together rather than speeding  
the trip up between them, it is the assertion 
that the shortest distance between two points  
isn’t a straight line, or geodesic, but rather 
that it's no distance at all, that it’s zero.
 
The analogy given is that if I draw points A and 
B on a piece of paper, I can draw any number of  
lines between them, but if I fold that sheet so 
A and B touch, then they are at the same place.  
This is folding space. And again this is not how 
a wormhole works, even though folks will often  
demonstrate it this way, fold the two points 
over and poke a hole through with a pencil.  
Indeed that’s exactly the analogy used by Dr. 
Weir in the film Event Horizon, though the film  
instead utilizes the concept of hyperspace, going 
through some other place to shorten your trip,  
rather than no space at all. In the case of 
that film, that other place is literally hell,  
which we also see with the Warp in Warhammer 
40k and why fans of both often joke that Event  
Horizon is the unofficial prequel to 40k. So 
yes on the paper analogy, even boring through,  
but folding space isn’t supposed 
to involve a long wormhole passage  
or diversion through a different type of space.
I’m not sure what you’re supposed to be boring  
through either. See our wormholes episode for more 
discussion of how those work but they’re parallel  
to folding space in that the analogy is if I have 
a balloon with an A and B printed somewhere on the  
surface, I can squeeze that balloon at those two 
points until they touch. This involves distorting  
the whole balloon in both those regions until they 
stretch enough to touch, essentially now a long  
tunnel, or wormhole. But folding space itself 
usually implies no distortion, it's finding a  
topology where those two points already touch and 
we’ll come back to what topology is in a moment.
 
One of my favorite fantasy series, indeed my long 
running favorite, is the Wheel of Time by Robert  
Jordan and ironically I became aware it had a 
tv series version coming out at the end of the  
week this episode premieres on and got to see 
the trailer while taking a break from writing  
this episode. I’ve no idea if the TV version 
will be any good, fingers crossed, but the  
books are excellent in many respects and one of 
the reasons is that the author, Robert Jordan,  
was a physicist by training, and tended to keep 
his magic in the series very rules-constrained,  
a habit he shares with his posthumous 
successor Brandon Sanderson, thinking through  
the consequences and additional uses, same as we 
encourage folks to do when making up new science  
and technology in science fiction. 
Keeping the spoilers minimal,  
we find out that there’s basically three similar 
but distinct magic systems in the setting,  
the polar opposites saidar and saidin, the female 
and male halves of normal magic, called the One  
Power in spite of the dichotomy, and True Power 
as its called, which is basically magic for the  
setting’s Devil equivalent, the Dark One. 
In the novels he’d often explain how an  
effect was happening and that each of the three 
systems did it so differently that they couldn’t  
teach each other. Their form of instantaneous 
travel, long lost, and simply called “Traveling”  
used three different methods. We’re first shown 
a weaker form that involves stepping into some  
other place, traveling there, and coming 
back, called Skimming, and this is another  
hyperspace example like we looked at in the 
Edge of the Universe episode sometime back. 
 
But then we’ve got the genuine instant transport 
methods, through what they call a gateway.  
We’re told that the one system does this by 
boring a hole through the pattern of reality,  
whereas it’s opposite power system does this 
by creating a similarity between the two places  
instead. The True Power demonic version seems to 
just rip that origin location out of reality then  
cram it into the destination spot like some 
parasitic graft of two chunks of spacetime  
forcing reality to scab over the injury. And 
indeed destroying reality itself is shown  
to be a major goal of the chief bad guy of that 
series and we see it degrade throughout the tale.
 
Now besides it being a series I love that’s 
coming out in TV form soon, and wanting some other  
popular reference besides Dune, I mention Wheel 
of Time because it does call out the multiple ways  
space folding occurs. You’ve got three completely 
different methods that would imply three entirely  
different sets of physical laws. First we get the 
‘we said space folding but really meant hyperspace  
or wormholes’ that we see with Skimming and some 
other alternate reality travel in the series,  
then we get the various ways folks tend 
to analogize the concept of space folding.  
Essentially, boring a hole through space after 
folding it together, folding it by creating  
similarities in the places, and just bypassing 
the notion of folding by just ripping chunks  
out of space and stuffing them elsewhere.
It's fantasy but it’s also highlighting how  
these approaches get used in scifi. Scifi settings 
often allow many different methods of FTL travel,  
Star Trek did this a lot and we see it in 
many tech trees of 4x Space Empire games,  
but each hypothetical FTL method we have is 
based around assuming the laws of physics  
work in a specific way, and if they don’t, it 
doesn't work, and if they do it does but those  
other FTL methods don’t. It’s not a smorgasbord 
of options, it is a collection of possibilities,  
one of which would be true, not all, 
and honestly I doubt any of them are.
 
Now I think we need to take a moment to discuss 
topology. Topology is a math term that sounds very  
impressive, but in many ways it's just the study 
of the tops of things, or how the properties of  
surface areas and other geometric objects are 
preserved even when you warp or deform them.  
As a quick example, if we ignore 3 dimensions and 
only think about the surface of the piece of paper  
or a balloon, then twisting or smushing 
these doesn’t mean the folks moving around  
their surfaces have a different map to travel. 
Same as if you took a paper map of Earth and  
folded it up like some Origami bird, the various 
roads on that map between cities still run there.  
It doesn’t matter how warped it is, the towns next 
to mine when its flat are still next to mine when  
they are twisted, but it might be that if I could 
leave the 2D sheet of paper, like by traveling  
through some higher Third Dimension, I could reach 
another continent where it was folded near me  
but not touching. And if it was touching, then 
bam, closest distance between two points is zero.
 
How I switch between them, these two points 
on a surface folded to touch each other, is  
rather tricky. I can poke a hole through, or I can 
meld the two together. Now in topology you don’t  
get to open holes, close holes, tear the surface, 
glue it together, or make it pass through itself,  
so generally any discussion of folding space is 
already outside of the basic topological laws.  
This is not limited to two-dimensional surfaces 
either, those are just the easy examples,  
and it’s another place we get the notion of 
looking at reality as a three-dimensional  
surface of a 4-Dimensional object from. 
This is also where we get the concept of manifolds  
from in the context of weird spacetime-thingies in 
scifi. Both the line and the circle are examples  
of topological manifolds, usually deemed the 
easiest and second easiest examples incidentally.  
Parabolas and Hyperbolas are too, and a square 
is not a basic manifold because it has corners,  
and to over simplify a bit, sharp corners are 
mathematically tricky, akin to singularities in  
general. Now a singularity in math is any point 
where a mathematical object is not defined,  
and thus tends to represent paradoxical 
behavior compared to the normal on that object,  
often the Universe at large. 
Take a string, ignoring it’s thickness,  
and you have a line or one-dimensional 
manifold, drop it on the floor so it  
curls into a heap and now you’ve got a bunch of 
singularities wherever one segment of the rope  
intersects another. And as you might guess, this 
connection is poorly defined, in one-dimension.  
But it's just fine in two or three, where you 
can imagine some insect walking along the rope,  
now that it's curled up, being able to jump over 
a lot of rope by just going between two places  
where it intersects. This is why higher-dimensions 
are so vital to so many cosmological models,  
adding them helps get around apparent 
singularities or paradoxes in 3 dimensions.
 
But when we try to bring this into the 
actual universe, it gets a bit tricky,  
you get those paradoxes. We’ve folded bits of 
paper together, and that works fine in 3D space,  
but it doesn’t in 2D space and folding 
the Universe doesn’t work well in 3D.  
What’s the spot look like? Ir it a big rip 
in reality? Is it a similarity and if so,  
do we have to make two places identical to 
move them together like that? Imagine for  
the moment the sheet of paper only this time 
instead of an A or B I put two colored dots,  
red and blue. If I dab them on and touch them 
together, are they going to naturally merge to be  
purple together? Is blue ink going to run onto 
the white paper around it? Do I need to have folks  
at both sides adding more red or blue ink to each 
spot until they match in color? Do I need to make  
the red and blue dot exactly the same shade of 
purple and if I did, would that form my gateway?
 
And these are basically the logical 
loopholes going into space folding.  
But there’s another two. It takes energy to fold 
a sheet of paper, real actual energy and if you do  
it with something like a sheet of metal you will 
feel the metal warm up as you fold it, until it  
breaks from too much of it. And both that energy 
usage and possibly breakage come up in discussion  
of space folding too. How much energy does it take 
to fold the entire Universe? Presumably a lot.  
I mean we can bend space and time, very literally, 
and it takes a lot of energy. We also know there’s  
a lot of energy in a given chunk of spacetime 
too. Under the upper limit of the Cosmological  
Constant, there’s a nanojoule of energy in a 
cubic meter of free space, as vacuum energy.
 
That should seem fine, since cramming two cubic 
kilometers of empty space together to move a ship  
from one to another would require only 1 joule of 
energy from each to be merged, assuming it was a  
true vacuum. I’m not sure we could ignore the mass 
energy of all the dust and gas in that volume,  
or even of that ship, and some multi-megaton 
spaceship is carrying hundreds of trillions of  
trillions of joules of energy, not one or two.
But that’s at the upper limit in the Cosmological  
Constant, and this is where we need to discuss 
vacuum energy. Because a joule per cubic  
kilometer is the vacuum energy of space under the 
Cosmological constant, or even less than that.  
However, there’s a mismatch with what’s 
predicted from Quantum Field Theory,  
originally we thought it might be 
120 orders of magnitude higher, a  
trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion  
times higher, though newer modeling 
suggest the degree of mismatch  
is only 60 orders of magnitude, a mere 
trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion  
times higher. Which for perspective, if 
true, would mean that Quantum energies  
in the vacuum contained all the mass energy 
of our entire sun squeezed into a spot about  
the size of a football stadium. Which is 
much better than all of it squeezed into  
something the size of an atom that the previous 
mismatch had, but still seems absurdly dense,  
and indeed still would be dense enough that such 
a sphere would instantly turn into a black hole.
 
Of course it isn’t just this single spot, it's 
everywhere, so no collapse to singularity I  
suppose. But this prediction under Quantum Field 
Theory, either the 120 or 60 magnitude version,  
is the reason why Vacuum Energy is considered 
so potentially awesome in scifi. The idea of  
folding two such spots on top of each other, and 
possibly causing one of those two sets of quantum  
energy to spring out, is not considered out of the 
question and would be quite the doomsday weapon.  
Possibly universally too, this is akin 
to the notion of false vacuum collapse  
which is considered one theoretical model for 
the Universe being destroyed. Indeed in Brane  
Cosmology – a cousin of string theory – our 
universe is on a brane, short for membrane,  
a three dimensional object in a higher dimensional 
space known as “The Bulk” and gravity is weaker  
than the other forces because it can leak into the 
Bulk, and in this topology-rich theory, branes,  
with different universes on them, can touch 
and intersect and even collide. Think Big Bang,  
and that would specifically be the Ekpyrotic 
model, though there’s some others too.
 
Needless to say, Brane Cosmology does permit 
the notion of warping a brane – or folding  
space – and if you want to delve into the math 
of how, this does come down to manifolds again,  
especially Calabi-Yau Manifolds. I’m noted 
for my dislike for String Theory which I  
suspect tends to make me bad at explaining 
it, and probably understanding it too,  
so I’ll attach a lecture from David Morrison 
on the matter. Nutshell form though, since we  
tend to assume this whole setup is the reason or 
origin for how gravity and dark energy behave,  
and since those both involve stretching or 
compacting spacetime, we deduce it may be  
possible to artificially fold space this way. 
The concern, of course, is that the point of  
connection or boring through, whichever, 
might be rather explosive. I will also  
note that this permits travel to other manifolds 
and branes i.e. Universes – and time travel too.  
It also potentially makes for 
an unbelievable power source,  
and again that’s the basis for vacuum or zero 
point energy, different but parallel concepts.
 
Now the notion spacetime holds a single lone joule 
per cubic kilometer is much less interesting,  
barely enough to lift a cup of coffee, the true 
fuel that runs this show, but it would still make  
for a lot of energy if we had to bend it and doing 
so required using parallel amounts of energy.  
As an example, a light year is around 10 
trillion kilometers long and a cubic light year,  
10 trillion cubed or 10^39 cubic kilometers or 
10^39 joules of spacetime energy, this is the Mass  
Energy of our entire Moon, and the Sun’s total 
energy output for one hundred thousand years.  
It’s ten million times the energy 
needed to rip Earth apart. 
 
And that’s just one cubic light year, our 
galaxy would contain trillions of times that  
and the Observable Universe would be about 10^32 
cubic light years, for something on an order of  
10^71 joules of energy, non-coincidentally 
that’s pretty parallel to the mass energy of  
the entire Universe. Keep in mind this is the 
Cosmological Constant values for vacuum energy,  
the quantum field theory ones, even 
the conservative 60 orders of magnitude  
higher version, do not require interstellar 
volumes to get to Universal levels of energy.  
This is part of why we can discuss setting 
of micro big bangs and bottled universes.
 
It's hard to say how much energy it talks to fold 
space in this Universe so two distant points of  
it touch, but considering we have to move an 
entire sheet of paper to fold it, moving an  
entire Universe to fold it seems plausible too.
But not necessarily, nor does it necessarily  
need to be powered internally, anymore than I 
need energy from a sheet of paper to bend it.  
Indeed when folding the paper or 
squeezing the partially deflated ball,  
the energy is entirely external and is being 
resisted internally, we push, it shoves back.
 
A sharp flat fold might be easier, in the same way 
it take a lot of energy to cut a board with a saw  
but one slicing through only one molecule 
thick, rather than a few millimeters,  
might take way less energy.
Well the smallest distance in the Universe,  
we believe, is a planck length, and that’s so tiny 
it is to an atom what an atom is to the Universe,  
coming in at 10^-35 meters. Such being the 
case a square slice of space a light year wide  
on each side and one Planck Length thick only 
contains about a thousandth of a cubic meter or  
one trillionth of a joule of spacetime energy. 
So if we imagined a sheet the size of the whole  
Observable Universe wide, or a circle 46.5 billion 
light years in radius, but just one planck length  
thick, we’d only have about 7 billion trillion 
square light years or 7 billion, billion cubic  
meters, or 7 billion joules of spacetime energy 
– and mind you that is the upper limit under  
the Cosmological Constant modeling, it could be 
smaller. Now that’s not a tiny amount of energy,  
but its like 50 gallons of gas, so even if you 
had to supply that every second – requiring a  
very large modern nuclear reactor or hydroelectric 
dam – it is doable, especially in sci-fi terms. 
 
Now this utter wild speculation, we’re not 
really doing science here we’re throwing  
concepts at the wall and plugging related numbers 
into them. Great for writing a realistic-feeling  
scifi but not science, and hence why it’s a 
scifi Sunday episode. And even if we could  
do that planck-length wide sheet, it might be 
that sustaining it took that much energy per  
planck-time, which is even smaller to a second 
than a planck-length is to a meter, in which  
case you might need to burn through whole stars 
to fold the Universe for a single heartbeat. 
 
Does this violate known science? Well unlike 
a lot of our FTL system no it does not,  
it merely posits our universe exists 
in something higher-dimensional,  
which we have no real evidence for or against, 
and that it has topology that can be manipulated,  
with the usual assumption being through gravitons 
or whatever dark energy is. Indeed I once heard  
someone describe dark energy as the thing leaking 
out from the crack in the spacetime manifold  
as it bent and expanded, though I suspect 
that analogy is more amusing than accurate. 
 
So is folding space possible? Well 
if those assumptions are true,  
that the Universe does exist inside something 
higher-dimensional it can be bent around,  
then yes – though some would argue that 
higher-dimensionality is not necessarily required.  
How you do it, no clue, but possible through 
application of something like a gravity laser or  
non-omnidirectional gravity beam or maybe a 
Kerr Ring. Not by shooting beams of light out  
your mouth like the Dune Navigators seem to do in 
the 1984 David Lynch film, but as I recall that’s  
symbolically representing them picking possible 
paths or folds that would move the ship safely. 
 
Which to close out brings us back to the issue 
of what we mean by folding space because in that  
series or others with the instant jump we are 
often told of concerns like accidentally passing  
through a star. This is exceedingly unlikely 
normally since space is so empty and few straight  
lines pass through a single star even over a whole 
galaxy, but the usual notion is that gravity is  
warping space so things taking advantage of that 
tend to get yanked more toward such big objects.  
Which is fine for a story but you’re not folding 
space between two points if you can run into other  
things on that manifold or sheet – again the 
universe – while traveling from point A to B,  
because you’re not traveling through the 
Universe, or through some other Universe.
 
All right, let’s wrap this into a closed timelike 
loop to the beginning to finish for the day. If  
you can warp space – and we can – you can shorten 
the distance between two points. This is not  
folding space, it’s compacting the sheet, opposite 
of stretching it, not folding two bits together.  
This is how warp drives works, but folding space 
is bending, and probably requires tearing or  
poking. And that would seem to inherently 
imply higher-dimensions as it’s not allowed  
under topology without those getting around it.
Which to close on, raises the point that if you  
can make any two points in our Universe touch, 
by folding them through some higher reality,  
also presumably means you can find other 
Universes to explore or settle. So folding  
space seems like a potentially good way to 
colonize our Universe, but is probably more  
valuable ultimately – if you can do it – for 
letting you fold space to other Universes.
 
Just keep in mind, in many models of branes and 
higher dimensions, folding bits of them together  
tends to have explosive effects, the kinds 
that make supernovae look like firecrackers,  
the kind of very big bangs that start 
universes... and perhaps end them too.
 
I was talking a bit today about the general 
misconceptions folks often get with terms like  
Singularity and spacetime warping, and I wanted 
to give a shout to the Cosmic Front series over  
on Curiositystream for the great depth they 
give to black holes and other space topics  
compared to the norm. That’s something I try to 
aim for here on the show too which is why even  
our Bonus fun episodes like today’s Scifi Sunday 
episode often tend to get into longer details,  
though I do try to keep them shorter and as I was 
prepping this episode for release it occurred to  
me I had not discussed how space folding 
technology would impact colonizing space,  
so we will go ahead and do an extended 
segment for today’s episode over on Nebula,  
looking at colonizing space with space 
folding tech. A lot of our episodes on  
Nebula are longer and uncut, but we make up 
for it by cutting out ads and sponsor reads.
 
If you didn't know, Nebula is our streaming 
service full of awesome content from STEM creators  
like Real Engineering, Mustard, Answers with 
Joe, MKBHD, Rene Ritchie, and a bunch of others.  
It’s designed to give creators more freedom 
than other platforms, and all our episodes  
of this show appear early and ad free on Nebula, 
and we some have extended editions too like  
todays, as well as some Nebula Exclusives 
like our Coexistence with Aliens Series.
 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself but 
we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational videos, 
to offer Nebula for free as a bonus if you sign  
up for CuriosityStream using the link in our 
episode description. That lets you see content  
like the Cosmic Front series, just some of the 
amazing content on Curiositystream, and all the  
great content over on Nebula from myself and many 
others. And you can get all that for less than $15  
by using the link in the episode’s description.
Incidentally this month’s episode was obviously  
partially inspired by the new Dune film and Wheel 
of Time TV series coming out and that was also  
the case for last month’s scifi Sunday episode 
on Sentient Planets & World Consciousnesses,  
in regard to Isaac Asimov’s Foundation series 
getting adapted to TV, as in the later novels we  
get introduced to a planetary consciousness, and 
we gave a lot of examples and skipped many others.  
Two I felt especially bad for forgetting about 
were Stanislaw Lem’s sentient Oceans from his  
classic Solaris and David Brin’s superconducting 
perovskite mantle from his novel Earth, and both  
were previous Books of the Month on this Show. 
Now I also mentioned today that hyperspace in  
Asimov’s Foundation series sometimes is described 
as a space folding method and with that new  
Foundation show having folks asking my opinion 
on the series, for folks opting to read the  
novels now, there was a Second Foundation Trilogy 
released after Asimov’s death by his friends and  
fellow scifi authors David Brin, Gregory Benford, 
and Greg Bear and that trilogy ender, and series,  
Foundation’s Triumph by Brin, is my personal 
favorite in the entire series not including  
Asimov’s original trilogy and prelude. 
All right, so with those scifi recommendation,  
we will wrap up another scifi Sunday, and we 
will be back next month for a look at staking and  
jumping claims in space colonization. We’ve plenty 
of regular Thursday episodes before then though,  
and this Thursday we’ll return to our Alien 
Civilization series to contemplate aliens  
with tempers and aggressive tendencies in 
Belligerent Aliens. And in two weeks we’ll  
talk about another colonization strategy 
for space - saving Earth - before closing  
out the month with our Livestream Q&A.
Now if you want to make sure you get  
notified when those episodes come out, 
make sure subscribe to the channel,  
and if you enjoyed the episode, don’t forget to 
hit the like button and share it with others.  
If you’d like to help support future episodes, 
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website,  
IsaacArthur.net, and patreon and our website 
are linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media 
forums where you can get updates and chat  
with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
