This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
We have all dreamed of owning our own personal
spaceship to fly around this world or to others,
but what would it take to make that dream
a reality?
Whether it was the Millenium Falcon of Star
Wars or the Serenity from Firefly or the Heart
of Gold and Zaphod Beeblebrox from Hitchhiker’s
Guide to the Galaxy, we’ve all dreamed of
having a ship to call our own to travel from
world to world, or even from time to time
like with the TARDIS from Doctor Who.
Sometimes it’s a small crew on a small ship,
like the Falcon or Serenity or Rick and Morty’s
garbage-ship.
Sometimes it’s a small crew on a huge ship,
like the Liberator from Blake’s 7 or the
Nostalgia for Infinity from Revelation Space.
And sometimes it’s a huge crew on a huge
ship, like a Star Destroyer, or the enormous
rogue trader vessels from Warhammer 40k, kilometers
long and crewed by tens of thousands, but
owned by one person or family.
Today we’re going to ask what sorts of technologies
we need to make it possible for a person to
be able to have their own ship, whether it’s
a fairly wealthy individual owning their own
yacht or even just everyday Joe with his own
space car, and as we will see today, there
are actually some pathways for a regular individual
to own a personal spaceship that might unfold,
even in the next century and without any particularly
revolutionary science.
Now, this episode is principally interested
in some hard science examples and realism,
but given the topic, we will also explore
some scenarios that are more on the very theoretical
or even scifi side near the end of this episode,
and have some fun with it.
There are a lot of options, so sit back, grab
a drink and snack, and don’t forget to hit
those like and subscribe buttons.
So, space travel is incredibly expensive but
it’s already gotten way cheaper in this
century, mostly from reusable rockets, and
that gives us some hope for the future, though
chemical rockets aren’t really a good path
for a future in which you have a spaceship
parked in your garage.
Partially that’s because fuel is expensive,
but that needs a few caveats.
First, determining actual launch costs is
always a bit tricky but the old space shuttle
used to run into costs of about half a billion
dollars per launch.
That number is debatable and controversial,
but more importantly for today, it isn’t
mostly made up of fuel.
Now, it held something like 2000 tons of fuel,
but as huge as it sounds, 2000 tons of gasoline
for instance is only 2.5 million liters or
about two-thirds of a million gallons.
Even at modern fuel prices, that’s only
a few million bucks.
We don’t use gasoline in rockets, generally
its high-quality kerosene or a liquid hydrogen
and oxygen mix.
The latter is energy intensive to make and
a pain to store, but it can be made by just
separating water and the cost of that is electricity.
The shuttle was a bit of a fuel hog and the
falcon 9 for instance usually only needed
about $200,000 worth of kerosene, while falcon
heavy needs maybe half a million, but even
the shuttle was still using less than 1% of
its launch cost for fuel.
Though, if you winced filling your car’s
gas tank up in 2022, consider a small personal
spaceship blowing through a hundred thousand
dollars worth of fuel.
Fossil fuels are obviously of limited quantity
and worrisome to use but there’s nothing
unique about their make-up, and you can create
them sans dinosaurs in a lab, it just requires
you put more energy in than you’ll get when
they’re later burned, though carbon neutral
at that point.
Which makes artificial fossils awful as a
main power source but a great portable power
supply in a fission, fusion, or solar economy
where you can’t make those power supplies
or electric batteries compact and powerful
enough for mobility.
Cost presumably goes way down in a society
with energy abundance, but as we noted, it’s
only a percent of costs.
A lot of the other cost can be tossed aside
by automation and computerization though.
A lot of your launch and maintenance personnel
might disappear from computerization and scaling
up.
Reusable rockets require extreme precision
to make right, and require labor-intensive
inspections and repairs after each use, but
that is definitely one of those things that’s
a good candidate for going from hyper-expensive
to dirt cheap the way a few megabytes of computer
memory or GPS systems are.
There are no components of a modern spaceship
which are inherently expensive to manufacture
or maintain.
Even when we use stuff like gold for spacesuit
visors or mirrors it's not much.
That enormous gold-coated mirror array on
the James Webb Telescope is just under 50
grams or a tenth of a pound, a couple thousand
bucks worth of gold based on the price as
I write this in August of 2022.
High quality aluminum for the spaceship frame
is also one of those things that more advanced
manufacturing and cheaper electricity make
much less expensive.
Truth be told we really are not that far from
being able to economically mass-print parts,
and of course, the nature of printing or a
self-replicating economy is one where a lot
of your gear for making your feedstock and
power supply is also suddenly cheaper too,
potentially causing a plummet in price tags
for things like engines, super-precisely machined
air-frame or rocket nozzles, and so on.
So, we could imagine a civilization where
people did own rocket ships that could blast
them into orbit everyday.
One where most or a large fraction of the
cost was fuel, as it tends to be for cars,
and where that amount of fuel was a bit smaller
and much cheaper, maybe tens of thousands
or so dollars per launch.
That’s definitely not personal car type
space travel, but it is one where the cost
to fly to space for a vacation or business
trip starts getting comparable to chartering
a personal jet or maybe even a first class
international flight.
Also on an alien world rich in methane for
instance, that we colonized, the cost of fuel
is just pumping it really, and a few thousands
colonists might pump it as casually as we
do water for farming.
And that presumably requires a pilot, though
in reality a machine mind weighing a few kilos
and capable of lightning fast reflexes and
incapable of being distracted, sleepy, or
malicious might be a preferred option.
Now, in the shorter term this is probably
an example of human-machine teaming, where
your autopilot is designed to augment the
human pilot and serve as a backup, and people
might prefer that.
Such being the case, you could run your own
spaceship to and from orbit ferrying a dozen
passengers on each leg and probably be able
to make more than one trip a day.
In this same sort of economy, we also have
the option for someone to own the equivalent
of an interplanetary freighter, what we call
a Cycler or Space Castle.
The notion there is to put a big heavy craft
on a long elliptical orbit, crossing the orbits
of two planets, usually Earth being one, but
it doesn’t have to be and could also be
an asteroid or Lagrange point, and these don’t
stop, they just swing past those worlds.
They require no refueling, same as anything
else orbiting, maybe a few nudges here or
there.
What that means is that a small and light
ship meant for darting to orbit and back down
to the ground that’s light on things like
comforts and radiation shielding since it
has to pay the fuel bill for them each time,
can instead dock with one of these slow behemoths,
for the long jaunt to another world, which
can afford way more armor and amenities.
The cycler castles are an example of a big
ship that doesn’t really need much crew
but might have a lot too.
Hospitality services for passenger and maintenance
crews for spaceships.
Indeed they might have large hydroponics facilities
for growing food and recycling air and water.
Plus they would be far easier targets for
automated fuel pods to be sent to, given that
they don’t deviate from their predicted
course much and could easily rope in a pod
launched from some fuel depot or refinery,
where they could then refuel smaller ships,
or receive spare parts too.
Now, cyclers are slow, and interplanetary
ones have trip times comparable to orbital
periods of the planets they service, which
means they aren’t so much hotels as short-term
homes where you’ll be for months or even
a couple years.
Though, they also work for orbits around planets,
not just stars, so you could see these on
trips between orbital colonies or multi-moon
systems where durations of trips are weeks
or even days.
Spaceships might be used to launch assist
like mass drivers too, and radiation tends
to be high in the space around such worlds,
so a big Cycler with thick shielding might
be handy.
If you own a personal spaceship docked on
one, it might be like an RV camp, and for
the captain of an interplanetary cycler, it’s
less like running a hotel than being a landlord.
Or a freighter captain on one of those huge
slow container ships we have.
Speaking of moon systems around gas giants,
or moving around asteroid belts or collection
of orbital colonies, travel is easier.
Here, there’s no real need for any advanced
or expensive spaceship.
A lot of times there will be minimal escape
velocities to leave these objects and move
through that volume of space.
And none it is through thick air exerting
extreme heat and pressure on your ship.
Generally speaking you only need the majority
of your ship to be fuel by mass when you need
a delta-v greater than the exhaust velocity
that fuel or propellant has when burning out
the back of the ship.
How fast all the burned or exhausted particles
are moving is the exhaust velocity, and for
rockets fuels that tends to be anywhere from
2 to 5 kilometers per second.
The rocket equation is quite harsh when you’re
trying to get a ship moving at speed similar
to that exhaust velocity, and utterly tyrannical
when it comes to speeds in excess of that.
Which unfortunately are the speeds usually
needed to get away from Earth, but not from
moons or asteroids.
A one-ton ship trying to reach its own exhaust
velocity needs 1.72 tons of propellant for
the job, ideally, but to get to half that
speed, it needs only a third of that fuel,
0.65 tons, and a quarter of that speed, which
might be a kilometer per second, only .28
tons.
For double that speed, 6.39 tons of propellant,
and for triple, 19.1 tons, or 95% of the initial
mass as propellant rather than ship and cargo.
That’s essentially the key problem with
chemical rockets.
Earth’s escape velocity is more than 20
times what it is for the largest known asteroid,
Ceres, which we often classify as a dwarf
planet like Pluto.
The higher the exhaust velocity of your propellant,
the better, and the same for specific impulse,
which can be thought of as how many seconds
a given propellant lets you hover a rocket
in Earth’s gravity.
Simply having the highest exhaust velocity
does not automatically make something the
best fuel or propellant, but its a central
feature and to highlight that, our one ton
ship seeking to get away from Ceres using
Liquid Hydrogen and Oxygen with an effective
exhaust velocity of 4500 meters per second
is only needing about an eighth of a ton of
that fuel, a lot like a car’s gas tank,
and that same rocket trying to escape from
Earth would need 10.5 tons of that fuel and
more like 80 tons for many of the fuels with
about half that exhaust velocity.
That’s a very simplified review of rockets,
and it generally takes a lot more fuel because
of the air drag too, see our upward bound
series for more on that, but it’s also important
to note that, at a core level, temperature
is the random motion of particles, faster
particles, higher temperatures, and the higher
your exhaust velocity, the rougher it is on
your ship’s rocket nozzles and other equipment,
and that damages tends to rise sharply with
temperature and pressure.
For that and other reasons, it also takes
far less precision manufacturing and careful
maintenance to keep together a spaceship designed
for traveling from one small airless moon
to another or between two O’Neill Cylinders
sharing a similar orbit.
Personal spaceships are no problem here, even
with modern technology and costs, and given
the difficulty of making those places with
those modern costs, it can be assumed it would
be even easier to own a personal spaceship
if such moon bases or rotating habitats existed.
For personal spaceships on Earth though, the
really big deal is heat.
The rocket fuel in an energy abundant economy
might be made carbon neutral and cheap as
water, indeed we might make it out of water,
but if you’re burning through a hundred
tons of kerosene to get to space for an afternoon,
you still just released a few trillion joules
of heat into the atmosphere.
And if we had a few hundred million folks
doing that a day, then you are adding a billion-trillion
joules of heat to Earth every day, 10^21 Joules,
and that’s about a tenth of what hits Earth
every day from the Sun.
So it is a lot of energy and it’s going
to raise the planet’s temperature, though,
we’re not talking about an oven-roasted
planet here.
Still, we were assuming a fairly modest fuel
expenditure per personal spaceship there,
and only a few hundred million people using
one daily.
So a chemical rocket future is one where folks
on Earth could have their own spaceplane for
flying around, but it’s definitely a luxury
here, you wouldn’t want everyone to do it
daily, though for folks living in orbital
colonies or asteroids and moons, it’s just
fine.
The analogy would be a bit like owning a car
in a major metropolis, something of a luxury
to own on a planet but not in space, but probably
even that would be conservative.
The other issue though is, if you want your
neighbor flying a plane full of a hundred
tons of rocket fuel or storing that at their
house.
Or if you want anybody moving a supersonic
spaceplane anywhere near human habitation,
both for the sonic booms and that such vessels
carry fuels and move at speeds that make them
as dangerous as our biggest non-atomic bombs.
As we move into other and better technologies,
those problems will remain an issue for us
to address.
Now, I would be very dubious about folks ever
letting nuclear-powered spaceships on Earth,
let alone personal spaceplanes running on
them, but they do way better as an option
from an engineering standpoint.
See our episode The Nuclear Option for a full
discussion of those engines, including surprisingly
safe Nuclear Thermal Rocket models for ground
to orbit launch.
A nuclear electric engine with a slow but
efficient ion drive might push particles out
the back at 10 times the exhaust velocity
of chemical rockets or more.
This potentially provides a very economical
private spaceship for any region where folks
were okay with its use, like upper orbital
colonies perhaps, or in the Belt.
An Atomic Rocket obviously is a scary notion
but keep in mind that the whole ship is lethal
simply by being a spaceship, as we say on
the show, there is no such thing as an unarmed
spaceship, because some ship moving at 10
kilometers a second is carrying more kinetic
energy in it than an equal amount of high-explosives.
Atomic rockets operating offworld can also
make sure they always point their exhaust
away from any nearby planet or station, and
said exhaust will leave the solar system forever
if it’s higher than solar escape velocity,
which, depending on where you are, can often
be as low as 16 km/s.
Plus, the whole solar system is already saturated
in radiation anyway so that exhaust isn’t
a big deal, and a few kilograms of vaporized
radioactive particles scattering across Earth
on the occasional rare accident is trivial.
Nonetheless, you might want safeguards to
make sure those engines were pointed safely
away and might require they not ignite them
till medium or high orbit, to make sure such
incidents were very rare, even if you had
a lot of ships using them regularly.
Fears of what the fuel of a ship, atomic or
mundane, can do if misused by malice or accident,
are likely to be a big factor in whether or
not personal spaceships are allowed, or either
banned or regulated into a near impossibility.
This is where we get to the best plausible
on-planet spaceplane, at least for settled
planets, as opposed to some lightly populated
colony somewhere.
And here we can’t remove that kinetic energy,
but we can remove the fuel.
Our fastest jet designs utilize an engine
known as a SCRAM jet, and these and the lower
speed ramjet both are often called stovepipes
because of how insanely simple their function
is.
Air comes in the front and we burn insane
amounts of fuel to superheat it and toss it
out the back.
That is it.
The geometry and metallurgy of the RAM or
SCRAM jet is important but there’s no moving
parts to the engine itself, unless you count
the fuel being sprayed in and ignited, so,
since they have no mechanically-moving parts,
they might be considered a solid-state engine,
which can last a lot longer, and require much
less maintenance than one with mechanically-moving
parts.
However, we can replace that with an external
power source, by either locking-on a laser
beam or microwave beam which tracks those
engines and just pours energy in.
If the beam goes off the plane simply drifts
slower over time, and with that kind of velocity,
it’s got no problem making an unpowered
landing anywhere, plus, it might be carrying
a smaller and more conventional engine for
getting up to a decent speed.
As the beam is coming in from elsewhere and
the vehicle is air-breathing, it circumvents
the rocket equation and the very nature of
that device means that such a plane is constantly
monitored, and given that it’s an ultra-powerful
laser or microwave on the vessel with pinpoint
tracking, blowing up a ship that suddenly
turns kamikaze is a fairly trivial exercise.
The concern there then becomes fire control
and who is allowed to say fire and when.
Such a spaceplane could get up to an orbital
velocity or a large fraction of it, then either
make use of a skyhook network or onboard rockets
to finish the job, and now you are firing
off superhot gas in the high upper atmosphere
at a perpendicular angle to the ground, not
down at it, so it’s not really heating the
world much.
In a world that’s more confident about nuclear
safety, it might have a reactor onboard and
an ion drive to let it become an interplanetary
ship at that point, after docking to a space
station for some refueling and changing of
fuel types.
A spaceplane like this can fit in a garage
too.
It might have a gas engine and VTOL setup
for take-off and back-up but I think it could
be all electric even then, especially with
good enough batteries or power transmission.
You roll out of your garage or open the top
and take off vertically, climb up and get
locked on like a cell tower, and roll out
at whatever the local speed limit is for a
given place and altitude.
Now, once up in space we can continue this
power beaming trick if we want.
At interplanetary speeds, it’s nice to have
a propellant like hydrogen you can superheat,
via beamed energy from orbital stations, but
you could also have a small sail that those
beams could push on instead, and while that’s
very inefficient at interplanetary speeds,
compared to superheating hydrogen gas with
that energy, it’s quite efficient for interstellar
speeds.
See our episodes on beam-powered spaceships
and spaceplanes for more discussion of this
topic.
And based on known science, I think this is
the most plausible route to personalized space
travel, especially given that intense tracking
is vital to allowing spacecraft to fly around
the sky by the million.
Other options include tether trains to orbital
rings from most towns and spaceship docks
on those orbital rings, like boats at a marina.
That would probably optimistically still require
an hour or two to get to the local tether
ground station, up that tether on a tram line,
and then over to your dock.
That makes it more like a marina or airport
where you keep your plane in the hangar.
Note that in all of these cases, there’s
still an option for a private spaceship, even
in less optimal scenarios, it is just that,
in one of those options, everybody owns one
and uses it as they want, and in the other
it is more likely you’re either privately
wealthy or you are running a commercial operation.
You’ve got a nuclear engine on your 747
sized spaceship and you are heavily screened
and licensed for that, and you operate a service,
ferrying a hundred people to orbit everyday
and those tickets weren’t bought for the
price of a cup of coffee but they weren’t
like getting a second mortgage out either.
That ship is a multi-million dollar affair
and you’re probably plowing 90% or more
of your revenue right back into debt service,
licensing costs, crew wages, land usage, noise
pollution fees, fuel or energy bills, maintenance,
and so on.
In the following example I’ll give, John
runs a ship straight from New York City to
Olympus Mons on Mars, the ship weighs a thousand
tons and has a hundred cabins suitable for
a person or for a couple who like each other
enough not to mind being crowded, the accommodations
are mostly in virtual reality but there’s
a gym and a cafeteria and some other amenities
and half a dozen staff who are a constant
challenge to scrape together payroll for.
It collects its passenger in the harbor and
gets beam-powered turbines to push it out
to sea and up into the air, it uses a lot
of that energy to grab water and electrolyze
it into hydrogen and oxygen as it goes, or
tanks up before going, maybe filling up on
both to burn them or maybe just hydrogen for
heating via beamed energy.
Then, when safely away from the city, it races
up on beamed powered SCRAMjets, then switches
to beam-heated hydrogen or hydrogen/oxygen
rockets to get into orbit.
It isn’t going to dock with anyone, rather,
it’s going to expand out its cabin to form
a ring which it will begin spinning for artificial
spin gravity, and on that ring, it’s going
to stretch a reflective sail for a laser to
bounce off of, or a microwave mesh to absorb
energy for running an ion drive.
Pods of hydrogen can be fired-off from the
moon by mass driver to match speed with John’s
ship and other ships, for a price, after all,
that hydrogen gets trucked in from Jupiter.
The ship accelerates at a fraction of a gee
for a day, till reaching a cruising speed
of a couple hundred kilometers per second
and arrives at Mars a couple weeks later,
and then catches pods from Mars to give it
the propellant it needs to land comfortably
in the thin Martian atmosphere.
John’s ship could carry that slow down fuel
and maybe does, but he can carry more cargo
by having it shot to him en route.
There are nearly a thousand square kilometers
of orbital solar array that’s auctioning
its power off to the beaming grid to run that
ship when it’s being shoved up to cruising
speed and needs a terawatt of power, but that’s
not much more than tinfoil-thick.
John always thinks to himself the real money
isn’t in captaining a ship but in owning
solar farms in space, but he would never give
up flying.
The excitement, the new places and people,
the knowledge that at any moment, Earth control
might flip on his autopilot or blow him out
of the sky if he doesn’t work with precision.
Definitely an interesting picture.
Now, beamed energy is awesome but also relies
on others.
It generally matches fission or fusion for
interplanetary work.
At the interstellar scale, it’s better,
and you need something like cheap and safe
antimatter – which is something of an oxymoron
by current science – or a micro-blackhole,
which ironically is way safer than it sounds
like, based on current science.
See our episodes on Black Hole Ships or Antimatter
Factories for more discussion of those.
Neither of those is very scifi for all that
they sound it, but speaking of that, what
sort of hypothetical options do we have?
We did an entire episode on hypothetical Spaceship
Drives some years back and probably need to
refresh that, but let’s contemplate some
different technologies instead.
Now, mass is a strange thing in physics, it
has the effect of both determining how strong
gravity pulls on something, how strongly something
is pulled on by gravity, and how a given piece
of mass responds to being shoved on in terms
of its new speed and momentum.
This feature we call Inertial Mass, and we
have some reason to think it might be possible
to alter it.
A ship’s momentum, is the product of its
mass times its velocity, but that’s its
inertial mass, so a ship that started off
massing a thousand tons and moving at a kilometer
per second and then flipped on its inertial
changer and suddenly had an inertial mass
of just one ton, would still have that same
momentum, and suddenly be moving a thousand
times faster, a thousand kilometers per second.
If this was done uniformly, it might avoid
killing everyone on board at the sudden acceleration.
This is definitely what we call a Clarketech,
technologies so advanced they are indistinguishable
from magic and to which we have no clear technological
pathway to, but it is in the realm of plausible
science.
I wouldn’t hold my breath for this technology
anytime soon or honestly ever, but much like
power-beaming, it offers an option for the
sorts of spaceship and use that we see in
scifi.
A ship whose inertial mass is suppressed has
less kinetic energy than one moving at that
speed should have.
So, it ramming into a building shouldn’t
do as much damage, and your classic near light-speed
ship isn’t ramming into buildings and destroying
them, it is ramming into planets and leaving
mushroom clouds and craters.
The energy conservation in inertial suppression
is rather tricky, kinetic energy goes with
mass and the square of velocity so a ship
that just had its inertial mass drop by a
factor of ten should have its kinetic energy
drop by a factor of ten from the mass, then
go up by ten-squared from the sudden jump
in velocity to conserve momentum.
But 100 divided by ten is ten, not 1, so its
kinetic energy just went up ten-fold, which
presumably violates conservation of energy,
unless you have some place to grab that energy
from.
Additionally, you can’t really ignore the
effect such a drop has on chemistry.
As we said earlier, temperature and heat are
essentially random kinetic energy of particles,
so, if your blood suddenly has its inertial
mass drop by ten and its kinetic energy go
up by ten, then you suddenly have 10 times
as much heat in your bloodstream.
Obviously a pretty potent weapon if that worked
that way, but there might be workarounds.
It is an awesome scifi handwave for any authors
or game designers interested in making ships
easier though, because it would massively
cut down on how much fuel you needed, and
how much damage a spaceship would do if ramming
something.
Though, you would probably have to say it
was a bubble of low inertial mass, inside
which, everything behaved the same.
Hypothetically, any particle with zero rest
mass, automatically moves at light speed,
so an inertial drive able to temporarily drop
that mass to virtually nothing, or even flat-out
nothing, would move at light speed.
Hypothetically, if you could take that further
to make it negative inertial mass, it might
move superluminally, though that had bad consequences
for the ship that tried it in the novel Redemption
Ark by Alastair Reynolds, one of my personal
favorites.
See our FTL series for more discussion of
those kind of options but a point I like to
remind folks of is that, it takes insane amounts
of energy to move things at near-light speed,
and that rises as you get ever closer, and
there’s no real reason why that would stop
rising going into FTL.
Though, exceptions like the warp drive, contemplate
the necessary use of negative energy, and
we also might imagine ships able to dump energy
or fuel into pocket universes or similar too.
You don’t pay the fuel bill because it's
all stored in some universe in which you have
a tiny wormhole too, or hammerspace, which
isn’t counted against your ship’s mass.
That might be actual fuel from this universe
or a connection to some younger and more compact
Universe that’s still as hot as a star.
An in-universe wormhole to the center of a
star as your rocket might work well too.
Very nice powerplant or weapon system for
your ship as well.
When it comes to options for using less energy,
another one of course is micro-sizing.
It is very easy to have your own personal
spaceship if you’re an uploaded consciousness
who can fit on something the size of a smartphone.
That doesn’t mean your ship is that size
though, damage to ships from hitting stuff
is all about speed of impact and resistance
to that damage is just a matter of thickness,
a modest ship whose crew are human, might
need a meter of metal on their ships prow,
but so does a juggernaut carrying millions
and a tiny little hard drive carrying maybe
millions of digital minds.
Size helps in space travel, but costs more
fuel, so a big lead sphere the size of a minivan,
plowing through space with digital minds inside,
is still a lot more energy efficient than
some Star Destroyer-sized ship with a hundred
thousand mortal crew.
Miniaturization of a lot of drive components
wouldn’t work either, though one it would
work for is a black hole drive.
In terms of size anyway.
Assuming you can keep feeding it matter, a
black hole in the hundreds of kilotons range
is practically ideal for running an interstellar
spaceship, but it has to be a big one.
A hundred kilotons is what a Nimitz Class
Aircraft Carrier masses, black hole-powered
ships are likely to weigh low megatons as
a result.
And you can add more black holes to ramp up
power, but you can’t really change black
hole mass much.
The smaller they are, the more power they
produce, burning very quickly.
A megaton black hole masses 100 times what
a 10 kiloton black hole does, but lives a
million times longer, about 1500 years, while
pushing out 356 Trillion Watts of Power, but
the other, smaller black hole would produce
10,000 times more power.
That’s around twenty times the power consumption
of the entire human race right now, for the
bigger, lower-power black hole, about 20 times
of all the incident light on Earth for the
smaller black hole, which would barely live
12 hours.
It’s important to think on that when you
are contemplating stuff, trade and cost and
so on.
What a ship is bringing for trade to be paying
for such titanic engines needs to be contemplated
in terms of all those ports of call probably
having that exact same type of power plant.
You’re not moving food from planet to planet
because they can pay for all the lighting
and environmental tailoring using a power
plant like that, luxury foods might be different
of course.
And as unrealistic as something like an inertia
drive or light speed drive might be, in many
ways it’s the economies of scifi empires
that make even less sense.
No place where anyone can afford to own a
spaceship they haul ice to worlds for water
with, is ever going to have shortages of air
and drinking water for instance.
You might own some big 5 megaton trading ship
kilometers long, running on a megaton black
hole in its basement, with a crew of a hundred
thousand, but someone using that same power
plant could be powering the entire modern
economy several times over, or lighting up
around a thousand full-size O’Neill Habitats,
each home to hundreds of thousands of people
too.
In that regard, a lot of your ships are going
to be interplanetary and slower, probably
keeping to a speed roughly on the same order
of magnitude as the fastest exhaust velocity
they can make happen by pouring energy into
hydrogen.
Hydrogen is ultra-plentiful and dirt cheap
in a space economy, and you just get better
thrust by putting your energy into those than
shining it out the back as a flashlight, assuming
you are not aiming to move much faster than
you can heat that gas up to.
Light has an exhaust velocity of light speed
so it always does best, kilogram for kilogram,
as a propellant.
If they can blow them out the back of the
ship at million kilometers per hour, then
figure on your typical passenger ship making
that speed and a freighter doing maybe half
to a tenth.
Big doesn’t mean slow where ships are concerned,
more like the other way around, bigger can
be faster, but bulky and non-perishable cargo
doesn’t need to move fast and if you can
deliver it for less cost, that’s what you
do.
If someone has a contract to deliver ten quadrillion
tons of ice to Mars over the next century,
there’s no reason to rush delivery to weeks
when months are vastly cheaper, while at the
same time you have operating costs for owning
that ship, so you don’t want to go too slow
either.
In one direction, these become space cars
or maybe RVs or yachts, they really are not
going to be junkers like the Millenium Falcon
is often shown to be.
Maybe in a period of strife or techno-barbarianism
after a war you might have clunkers, especially
around multi-moon gas giant systems or asteroid
belts.
But otherwise, it’s an energy abundant economy
that’s probably got robot vacuums and mops
better than what we have now.
So the ship isn’t dirty.
Keeping that in mind, the other direction
for ships to develop in is big ones.
Those might still be small crewed or single
too, automation can do amazing things.
Big crews on big ships also might still have
tons of elbow room, some kilometer-long ship
with a crew of ten thousand might sound crowded,
like a submarine, but in practice, that thing
would have vastly more room than even our
biggest skyscrapers and there’s quite a
few of those with thousands of residents and
often shopping centers and community areas
too.
So, whether your megaship has a crew of ten
thousand or ten, there’s a lot of room for
things like hydroponics bays, but also for
gardens, tennis courts, swimming pools - a
ship’s water reserves might as well be in
a pool or aquarium after all – and a ton
of other features.
Also all those big habitats we talk about,
like O’Neill Cylinders, if artificially
lit, can essentially choose to be spaceships
too.
You might have your own interstellar ark ship
and nature preserve containing ten thousand
acres of forest for instance.
For that matter, a large habitation drum of
many hundreds of acres might be the living
quarters for a mega freighter for pushing
ice that could fit something like that in
its proverbial closet.
Assuming we survive the next few decades and
technology progresses to better automation
and energy abundance, and we cross into a
post-scarcity civilization, that is a future
where your own personal space car or your
own personal space habitat even become real
possibilities.
Needless to say, there are a lot of unknowns,
and unknown unknowns that limit our ability
to discuss this matter, but what we do know
tells us there’s a good chance people in
the future might be able to own their very
own spaceship.
One things about having your own spaceship
is you have to be able to navigate the thing,
and that’s an area where knowing your geometry
and trigonometry can really help, even when
you have computer assistance.
The notion of trying to calculate an atmospheric
entry probably seems a bit intimidating, but
it doesn’t have to be, and a powerful knowledge
of trigonometry and geometry is helpful in
so many areas of life.
That’s where Brilliant’s many interactive
courses on geometry can help.
Many topics in math and science can seem hard
because there is no interactive and intuitive
way to work with the idea, compared to more
traditionally hands-on topics that you can
play with and thus learn easier, so Brilliant
focuses on making interactive and handson
content which makes it easier for anyone to
learn, be it basic math or advanced topics
like probability simulations.
Folks often ask how higher math will help
them in day to day life, but believe me, once
you know it, you’ll see real world practical
cases to use it everywhere you look.
A better knowledge of math, science, and computer
science can not only be enlightening personally,
but a road to greater personal success.
Be a lifelong-learner, and let Brilliant be
your partner on that journey.
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own
pace, learn on the go, and learn something
new.
To get started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or click on the link in the description, and
the first 200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
I’m never sure how much attention folks
pay to the intro overlays or credits but this
is the official episode 365, which now means
you could watch this channel every day for
a year and not repeat an episode.
Though in point of fact the official spreadsheet
of episodes lists this as entry 490, since
our livestreams, collabs, Scifi Sundays, and
other bonus episodes are not counted in our
official weekly chronology of episodes, nor
are our Nebula or Audio-Only Exclusives.
If you’re curious we have a publicly viewable
list of every episode on Youtube we’ve done,
which I’ll link in the episode’s description.
Folks are often surprised that when they ask
for a topic it's one we’ve already done
before, sometimes even twice, since we tend
to revisit certain topics for updates and
extensions.
It’s also where you can see our full list
of planned and finished episodes which is
usually about 3 months aheads, not just the
month or so I usually put up at the end of
episodes.
Speaking of next month’s schedule, we still
have one more regular episode, 366, coming
up this month, where we’ll continue today’s
discussion by asking about what to do if your
spacecraft gets damaged or you get shipwrecked.
Then we will close out the month on Halloween
weekend with our Livestream Q&A, on Sunday,
October 30th, at 4 pm Eastern Time.
Join us live to get your questions into the
chat so they can be answered.
After that we’ll head into November to discuss
refueling the Sun, an option that could make
it possible for us to keep Earth going for
trillions of years to come, and then come
back more to the present and near future to
discuss what an automated economy would really
look like, how it would take shape, and the
possible problems of unemployment.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like to help support future episodes,
please visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net,
for ways to donate, or become a show patron
over at Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
