Mercury, in Roman mythology, is the god of
merchants and travelers,
transporters of goods and thieves.
Given what we’ve got planned for Mercury’s
future, that planet is well named indeed.
So today we are returning to the Outward Bound
series after a few months hiatus to look at
Colonizing Mercury, probably one of the most
neglected planets in science fiction.
Mars gets a lot of attention as does Venus,
but even the various moons get more attention
than Mercury does.
This is a pity, because there are a lot of
options there for Mercury, some of which we’ve
mentioned in passing before, and when I sat
down with the production crew on our SFIA
Discord server to chat about those, we came
up with pages of different possible approaches
to making Mercury useful and even a pleasant
place to live.
Traditionally Mercury is seen as having one
big problem and one big use.
It’s scorching hot because it’s so close
to the Sun and being basically a big airless
ball of silicon and metal, we usually figure
on using it as a giant building supply store
to construct power collectors, and in the
long term to completely disassemble it to
form the basis of a Dyson Swarm.
But there’s a lot of time between starting
up some mines and power collection near Mercury
and totally disassembling it.
Taking apart planets is not a fast process
and requires civilizations to exist far longer
than any in our history.
We often talk about the problems in science
fiction and futurism in general of people
not really getting scale right, and lifetimes
of colonies is a good example of that.
We might point at a supergiant star with a
lifetime of a hundred million years, already
more than halfway done, and say “You wouldn’t
colonize that” while forgetting that compared
to any civilizations which have ever existed,
that’s nearly an eternity.
If some big island rose up from the depths
of the Pacific tomorrow, covered in fertile
mud, and geologists said it would sink in
a thousand years, many would of course rush
to claim and colonize it.
Many folks would shake their heads and point
out that it was doomed, but the last laugh
would presumably be on them, since that’s
a millennium for a culture to flourish on.
Even Rome, the Eternal City and the standard
by which we tend to judge long-lasting civilizations,
lasted only about this long.
You don’t need to be around long to have
a lasting impact on humanity, our culture
or technology, let alone just have a long
and productive life.
Nor is the need to eventually move really
a problem, after all your ancestors would
have moved or you wouldn’t be there.
So not only can a great civilization be worth
having even if it would only last a few centuries,
but it’s quite rare for them to even last
that long.
That’s something worth remembering when
we talk about colonizing places, they’d
go through a lot of phases and a lot of history,
even if they had much sooner expiration dates
than billions of years.
Whether or not Mercury might get disassembled
is probably a long way down the road, so today
we’ll focus on near and mid-term colonization.
But let’s start by talking about Mercury
and how and why we’d want to start a basic
colony there.
Mercury of course is the closest planet to
the Sun, and thus we’d tend to think of
it as the hottest but Venus beats it out slightly
for peak temperature and Mercury gets downright
cold at night.
Unlike Venus, it has no atmosphere worthy
of note, just a thin haze of mostly hydrogen
and helium from captured solar wind that soon
enough evaporates away and gets replaced by
more of it.
The surface pressure of that atmosphere is
less than in Low Earth Orbit by the space
station and so can be mostly disregarded.
Like Venus, it has a peculiarly long day.
It was once believed to be tidally locked
to the Sun like the Moon is to the Earth,
which means a 1:1 orbital resonance where
the day and year are the same length, leaving
one side eternally lit by the Sun and the
other in darkness.
But actually, Mercury is in a 3:2 Orbital
Resonance, meaning it rotates on its axis
3 times for every 2 orbits around the Sun,
which it does every 88 days.
It rotates once on its axis every 59 days,
two-thirds of 88 days, but that is not its
day night-length.
Indeed, Earth doesn’t take 24 hours to rotate
360 degrees, just 23 hours and 56 minutes,
what we call the sidereal day, the time for
one complete rotation.
But as it is moving around the Sun, it takes
just a bit longer on each rotation for the
Sun to be in the same place, to set on the
horizon, just 4 minutes, resulting in a 24
hour day/night cycle, what we call the Synodic
Day, though of course we just call it the
day.
However on Mercury the rotation is so long
and the orbit so short, that this effect is
considerably magnified.
The Sidereal Day on Mercury is 59 days long,
while the Synodic Day, the time for one day/night
cycle, is 176 days, or two Mercury years.
That’s a very long time to wait between
sunrises and sunsets.
More importantly though, with an equatorial
circumference of just over 15,000 kilometers,
the day/night terminator only moves 87 kilometers
a day or 3.6 kilometers per hour at the equator,
walking speed.
Move up north or south to say, 60 degrees
latitude, and that’s cut in half, at 76
degrees it would be only a quarter, and you
could keep ahead of the rising sun if you
were strolling and camping to rest along the
way.
We’ll be talking about mobile bases, colonies
just rolling around on wheels or rail later
today, and they wouldn’t need to move too
fast particularly up by those poles.
If you’re curious, if you take the cosine
of your latitude, north or south, and multiply
it by a planet’s circumference, 15,300 kilometers
for Mercury, or by pi times its diameter,
then divide that by how many hours in its
day, that will tell you how fast you need
to move to keep up with the Sun, such that
it would never set, or to stay out of it,
so it would never rise.
Ideally, you don’t want to be around when
the Sun is up on Mercury, since the temperatures
at noon would flash fry you, but you don’t
want to be there at midnight either.
Its temperature ranges from hotter than your
oven to colder than liquid oxygen or nitrogen.
So if you could be mobile, you’d probably
want to chase around that Terminator, staying
just where you could catch some solar power
but where it hadn’t heated up or cooled
down much yet.
You’d presumably have a ring rolling around
the planet’s poles that was a comfortable
room temperature and want to stay near there
if you could.
As I said, Mercury is not tidally locked,
it doesn’t have a stationary day and night
side.
There’s some debate if this might ever change,
as Mercury has a particularly high orbital
eccentricity which makes a 1:1 resonance less
likely.
Indeed it's the most eccentric orbit of any
planet, now that we don’t count Pluto, which
is so eccentric that it is often closer to
the Sun than Neptune, and in fact it was from
1979 to 1999.
Mercury doesn’t ever become our second planet,
even at aphelion, when its furthest from the
Sun at 70 million kilometers, it’s still
a lot closer than Venus ever gets.
But at Perihelion, Mercury gets to just 46
million kilometers from the Sun.
That means it gets half again as far from
the Sun at Aphelion than Perihelion, and since
light from the sun falls off inverse square
of the distance, it only get 40% as much light
and energy at Aphelion as it does at Perihelion.
So even keeping up with the Terminator won’t
give you a stable temperature.
Nor is that sunlight very healthy even where
the temperature hasn’t risen much yet.
There’s no air there filtering out the harmful
frequencies of sunlight.
This of course is one approach to colonizing
Mercury for mining.
You set up your camp where it’s cool and
move on when the light and heat are too much.
You drive ahead to some place that’s colder
but not quite so cold you can’t work there,
set up your camp again, do some more mining,
and move on.
Think of the Sand crawlers from Dune that
harvested the Spice Melange, only you’re
running from the Sun rather than giant sandworms.
You’d probably want to make sure you’ve
got back up vehicles and engines in case one
dies, and you can use the extra energy while
moving to power your smelters and refineries.
Needless to say heating things up on Mercury
to smelt them isn’t too hard, a solar oven
would work quite well there, with no clouds
and being that close to the Sun.
Mercury’s night side is also a good place
to get rid of heat, something hard to find
anywhere else near the Sun.
You can create a cool day anywhere in space
by just putting a mirror between you and Sun,
but if you’re generating a lot of heat,
you can only get rid of that by radiating
it away.
Down on Mercury’s night side you can use
conduction too, so you might have mobile factories
at work, not just mining and refining operations.
Of course getting what you produced off Mercury
isn’t too hard either.
Mercury has an escape velocity of just 4.25
km/s, and an orbital velocity of just 3 km/s.
Moreover, it has no air, so you don’t even
need any of the impressive launch systems
we’ve discussed like launch loops or orbital
rings.
If you had a flat track you could drive on
down there, without worrying about friction
on the wheels, you could literally drive down
that highway, flooring your engine, until
your car left the ground.
Not because you’d hit flight speed, there
is no air lift or drag, but because you’d
hit orbital speed.
Setting up a track something can run down,
a mass driver, is a lot easier here because
you don’t need a tube around it to evacuate
air out, you have way weaker gravity, so building
tall is easier and you need less speed, and
you don’t have to elevate the launch tube
anyway, as there’s no air to lift it over,
so you’d just have to bridge over any craters
you came across.
It’s actually landing on Mercury that’s
a pain, as again there’s no air, so much
like on our Moon, we can’t aerobrake to
shed velocity for free.
Though you might be able to hit a very long
track, very precisely, and slowly shed speed
off with friction or run down a magnetic tube,
the reverse of a typical mass driver, to let
it leach your speed off as power rather than
inserting power to give a ship speed.
This gives you a good reason to consider building
a track all the way around Mercury, and it
need not be at the equator either if you wanted
to keep it shorter.
Mercury gets hot, but is still cool enough
for many metals to handle.
Even steel, which is fairly mundane considering
some of the materials we might use, retains
its magnetic and conductive properties at
those temperatures and one thing Mercury is
not lacking in is metals.
One would still have to worry about metal
fatigue though, as some metals there would
be expanding and contracting to varying degrees
as they ran up from temperatures cold enough
to liquefy air to temperatures hot enough
to melt lead, but this is happening once a
Mercury day, which is very long, so it’s
not being heated and cooled constantly and
breaking quickly as a result, and we know
a lot of tricks for various alloys and composites
that minimize metal fatigue these days anyway.
However, while the surface of Mercury is constantly
fluctuating in temperature, every planet has
a vertical temperature gradient.
Here on Earth, if you dig down a bit, you’ll
hit a spot where the temperature stops varying
much by time of day, dig down a bit deeper
and it will stop varying much over the course
of a whole year.
How deep you need to go for each spot varies
on your latitude and soil type, but the Mean
Earth Temperature is usually reached after
about 4 or 5 meters.
Mercury should have such a spot too, if you
dig down a little bit, but as it receives
far more light than Earth and has a bigger
core, it’s unlikely to be a comfortable
temperature in many spots.
There was some modeling done on this and variation
on the methods, but interestingly Mercury’s
temperature varies by longitude, not just
latitude, as it does have that highly eccentric
orbit and long day in orbital resonance.
But depending on the model we start seeing
human livable temperatures underground even
away from craters as we get closer to the
poles, and in one of the more optimistic models,
even room temperature underground at the equator,
at 90 degrees west.
Regardless it is going to stabilize at some
depth, which would help with expansion and
contraction causing fatigue and other construction
problems regardless of that equilibrium temperature,
so you could retract bits of track or other
constructs underground or even build that
way, down in tunnels built with a tunnel boring
machine that mines and leaves you with habitable
space, and we will discuss air conditioning
in a little bit.
So that’s one possible option so far.
We’ve got the mobile one, where you pick
up and move sporadically or keep your base
constantly moving, powered by solar to run
your vehicle-bases.
And we’ve also got the retracting option,
where things fold down at night and brightest
day and pop back up when things are more moderate.
But you don’t necessarily need to do either.
We’ve discussed something I call a Mushroom
Habitat before.
This is where you stick your habitat up on
stilts that aren’t thermally conductive
so you aren’t getting much heat from the
ground and put a big umbrella over it covered
in mirrors to bounce light away, one that
could flip open or move aside to let in however
much light you wanted at the time too.
Once more, there’s no air, so heat can only
get to you by absorbing sunlight or touching
the ground and conducting it up, no convection.
You probably don’t need anything high-tech
like aerogel to build those stilts or pad
out of, just something that doesn’t conduct
heat well, likely made from the silicate beneath
you, nor does that habitat or big mushroom-cap
mirror shade require any fancy engineering,
as there’s no wind pushing on it and not
much gravity pulling it down either.
You might make it tilt-able so it’s just
always blocking the Sun from hitting your
habitat and the ground near it, as the Sun
slowly rises and sets over the course of 176
days.
The other handy thing about not having air
resistance is that you can spin that habitat
to combine centrifugal force with local gravity
for a higher net gravity.
As we’ve discussed before, you can combine
centrifugal force with local gravity, sloping
your floor to let you merge those two perpendicular
forces for a higher effective net gravity.
Odds are pretty good Mercury’s gravity,
again the same as what Mars has, is enough
for people to live with some healthy exercise
and supplements, but if not, or if that’s
uncomfortable, you can go the spin-habitat
route, as we’ve suggested doing on the Moon
or bodies with a significant surface gravity
but not quite enough for health and comfort.
So that gives us three options for living
there, and again there’s no problem getting
power as the Sun provides plenty, at least
during the Day, those are some pretty long
nights if you’re not mobile.
That can be gotten around by using orbital
power satellites, and building big power satellites
is very likely to be something done on Mercury,
for collecting power up near the Sun to beam
back to Earth or other places.
However that big change in temperature constantly
going on in the ground is pretty nice for
thermocouples too, as is that large molten
core for geothermal during the nights.
This got us thinking about generating power
using that temperature difference, and with
big long tracks running around the planet,
and we came up with an interesting fusion
of all these ideas that provided a lot of
complimentary options and handy redundancy.
If you built one or more facilities by one
of the poles, you can make that track around
the planet quite short.
You can have solar panels nearby that are
constantly feeding sunlight in, and flipping
over or retracting if the heat or light becomes
too intense.
Those also can act as nice radiators to get
rid of waste heat, as they have large surface
areas.
Buried underneath the track could be long
wires carrying power to wherever the bases
were, but you could also have big wide pipes
carrying coolant, be that water or whatever,
and indeed we think there is water in some
craters at Mercury’s poles, it’s actually
quite cool there, relatively speaking.
That coolant could help regulate temperature
for the bases, and even those solar collectors
or other constructs.
What’s more, a big ring of fluid at different
temperature is easily modified into a Stirling
Engine, and represents a viable power source,
and a pretty big one, all on its own.
We were talking a couple of months back about
how civilizations are defined as much by what
they have a scarcity of as an abundance of,
and in the case of Mercury, we can say two
things: they have a lot of raw materials to
build stuff out of, and the power to run it.
As we said earlier in the series when we looked
at colonizing Saturn’s moon, Titan, and
how it’s huge abundance of cold made computing
and industry more efficient, here on Mercury,
while computing would be rough, the sheer
amount of raw materials, silicon in particular,
and energy make industry a pretty viable option,
and there’s no atmosphere or oceans to pollute.
As we also said in our look at Titan, colonizing
a place does not necessarily mean we are making
it Earth-like or even living there, but as
we can see, you could live there easily enough,
none of this is very high-tech or hard to
do and allows a lot of over-engineering and
redundancy to keep folks safe if bits and
pieces fail.
In this case, folks could slowly harvest material
from Mercury, whittling away at its mass,
for a very long time without making much of
a dent.
Earth’s steel production is a bit over a
billion tons a year, even if Mercury exported
a hundred times that, a hundred billion tons
a year, of various metals or manufactured
goods, it would take around a billion years
just to reduce that planet’s mass by a couple
of percent, with no real effect on the local
gravity.
That’s a very long time for a very productive
civilization to last.
Of course you might decide you want to terraform
it, and as we’ve discussed with other places,
we can make it fairly Earth-like.
Large mirrors or shades, orbiting or at the
Lagrange point between it and the Sun, the
L1, could be used to cool the planet down
and by use of those mirrors, orbiting the
planet once a day – an Earth Day – produce
a 24 hour day/night cycle.
Mercury is massive enough to hold a breathable
atmosphere, and so long as you aren’t letting
the Solar Wind strip that off, it will stick
around if added, as would water.
Indeed with that solar wind blocked, its own
magnetosphere and the addition of an atmosphere
will help block remaining radiation.
Mercury has plenty of oxygen in the rocks,
and that’s plentiful everywhere, it could
get its nitrogen from Venus, which has plenty
but has a boiling hot atmosphere between it
and its metals and we might prefer to get
them from Mercury instead.
With all that power and industrial capacity,
it has the coin it needs to buy what it needs
to make it a livable place.
You could of course spin it up, by launching
matter you’ve extracted from the Planet
from mass drivers to their destinations, so
long as you timed and aimed that right, you
could slowly increase Mercury’s rotational
rate.
You could also, and more easily, slow it down
even more so it was tidally locked, giving
you a permanent day and night side and areas
of stable temperature, just fluctuating as
Mercury got closer or further from the Sun
over its year of a mere 88 days.
Which might make that big cooling loop and
Stirling Engine we discussed earlier work
even better.
Indeed you could mess with its eccentric orbit
too, normalizing that, by the same method.
Like Venus it needs hydrogen, but it’s far
closer to the Sun, which has plenty, and is
hit by solar wind, rich in hydrogen and helium,
both things it could collect and use or sell.
This could also serve as yet another source
of power, using a big mirror or shade between
the planet and the sun, acting as a giant
windmill driven by the solar wind.
There’s some interesting tricks for doing
this with nanomaterials we may discuss in
the future, but it could be done by just having
a big pinwheel shape, or several, potentially
with paddles spaced to let light through in
a 24 hour pattern.
These could also be used to slow down and
funnel large amounts of solar wind to polar
collectors – Mercury’s magnetosphere does
tend to already funnel that in by the poles,
similar to our polar auroras.
We couldn’t find an example of this in the
literature so after a bit of debate we settled
on naming it a ‘Star Wheel’, and the potential
massive factories using that captured solar
wind and energy and raw materials from Mercury
a Star Forge, as a hat tip to Knights of the
Old Republic.
Done properly you could use most of these
options together to make Mercury a very livable
place you could walk around the lush forests
and fields of, while exporting huge quantities
of energy, raw materials, and manufactured
goods to the rest of the solar system.
It’s also a great place to build stuff for
space, not just solar collectors for near
the Sun, but even ships.
Mercury, named for the fleet-footed messenger
of the gods, is the fastest planet, orbiting
the Sun at 48 kilometers per second or over
100,000 miles per hour, a nice boost to a
ship wanting to leave the system, even though
it will lose much of that as it has to work
its way out of the Sun’s gravity well, but
as we discussed in Colonizing the Sun, you
can build enormous lasers there, such as the
Stellaser, and it’s much easier to keep
a powerful beam locked onto a ship to push
it when it’s closer.
Such a vessel, built and launched from Mercury
and pushed by Stellasers, could pick up a
lot speed as it headed out of the solar system,
a possible alternative to our usual approach
of assuming a fusion powered ship launched
from some icy moon or asteroid deep out in
the solar system where the gravity well of
the Sun is mostly gone and hydrogen for fusion
fuel and propellant is plentiful.
It’s always important to me in this series
that we look at a different way of approaching
colonization for each episode, which is why
we probably won’t want to do one for every
planet and why I initially skipped Mercury
for terraforming, it’s a lot like Venus
and I always think of it as just a big supply
depot for building a Dyson Swarm.
In hindsight though I do regret that, as we
can see there are a lot more options for Mercury
than at first glance.
Sadly I’m not alone in that bias, and it
gets rather neglected in fiction.
There are not too many colonies on Mercury
in sci-fi, and when they are mentioned at
all it tends to be very briefly.
There’s one in our Book of the Month from
last week, Dennis E. Taylor’s Singularity
Trap, and it’s the center of the 2005 novel
Mercury by Ben Bova, my personal favorite
in his Grand Tour series, as well as the home
for a lot of the characters in David Brin’s
1980 novel Sundiver in his Uplift Saga, but
a lot of the fiction on it dates back to the
older days of sci-fi when we knew less about
it and in novels where the science part of
science fiction was mostly ignored.
Again we can see a lot of options on the table
for making it a fairly interesting place to
live so perhaps we’ll see some more novels
giving it a center stage.
Good science fiction doesn’t have to put
a focus on the science, but I think it’s
better when it does, and certainly as one
learns more science it can be rather irritating
when an author makes a mistake on that.
Points to all three of those authors, Taylor,
Bova, and Brin, for being in the minority
who always do their homework and know their
science, and their works are made more enjoyable
by that.
I mentioned how Mercury’s low escape velocity
affords it numerous benefits like requiring
less energy to export materials.
But how low can we go?
If you want to understand further about escape
velocity and its implications, then I recommend
that you check out Brilliant.org.
They have a course on applying Newtonian Gravity
to Escape Velocity, which also covers the
technical planning for interplanetary travel,
and extends to the effects on the stability
of planetary orbits and the solar system!
I found the explanation of how escape velocity
emerges from gravity straight-forward and
intuitive, and recommend that you check it
out.
If you want to learn how to quickly understand
the depths of everything an aspiring space
traveler would need, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription.
That’s the subscription I’ve been using
to explore concepts like escape velocity.
As a quick headsup before we talk about what’s
scheduled for next week, last week I sat down
for an interview on TMRO with Athena Brensberger
to discuss some of the implications of topics
we look at here, then joined the rest of TMRO
crew for a fun chat later in that episode.
I’ll post a link to that n the video description
below.
So the Outward Bound series came out of hiatus
to look at Mercury and we’ll be coming back
to it again soon to look at Ceres, the queen
of the Asteroid Belt and arguably our fifth
planet, in which context Pluto would presumably
be the tenth, or Planet X.
Before that we’ll be looking at the notion
of civilizations rising and falling, over
and over again, and what traces they might
leave behind, if they could rebuild afterward
when some resources might be gone, and how
this might fit in with the Fermi Paradox,
in Cyclical Apocalypse.
The week after that we’ll return to our
look at Post-Scarcity Civilizations and ask
what sort of purposes might motivate and drive
people in a society that is essentially a
Utopia, and what might happen if those folks
don’t have a purpose to their existence.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
