To reach out to the stars and send spaceships
across the interstellar void is a titanic
task, but so is setting up an entirely new
ecosystem and civilization on the other side…
What happens if those fragile oases fail to
take root and prosper?
The Fermi Paradox is the big question about
why the Universe appears to contain billions
and billions of planets, many vastly older
than our own pale blue dot, and yet seems
to be absent any huge and ancient galactic
empires.
They would also be Loud aliens, the kind that
make a big splash on the galactic stage and
their noise would last for a while – maybe
thousands of years or potentially even more.
So they would be hard for observers like ourselves
to miss.
If our future is out among the stars, then
surely it was for others who came before us
too, and so we ask where they all are?
Today we’ll be discussing a new possible
explanation, Pancosmorio Theory, in conjunction
with Percolation Theory and the Aurora Effect,
as a possible new Late Filter of the Fermi
Paradox, to ask if maybe it's simply too difficult
to find or create environments away from Earth
on which civilizations can thrive in the long
term, beginning with creating ecologies that
could survive deep space missions to new solar
systems.
Pancosmorio, meaning “All World Limit”
is a new concept and makes a strong case for
the difficulty of colonization, though in
many ways it is an old argument too, indeed
arguably the original argument that solves
the Fermi Paradox.
This answer to the Fermi Paradox dates back
to Enrico Fermi himself.
He reasoned that the colonization of new worlds
is just very, very hard and doesn’t happen
much if at all.
When Fermi expressed that opinion in 1950,
it was over a decade before we started the
space race, but not long after he had helped
invent nuclear weapons, so he was understandably
a bit dubious on two important late filters.
One, our ability to survive without blowing
ourselves to smithereens and two, whether
space travel, let alone space colonization,
was possible, when nothing had yet been sent
into space.
And we call these two our late filters of
the Fermi Paradox, things humanity has yet
to pass through on our way to becoming a big
interstellar species that might be detected
by someone else.
Filters are those steps on the way to answering
the Fermi Paradox, and an example of an earlier
filter, the kind we already went through,
would be living on a planet that’s warm
enough for life to survive or a species on
that planet evolving a sophisticated brain
that could figure out space travel.
We have dozens of proposed early filters,
and many late ones too, but the late ones
mostly fall into those two categories, not
blowing ourselves up and finding a way to
make interstellar travel and settlement practical.
Our default perspective on this show is that
the Fermi Paradox has no good solution yet,
but that the least bad one is that those early
filters just pile up to make life rare and
intelligent and technological life rarer still.
So much so that there’s probably none within
a billion light years of us.
And our reasoning for this is based on three
key assumptions.
First is that critical one to all Great Filter
approaches to the Fermi Paradox, that there
is no detectable alien presence here on Earth.
Obviously, many disagree but it’s not much
of a Paradox if they are actively here now.
Second is that while our knowledge of science
is hardly complete, our current understanding
of the way the universe and biology works
is sufficiently correct for us to be able
to discuss the problem.
As with the first assumption, there’s no
paradox if we’re horribly wrong about the
size or age of the Universe or Darwin was
wrong or we live in a tailored simulation.
Needless to say, many solutions proposed for
the Fermi Paradox work by challenging those
first two cases.
The third, though, is the assumption that
we can make long-lasting civilizations elsewhere,
because there’s no Paradox if everyone is
stuck on their home planet, so long as intelligent
life isn’t so common that there’s been
a million-alien civilization independently
arising in our galaxy already.
Even tens of thousands makes it very unlikely
that we’d be able to hear any of them.
Especially as the inability to leave their
homeworld yet strongly implies their technology
peaked out not too far ahead of where we are
right now.
If everyone is transmitting signals you couldn’t
hear a thousand light years away, with that
same level of technology, then it might as
well be a thousand people evenly scattered
over a continent bellowing to each other,
no one’s within ten miles of each other
to catch that.
Worse in this case, those thousand people
are scattered across time too, so the one
20 miles away from you might have died off
long before you started listening.
This is usually on the show where we argue
these late filters don’t work well – and
indeed we will still argue that today, I wouldn’t
have waited a year to do an episode on this
topic if I thought it made a very strong case
– but our normal reasoning goes that our
current weapons aren’t capable of obliterating
humanity, and that the types of things that
could get us all need to be intelligent, like
AI, and would just replace us.
The Fermi Paradox doesn’t care if you’re
made out of meat or metal, anymore than it
cares if your species is homo sapiens or neanderthals.
Our other end of this is that space travel
is possible, even interstellar space travel,
and we’ve discussed this a lot, even looking
at low-tech ways of colonizing the galaxy
such as in our episodes Crawlonizing the Galaxy
and The Last Planet.
What we don’t tend to focus on is how you
sustain an ecology on a trip across the stars
or set one up on another planet.
Principally for two reasons.
First, while we have done some episodes on
that, like Exporting Earth, I’m a physicist
not a biologist and tend to focus on those
areas as a result, and our biology episodes
often have a co-writer or active editor helping
on them who is a biologist.
The second is that biology is not a hard limit
on colonization, and again the Fermi Paradox
doesn’t care if you’re meat or metal.
And that’s your ultimate fall back if your
biology never gets good enough for colonizing
the galaxy, back home someone is eventually
going to come up with some post-biological
approach.
That might mean a von Neumann machine arriving
and terraforming a planet from frozen samples
or digitally printed DNA, as we discussed
in Seeding the Stars, or it might be that
Skynet colonizes the galaxy with robots and
computer minds.
Either way this option bypasses the stable
ecology issue.
Mostly, because we need to be mindful that
post-biological or mechanical or digital civilizations
would still have their own equivalents of
ecosystems.
And ecosystems is the key of a concept like
Pancosmorio because it’s a reminder that
ecosystems, and civilizations, are not just
something you drop in or print out that just
automatically functions and keeps functioning.
As an example, our ecology here on Earth is
very dynamic.
Last century’s forest was a field or pond
a century ago and a farm now might be a forest
next century, and its internal composition
of critters and plants and food chains shifts
constantly.
And unless we found some planet that was an
utter and impossible copy of Earth, we couldn’t
just dump life there and expect it to thrive
like it did here.
Indeed many current or past organisms on Earth
would not thrive if dumped into a time machine
to a different era of Earth, let alone another
planet.
Non-stop maintenance and intercession would
be needed, even more so on some giant arkship
carrying colonists and zoos to some new planet
that lacks its own life.
A planet once terraformed, which would be
a long and arduous process of many centuries,
can de-terraform fairly quickly too.
Also some big ship full of colonists numbering
in the tens of thousands might seem like a
lot but compared to an entire planet, that’s
a group whose boots are very thin on the ground,
and a lot of them aren’t volunteers anymore
either.
The kids that are born en route to the colony
might decide that after they drop the colonists
off, them and everyone else who either didn’t
volunteer or changed their mind are putting
themselves on ice and flying back home to
Earth.
Or those that remain just don’t manage to
ever get that colony going as a working civilization
and it slowly falls apart.
The Aurora Effect is named for the novel Aurora
by Kim Stanley Robinson and documents such
a generation ship carrying a couple thousand
people and 24 self-contained biomes.
They journey at 10% of light speed to Tau
Ceti and their ship basically turns into a
dictatorship along the way and when they do
arrive they find the planet they planned to
terraform has bacterial life on it that makes
them sick.
The entire colonial effort fails, and they
head home, and the book is decidedly pessimistic
on colonization, which I assume was the author’s
intent, and so is the theory named for it.
There’s an undertone to a lot of settlement
stories that we go to new worlds because we’ve
messed up Earth and need a new place to wreck
but that’s not how the game works.
If you can’t keep Earth habitable you sure
as heck can’t make a dead rock like Mars
work.
And so if you approach humanity and Earth
as doomed and think we’re going to totally
wreck Earth beyond repair, then you need look
no farther for a Fermi Paradox solution, because
terraforming new planets is beyond that civilization's
skill and tends to imply that would be the
case for other alien civilizations, and an
example of a strong Late Filter if true.
More broadly it carries on from the idea of
Percolation Theory, which is the classic approach
to sub-light colonization of space.
Here we assume only a small fraction of star
systems are truly habitable and that we colonize
those near us and wait until those grow or
fail, and the ones that mature to modern numbers
and infrastructure will send out their own
colony ships to those in range, rinse and
repeat till you fill the galaxy.
Except that you have multiple parameters in
there and they can be set to cause it to extinguish
rather than expand forever.
Especially if there’s an additional cost
to maintaining a planet as Earth-like that’s
not too close a copy, then only Earth could
really operate at maximum for sending new
ones out and our daughter colonies are disadvantaged
in repeating that.
If your colony ship range is X, your chance
of successfully arriving is Y, and your chance
to establish and maintain a long term growing
civilization is Z, then those values don’t
need to be that low, especially if you’re
limited to Earth-clones near yellow suns,
to just make colonization fail completely
or peter out with a handful of colonies that
rely on regular transmission or shipments
of data or DNA to keep themselves viable.
Especially if Earth stops sending them.
Just as an example, if your odds at each of
those two steps is fifty-fifty, then only
1 in 4 of those colony expeditions you sent
out is ever sending out another colony ship
to a more distant world, and if your range
is just 20 light years, there are only 6 G-type
stars in that range, and if only half of those
had an exoplanet we could plausible terraform,
you now have 3 candidates and a 1 in 4 chance
a mission sent to one of them is sending out
a duplicate in a few millennia, which would
have fewer candidates on average since part
of its own 20 light-year sphere overlaps with
Earth’s sphere.
This brings us to Pancosmorio Theory from
Lee and Morgan Irons, a father-daughter team
who produced the paper of that same name in
2023, and even though I do not agree with
the conclusion many are drawing from it as
an extension of the Aurora Effect, it is a
great paper and establishes some excellent
ways to categorize sustainability of any environment
in space.
I will link it in the episode description.
Channel regulars already know most of those
reasons and we’ll revisit them but let’s
summarize the theory first.
It goes like this: Earth has unique conditions
that helped life evolve, and these conditions
might not exist elsewhere, and what’s more
the earth life evolved on was very different
than what life has turned it into after billions
of years, and that life is adapted to this
modern incarnation of Earth.
The study looks at how Earth and the Sun,
as its ultimate power-source, maintain life-friendly
environments amidst the vastness of space.
It reasons, entirely properly, that if humans
try to live in places without Earth-like conditions,
we might face challenges, like resource shortages
and societal collapses.
And that the smaller those ecosystems or the
less Earth-like they are, the more input from
Earth is going to be needed to keep them going.
Needless to say, it’s hard to maintain supply
chains in space, especially over interstellar
distances, so any fragile colony that is dependent
on that supply chain for survival is vulnerable,
and those that are just barely sustainable
on their own could fall apart quickly if something
went wrong, like an internal civil war.
Suppose we build a space habitat orbiting
Titan with a big parabolic dish near it to
focus sunlight to grow food.
We ship that food down to the nitrogen and
methane mines of Titan, and they pay in those
goods, which we stuff into big pods and ship
home to space habitats in the asteroid belt
or near Earth who want that nitrogen and methane.
Those ships return with new immigrants, new
biological seeds and specimens, and manufactured
goods.
It is not that hard to imagine damage to that
dish or civil unrest or labor disputes disrupting
one of those trade nodes or even just some
comet miners undercutting the business and
leaving Titan to wilt.
All the more reason for them to want to diversify
their trade and have more partners and clients
so they’re not as vulnerable, but that may
be hard to get started if the trade is already
marginal.
And frequently a settlement is started when
it is marginal, rather than waiting till it's
easier.
The early bird gets the worm… and the bit
left off is that the other bird starves to
death.
Many of these problems can be fixed by building
bigger, or getting in an occasional shipment
of DNA or frozen samples from home but that
all needs resources and if you’re suddenly
tight on those, you’ve got a problem, and
we see this in play in the economic ecosystem
of countless towns.
Roads crumble while crime rises and the tax
base decays while new business is just not
attracted to coming in there.
Any catastrophe is likely to disrupt things
even worse, and is more likely to occur and
be severe as you don’t have the resources
to prevent or to mitigate them as well.
One day you end up with a ghost town.
This doesn’t mean everyone died either.
That colony is probably not politically independent,
not with jugular veins that big, so while
their patrons might get exhausted sending
resupply, they probably would send a ship
to take people home.
Likely after first sending a new manager there
with some resources to try to get things moving
again first.
Indeed, it might be common practice for colony
endeavors under planning to be able to show
plausible business plans to investors and
have an insurance policy specifically covering
the cost of bringing in a crisis management
team and resupply, and then of having everyone
come home if the benchmarks for sustainability
get missed and failure is getting inevitable.
But that is another non-biological example
of a drain on a colony, because that’s being
paid out of a budget somewhere, even if it’s
essentially a measure of taxpayer support
and political willpower to send missions.
We could effectively build a fairly large
equivalent to the normal Fermi Paradox filters
for the late filter process of successfully
colonizing a planet that in turn colonizes
another planet, percolating out.
And I’d emphasize the non-biological examples
because channel regulars already know what
the usual answer to those biological ones
will be: Build your ecosystems bigger, build
more of them, be open to using genetic engineering,
cybernetics, and post-biological approaches.
Returning to the paper, as I said it gives
us a nice classification system, and not just
for ecosystems, and in 4 intuitive levels
that I’ll simplify out of the paper, which
discusses them more in a thermodynamics context.
Level 1 is our classic Space Opera planet
where there’s some differences with Earth,
but the Gravity and sunlight and other factors
permit a stable ecosystem that needs no further
input after initial settlement to stay around
for millions if not billions of years.
I would personally guess there’s fewer than
a billion planets like that in the galaxy,
maybe even tens of millions, as we don’t
really know how narrow the eye of that habitable
needle is that we need to thread.
And this is the keystone of the idea in the
Percolation and Aurora Effect context, because
if you have less than a billion Level-1 planets
out in our galaxy, our potential M-type planets
I suppose we could say, then you would only
expect 1 or 2 of them within a fifty light
year radius of Earth.
Which means you need colony ships able to
plausibly travel that far with a high chance
of arriving and with enough people and resources
to pull that settlement off without anything
but technical help transmitted from home.
That’s as much as a one-thousand year journey
with an Orion Drive spaceship moving at 5%
of light speed and that’s a very heavy lift.
And again, this is the basis of using this
as a Fermi Paradox solution.
It is entirely reasonable to then say we need
to be able to do much less hospitable ecosystems
in the long term to make space colonization
work, especially since a voyage of several
centuries presumably is required and expecting
a spaceship, multi-generational crew, and
onboard ecosystem to survive for that time
is also a very heavy lift.
But that takes us to Level 2, which is more
of the category we think of for space settlement
on this channel.
Where some degree of alteration, genetic or
cybernetic, to people and some organisms would
be needed for a completely stable ecosystem
or you would need some supply chain to keep
it going, and this is a potentially brittle
ecosystem as you are constantly bringing in
outside resources – which represents a supply
chain that accident or warfare can disrupt,
and same for some large piece of eco engineering
hardware like a parabolic sundish at Titan
or single huge solar shade at L1 for Venus.
And this is the circumstance for colonizing
our own solar system, and we usually reason
this is what we do before sending colony ships
into deep space since that makes for good
science fiction but crazy policy.
If you can’t make settlements work here,
it's too soon to send them to distant suns.
The early bird may get the worm, but not if
it doesn’t wait till it learns to fly first.
Level 3 goes further, though, and fits better
for our classic arkship.
Here we assume there’s not enough room or
energy in this system to avoid cascade failures,
that base on Titan we discussed earlier would
fit this, being relatively small and using
a parabolic dish to focus light in for heat,
photosynthetic light, and energy.
If something smashes that dish, then they
could freeze to death before they might repair
it.
That’s something they would obviously plan
for and have backups for, so our Titan case
isn’t a real level 3, but an arkship 20
years out from Earth running on a pair of
fission reactors and a limited stockpile of
replacement parts certainly is.
Level 4 is something like the existing international
space station that must have a strong umbilical
cord to Earth just to survive temporarily
and which has no plausible scenario for independent
existence and this would apply to most Moon
and Mars base designs as well as places like
McMurdo station in Antarctica.
And we could imagine this still being done
for interstellar travel in FTL scenarios,
your outpost that a ship with warp drive reaches
to resupply every year and change over crew,
your stargate-connected planet that suddenly
has that gate disconnect or break.
But otherwise you would be insane to have
an interstellar outpost or colony that was
intended to be level 4 at any point beyond
when it was in dock around Earth being built
and taking on supplies and crew.
When its engines turn and it leaves that dock,
it needs to be as independent and self-sufficient
as it can, not level 4.
The paper dips a lot more into thermodynamics
and discussion of cascade failure, power sources,
growth, blight, diversity loss, and cascade
failure hypotheses, and it is absolutely a
great basis for a planning chart for a colony,
but again not a Fermi Paradox solution in
and of itself.
With the exception of where it just got to
the point that the constant stacking issues
and problems for settlement, each individually
solvable, and probably even as a group, had
still just piled up to the point that nobody
wanted to try it.
And thinking about the constant roadblocks
to returning to the Moon and setting up a
base there, it certainly is believable that
could happen.
However, as we so often discuss, it just requires
us to be too wrong about too many of those
near-horizon technologies that kick you into
being a true post-scarcity civilization and
make problems like this not just solvable
but also appealing to a civilization that
basically wants for nothing but a good challenge.
Exploration and Expansion make for fairly
satisfying purposes to humans by default,
and probably any other critter that came up
Darwin’s ladder like we did.
And again, for my part, I never assume we
colonize space because we need a new home
or fear extinction otherwise.
Rather I just tend to assume humanity a couple
hundreds years from now just has very impressive
physical and medical technologies, and desires
to tackle the problem and claim new suns.
Space travel is a lot less risky if your body
is pumped full of tailored bacteria and nanobots
that can prolong your life indefinitely and
your boring day job is a one-day a week 8-hour
shift at the local paper clip factory making
sure the robots don’t go off the hinge when
corporate sends them a note to maximize paperclip
production ahead of the start of the school
year.
So, when someone suggests building a 20 mile
long space ark for the low-low price of 20
trillion bucks, you're viewing that in the
same way we would if someone said let’s
build a skyscraper.
It’s also not using brand-new untested technologies,
it’s using the same hydroponics systems
that a hundred space habitats out beyond the
belt have perfected and the same 3D printers
that everyone’s been using to manufacture
replacement parts for interplanetary ships
far from port for the last century.
You’re not sending a colony ship to one
Level-1 planet, you’re sending a fleet there,
and you’re sending a fleet to every star
nearby and have got the closed-loop ecosystem
thing down to such an art that you don’t
care what spectrum of sunlight that star shines
down on whatever dead rocks pass for planets
that are orbiting it.
You know what you’ve got, you know how to
use it, and you can make it and fix it.
You’ve got the recipes for success.
So long as you have that and a decent power
supply, you’re good.
With a good library of knowledge and tech
specs, and some decent automation and 3D printing,
probably including DNA printing from an archive
of organisms, then likely can keep your Level
2 and 3 ecosystems from undergoing cascade
failure.
The takeaway would be that you are militarily
and diplomatically vulnerable to anyone in
position to stress those factors, especially
if they are more robust to them then you are.
Which is how you can use diplomacy, trade,
and military muscle to create interplanetary
nations, but that vulnerability doesn’t
hamper interstellar growth because the same
issues that make interstellar travel difficult
also make it difficult to externally yank
on those vulnerabilities from light years
away.
Of course, it doesn’t prevent internal strife
from sparking off a cascade failure, a century
away from help or rescue or any court of law.
Which is a fair closing point to remember
because the thing that allows us to make Level
2 and 3 environments effectively sustainable
Level 1’s is advanced technology and human
willpower and intellect.
You can’t tamper proof these colony-ships
or colonies, even freezing the colonists for
the trip is not a total solution.
Humanity is traditionally its own worst threat
and you are exporting that wherever you export
us.
Enormous nuclear powered ships can get you
to new worlds, and automated resource gatherers
and manufacturers can help craft huge domes
and terraforming equipment to reshape worlds.
But they can absolutely also make missiles
and tanks too.
So while you probably will not need help from
distant Earth or need to fear them controlling
you, you do have potential problems closer
to your new home to consider.
You have the ability to forge a new world
into a paradise, but if your colonists don’t
agree on what paradise should look like, the
battle to determine that might not just delay
it being accomplished, but potentially leave
your newly living world, once more a dead
and barren rock.
One of the bedrocks of science and futurism
speculation is modeling systems and we see
that with Pancosmorio Theory and how the model
exposes a lot of potential weaknesses in classic
ideas of space colonization.
We also saw how minor crises and catastrophes
here on Earth could be ruinous to fledgling
colonies if unprepared.
A lot of times those models and topics can
sound complicated and part of my job is to
walk through these ideas in a fun and easy
way to help folks learn more about them.
That’s the same philosophy our friends over
at Brilliant have, fun and interactive learning,
and Brilliant is the best way to learn math,
science, and computer science interactively.
They have thousands of lessons on these topics
including tons of interactive visualizations
of probability and modeling.
From simple to complex, whatever your skill
level, Brilliant customizes content to fit
your needs and lets you solve at your own
pace.
The world is an amazing but chaotic place,
and Brilliant can be an excellent partner
for exploring it.
Prepare for your future, and build a daily
learning habit to future-proof yourself, in
bit-sized intuitive bits and at your own pace.
Try Brilliant out for free, for a full 30
days, by visiting brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or clicking on the link in the description,
and the first 200 people will get 20% off
Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
So that wraps ups our first episode for the
2024 but we have plenty more to come, continuing
this Sunday, January 7th, where we will deep
dive into the functions and uses of Statites,
Lagites, Quasites, Solar Moths, Mag Sails,
and other alternatives to classic Keplerian
Satellites and Orbits that offer us the possibility
to move stars or transform solar systems.
And speaking of transformation, in the future
we might transform animals into more intelligent
critters or even human intelligence, in a
process called uplifting, and in two weeks
we’ll discuss the ethical challenges of
that endeavor.
Then on January 14th it will be time for Scifi
Sunday and a look at Aliens vs AI, and which
is a greater threat to us and who would win
in a fight between the two.
And we’ll discuss regulating space on January
18th, then in 3 weeks we’ll talk about settling
our Lagrange Points and why a society at L5
would be awesome.
Then we’ll close out the month with a look
at how our universe might have began, or how
other previous universes might have predated
ours, in Conformal Cyclic Cosmology.
One month, 8 episodes,welcome to 2024!
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content
like Giant Space Monsters, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
