Even though Neptune is thirty times further
from the Sun than Earth, cold and dimly lit,
it’s still thousands of times closer to
us than the nearest stars.
And yet, it may turn out to be a great place
to live and a gateway to those stars.
So today we return to the Outward Bound series
to look at how we’d go about colonizing
Icy Giants like Neptune.
We’ve looked at colonizing gas giants before,
but mostly in the context of colonizing their
moons, and not so much the planets.
Ice Giants like Neptune and Uranus are very
common in the Universe - as best as we can
tell - and aren’t actually that much more
massive than Earth, generally only being 10
to 20 times as massive.
Not like the bigger Jovians which are many
hundreds or even thousands of times larger.
Indeed their surface gravity, for a given
value of ‘surface’, is pretty close to
Earth’s own.
Uranus has 89% of the Gravity Earth does,
and Neptune has 114% of Earth’s gravity.
Only Venus is closer, at 90%, and it is in
some ways harder to colonize than either of
these two planets.
Akin to the Venusian sky cities, we could
possibly build cities which float in Neptune’s
atmosphere; this, however, would be much more
challenging to pull off because the wind’s
on Neptune are murderous.
Even on the planet Uranus - which has lower
wind speeds in certain spots due, presumably,
to this planet being tilted on its side - high
wind speeds would still be a big problem.
They are also potentially a source of massive
power though.
Wind is tricky on Earth due to speeds ranging
from useless to hurricane force.
You wouldn’t use a classic windmill on places
like Neptune though, you’d use something
closer to a jet turbine.
Power is a pretty big issue for these outer
planets because the sunlight just isn’t
strong enough so far from the Sun to be a
viable way to power an entire colony.
These planets aren’t dark though, they get
lighting on par with what you’d expect in
a room lit by normal light bulbs.
We have some alternatives though.
We could also beam power out as we discussed
in the Power Satellites episode a couple months
back.
As already mentioned, we can tap the atmosphere
for wind power, as well as the Nuclear Option.
But what we really want is fusion, especially
for these two planets as they have large stockpiles
of Helium-3, the preferred fusion fuel for
aneutronic fusion.
We will discuss why aneutronic fusion is seen
as better than normal fusion in a moment.
I mention the other power sources just to
make it clear we have alternatives even if
we never achieve portable fusion, but Uranus
and Neptune in particular are both places
we’d be most likely to hold off fully colonizing
until we either did have it or knew it wasn’t
in the cards.
So let’s follow an intrepid traveller on
a journey to colonize Neptune.
It is the year 2400 and while Uranus has some
basic stations on its moons already, Neptune
only has a few small scientific outposts in
its atmosphere and on its largest of 14 moons
Triton, the coldest object in our solar system.
We’re colonists leaving from Earth on board
a colonization fleet that’s the first to
feature fully functional aneutronic fusion
drives, and as those rely on helium-3 for
fuel, establishing some big Helium-3 refineries
in the outer solar system is high on everybody’s
list.
We’ve had fusion technology for a while
but they are big and clunky power plants,
and while those improved, they never got too
good at powering ships.
The problem with typical neutronic fusion,
like that using deuterium and tritium, is
that most of the energy from that fusion event
is in neutrons, and these are hard to tap
for energy and do a lot of damage to whatever
containment system you are using.
Aneutronic fusion is exactly that, fusion
that doesn’t produce many neutrons, but
instead mostly stable and charged particles,
which should be easy to get electricity from.
Aneutronic fusion is far harder to do, but
represents probably the best path to relatively
compact and lightweight fusion reactors, like
the kind we’d like to use in spaceships
or small colonies, places where mass and size
matter a lot, and probably maintenance too.
Someone went through the difficulties in inventing
one, which opened the gates for us to the
outer solar system.
Not just Uranus and Neptune, but all of the
Kuiper Belt, which is vastly larger and more
massive than the Asteroid Belt, and indeed
it even opens the gates to the Oort Cloud
and other solar systems beyond.
We now have a ship engine able to produce
a significant thrust for days or even weeks
at a time.
Our Neptune Colonizing Fleet will burn out
toward Neptune at .2-gee for half the trip,
then flip over and burn down, arriving 5 weeks
after our departure from Earth, and reaching
a maximum velocity of 1% light speed.
Like in the Expanse, we can use constant acceleration
in place of rotating sections to provide gravity,
though in this case, just a little better
than Moon gravity.
But for a 5 week trip, that’s fine.
Now as we’ve noted before, this constant
acceleration approach is not usually a good
one since it is very fuel wasteful.
By preference, you’d accelerate faster but
not for as long, cruise, then flip over and
burn down to stop.
However, in this case it is okay because fuel
and propellant don’t matter too much because
that’s the hypothetical maximum acceleration
out of this style of fusion drive, .2-gee,
and that’s probably being optimistic.
So we just burn the whole time because it’s
not that long a trip.
And indeed we are quite capable of handling
a much higher acceleration, as we are not
exactly human.
The fuel is fairly rare but the propellant,
hydrogen in this case, is very common so we
can blow it like it was going out of fashion.
If we could accelerate faster we would, and
we’ll talk about how we might later, but
fusion drives and high-thrust don’t work
well, at least not if you want a high final
speed.
We’d like to be able to do a full-gee, like
we were standing on Earth, and in truth we’d
like to do more and we could handle a much
higher acceleration.
This is the 25th century after all, and we’ve
been picked to command this fleet because
we are an experienced traveler and colonist.
Few people in the solar system have been to
as many of humanity’s new worlds as we have
and we’ve made a career of colonizing planets
over the centuries.
And we’ve become more than a bit of cyborg
in that time.
Long gone are the days of roughing it or making
small outposts to slowly grow.
Our fleet is carrying state of the art expandable
rotating habitats with it, huge amounts of
colonial gear, and most of those ships will
be immediately departing to either pick up
tens of thousands of more colonists from Earth
or race off to the massive factories of the
Belt, Titan, and the Jovian Moons to pick
up more equipment.
We’ll need it too, because while we’ll
be temporarily housing people in those rotating
habitats in orbit of Neptune, we are going
to be building massive refining facilities
right inside of Neptune’s atmosphere.
Indeed, it is going to be the single largest
construct humanity has ever created.
It will even outstrip the Orbital Rings of
Earth.
After all, those refining facilities are going
to be similar to those rings, but Neptune
is a lot bigger than Earth.
See there’s a lot of ways to mine gas from
a gas giant.
You can dive down and scoop it up for instance.
But we are going to do this with the biggest
bucket wheel excavator in the galaxy, namely
a giant ellipsoid orbital ring which, incidentally,
looks like a chainsaw, a chainsaw fit for
a god like the one the planet is named after.
Neptune’s Chainsaw.
This is the 25th century we don’t do space
colonization small or on shoestring budgets
anymore.
Billions of people live and work in space,
and factories the size of small moons convert
megatons of ore into products every day.
Ships that dwarf the biggest oil supertanker
crawl across the solar system delivering goods
and soon they will sprint, not crawl, as superior
engines permit them to race across the void,
fueled by the near-endless stockpiles of helium-3
on Neptune and the other gas giants.
For now, many of those ships are carrying
out segments of Neptune’s Chainsaw for assembly,
and many of our passengers are not colonists
at all, but folks traveling to view the historic
event, the colonization of the last planet
in the solar system.
Truth be told, we find their presence rather
irritating, standing around gawking and getting
in the way, but this mission requires a lot
of resources and backing and spectators were
part of the cost for that.
One of them, on the younger side, asks us
why it is such a historic event.
We explain, until now humanity has been essentially
limited to using either stuff like uranium
or thorium for fast ships, or dependent on
powerful energy beams from huge collectors
near the Sun.
Those work, and energy beaming from the Sun
is actually quite efficient and part of this
expedition will be making that system even
more useful, but ultimately we were dependent
on those.
We couldn’t make massive amounts of power
locally and in a compact way.
In a generation or two, a small colony will
be able to buy its own aneutronic reactor,
cheaply fill a tank with helium-3 and deuterium,
and have a reliable local power source.
With fusion, and some decent local manufacturing
ability, they can set up anywhere they want,
even way out in the Oort Cloud, and only need
infrequent refueling.
Nobody can threaten to jack up their power
beaming rates or cut them off, a single tanker
of what Neptune will soon produce will let
a colony last centuries or even millennia
without needing any new fuel.
“But why is the Chainsaw going to be shaped
funny?
Elliptical, not circular, like Earth’s orbital
rings?”
our passenger asks.
Orbits come in many forms, including some
rather peculiar ones, almost every natural
orbit is an elliptical one.
If you can make a stable orbit, you can make
an orbital ring that matches that orbit.
You can even make some that wouldn’t normally
be possible.
Our goal, for the Neptunian Chainsaw, is to
have an elliptical one that drops down into
the atmosphere on its low portion and rises
high up afterward.
We will scoop gases up in big buckets which
will enter the ring’s Transport System and
be shoved along, refined as it goes for what
we want, and raced up to fill tanker ships.
Now we have options like this for Earth too.
You could put two big circular rings around
Earth connected by a third elliptical one.
Indeed, that would keep the low portion of
the ring just over the atmosphere and lower
tethers down to suck up air.
But what’s interesting about Neptune is
that its gravity is higher than Earth’s,
if not by a lot, and on that upper portion
of the ring it will be a bit lower.
We can build domes on those sections with
normal gravity and still get protection from
micrometeors and radiation by the thinner
atmosphere up there.
Meteor protection matters too since all of
the gas giants have rings of debris around
them - even though they’re not as big as
Saturn’s - and thus have a lot of meteors.
While there’s not enough light there to
grow most natural plants, it is enough to
comfortably see by, though Neptune’s day
is only 16 hours long, so you would want supplemental
lighting.
Fortunately there is an effective near-infinite
power supply right below.
And Triton is almost as large as our moon
and can provide plenty of construction and
manufacturing materials after we’ve consumed
it’s tiny siblings.
Triton is the last and smallest of the large
moons in our solar system and actually has
more mass than all other Neptunian moons smaller
than itself combined.
If you head down deeper into Neptune’s atmosphere,
it’s got interesting layers of clouds.
Clouds on Earth are made of water, but clouds
on some other planets can be made of methane,
ammonia or sulfuric acid instead.
Neptune though is thought to have many different
layers of clouds made of different things
as you go down.
Neptune and Uranus - which are small gas giants
but which you can also think of as Ice Giants
- have a lot more volatiles proportionally
than Jupiter has for instance.
Volatiles, things like nitrogen, water, carbon
dioxide, ammonia, methane and sulfur dioxide,
are always of interest to us, and if we’re
willing to dive deeper down, we can find clouds
of them for harvesting.
We often think of mining space for metals,
precious ones like gold or ones for construction,
but these chemicals we need as the basic building
blocks for life itself are very precious.
Triton is also a good source for volatiles
and its surface is covered with these ices;
but since demand is growing and since mining
that ice is more difficult than just scooping
or pumping it up, it would still be advantageous
and indeed preferable to mine such volatiles
from Neptune’s atmosphere.
Now, we have a few ways to get down to those
deeper levels.
The first of course is to suspend yourself
from a tether, hanging from Neptune’s Chainsaw
- the orbital ring system that encircles Neptune
which we discussed earlier.
The second would be to fly down in some interesting
mixture of plane and submarine.
The third would be from a balloon or even
a giant turbine.
A problem with using balloons on gas giants,
as opposed to Venus, is that they are mostly
hydrogen with a bit of helium, our two preferred
lifting gases.
You can’t use something as a lifting gas
inside an atmosphere composed of that, on
Venus we can even use oxygen as one because
the atmosphere is made of denser gases.
But Neptune is almost 20% helium, so we could
use pure hydrogen, likely in plentiful supply
as you refine out the helium and helium-3.
And you can heat it too since we’ve got
access to power.
Or you can just run a giant engine and coast
along with the terrifying winds.
But you could also keep yourself pressurized
like a submarine and drop deeper instead,
to where you’d be buoyant.
Hanging down from tethers seems rather neat
though, and since the Sun isn’t really your
source of light, there’s no need to build
flat.
You don’t have to make your Orbital Ring
wider to support more domes, though you can.
Instead you just build up or down from it
or another supported platform.
Hanging down is as structurally sound as building
up like a skyscraper; the only difference
is that one relies on tensile strength whereas
the other relies on compressive strength.
So you could have hanging cities, lighting
themselves, suspended over Neptune and down
into its atmosphere.
Cities, glowing in the dim dusky light, hanging
down like immense chandeliers.
Chandelier cities.
A book series I’m fond of, Gregory Benford’s
Galactic Center Saga, references Chandelier
Civilizations at one point but I never got
a description of them, I’ve always wondered
if this is what he had in mind.
I should ask him one day, but regardless we
shall call these Chandelier Cities and they’re
ideal for Ice Giants.
I imagine they’d be absolutely stunning
to approach by plane, hanging there among
the clouds and storms.
But the atmosphere, while it gets much denser
as we go deeper, is not the majority of Neptune.
Indeed it has a very large mantle which is
perhaps a dozen times more massive than the
entire Earth and which is composed mostly
of the ices that make us call it an Ice Giant.
With all that water, ammonia, and methane
ice, it is massively rich in the building
blocks we need for artificial ecosystems.
Getting down there to mine it would be tricky.
But active support, like our orbital rings,
can be used to make stuff much stronger against
crushing too.
However, it’s quite likely it rains diamonds
down there and we could get quite deep just
relying on strong materials.
Because of this we’d be able to harvest
a lot of that diamond and possibly other materials.
Or even get to live in diamond hard domes
deep down in Neptune.
I should note, though we always hope the future
will be peaceful, that these sort of buried
colonies, hidden and shielded by huge atmospheres,
are good places to live during conflicts.
For that same reason, you could see a lot
of rotating habitats bury themselves deep
under ice or rock in asteroids and comets,
or import a lot of hydrogen and helium not
just as a long term fuel supply but additional
shielding, they can wrap their habitat in
cheap tanks of gases.
It’s hard to drill deep into the Earth not
just because of the pressure but the rising
temperature; but it’s not as bad inside
Neptune’s mantle as it is in Earth’s.
Eventually there is a core - which is essentially
a rocky planet all its own down there - but
you’d probably have to remove that atmosphere
to get to it.
We’ll talk more about mining planetary mantles
and cores in our Earth 2.0 series, which will
start next month.
For Ice Giants in other solar systems, ones
nearer their Sun, as some might well be, you
might blow that atmosphere off and use it
like a rocket flame to push the planet into
its sun’s habitable zone, and be left with
a rocky planet when you’re done which is
ready for terraforming.
For this we can employ the Fusion Candle we
discussed in Colonizing Jupiter.
We’re not expecting to do that with Neptune
though.
The long term plan is just to build more Neptunian
chainsaws and regular circular but wider orbital
rings around it till we encompass the whole
planet.
This is something we call a Shell World, and
we discussed it in more detail in the Mega
Earths episode.
Even for an advanced civilization living in
the 25th century, building a shell world around
Neptune would take a really long time, but
it can be done incrementally.
Just adding more rings and chandelier cities
till you encompass the whole planet, then
add dirt and water and lighting, potentially
Sun-Moons orbiting once a day, vast fusion
satellites producing light.
We have a power supply for that and such an
enormous construction project and as we mine
Neptune’s atmosphere and mantle, we can
slowly contract those rings and, therefore,
contract the shell world too, keeping it to
a size that provides normal Earth gravity.
Incidentally, even if you eventually expanded
your orbital rings to make a complete Shellworld,
you could keep those Chandelier Cities we
mentioned earlier hanging down under the shell.
They might also work very well on planets
or moons with icy shells over deep oceans,
like Europa.
Neptune’s own moon Triton might have a subsurface
ocean too.
There is a lot of gas on Neptune, and it raises
the question: What would we do with it all?
For that matter, with Uranus being closer,
and maybe easier to mine with its lower winds,
who is buying our Helium-3?
Well, first, the Helium-3 concentration on
Neptune is 19 parts per million which is a
little higher than Uranus’s 15 parts per
million Helium-3 concentration.
But second, in a fusion economy, that extra
distance to Neptune from the inner solar system,
as opposed to Uranus, is actually fairly irrelevant.
Indeed parts of the asteroid belt will sometimes
be as close to Neptune as Uranus and this
difference in distance doesn’t much matter
anyway.
It’s a minor amount of delta-v compared
to the energy that fuel contains.
Tankers carrying helium-3 and Deuterium would
still move slow.
It won’t spoil and has a high energy density
so there is no reason to move it quickly and
waste energy or capital on very large engines.
Moreover though, we’ll be seeing a lot more
people moving to the outer solar system now,
particularly the Kuiper Belt, where land is
cheap and plentiful - but they’d have to
bring their own sunlight.
And as rarely as one would need to bring in
fusion fuel, folks can wait a couple centuries
till Neptune is close to them again on its
own long orbit to refuel themselves.
But when asked, our traveler, admiral of this
colonial fleet and figurehead governor of
Neptune, says that it is really all about
ships, and not just ones with aneutronic fusion
drives.
See, you can bounce a laser off a sail and
make it go further away or even off to a side,
by tilting the sail to bounce the light at
an angle.
But you can’t move just sideways, or inward
toward the Sun, not by bouncing alone.
What you can do though is bounce a beam off
something further out, and bounce it back
in at your light sail, pushing you back inward
toward the Sun.
The problem is, if you stick a mirror further
out than your ship, you will push it away
eventually.
So it helps to have that mirror on something
that is massive enough for the recoil to be
negligibly small.
Ice Giants and their Moons are perfect for
this, as are larger icy bodies in the Kuiper
Belt.
They can also emit their own beams, rather
than bounce, if they have a power source.
Had nobody invented good, cheap aneutronic
fusion, we could have gone about colonizing
the outer solar system this way.
Beaming energy out from massive solar collectors
near the Sun and using those, bounced back,
to push ships inward, and to power these cold
lonely pushing stations.
Even with fusion though, it’s still a nice
path, because it means ships need not rely
entirely on onboard fuel and propellant.
Indeed, the combination of the two will allow
even better and safer and cheaper interplanetary
travel.
We said that this sort of fusion drive really
only permitted a maximum acceleration of .2
gee, and there are ways that could perhaps
be boosted, but it could pull that while getting
beamed energy, or even beamed propellant,
out to the ship.
So you’d get laser highways inside a solar
system folks could use to supplement their
engine, but they could still operate without
them too.
It would be like jumping in the fast lane,
and gives the benefits of both systems while
removing many of the limitations of, and dependance
on, each.
Our traveler turned admiral turned governor
though has even bigger plans than Chandelier
Cities, Planetary Chainsaws, Shellworlds,
and giant mirrors.
Indeed even plans beyond colonizing the Kuiper
Belt and Oort Cloud.
Our governor plans to colonize the Stars themselves.
He tells our young tourist that one day the
Moons of Neptune will be giant shipyards,
turning out colonial fleets to head out to
the stars themselves, Armadas that will be
built here and launch, not out to the stars,
but in toward the Sun, pushed by beams toward
it and then sail past, pushed even faster
by stellasers near the Sun, running up to
decent fractions of light speed then back
out again, ever faster, pushed on till they
reach the Kuiper Belt and then pushed even
more, from relays and lasers out there.
Then they will cruise along ahead, massive
interstellar arks lit and warmed by fusion
reactors, sailing off to yet more distant
homes.
Neptune, we tell our young passenger, will
be the gateway to the deep ocean of outer
space, the last big port of call, and it may
be big indeed.
With vastly more size and resources than Earth,
with a near endless source of power, with
all those moons and its own rings and Kuiper
Belt nearby, it could become a massive kingdom
fit for its namesake.
If our young passenger returns to Neptune
when they’re an adult, they’ll see a growing
empire that they can reach in just a couple
weeks travel, and quite cheaply.
It’s an empire the governor himself will
never lead.
Once it’s built up enough to build its own
fleets for interstellar travel, he means to
be on one of those, and tells our young passengers
he hopes they’ll join one themselves one
day.
The solar system is now a much bigger place,
opened up far past the asteroid belt for settlement,
but it’s just a tiny corner of a vast galaxy.
While not the last frontier of our solar system,
Neptune is the last truly big one, and it’s
fitting it should serve as the gateway to
the stars.
So this is not the end of the Outward Bound
series; we still have a lot of solar system
to explore, not to mention other systems,
and some places closer to home to revisit
like the Moon or Mars.
However, while we continue our look at the
ships that will get us to those other star
systems, we’re going to take some time to
talk about colonizing a bit closer to home
than even our Moon.
In the upcoming Earth 2.0 series we’ll be
looking at colonizing our oceans and frigid
poles and deserts and mountains and how we
can use the technology we’ve discussed in
this series to do it.
We talked a lot about Orbital Rings today
and structures hanging down from them, our
Chandelier Cities.
A lot of times we suggest structures folks
aren’t used to and can seem less safe as
a result, even though they are often more
structurally sound than things we use all
the time.
Ultimately they use the same structural mechanics
as a Suspension Bridge, so do the rotating
habitats we often discuss.
Most folks are comfortable with those because
they’re familiar, but if you’re curious
about the mechanics involved, so you can understand
why a city hanging down from an orbital ring
is as safe or even safer than a skyscraper
or your house, I’d suggest trying out Brilliant's
course “Infrastructure”.
As part of their Physics of the Everyday courses,
Infrastructure has some great quizzes on bridges
and skyscrapers, and like all their quizzes,
they’re meant to keep teaching, not just
evaluate knowledge.
The future is going to be a place of vast,
awe inspiring structures that dwarf anything
we have now, and if you want understand them
and the challenges to building them, the Infrastructure
course is a great way to do that.
If you’re interested in learning more math
and science, and doing so at your own pace,
you can go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur and
sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription
So as mentioned we’ll be talking about colonizing
Earth soon and we’ll start that off with
a look at Seasteading and making artificial
islands in two week, then moving on to Colonizing
the Oceans after that.
First though, we’ll be exploring the human
mind and talking about mind control and brainwashing,
and our book of the month, George Orwell’s
dystopian classic, “1984”
Make sure to subscribe to the channel for
alerts when those episodes come out, and since
this episode happens to be coming out on my
birthday, I will shamelessly guilt everyone
with that before asking you to please like
this video and share it with others, it also
happens to be the fourth anniversary of the
channel, and its original pilot episode.
If you want to help support the channel on
Patreon, you can find a link to that in the
episode description below, along with our
facebook and reddit groups, if you want to
discuss this topic more.
And should you visit those, I’d be curious
what other places you’d like this series
to visit, when we return to it.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
