So today we are looking at Water Worlds, places
that consist entirely of water on their surface
with no land at all.
We’ll be discussing how they might still
have land life in spite of that, how life
might evolve there, and how we might terraform
such a planet ourselves.
Now it has been a while since we were in the
Habitable Planets series, we’ve been off
covering a lot of other topics, many inter-connected,
so it will be nice break to talk about a subject
that is a lot more down to Earth, at least
as much as discussing an alien world could
be considered down to Earth.
Though by the standards of this channel this
subject is about as close as we come to that.
If you’re new to the channel I will occasionally
reference associated topics we’ve covered
in more detail elsewhere, and you’ll often
see a video link pop-up you can click on to
pause this video and watch that one in a new
window.
Also if you haven’t gotten used to my voice
yet it’s a good idea to turn on the closed
caption subtitles on the video.
We tend to move through a lot of info quickly
so anything that makes it easier for you to
understand me is a good idea.
On that note, if you are a veteran to this
channel I should add that we will be going
at a slower pace for this video, I think I’ve
been slamming through material a little too
quickly in recent ones and I felt like we
should take our time for this trip.
Whenever we look at these planets in this
series we have certain goals we aim to achieve
and questions that need answering, and I thought
I’d list them out formally this time.
These are:
1) What are the specific traits of these planets?
2) Are there any important sub-categories?
3) How likely or uncommon are such planets?
4) How likely is life on them?
5) How likely is complex or intelligent life?
6) How would we terraform such a planet?
Now most of the time in this series I’d
ask if we could terraform a given type of
planet but if you’re a regular to this channel
you know the answer is always yes, heck last
week we were talking about basically terraforming
black holes, so I’m not even going to bother
answering if we can terraform a planet covered
in water, just talk about some of the options
unique to Oceanic Planets.
Ditto, on a planet covered in liquid water,
which is our main trait used to define the
Habitable Zone of a solar system, if liquid
water can exist there, it would seem a bit
pointless to ask if life can emerge on such
planets.
We’ll instead look at how in some cases
it might not, and some challenges some types
of Oceanic planets might face for complex
life to emerge.
So let’s start with #1, what are the specific
traits of these planets?
What makes a planet an Ocean World and what
other features might we expect.
Well the simple answer is it is a planet almost
completely covered in water, though it might
have some small landmasses and ice at the
poles, and today we aren’t interested in
a world that’s totally covered in ice though
we will be talking about ice quite a lot,
even on ones with none on the surface because
there’s a lot of different types of ice
and some can exist at room temperature or
even temperatures that would boil water normally.
More on that in a bit.
Today I am defining this broad category of
planets into those which contain little or
no land, at least in the sense of land being
rocks and dirt left over from volcanic eruptions
and tectonic upheaval above the sea level.
And it is tricky for us to predict how common
that actually is on planets because we still
don’t know what drives our tectonic plates,
or what the prime force driving them is.
There’s many theories, that it’s convection
in the mantle over them or that old plates
get denser and sink being the two most popular
currently.
And we don’t know how much tidal forces
of moon or sun play a role in this.
Stacked again that, we know the sun and moon
both play a huge role in erosion of land.
Waves crashing onto rock, tides lowering and
raising the sea level, storms, rain, wind
etc all act to erode rocky landmasses and
in a world with no tectonic activity they’d
eventually wear down the landscape, and if
they were stronger they’d do it faster.
A world with very little tectonics and a great
deal of erosive forces could easily become
one in which there was no land even if the
seas weren’t very deep.
Similarly if your oceans are a lot deeper,
it’s much harder for land to emerge up through
all that extra water.
And water is very common in the universe because
hydrogen and oxygen are the first and third
most abundant elements.
Earth is just under a third each iron and
oxygen, with the remaining third being mostly
silicon and magnesium, but oxygen is much
more common in the crust and iron in the core.
The rock and dirt you walk on, the water your
drink and swim in, is mostly oxygen, because
oxygen is so common in the Universe.
Yet hydrogen and helium are much more common
in the Universe and nearly absent from Earth,
and oxygen is a lot less common on the Planet
Mercury for instance.
We’ve talked about this before and it comes
down to three big factors.
The sun tends to hammer planets with ionizing
radiation that strips off lighter elements,
especially helium which can’t chemically
bond to anything to form heavier molecules
and solids.
Retaining lighter elements then comes down
to three things:
1) How massive or dense a planet is.
Increasing these increases the escape velocity
of the planet and those particles trying to
flee it.
2) How strong its magnetosphere is.
Since that will help keep back some of the
radiation stripping the particles and can
bounce many fleeing ones back down, and...
3) How hot the planet is.
Since that indicates both how much radiation
it is being exposed to and what the overall
temperature is.
Temperature provides a large initial boost
to each particles speed, especially lighter
elements, that make them easier to whack with
radiation and add enough speed to lift them
off the planet.
We’ve talked about that in more detail in
the Terraforming video.
What it means in a nutshell is that planets
much lighter than earth generally won’t
have true atmospheres and so can’t have
liquid water either, water just doesn’t
exist as a liquid below 600 pascals, or 6
millibars of pressure, about 0.6% of Earth
sea level air pressure, and even above that
there’s a much lower range of temperatures
that permit liquid water to exist than we’re
used to.
There’s an experiment we often do in introductory
physics courses where we stick a cup of water
at room temperature under a jar and pump out
air until it boils.
Pressure is always pushing on water molecules
trying to stick them together while temperature
pushes them outward, trying to force them
apart, liquids basically exist in that range
where neither is winning the fight.
When pressure wins and dominates the situation
you generally get a solid and when temperature
wins you get a gas.
That pressure and temperature vary by each
substance and you can get many different types
of solids with some substances, including
normal old water ice.
That will important in a bit too.
Now pressure is a factor of only how strong
gravity is at a given spot and how much stuff
is sitting on top of it.
You’ve got roughly 14 pounds of air sitting
over every square inch of your head for instance,
14 PSI, or around ten tons on every square
meter, 10,000 kilograms or about 100,000 Pascals,
or 100 kilopascals or 0.1 Megapascals.
You’d also know this as a bar of pressure,
a bar being exactly 100 kilopascals or .1
megapascals, or an atmosphere of pressure.
It’s actually a bit more at sea level, an
atmosphere is 1.01 bars.
Up here in Ohio where I live it’s usually
a bit less than that, about .98 Bar or .97
atmosphere.
These can get confusing sometimes because
while the one is calibrated off sea level
the other is in metric and just coincidentally
they are very close to each other.
In case you’re wondering Mars’s atmosphere
at the surface is 6 millibars which as I mentioned
is the point where liquid water ceases becoming
possible at any temperature so it wouldn’t
take much more air to allow liquid water on
Mars.
So lighter planets have a problem holding
on to air and water.
Alternatively heavier planets can hold on
to it much easier so we actually expect, all
things being equal, that planets bigger than
Earth would have more water on them proportionally.
But they also have less surface area to spread
that around on.
If I keep density the same and just double
a planet’s mass, I’d only increase it’s
radius by about 26% percent and its surface
area by 59%.
Yet it would have double the water even if
it only had the same percentage of its mass
made of water, so the water would be 26% deeper
on average.
Like I said though, you’d expect if Earth
were more massive it would have more water
proportionally too, because much less of its
hydrogen would escape.
So its ocean could be even deeper.
I’ve mentioned this in regard to the Fermi
Paradox, the question of where all the aliens
are, as an example of how a planet might be
uninhabitable, at least to technological life,
from even a minor change to Earth’s mass
since we might have no liquid water if we
were just a bit less massive and so much water
there’d be no land if we were a bit more.
We’re not really sure yet where that critical
point comes in though, since planetary modeling
is still pretty new and hasn’t got tons
of real world data from exoplanets to plug
in to check it.
But the indications so far are that worlds
significantly more massive than Earth and
similar in temperature will have more water,
and that planets significantly less massive
will either be icy if cold or lack much ocean,
maybe any at all.
So even though the main trait of a water world
is simply having a lot of water, we are seeing
a second related trait that they probably
tend to be massive.
Don’t confuse this with ice-covered planets
or moons like Europa where under the ice there’s
liquid water, different topic for a different
day.
That’s our third trait though, they need
to be warm enough to have liquid water with
only air and space between that water and
the sun, which also puts photosynthesis on
the table, more on that later.
So let’s move onto our second topic for
today, sub-categories of these planets.
This is mostly about depth of the water.
There’s really no official names for these
yet and the two subcategories created at Orion’s
Arm, a site those of you who are regulars
here know I like to reference a lot, don’t
satisfy me in this case as a good system.
There they use Bathypelagic and Panthallasic
to refer to water worlds where the oceans
are less than 50 kilometers deep, or 30 miles,
for the former and more for the latter.
This is non-ideal because it’s not describing
them in anything but arbitrary depth, though
the break isn’t entirely arbitrary, 30 miles
is twice as high as the tallest mountain in
the solar system, Olympus Mons on Mars, where
there is no significant erosion to shorten
it and less gravity to prevent it getting
higher, so we can safely assume land masses
arising from an ocean floor will very rarely
get that high and thus couldn’t be dry land,
just underwater mountains.
But as I said, this doesn’t satisfy because
we have more variables in mind.
So let’s create four planets based on water
depth and erosive and tectonic net effects.
Now Thalassic and Pelagic both mean water
or sea in old Greek but Pelagic is what we
use for defining oceanic zones here on Earth
so I will stick with that.
Personally I prefer to consider them all Panthalassic
but that’s because I can’t pronounce worlds
and Panthalassic Planets suits me better than
Water Worlds.
It’s also Greek, Pan, all, Thalassic, sea,
and you’re supposed to use Greek or Latin
for this stuff or people might not think you’re
doing science.
Plus I hated that film, Waterworld, in spite
of being a big fan of Kevin Costner as an
actor and director.
A couple years later he did the film Postman
adapted from the book of the same name by
eminent author and physicist David Brin and
I think it’s a pity he didn’t do them
backwards since he could have consulted Brin
about a Waterworld, something he discussed
in his Uplift series at one point.
Of course he’d probably have told Costner
that if you melted every drop of ice at our
poles you’d still have a ton of land left
over and scuttled the project or just been
ignored, but I’m digressing again.
So Panthalassic Planets will be the type name,
and we will use pelagic for our subtypes.
Now the Pelagic Zones we use are a bit arbitrary
for the lower ones so we’ll be lumping them
together and taking some liberties with them,
along with creating a new one, Stereopelagic.
Here are my four:
1) Epipelagic Planets – planets where only
a thin skin of water covers the planet but
covers it basically everywhere, such planets
would only exist where erosive forces seriously
beat out tectonic forces creating land.
I am including the mesopelagic zone in these,
but basically they would be planets where
if you couldn’t hold your breath and swim
to the bottom in most places, you could scuba
your way down.
Epi means over in Greek and we’re thinking
of it like Epidermis, your top layer of skin.
Mesopelagic, meso, simply means middle, like
mesolithic means middle stone age.
2) Bathypelagic – Planets where the ocean
depths are more comparable to the norm on
Earth, erosive forces dominate tectonics enough
that you don’t get landmasses except maybe
the occasional small island.
These would be places where the ocean is miles
deep almost everywhere, potentially even deeper
than the deepest trenches on Earth.
Bathypelagic means deep sea.
3) Abyssopelagic – On Earth this is the
next layer after the Bathypelagic but you
still have one more, the Hadopelagic, reference
Hades, that is pretty arbitrary and mostly
just applies to ocean trenches.
Abyss meaning endless in Greek, while on Earth
this begin just four kilometers down we will
be assuming it begins deeper today, Abyssopelagic
Planets for today will assume any planet where
even strong tectonic forces simply aren’t
enough to cause land to rise up through all
that water.
We can’t put an actual depth to that, since
not only would it vary from planet to planet
but we don’t have the science for it just
yet.
As I mentioned we don’t actually know what
drives Tectonic forces for sure.
For today it is a planet where even strong
tectonics can’t hoist land up over all that
water but there is actually land down there
eventually.
Now you might say, well no duh, every planet
would have land eventually but not quite,
and that gives us our fourth category.
4) Stereopelagic – Stereo actually means
solid in Greek, so Solid Ocean would be the
meaning here.
As we’ll see in a bit water under enough
pressure, even at high temperatures, can become
ice, and ice denser than normal water so it
wouldn’t float up.
Not only is the water to deep to possibly
allow any surface land but there’s not even
land at the bottom of the sea, just a thick
layer of ice.
In case you are curious the use of stereo
to describe sound emerged in the 1920s term
stereophonics, literally solid sound, which
might be regarded as a bit of marketing made
up word for better sound quality.
It’s an interesting mutation because we
mostly know stereo from the sound device for
giving you a left and right ear sound, or
the word stereotype, which itself is a mutation
off of the original stereotype, which meant
printing with a solid plate of type rather
than movable type printing presses, and its
modern form associated to bigotry is also
from the 1920s.
Stereoscopic images at least influences the
word stereophonic, since those involved producing
an image which seemed more solid when viewed
by using two separate images too give a 3D
effect, one which was more solid as it were,
and was very popular in the 19th century.
Here we are using it very literally, Stereopelagic,
solid ocean, as our deepest Panthalassic Planet
Type, oceans which might go a hundred miles
or more deep, and above that Abyssopelagic
Planets, for ones of seeming endless depth
until many miles down you hit land.
Above that Bathypelagic Planets where the
oceans are as deep or decently deeper than
on Earth, and the lack of land is simply due
to a mix of depth and greater erosive forces.
And finally, our shallowest, Epipelagic, where
the ocean is not very deep at all, no more
than most lakes, and these can exist only
because of very weak tectonics mixed with
powerful erosion.
That erosion incidentally need not be entirely
natural, in this sense possibly being a byproduct
of life itself.
We’ll talk about these in detail now, but
we’ll be adding in our third, fourth and
fifth topics as we go through each individually
and summarize those at the end of our look
at the 4 sub-types.
Those again were how common or likely such
a planet is, how likely life would be on them,
and how likely it would be for complex or
intelligent life to show up on them.
So let’s talk about these in a bit more
detail, and back down in order of depth.
An Epipelagic Planet is a very shallow one.
These probably wouldn’t be terribly common
because it’s not very likely a planet could
have so little tectonics as to keep a planet
that nearly smooth and still have water and
air.
After all even the occasional large asteroid
strike ought to spoil that smoothness.
But they wouldn’t be so rare as the double
planets and Rocheworlds we discussed last
time either.
As I mentioned I wrapped in the mesopelagic
zone to this planet type too.
On Earth the Epipelagic Zone, also known as
the Photic Zone, is the first 200 meters or
660 feet of water, where photosynthesis is
actually possible.
This will be the case on most other planets
too though those with thicker atmospheres
won’t get as much light through and it might
be decently less there.
It wouldn’t be much more though because
a planet that received more illumination that
could penetrate deeper would also be much
hotter.
The Mesopelagic, which extends beneath that
to about kilometer of depth, is too deep for
photosynthesis but still light enough for
vision to be useful.
Virtually all marine life lives in these two
zones and it is the Epipelagic that is the
main food pump for marine life.
Now the reason this is an important sub-type
is because there is no problem at all with
getting nutrients and minerals to the area
where photosynthesis can take place.
That is big issue with the others 3 types.
On our Epipelagic Planets water currents can
easily transport stuff from the sea floor
up to the light-heavy regions for plants to
use and it would be possible for plants to
grow like trees from the bottom all the way
to the top, although that would be trickier
for plants who were growing in areas where
the light didn’t get all the way down to
the sea floor strong enough to allow photosynthesis.
But the epipelagic does go down 660 feet,
deeper than the tallest redwood trees are
high, and there is seaweed that has been measured
nearly 200 meters tall too.
So you could get some very tall marine flora,
and such worlds actually ought to hyper-abundant
in life.
On Earth, outside of the shallow regions,
the ocean tends to be low on life even in
the photic zone because there just isn’t
much nutrients available and plants have had
to adapt to be able to even just get that.
Where the ocean is shallower, closer to the
shore, life is much more abundant because
nutrients are readily available to plants
by either being directly accessible or easily
kicked up by tides and currents to that height.
So that’s our definition for an Epipelagic
planet, one which weirdly has no land above
water but is still close enough to the sea
floor that plants can either directly reach
it, and sunlight, or that currents drive nutrients
up regularly.
Which if there is a lot of erosive force would
presumably be easier too.
You would expect life, if it arises, to be
super-abundant compared even to Earth, an
Epipelagic Planet should be a giant biomass
pump.
Now you would think life would be very likely
to arise on search worlds but that’s not
a given.
We have three probable causes for the origin
of life, in a modern scientific context anyway.
Tidal pools, oceanic thermal vents, and panspermia.
Now Panspermia, the notion that the simple
precursors for life, or even very simple life,
might have rained down on Earth isn’t in
great favor and often attracts some mystic
woo and pseudoscience elements but it remains
a decent theory for abiogenesis and obviously
would work as well on this planet as any other,
so no problem.
Tidals pools wouldn’t actually exist on
a landless planet but reasonable approximations
of that same effect, essentially making a
nice solution of mud, would be quite abundant.
Thermal Vents less so, since we have said
these planets would exist primarily because
tectonic forces giving rise to volcanic activity
wouldn’t be strong, and so you wouldn’t
expect as many thermal vents though that’s
hard to say for sure.
Last I checked that was the preferred theory
for the origin of life over tidal pools and
both are normally considered vastly more likely
than panspermia, so these worlds could remain
barren lifeless mudballs.
I don’t think it’s a stretch to assume
they would have life, and complex life would
have no serious barriers to existence either
after that, including intelligence.
But you can’t have fire on a Panthalassic
Planet because everything is either underwater
or constantly drenched.
Now to get around that, first we could assume
plants formed dry areas, either treetops,
as it were, extending above the water or actual
rafts.
It isn’t inconceivable you might get some
analog to dry land on some of those.
Ditto you could get ice at the poles and icebergs
drifting south and maybe things would live
on those even if just as a place to hang out
to fish from.
But even in that scenario they would have
to carry their rock up from the seabed manually
and I can’t see them ever developing metal.
A scenario for technological civilization
arising from a world like this, or any of
our Panthalassic Planet types, probably does
exist but it would seem very contrived and
improbable.
Alternatively once technology did exist it
would be easy enough to maintain so it would
be no issue for a civilization to setup shop
on such a planet that arose elsewhere.
So ignoring that these planets probably aren’t
too common, though probably not incredibly
rare either, and also the possible thermal
vent issue for letting life begin there in
the first place, Epipelagic Planets are ideal
for life, better than Earth probably at least
for pumping out raw quantity, but not for
creating technological civilizations.
Bathypelagic Planets would be a bit harder
on life.
These planets are likely a lot more common
than Epipelagic but the depth of the oceans
makes transport of nutrients up to the Photic
Zone quite tricky.
Especially since we’ve already stipulated
that most of these probably have oceans deeper
than our own Bathypelagic Zone on Earth usually
ends at or much less tectonic activity, otherwise
they’d have land.
You could get life around the thermal vents,
but unless there were at least some islands
or lots of spots where the land rose nearly
to the surface it would be hard to get much
nutrient up to the photic zone.
I already mentioned that those parts of our
own ocean that go that deep tend to be fairly
barren even up in their photic zone from a
lack of nutrients but it is actually a bit
worse here because we still have plenty of
land sweeping nutrients out to ocean before
they sink too deep.
So Bathypelagic Planets could certainly have
life deep down near thermal vents, but that’s
not very nourishing at a planetary scale,
and they’d have a tough time getting anything
going up in the photic zone.
Indeed the main source for energy for life
in our own Bathypelagic Zone is Marine Snow,
a term for the constantly falling, snow-like
appearing detritus of flora and fauna in the
upper zones.
I think you’d almost need a reverse snow,
dead matter and nutrient carrying itself upwards,
to get this to work.
But you need some sort of pump putting nutrients
up where the sun could reach, or a ton of
thermal vent activity which would seem to
counter-indicate not having any landmasses.
So these planets would probably have life,
but it wouldn’t likely get very abundant
and that would make long food chains to support
large animals in large quantity tricky so
intelligent life would seem unlikely.
It has even more of a problem developing technology
than Epipelagic Planets if intelligence did
arise though.
A Bathypelagic planet would probably need
to have a lot of just barely submerged mountains
or many tiny islands to still qualify as a
Panthalassic Planet yet get the nutrients
needed.
If it had a lot of islands or atolls to permit
genuinely abundant life you might regard that
sub-subtype as an archipelago planet.
Archipelago or maybe for consistency archipelagic,
since it does have pelagos in there, though
archipelago translates as chief sea, and if
you are wondering what chief sea means that
would make it now mean a chain of islands,
that was very literal originally.
The Aegean Sea southeast of Greece was called
Archipelago, chief sea, in a bit of understandable
egocentrism.
It also happens to be filled to the brim with
tiny islands.
The word mutated a lot over the years and
into modern Italian when it came to mean any
place studded with islands.
You’d expect these just as much on an Epipelagic
Planet too, but they aren’t necessary for
abundant life there while they are on a Bathypelagic
Planet, they probably do deserve their own
subcategory since they straddle both and are
also like to be a bit different.
The Galapagos Islands, also known as the Archipelago
de Colon, gets the latter name for Christopher
Columbus, who is Colombo in Portugese and
Colon in Spanish.
The other name, Galapagos, means saddle in
Spanish but is actually for the giant tortoises
they found there whose shells resembled saddles.
I mention this because the Galapagos Islands
are best known as the place where Charles
Darwin did a lot of his work, and because
those tortoises as well as the mockingbirds
resident there differed from island to island
and helped him get the notion of evolution
and origin of species put together.
That’s important today not just as a nod
to Darwin but as a reminder that little tiny
islands can cause lots of biodiversity as
you get small isolated populations inbreeding
together passing mutations quite quickly,
meaning two little islands originally connected
but having a been separated even just a few
thousands year before by the sinking of the
connecting bridge could have serious large
differences in the two sub-species of each
animal and plant that remained on each island.
This could cause a lot of biodiversity aiding
advanced life developing and since there is
land, these are plausible candidates for technological
civilizations to arise from.
I should also note you can get this same effect
with submerged islands in proximity to each
other, since you’d expect life to be abundant
there but minimal interchange between less
mobile plants and animals who could not migrate,
or rarely migrated, between the two.
Our next type, Abyssopelagic planets, is actually
a very bad candidate for life, but a great
one for terraforming.
Here the oceans are simply so deep that even
if the planet is very tectonically active
it just can’t thrust mountains up to the
surface and nutrients have no way to get up
there especially not in sufficient quantity
for life.
Now let me adds three caveats to that.
First, I should note that most of Earth’s
water isn’t even in our oceans.
For a long time, especially since we believe
the formation of our moon involved the Earth
being whacked by another smaller planet that
tore off our crust and any water residing
on the planet then, we assumed our oceans
came from comets.
Just in the last few years we’ve found huge
amounts of water hundreds of miles below the
surface, mostly locked up in a mineral called
Ringwoodite.
This puts some serious doubts on a lot of
our planetary modeling in terms of where water
comes from here on Earth and other planets
since it means water can be far below the
crust and in immense quantities.
So Abyssopelagic Planets might be less common
than we might expect since water if abundant
might tend to get migrated down and cycled
to and from like continents are with our mantle.
However we could still easily have planets
with oceans too deep to allow land formation
so it likely just means Abyssopelagic planets
wouldn’t be as common as we might first
think.
Second, even though it might turn out comets
aren’t where Earth got most of its water,
it is where it got some.
Also while Saturn has very impressive rings
these days it hasn’t always had them and
odds are good Earth has had a nice set from
time to time too.
Planets often have rings, they vary in how
big they are since they dwindle over time,
either falling down or clumping into moons,
and get replenished by collisions and the
like.
Earth doesn’t get a lot of meteor damage
because Jupiter protects us by sucking up
most asteroids but not all solar systems will
have that arrangement so an Abyssopelagic
Planet might get its nutrients from a fairly
steady rain of dust.
As is, Earth gets about 60 tons of space dust
every day, stuff burning up in our atmosphere
and floating down, or just random dust floating
about we sweep up.
There’s probably been times that was a lot
higher and some planets, especially higher
mass ones, probably could get a lot more.
And as mentioned higher mass planets could
be more likely to be covered in deep water
to begin with.
So caveat two, Abyssopelagic planets might
get decently fed nutrients in their own photic
zone to feed some plants.
Of course how they migrated all the way up
from deep under the ocean if that’s where
life originated would be another story.
Caveat three is the end, or beginning of that
story because these planets could have a lot
of volcanic activity and thus thermal vents
way, way down at the bottom, so if that is
where life originates they shouldn’t have
any special problem originating there either.
Those caveats aside the story doesn’t look
great for Abyssopelagic Planets to host complex
life with a chance for technology.
Thermal Vents just don’t provide a great
overall power source to allow robust ecosystems
that could support hundreds of animals of
the same species big enough to have human
level intelligence and close enough in proximity
to form civilizations.
They obviously can’t have fire or metalworking
either.
But ironically this makes these places perfect
for humans.
It is a possible exception to the norm where
we might actually be able to set up our own
biosphere on an alien planet without necessarily
damaging the local life and maybe even helping
it.
Now the terraforming on such planet would
take two principals forms.
The first would be building floating habitats
for ourselves.
If you’re not a regular on this channel
the idea of building chains of floating islands
or even whole continents on top of a huge
ocean might seem pretty impressive but compared
to the efforts involved in interstellar colonization
or some of the megastructures we’ve looked
at, even the modest ones, you’ll recognize
that building thousands of artificial islands
is not exactly a major effort compared to
those involved in getting there in the first
place.
You could source the matter from asteroids
or from deep under the sea.
You’d probably start with the former and
convert over to deep ocean mining once you
had some in place.
Now building an undersea dome ten or more
miles underwater is one heck of task and there
is no native light that deep to give you anything
to look at, so a dome that deep is more for
the aesthetics if you decide to light up your
immediate area.
For every ten meters you go down in the water
you add one atmosphere or bar to the pressure,
more on higher gravity worlds.
At ten kilometers deep that’s a thousand
atmospheres, double the depth, double the
pressure.
It’s still a lot less than you need to make
diamonds or that they could withstand so diamond
domes deep down under the sea would be plausible.
Diamonds actually quite easy to make synthetically
using microwave ovens.
I wouldn’t suggest trying to use your home
microwave oven to save on getting your significant
other a ring but I wouldn’t be surprised
if we start seeing diamond used in construction
in the not too distant future and the Air
Force has been looking at making cockpit windows
out of it.
A nice research project that emerged out of
my old stomping grounds of Wright-Patterson
Air Force Base where I interned before my
senior year as an undergraduate back when
I was 19.
Great base and there’s a wonderful air and
space museum there should you ever been in
the area.
I seem to be big on digressions this time,
probably as a result of going for a slower
pace.
Anyway you could have your floating islands
and native Earth marine life up top and while
you would expect Marine Snow to drift down
to the native biology if there was any there’d
be a decent chance to do this in a way that
made it only food and not an invasive species.
This would be harder around the domes if you
decided to transplant life that could live
off photosynthesis and lit the area outside
up so you could see outside.
You would need exterior lighting too, a light
down on the sea floor would shine outside
but you wouldn’t see anything for the same
reason you can’t see well outside through
a window at night when you have the lights
on or see inside someone’s windows from
outside if its daytime and they don’t have
lights on.
This brings up one of my favorite concepts
for terraforming I’ve nicknamed vertical
reefs, because you can hang chains of lights
off the bottoms of your floating islands to
help vegetation grow far deeper than the normal
photic zone of the oceans and you could do
the same for your dome below, as towers or
roads of light.
Or drifting out like tentacles from submarine
cities floating a mile under water nowhere
near land or the sea surface.
This takes a lot of power but is pretty doable
on the power scales available to species that
do interstellar travel and we’ve talked
about similar concepts in the Rogue Planets
video a couple episodes back in this series
and the Arcology and Ecumenpolis videos a
couple weeks back on the channel.
What’s interesting is that if the planet
had native life, so long as you limited yourself
to bringing in species that relied on light
or first and second had byproducts of it to
live, you could get away with not overlapping
those two ecologies, and it is possible the
waste from all that would generate a marine
snow that might actually serve to help feed
the native life letting it grow in quantity
and spread out from the thermal vents it was
otherwise limited to exist near.
Now our next and last category is a quick
one except for the chemistry.
Stereopelagic planets, ones with solid water,
would be places where the ocean was so deep
the pressure got high enough to turn water
solid.
Ice, normal water ice we’re used to, is
only one of many types of ice that can exist
and some at temperatures so high that its
maybe more accurate to think of them as solid
crystallized water than ice.
The others happen at higher pressures, those
in the hundreds of Megapascals range, or thousands
of atmospheres, and again under Earth gravity
it take about ten meters of water to get another
atmosphere of pressure or a hundred to get
a Megapascal.
A kilometer will get you ten megapascals,
10 kilometers a hundred, and the weirder stuff
happens at the hundreds.
In between 200-600 Megapascals, or 20 to 60
kilometers of depth, weird types of ice can
form at cold but not supercold temperatures.
Over 600 Megapascals you get Ice-VI forming
at about the normal freezing temperature of
water and up past that pressure it can start
forming at room temperature or even nearing
boiling temperature when up over a thousand
megapascals, at depths in excess of a thousand
kilometers, it transitions into Ice-VII
Normally while we say the ocean depths are
quite cold, they never get too cold because
if ice forms it just drifts up toward the
surface till it melts.
Normal Ice is less dense than water which
is why icecubes and icebergs float.
Not so for Ice-VI or VII.
Ice-VI is about 30% denser than water and
both ICE-VII and VIII are closer to 70% denser.
They both sink in water.
But that’s still lighter than most stone,
especially the denser kinds that get made
under massive pressures.
So Stereopelagic Planets literally have sea
bottom composed not of rock but solid water.
We already had a difficult task of transporting
nutrient from the sea floor of Batyhpelagic
Planets and a seemingly impossible one for
Abyssopelagic Planets, but on Stereoplegaic
Planets there wouldn’t even be a sea floor
made of rocks, just solid water.
These could only be terraformed by either
doing floating islands with mass brought in
from elsewhere or actually removing ocean
for use on other planets or artificial habitats.
There wouldn’t seem many scenarios for life
to exist here, the place is simply too dilute.
So I’d rate this is basically 0% likely
to host intelligent life let alone anything
technological native to it, and quite likely
to be lifeless, certainly not possessed of
rich ecosystems abundant with life the way
Epipelagic and even Bathypelagic were.
Though that’s a little hard to say for certain
for no life at all as you could get sediment
build up from eruptions deep below or space
dust building up on the ice and some thermal
flux.
Now you might think such planets would be
uncommon but it’s quite likely a large portion
of Super-Earths are like this and we’ll
know more in the relatively near future as
we keep finding more and more super-earths
among the exoplanets we’ve been finding
and as we get better at looking at those.
So the summary, we have our overall type,
Panthalassic Planets, places where almost
all the surface is water, with maybe polar
ice and a few bits of land for the special
category of Archipelagic Planets.
We have our four other depth based sub-categories.
Epipelagic, Bathypelagic, Abyssopelagic, and
Stereopelagic.
We’ve seen none of them except maybe the
first should be particularly uncommon and
even Epipelagic shouldn’t be too exceptional,
and that life should be a high probability
on any of them except the deepest Stereopelagic
planets.
But we’ve also seen that the deeper they
are the harder it is for them to support lots
of life, and that every one of them except
the special case of Archipelagic is not friendly
to the development of technology, even though
intelligence could develop on Epipelagic and
probably Bathypelagic too.
We also saw each was terraformable, though
for Stereopelagic it would be a rough time
and maybe not a popular spot to live especially
since the gravity would probably be high.
So that’s Panthalassic Planets, Ocean Planets,
and Water Worlds.
Next week it is back to the Faster Than Light
series to look at wormholes, where will discuss
the theory, look at some of the problems with
making them and how they could result in time
travel causality loops, and also explore a
lot of the overlooked uses of the things if
they can be made to work like terraforming
planets or serving as power plants or even
refueling dying stars.
If you want alerts when those videos come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed the video, please hit the like
button and share it with others.
Question and comments are always welcome,
and I encourage you to read those left by
others and talk to them because we get some
very insightful comments on these videos from
the audience.
If you want to help support the channel you
can find the patreon link in the video description,
and in the meantime please try out some of
the other video series on this channel.
As always, thanks for watching, we’ll see
you next time, and have a great day!
