This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. Get access to my streaming video service, Nebula,
when you sign up for CuriosityStream using the link in the description.
For every possible UFO sighting there’s
always a debate if it was an alien or a weather
balloon, but nobody ever seems to wonder if
it was an alien weather balloon.
So today we’ll be discussing the various
UFO sightings and footage released officially
by the US Navy in 2020 and we’ll ask if
they are UFOs, what they might be if they’re
not, whether or not they are UFOs of terrestrial
origin or alien, what they might be if they
are either of those, and if they are alien,
what it might indicate.
I’ve been getting requests to do this episode
for some time and declined, though it did
finally win one of our polls over on facebook.
We run episode topic polls on a lot of our
social media platforms but one thing I usually
like about Facebook is folks can add in their
own topics to the poll, and I will open another
of those up when this episode airs if you
want to join our facebook group, which is
linked in episode descriptions as are all
our other social media platforms.
As I said I mostly like that feature of folks
being able to add their own topics but sometimes
it throws me curveballs and this is one of
them.
I normally do not like to discuss specific
evidence of an alien sighting or other phenomena,
because folks either expect me to play the
hard skeptic or acknowledge some bit evidence
is utter proof of their theory.
Those of you who are channel regulars know
that’s not my style.
Let’s also get the UFO thing out of the
way.
First, yes these are UFOs, objects that fly
and have not been identified, and as a quick
and probably unnecessary reminder, that doesn’t
make them automatically alien, or even weird
prototype human tech, just that the sighting
didn’t permit anyone at the time to say
what it was or definitively say what it was
later.
I’ll also add in that they are being called
a UAP, or Unidentified Aerial Phenomena, but
same difference minus the conspiratorial tone
UFO summons to many minds, and we’ll just
stick with UFO.
Let’s start with the background real quick.
There’s three videos folks are usually talking
about, nicknamed GIMBAL, GOFAST, and FLIR,
and they differ from a lot of prior UFO footage
in that it’s US Navy footage so is generally
considered higher quality and more credible
in terms of both authenticity and the various
commentary and analysis given in and around
them.
For those of you watching rather than listening,
you’ll have been seeing that Navy footage
on the screen as I talked, and seen some peculiar
stuff.
It can seem even more peculiar with the observations
of the folks watching the event happening
on the recordings and in the backdrop of some
other reported incidents at the time.
However we can get some confusion, as for
instance one of the videos was shot shortly
after another pilot had seen something weird
in that area and often in discussion the events
of that eye witness account get confused with
the video.
We also have a radar operator who’d been
noticing objects plummeting from very high
altitude that didn’t seem possible connected
to that event too.
However, while one explanation is that both
events happened close together in space and
time, so to speak, was that it was a connected
event, like the same vehicle hanging around,
another is that when you’ve had weird events
get reported folks tend to see more of them
because they’re searching for them and maybe
finding them even when they’re not there.
Let me also throw a big caveat on this.
This footage is released by the Navy, but
they held it, officially, out of concerns
folks might figure out secrets from the instrumentation
readings on the screen.
That’s a valid concern, both in terms of
protecting military secrets and in trusting
the footage, since most of the explanation
for these being mundane events comes from
running the math on that displayed instrumentation.
I would tend to think it genuine, but it isn’t
exactly a wild accusation to wonder if that
data on the screen might have been doctored
before public release to avoid disclosing
instrument capabilities or weaknesses, and
if it were, well then all of what we’ll
discuss in a moment for mundane explanations
would be wrong and something far weirder was
being seen.
I want to go through those mundane explanations
offered for these footages first, then we’ll
discuss the non-mundane and even alien examples,
but before I do I just want to give a shout
out to Mick West.
His channel has done a lot of videos explaining
the mundane scenarios in great detail, complete
with modeling, examples, and solid math and
science but in a very approachable fashion,
and I’ll link his playlist focused on the
Navy UFO footage.
His channel has way fewer subscribers than
it deserves so if you head over to get those
details and enjoy it, make sure to give him
a like and a subscribe.
I will summarize though.
Of the three videos, GIMBAL is all about the
Gimbal-mounted camera tricking the observer,
“GOFAST” actually isn’t going fast at
all, and FLIR isn’t making any sudden moves,
the camera is just moving and zooming.
The mundane explanation, and the one I find
most likely, is that we’re probably looking
at a plane, a balloon, and another plane respectively.
While GIMBAL and GOFAST basically say what
the issue is and isn’t, FLIR does too in
a less obvious fashion.
FLIR stands for Forward Looking Infrared Radar.
Many bits of footage or pictures, in the air
or up in space, can look weird simply because
they’re not shot in the visual spectrum.
Infrared is the heat the object is giving
off, and it can make for a very blobby and
unsharp image.
Now this video isn’t about saying what these
objects were or weren’t, or whether we get
visited by aliens or not, but in this case
we do have one thing we can simply debunk.
Folks looking at the infrared footage will
see a black object with a white halo, black
indicating heat and the white ordinarily indicating
a colder region.
This is a weird thing, because a hot object
giving off a pocket or halo of cold, colder
than the surrounding environment, would violate
the laws of thermodynamics and entropy as
we understand them.
So some folks took this as an outright sign
of advanced technology based on thermodynamic
principles we haven’t yet discovered.
But the answer in this case is simpler.
The white halo in the video isn’t a pocket
of cold, but an artifact of image processing,
the camera system sharpening a blobby, blurry
image.
Now that’s a good example of folks doing
their research but not enough or in the right
spots.
That’s also a lot more understandable in
pre-internet days with some other footage
and pictures, especially given that the exact
camera effects, filters, and so on used by
the military aren’t necessarily public information
and folks would have to do guesswork.
I’ve worked with infrared cameras as a civilian
and when I was in the Army, so assumed it
was a camera artifact but still had to check
the forums to see which one it was, and if
it were what folks thought it was, a genuine
halo of cold, then yeah, that’s some scary
advanced technology and I would dub it almost
certainly alien since if anyone on Earth had
access to it they would either be a trillionaire
or the dominant economic and military superpower
of the planet.
Which does raise another point to.
A common explanation for the craft, in this
or other sightings, is that they might not
be alien but simply represent some country’s
advanced prototypes.
Given that it’s US Navy footage, there tends
to be an assumption it is some other country’s,
but given how bureaucratic and compartmentalized
the department of defense and some of its
kindred departments are, it is entirely possible
it is a US prototype and the folks who know
just aren’t saying because nobody with the
authority to ask them did so and publicly.
Another aspect of this though is that while
nation’s certainly do like to keep their
military hardware secret, they usually can’t
or don’t keep the core science secret and
something like a genuine compact fusion engine
let alone a perpetual motion machine or similar
represents a piece of technology that is vastly
more useful if openly employed.
It’s nice to have the best fighter jet but
even better to have whole fleets and armies
equipped and trained in variations of that
tech, and even better yet to have your economy
be so up-gunned by that tech that it is to
us what we are to folks centuries ago playing
with little prototype steam engines in terms
of economic booms.
There are tons of conspiracy theories for
why you might keep such beneficial tech a
secret, and they may be true, but an inability
to disprove something doesn’t mean it is
true.
I would also tack on the warning that if you
need a conspiracy theory to explain the motivations
of another conspiracy theory and more to tweak
those to explain their loopholes, you might
want to be considering if something more mundane
and straightforward is the reason.
Which takes us to the GOFAST video.
This video gets its name from an object that
seems to be traveling really fast and also
is not giving off any kind of Infrared signature.
That implies some sort of advanced technology
if true, and again the really advanced kind,
your thermodynamics violating kind, but the
more mundane explanation is just that it’s
just a balloon moving at the same speed as
the wind.
I know, it’s a cliché to say that a UFO
is “Just a Weather Balloon”, but as we
say in regard to writing and reading science
fiction, just because something is a cliché
doesn’t mean it's bad.
We launch a couple thousand weather balloons
every single day and of course they have no
engine on them to produce infrared heat, and
they’re full of helium rather than hot air,
so no heat holding them up either.
They also usually are carrying a science package
plus a radar reflector exactly so we can track
them, so they tend to pick up on sensors pretty
easily.
Now such a balloon obviously can’t travel
at the speed of sound or make jerking movements,
outside of extreme weather and the kind you
would find on a place like Jupiter, not an
terrestrial hurricane.
BUT, here we have an easier answer, in GOFAST
the background seems to be moving so quickly
because the plane and its camera watching
the object are moving fast, so the background
ocean behind the object is whizzing by because
it is looking at it from a rapidly changing
angle.
There’s the question of why the Navy kept
these secrets for years and part of the answer
is part of the reason why these bits of footage
look weird.
Quite a lot of classified imagery is classified
not because of what’s in the picture, but
because of what the picture reveals about
the camera, tracking system, vehicle carrying
the camera, or the time the camera was in
that location.
In these videos there are overlays of all
sorts of arcane data and that’s flight and
camera information.
The Navy wasn’t worried about revealing
the object, they were worried about what clever
rivals might be able to deduce about our hardware’s
strengths and weaknesses from that footage,
like how to evade detection or shoot them
down easier.
On the screen for GOFAST there’s data like
how far the object is from the observing plane
and what angle the camera is tilted at and
as we’ll see with parallel footage from
GIMBAL in a moment, we also see when the camera
loses lock and has to reacquire, which causes
a skip and other visual anomalies.
If you are trying to get a plane or missile
past a tracking system, knowing when and what
causes it to lose a target lock is obviously
rather handy.
Again, we can’t disprove other theories
here, and we don’t know for sure what these
objects are, but that’s the mundane explanation
for keeping it secret, for instance.
Though you can throw in a dose of good old
fashioned bureaucracy for the delay too.
As I mentioned earlier though, if we consider
that motivation, we also do have to accept
that the video that did get released might
have had those instrument overlays doctored,
though we’ll assume them genuine for now.
Anyway in the GOFAST overlay we have the camera
angle, distance to object, altitude and heading
and angle of the plane, and so on.
From that we can do some trigonometry to determine
the plane is around 6 kilometers high and
the object about half that, 3 kilometers beneath
it and above the water.
As soon as you do that, and calculate its
motion based on the plane and camera’s motions,
you suddenly have something moving at expected
wind speeds, exactly what we’d expect from
a weather balloon.
A nice Radar return, no big infrared spot
indicating powerful engines, traveling along
with the wind.
Getting back to GIMBAL briefly, again if you
want details I do recommend those videos by
Mick West I’ve linked, but the short answer
is that you’ve got a camera following an
object while it flicks through zooms and rotates
the camera, and the nature of the gimbal mount
it is one, along with its de-rotation package
designed to minimize the issues with that
gimbal mount turning, produce the effects
we see of impossible movement.
Now as to FLIR, before we move past mundane
explanations, this is not the ‘tic-tac’
incident but often gets confused with it for
some parallels.
Not long before that pilots of the Aircraft
Carrier Nimitz reported encountering a hypersonic
tic-tac shaped object zig-zagging around,
whereas FLIR itself is less exotic and it’s
blurry appearance is pretty close to what
we’d expect from a passenger plane looked
at by the camera given the distances and resolution.
As to the tic-tac, I am not going to impugn
either the honesty or expertise of any of
our pilots or radar operators, and they may
well have picked up on the real deal as it
were, but at the same time I’ve my own areas
of expertise and made my own share of blunders
or misidentifications so that could be the
reason too, errors do happen even with experts,
and a lot.
It is possible they were outright lying, and
from a science perspective we can’t just
dismiss that option, but I’d find it more
likely they were seeing the real thing then
being dishonest about it, and even more likely
it was just one of the myriad glitches, confusions,
or mistakes common enough in such cases anyway.
I mention the part about dishonesty not because
I think it likely but because I don’t feel
folks should have to worry about being attacked
for smearing our servicemembers or other eye
witnesses just for saying it’s a possibility.
Personally I tend to think the vast majority
of sightings, military or civilian, expert
or layman, are honest, just probably wrong,
but some probably are lies too.
Of course many being false observations doesn’t
mean they all are.
Scientific observation is about quality of
data more than quantity, and folks make mistakes
with this a lot.
They either say 99 mistakes means number 100
must be too, which is bad thinking as no event’s
evidence is greater or lesser because of the
veracity of other events, or they say that
the sheer number of sighting means at least
some must be genuine flying saucers, which
is the same flaw just in reverse.
10 Trillion sightings by honest eye-witnesses
of something they think strange is not the
same as a single case of well-documented and
recorded evidence.
Of course that’s the whole point of those
3 Navy UFO videos and some others like the
Chilean Air Force sighting.
You can see it right there on the video with
the flight data right on top, problem is you
actually have to account for what that data
says, assuming you trust it, and what the
hardware and software are doing, not what
it looks like when you watch it.
And it can get the experts too, as we saw
in the Chilean case, it puzzled them and they
are no amateurs and investigated thoroughly,
but it hit the internet and inside a week
we had an explanation for why it was probably
a plane complete with a record of a plane
running that path at that time, and no reports
from passengers or crew on it of anything
weird hanging out near them.
So there are the mundane explanations of GIMBAL,
FLIR, and GOFAST, probably respectively a
plane, a plane, and a balloon.
Probably.
Again, in the Chilean Air Force example we
at least had a plane on record on that flight.
To the best of my knowledge nobody has come
up with a positive ID for any plane or balloon
that might have been there at those times
and places, for the US Navy footage.
Which is not itself a big deal but their absence
certainly doesn’t help debunk the sighting.
I’ll also add that while skeptics have given
lots of debunking to these videos, they’ve
also got plenty of rebuttals re-bunking them,
if that’s a word, and also even more re-debunking
those rebuttals, and so on.
I’ve already said my opinion of the most
probable answer, but it is just that, and
I’ve encountered plenty of other sightings
down the years to which I couldn’t give
a ‘yes, this is definitely an X’ to, nor
is the most probable or mundane solution always
the right one.
Heck, science is mostly about running down
abnormalities and it doesn’t pay to just
assume anomalies with inconclusive data to
say yea or nay must be the mundane answer.
So what if it wasn’t mundane?
Channel regulars know I’m not a big fan
of conspiracy theories not because I don’t
think conspiracies happen, but because they
tend to function by assuming a given answer
then trying to tweak and shove the evidence
and assumed motivations of those involved
to fit that answer, and we examined that notion
more in our Alien Civilizations: Conspiratorial
Aliens episode.
Now I do that too, that’s basically what
the entire tongue-in-cheek Alien Civilizations
series is about, assuming a bit of evidence
and trying to determine motivations for it,
or the reverse, but as we often see in that
series, when we do that, many of the common
alien motives and actions suggested or witnessed
don’t really match up well.
As an example, we talked about that sharpening
artifact on one of the videos that caused
a white halo around hot objects, indicating
a cold zone around it and how that couldn’t
be any modern technology but implies something
bending or breaking thermodynamics.
As we often say on this show, there’s no
such thing as stealth spaceships and a major
reason for that is that they have to produce
heat to do anything, making them visible on
infrared.
Our big caveat is always that they can get
around that if they can bend or break thermodynamics.
If we ignored that sharpening effect and just
said ‘yes, they have this technology’
that would be implied, you have to then ask
why we’re picking them up at all.
The implication of them not landing in the
middle of Time Square or the White House Front
Lawn is that they’re not trying to be seen,
and since they have thermodynamics-breaking
engines, capable of running cold and running
at performances of thrust and time beyond
anything we have, why on Earth are we lucking
out and spotting them?
Why aren’t they using their Clarketech heat
changing ability inside the hull of their
ship to keep it cool instead of producing
some cold halo?
Remember the infrared shot shows a hot object.
Why on Earth, especially while on Earth hiding
from the natives, would you leave a big glaring
infrared signature on your ship’s hull and
a useless cold zone right around it that is
also visible?
And again, it isn’t, it’s a fairly mundane
sharpening mask used in lots of infrared imaging,
but that’s the sort of reasoning that can
cause problems.
You decide it’s got thermodynamics-breaking
capability – which is fine, that should
be the technology every civilization focuses
on pursuing with earnest if they get even
a hint they might be able twist known science
to make it work, and if they do, then its
value in virtually every device is beyond
counting – but you can’t stop there.
They’ve got this tech, what else can they
do with it?
Well, they can fuel their civilizations power
needs so well that they don’t need to bother
with even things like Dyson Spheres to run
their civilization no matter how big it gets
so you could have civilizations avoiding the
Dyson Dilemma we so often discuss here, and
which also has a caveat for thermodynamics-breaking
power sources.
So far it’s a great Fermi Paradox solution,
with the obvious issue that we generally consider
the Laws of Thermodynamics about the most
solid rule in science.
And if you’ve got that technology you’re
not interested in Earth except for curiosity’s
sake as we’re no threat they couldn’t
handle with a casual backhand and no use as
a conquest or for the planet’s raw materials.
So, you could guess they’re just here spying
for the sake of anthropology or to sneak in
and nudge us culturally in some preferred
direction.
All plausible reasons, but hanging on the
notion that a mission about stealth, and with
the capability for stealth, screwed up and
got caught.
Which is certainly possible and we played
with the notion of such accidents, or even
doing it on purpose, in Paranoid Aliens, but
while a stealth system might screw up or being
insufficient here or there, it would seem
peculiar for them to keep on the secret mission
stuff when the aforementioned stealth system
seems to screw up all the time, producing
untold numbers of sightings.
You’d also think they’d notice that they
got locked and a plane was pursuing them,
and given their super-engines they’d get
the heck out of dodge or try to act normally
till they got in a position to disappear,
mimicking a balloon or a regular jet or a
meteor falling into the sea.
Which to be fair might be what they do and
why we so often think something anomalous
shows signs of being a weather balloon.
We also have the repeated radars sightings
of them plummeting down from vast heights
that sparked the sequence of events ending
with the filming of one of the videos, and
a good question to ask in a case like that
isn’t if they could have technology permitting
them to pull off fast maneuvers beyond the
plausible scope of modern aircraft or spacecraft,
but rather what might have motivated them
to be doing it.
What’s out in the middle of the ocean that
they were zooming down on with such interest?
Were they studying whales or looking for them
like in Star Trek IV?
Incidentally, what about all the other reports
over the years of objects that jump around
and do impossibly fast turns?
Ignoring that, as we saw, it can be rather
hard to know that without knowing all the
angles and distances and running the calculations,
we usually mean that in a handful of regards.
First, it is very hard to get above the speed
of sound and stay there for very long, as
you burn fuel fast and release a very visible
jet flame doing that.
We did discuss some types of hypersonic plane
designs in our Spaceplanes episode that could
get around that fuel limitation, like a SCRAM
Jet that was heating the air it shoved through
via the chamber basically being a big microwave
receiver that was getting beamed energy.
Such an approach is not beyond our science
to do even now, the core science and technology
is very simple honestly, but it would certainly
have one heck of heat signature and unless
you were very tight with that microwave beam
that would probably be picked up too, both
the beam and scatter.
Very powerful alien engines, or secret government
prototypes, have to use that power and get
rid of the heat, resulting in Infrared signatures
that would be blinding bright compared to
normal planes unless they had that thermodynamics-breaking
tech.
Another way such maneuvers are impossible
is the acceleration rate.
Turning in the air, same as turning a car
around a curve on the road, produces centrifugal
force acting on the pilot the same as acceleration
or gravity.
As an example, if you’re moving 1000 meters
per second, roughly Mach 3, and you want to
turn, your turning radius is still ten kilometers
even if you’re pulling 10-g of acceleration,
and that’s a bit above what fighter pilots
can handle.
Alternatively something moving 10,000 meters
per second, 10 times faster and more akin
to what spacecraft launching into orbit do,
your 10-g turning radius is about 1000 kilometers
and your 1-g more like the radius of the planet,
since orbiting a planet at a given distance
is all about having your turning radius being
identical to your orbital distance at an acceleration
equal to the planet’s gravity at that distance.
So if you see some radar blip change course
at a speed and rate that would require it
to pull some 100-g maneuver, you know that’s
not a ship manned by a human.
Of course it could be a missile, drone, or
other computer controlled craft of terrestrial
origins, or it could be aliens who were better
at handling g-forces either because they had
better biology for it, or were not biological,
alien artificial intelligences for instance,
or had something like inertial dampeners.
Again we had that problem of what else the
technology could do if you’ve got it besides
flip aircraft around fast.
If your aliens are essentially artificial
intelligences then they have options like
just sending a very small drone down, or millions
of them, to be either remotely controlled
from a distance or with an actual and very
compact AI on them.
No visible giant heat signature with that
inertial dampener technology when it’s coming
down either since if you can play with inertia
you probably don’t have the usual issues
of trying to orbit a place then come crashing
down at huge speeds trying to remove your
inertia by air-drag to save fuel.
You can dampen inertia, without aero-breaking.
Same, if you’ve got a ship drive that makes
our look like a joke you can avoid most of
the speed issues we have to deal with.
Our atmosphere is not that thick, so you just
travel up at a modest pace then do all your
fast maneuvers in orbit, then drop.
Objects dropping into the atmosphere don’t
move very fast, it’s objects coming in at
interplanetary velocities like a meteor or
objects moving incredibly fast to stay in
orbit, then re-enter the atmosphere at those
speeds, that have all insane heat and energy
signatures.
Now none of these examples tells us what those
objects were or why they were here if they
weren’t from here originally, again this
episode isn’t about disproving any given
theory or trying to say for sure what they
were, but merely as a reminder that once we
label something with incredible attributes,
we have to consider what other things they
could do with those abilities and how that
might alter their goals here.
A species that can pull matter right of nowhere
doesn’t need to invade Earth for raw materials
for instance, a species with access to wormhole-like
gateways and fine control over them doesn’t
need to fly around in the sky, not to get
here and not to look around, they could just
pop a drone into the air from a wormhole or
even just open the wormhole to look at a place
with a telescope and camera on the other side.
And so on.
Again though, as to what those objects in
the Navy Videos where, we don’t know, but
we have some mundane explanations that seem
to fit the bill, and an absence of certainty
of those explanations doesn’t lend credibility
to the more extraordinary ones either.
Every explanation has to stand on its own
feet, not the failings of other explanations.
Sherlock Holmes liked to say that “Once
you eliminate the impossible, whatever remains,
no matter how improbable, must be the truth”.
But we do not know what is impossible, and
for that matter, sometimes a weather balloon
is just a weather balloon.
If you’re interested in learning more about
possible alien civilizations, not only do
we have our alien civilizations series here
on the main channel, but we also have a 4-part
series on Coexisting with Aliens, looking
at Xenopsychology, Trade, War, and Alliances,
exclusively available over on our Nebula Streaming
Service.
We also show all our new episodes there a
couple days early and without ads.
If you’d like to catch SFIA episodes early
and without ads, and help support the show
while you’re doing it, you can sign up for
Nebula today, and see that Exclusive Coexistence
with Alien Series along with other great content
from our sibling shows.
However, we also have a deal running with
Curiositystream, where if you sign up for
them at the link in the episode description,
you not only get a 26% discount, but free
access to Nebula while you’re a Curiositystream
subscriber.
Curiosity Stream has excellent educational
content of their own and they are running
26% discount if you use the link in the description.
That’s a great deal since it means you get
a year of both Curiositystream and Nebula
for less than $15, and it helps support this
show and a lot of other educational content
which is what Curiositystream and Nebula are
all about, and again you can get a year of
both for less than $15 by using the link in
the episode’s description.
So that will wrap up our bonus episode, but
we’ll be back on Thursday, and we will ask
how low-tech a civilization can be and still
travel through space to distant worlds, and
in two weeks we’ll return to our new series,
Becoming an Interplanetary Species, to look
at our first trip to a distant world, and
how high-tech we’ll need to be to pull it
off, as we look at our first Base on Mars,
and how we go about getting there.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
