The biggest danger of space elevators
isn’t the risk of them falling down, it
is the risk of homicidal insanity from sharing
the trip with others for hours while listening
to elevator music.
So today we are looking
at Space Elevators, a concept sufficiently
well-known it needs little introduction but
one which at same time is plagued with misconceptions.
Our goal is to dispel those misconceptions
and look at the concept in detail.
As part of our continuing look at systems
for getting into space cheaper, easier, and
safer we will also discuss some of the safety
and cost issues associated with space elevators.
Space Elevators hit
the public eye in a big way in the last decade
or two but it is actually a pretty old idea.
It got new life breathed into it with the
discovery of certain super-strong materials
in the last couple decades.
The concept itself it
pretty straight forward.
If we built a very tall tower on the equator,
one that reached up 22,000 miles or 36,000
kilometers above the ground, you could step
off the top and not fall down.
At that altitude the top of the tower is moving
at the same speed as what is needed to orbit
the Earth at that height.
Just above the Earth a stable orbit is just
a couple hours, and way out at the moon it
is a whole month, at the point where an orbit
takes a day the ground stays directly below,
since it also turns once a day.
That is why we call orbits at that height
geostationary.
Now this is only true right above the
equator and in a circular orbit.
You can have a 24-hour circular orbit at an
angle, but it won’t stay over the same spot
on the ground, though it will pass over the
same points each day at the same time.
That is called a geosynchronous orbit, as
it is still synchronized to the Earth’s
spin but not stationary relative to the ground.
If you watched such a satellite from the ground
it would seem to bob north and south each
day.
You can also have an elliptical geocentric
orbit, which would appear to trace a figure-8
in the sky each day and if it were tilted
off the equator one of those lobes would be
bigger than the other.
So a geostationary orbit is specifically
a circular orbit directly over the equator,
which means any space elevator we want to
build needs to be above the equator, though
we will discuss a few tricks to getting around
this later on, so that your elevator station
down on the ground doesn’t have to be at
the equator.
But the basic space
elevator is simply that, a long rope or tether
hung down from geostationary orbit.
You could also build a tower up to that height,
which was the original concept.
This idea goes all the
way back to the late 19th century, if not
before, but at the time they were thinking
of supertall buildings, and at that time the
word skyscraper was just entering the lexicon
and buildings were being constructed now that
finally took the title for tallest building
away from the Great Pyramid, which held the
number one slot for five thousand years, barring
a brief upset by the Lincoln Cathedral till
its tower collapsed.
Now, millennia later, we were routinely building
taller.
So it isn’t much of
surprise that folks were considering even
taller buildings not just scraping the sky
but stretching far above it into the heavens.
We’ve contemplated that notion all the way
back to the Tower of Babel, but the advantage
of structural steel was now letting us build
tall much cheaper and safer.
On the other hand orbital mechanics have been
known for many centuries.
Folks didn’t think much about putting people
into space then not because they didn’t
understand orbits, but because we didn’t
understand rockets and had no computers.
You really need both to get an object into
a stable orbit.
Now there is no material
that can handle the kinds of stress involved
with building a tower that high, or a rope
that long, not straight up and as wide at
top and bottom.
That’s an important point for later on though
because until structural steel replaced load-bearing
masonry, building tall was quite trick unless
you went the route the pyramids did, which
was to have very little interior space and
just build much wider at the bottom.
That pyramid never collapsed
not because its engineers were such geniuses,
though they probably were the best in the
world at that time, but rather because it
is almost entirely one big solid heap of stone
that is wider at its base then at its peak.
Such an object works on compressive strength,
how good a material is at being compressed,
such as by stone being piled on top of it.
When each layer is wider than the one above.
it spreads that compression out, letting you
go taller.
Mountains, for instance, do not require much
skill at engineering.
So a cone or pyramid can be taller than a
cylinder or rectangle made of the same material.
Hypothetically there
is no limit as to how tall you can build,
if you can keep making the base wider, but
obviously when you live on a spherical planet
there are some limits in that regard.
For a given material you can only build a
column of it so tall before it collapse under
its own weight, and by making the base wider
than the top you can increase this limit.
The same applies to ropes, only they are stretched
rather than compressed.
How much tension they can handle before snapping
is based on their tensile strength.
We will discuss this more in a bit since that
is what matters for modern space elevator
concepts, but for the moment it is important
to note that you can go longer by making it
wider at the top then the bottom.
Tapering it just like a pyramid or cone, only
upside down.
Now building something tens of thousands
of kilometers tall when the tallest building
wasn’t yet a kilometer tall and the tallest
mountain isn’t even ten tall seemed pretty
ludicrous.
However, the opposite idea, relying on tensile
rather than compressive strength, wasn’t
even on the table till we discovered certain
super-strong materials in recent years.
Ideas for building such a tower usually relied
on a concept called active support which we
will discuss in detail in future episodes
but briefly is the idea that just as you can
float a sheet of paper over a floor vent,
you could float a platform up by bouncing
things off the bottom, thus allowing even
taller towers.
The advantage of such a tower or tether
though is obvious.
Unlike a rocket, where you need to carry all
your fuel with you, on such a tower you can
run a power cable up it from a reactor on
the ground, or solar panels in space, to supply
energy to whatever is climbing the tower,
presumably an elevator though in practice
it might better be thought of as a train.
And you can gain power when things are going
down instead of up, so you are spending virtually
no energy climbing up the tether and can get
a lot of it back on the way down, losing some
energy to transferring that power between
the one going down and the one up.
Needless to say we have discovered
some materials that have far higher tensile
strength than anything we had back in the
19th century.
Kevlar and Zylon far surpass steel cables
in tensile strength, and carbon nanotubes
and graphene far surpass them.
Now any given material has what is called
a breaking length or self-support length.
This is how long that can be before it would
snap under its own weight.
For instance if we were standing on cliff
2 kilometers up with a spool of rope that
had a breaking length of 1 kilometer, once
we unspooled more than kilometer of it off
the cliffside it would snap even though no
one was climbing it.
A good nylon rope can have a breaking
length of several kilometers, and some metals
can be a hundred kilometers or more and Kevlar
and Zylon can do a few times better.
But carbon nanotubes appear to be good to
5000 kilometers or more.
Now here is where the first big misconception
comes in that causes many flawed objections
to space elevators.
Our elevator needs to be 36,000 kilometers
high, so if carbon nanotubes can only do 5000,
we’d seem to have a problem, 5000 is a lot
less than 36,000 and we need more than too
because we want to carry material up it.
But there’s two problems with this
objection.
First, as I mentioned, you can extend length
by tapering your tether to be wider at the
top then the bottom.
And second, breaking length is how long something
can be when hanging in Earth’s Gravity.
It’s higher on Mars, for instance, where
the gravity is lower, and even higher on the
Moon.
Of course we’re not on the Moon or
Mars, we are on Earth, but the cable is not.
Or at least most of it is not.
The higher up you go the weaker Earth’s
gravity is.
For instance, up at 5000 kilometers above
Earth, which has a radius of 6400 kilometers,
gravity has dropped to just a under a third
of what it is here on the ground, and the
breaking length of a material is three times
longer there, since everything weighs only
a third of what it does down here.
Out at geostationary orbit gravity is only
a couple percent of what it is here and breaking
lengths are almost 50 times longer.
Second, we have the ability to taper
the tether, making it wider at the top, which
lets it hold up a longer length.
So it doesn’t matter if something’s
breaking length is lower than the distance
to geostationary orbit, because by making
it wider at the top than the bottom, by giving
it a high taper ratio, we can increase that
breaking length and it is further increased
as gravity weakens from getting further from
the planet.
Hypothetically any substance can be used for
a space elevator with a high enough taper
ratio, but as before when we were building
up taller objects with wider bases this does
have a practical limit.
Now actually mass manufacturing something
that’s operating at its maximum tensile
strength, and essentially has few or no flaws,
is another matter.
Very expensive.
Especially since you either need to fly it
up there or build it up there and spool it
down, and getting stuff into space is incredibly
expensive.
I mean that’s the whole reason we want to
build this thing.
The usual notion is that you would actually
build it here.
You’d start with a thin wire, as thin as
you could make it, again wider at top then
bottom but still very thin, and fly that up.
That first one doesn’t necessarily need
to be able to handle double its weight, if
you can either manufacture the next cable
up there from material brought up in smaller
bits or join sections without creating a weakness.
These are massive things too.
Even a thin string weighing a gram per meter
on average would mass out at 36,000 kilograms,
and probably couldn’t carry anything like
that much mass as cargo.
That’s a bit more than the Space Shuttle
was designed to get into low orbit, and we
need to go all the way to geostationary, so
it would be either a very large launch or
we’d have to find a way to join sections
of tether together without introducing a weakness
in it at the joins.
They also don’t have to be circular tethers
like rope, a ribbon would work fine too or
other shapes, though you have to worry about
wind on these things.
There are a lot of forces acting on these
besides just straight down gravity that can
potentially cause some problems.
Now you can build bigger, but by and large
it makes more sense to build more of them
instead.
Better five or six cables right next to each
other than one bigger cable of equal strength,
and better another elevator elsewhere, servicing
another region, than to just have a single
elevator at some point on the equator.
This raises two other points though.
Having cables at places other than the equator
and where the top of the cable actually is,
because it isn’t at geostationary.
We should cover that first.
The tether doesn’t end at geostationary
orbit, it has to go at least a bit further
up, either ending in a massive terminus station
just above that or a very long length of cable.
Left to itself an object at geostationary
doesn't fall, but any point beneath that would,
and it is generating weight pulling the spot
at geostationary.
You need an equal force pulling upward, and
past geostationary the tether is pulling outward,
as those segments are now moving faster than
orbital speeds for that height.
A tether running out, say, another 17,000
kilometers, which would make it 60,000 kilometers
from the center of the Earth, would be moving
about 4.4 kilometers per second, while orbital
speed there is just 2.4, so you’ve got an
extra 2 kilometers a second of free speed
to launch into interplanetary space with
That counterweight doesn’t have to be more
tether running off for thousands of more kilometers,
it could just be a big space station right
over geostationary.
It’s all about making sure the total force
up and down at geostationary cancels out,
this is sometimes inaccurately called the
center of mass, but that’s not quite right
in a non-uniform gravitational field.
Anyway that station can be quite massive,
even with tethers running higher up, because
anything you build just a bit down and adjacent
to it, also at geostationary, is going to
float right there of its own accord, and you
just connect to it.
You could construct some fairly huge space
stations there, more than big enough to make
artificial spin-gravity viable.
That also means you can ferry up huge amounts
of material for whatever you are doing up
there.
Fuel for ships, solar panels for power, and
all the building material and equipment you
want, though it still costs money to make
such things and carry them up.
It is still fairly expensive but down to the
point that the equipment and salaries for
those there will be the bigger chunk of your
budget.
So you could have huge stations with industry
and drydocks and hotels up there, all given
artificial gravity by spinning them.
Now by default you build your space
elevators on the equator, probably on a floating
platform in the sea.
Geostationary is limited to a ring around
the equator after all.
This means that while space elevators are
pretty awesome they would seem to limit you
to having all your spaceports at the equator,
whereas most of the nations with robust space
programs are way north of the Equator, and
they’d rather have their space ports near
their cities.
This is fixable though if your cables
are decently stronger than the absolute minimum
strength needed.
Because again it is only the terminus station
that needs to be above the equator, or rather
the center of force of the tether.
Now if we stuck one end of the tether at geostationary
and the other down in, say, New York, we have
a problem, the station is going to be pulled
north and then go all out of orbit with problems
to follow.
But if we stuck another tether on the
opposite side of the equator, say down in
Santiago in Chile, that slightly off-center
force of being a few thousand kilometers north
and 36,000 kilometers up would be counterbalanced.
Just like guy wires holding up a tower, only
without the tower.
You’d want to use at least three, more works
too, and they don’t need to form an equilateral
triangle or anything.
You’d probably also want to have winches
at top and bottom of the tethers to help keep
the tension right for each and tweak that
tension if it starts to drift.
You can also stick one of these right
in the middle of a city, unlike airports or
some of the other designs where they either
have a big footprint on the ground or are
so loud they make a plane sound quiet.
These would be quite quiet.
Not much visual effect either, such cables
would be virtually invisible from any serious
distance and while the pods climbing them
would be bigger and probably have navigational
lights on them, you’d otherwise have to
be quite close to see the tether.
I often have folks worry that some of these
launch assist systems will ruin the night
sky but no more than airplanes or satellites
or skyscrapers.
Of course people also worry about them breaking
and wrecking their city, or the planet.
We might as well talk about that then.
Can such a tether break?
Yes of course, they can.
I mean the stuff they are made out of is as
tough as diamond but it’s not going to survive
intentional sabotage of someone setting off
a shaped charge or something on it.
It is not easy though, you could chop at one
with an axe all day long, stopping only to
replace your broken axe heads, without accomplishing
all that much.
But yes one can be damaged.
Where it breaks is what actually matters but
first let’s crush this idea it would cause
mass carnage.
One popular portrayal is that the broken
tether would wrap around the equator flattening
everything in site.
That’s very exaggerated, there’s not much
reason to build these things individually
thicker than an arm, if even that, just add
more in parallel if you need them, and they
are not crashing into the ground at hypersonic
velocities.
These are not thick cables, probably no thicker
in most cases then a large electrical wire
on a trunk line, and they won’t hit going
much faster than one of those would if it
fell, air will slow them.
They’ll either burn up if the fell from
high enough or slow to normal speeds before
hitting, and very low speeds if they are ribbon
shaped rather than cylindrical.
So yeah, don’t stand underneath one or it
will hurt or kill you, but you could also
see it falling anyway.
We also have a device for slowing things in
air called the parachute, and while we don’t
want to add a lot of static weight to our
elevator by installing parachutes at certain
intervals, what makes a parachute heavy is
the material it is made out of.
Parachute threads and ropes have to be very
strong, in terms of tensile strength.
Conveniently if you are building space elevators
you have the ability manufacture superlight
materials with huge amounts of tensile strength.
So you get much lighter parachutes and you
could place them at intervals with charges
designed to sever the cable into smaller bits.
So they wouldn’t do much damage falling
in the first place, but with some parachutes
on them this can be further minimized.
Another important factor is where it
breaks, and if it is anywhere inside our own
atmosphere the cable is going to ripple up
like a cut thread toward the station and then
fall back down and dangle just over the atmosphere.
You go in and repair it, and in practice you
probably have a couple hundred kilometers
of extra line up at the terminus station and
can just lower it back to the ground station.
The ten or twenty kilometers in the atmosphere
will just fall down, straight down.
I wouldn’t want to be in that station when
it happened, but you’d probably have gantries
and scaffolding around the base anyway.
A decently sturdy roof should survive it and
again parachutes are an option.
So a lot depends on where the cut occurs.
The problem is that orbital speeds around
Earth get lower as you get further away, but
on our tether, it gets faster the higher up
you are.
Up at geostationary the tether is moving at
exactly the orbital speed for that height.
Just a bit above it, at the Terminus station,
the orbital speed is a bit lower but the station
is actually moving a bit faster.
If you cut the tether below that the station
would drift off to a higher orbit and would
need to have some thrusters on it to instead
drop to geostationary while repairs were underway,
then boost back up.
It might need to cut free the tether higher
up too, the one whipping ships into interplanetary
space.
As to the tether, once cut, its individual
bits are moving too slow for orbit, orbital
speed is higher than up at geostationary but
the tether below that isn’t even moving
at that speed.
So it will fall down.
This is where the notion of it wrapping around
the planet comes from, it is still moving
faster than the equator, they have the same
angular velocity but not linear velocity,
same as the equator is faster than the polar
regions.
The higher up, the faster it is moving, so
it will fall and wrap around the equator.
But as we saw, it isn’t ground damage and
casualties we have to worry about, rather
it is the folks on the tether.
What happens to the people on the elevator
when it snaps?
We also have to consider what would happen
if the climber falls off the cable for some
reason.
For the folks above 23,000 kilometers,
they’re okay, they’ll fall gaining momentum
and actually enter an elliptical orbit around
the planet.
Anything with lateral speed relative to a
massive object will enter an orbit around
it, it’s just that if that is too elliptical
that orbital path will pass through the planet.
Since those pods have to be airtight the people
on them will be fine, so long as the air doesn’t
run out, until someone can retrieve them.
They’d have many hours if not days to be
rescued, probably by shuttles from the Terminus
station.
We will talk about how you keep folks alive
in such a pod or any other spaceship in a
few weeks in an Episode appropriately called
Life Support, because there’s a lot of misconceptions
about that too.
For the folks below 23,000 kilometers things
are actually a bit easier.
They won’t go into orbit, since the planet
is in the way, but if your pods are built
for reentry and have parachutes on them they
should be fine.
I mean for a given value of fine.
I’m pretty sure crashing thousands of kilometers
down to the planet in a passenger car full
of dozens of other terrified people is going
to leave some serious psychological trauma
even if physical injuries don’t occur.
And that is long fall too, dropping from halfway
up that tether is going to take a few hours.
Gravity is weaker there so you aren’t accelerating
as much at first.
There’s a lot of things that could go wrong
on that fall for people to worry about, and
a lot of time for them to worry, so I am not
going to try to minimize how awful those hours
of falling will be even if you do survive.
When the cable snaps most pods won’t initially
notice anything, if you have a string suspended
from the ceiling holding a weight and cut
that string, the string above the cut is going
to snap upwards but that isn’t instantaneous.
It seems like it to us because the string
is short but on a long cable it will take
quite a while for the wave to travel up the
tether.
This thing is thousands of kilometers long,
so even if the wave is moving several kilometers
a second it could be some minutes before your
pod bucks.
Plenty of time for the control station to
notice the break and send the command to the
pod to break off, some detonating bolts probably.
A little bit of speed is handy too since you
do not want to get lashed by a diamond hard
cable whipping upwards like a rubber band,
so giving yourself a few meters a second of
delta-v is probably a good idea.
So I don’t want to trivialize the dangers
and risks, but they stack up pretty good compared
to trains, planes, and automobiles.
Our normal methods of traveling around the
planet.
Speaking of that, these elevators are pretty
good for that kind of travel too, not just
getting up to geosynchronous orbit.
You can jump off part way up and do a controlled
fall to some other part of the planet, again
you are moving too slow for orbit so you could
jump off a tether from Los Angeles and fall
to New York, ride up a bit higher and fall
to London or Madrid.
You’d want wings and thrusters for control
and maneuvering but it’s a pretty fast and
cheap method of travel around the planet.
This is even easier if you are doing the multi-tether
option, where several ground stations run
up to a single terminus station, especially
if those cables are meeting part way up.
You could have an airport up there, assuming
your tethers are strong enough to handle that
kind of weight.
If they are you can also consider running
tethers sideways between two tethers.
Which would be faster than riding all the
way up to the terminus station then down another
tether, or taking a shuttle from that terminus
station to another tether.
You could also drop off those lateral tethers
too, an option also available to us when we
look at certain launch loops later in the
series.
But that’s a key point, these elevators
are handy for more than just space travel.
We should probably talk about speed on one
of these elevators.
That will depend a lot on how much power you
have to spend, but the default trip is many
hours.
There are some tricks using some of the other
systems we will look at in future episodes,
essentially hybrid versions, that could make
the trip faster, like shooting down a vacuum
tube first and up a space tower that was also
in a vacuum around that elevator to let you
build up speed without air getting in your
way.
If you could pull off one gee of acceleration
the whole way there, flipping midway through
to decelerate, your trip would take an hour,
faster than actually falling since again gravity
is weaker up there.
But even pulling 3 or 4 gees on the trip is
only going to cut that trip time in half.
Going that fast is rather energy wasteful
but convenience is often worth that and it
would also change your fall dynamics.
Okay, let’s talk cost.
We obviously have to be pretty vague here.
At the moment graphene, our presumed elevator
material, costs about $100 a gram.
That’s more than double the price of gold
and remember our thread-thin starter tether
massed about a kilogram per kilometer, or
36,000 kilograms, or 36 million grams, or
3.6 billion dollars.
The launch costs for getting that up there
are in that neighborhood too.
A tether as thick as a pencil or finger would
mass out at more like a 100 kilograms a kilometer,
or 360 billion dollars, with similar costs
for transport.
That’s why it’s important to start with
the small tether first, so you can take advantage
of the cheaper launch cost that tether will
provide for subsequent ones.
Now we expect the cost of graphene to get
a lot cheaper as we get into mass production
of it, it’s just carbon, preferably made
of graphite which is more like a buck per
kilogram, not a hundred bucks per gram.
The real issue is making a single cable as
one complete unflawed or mostly unflawed thing.
And more importantly of doing that up in space.
Once you get that first small tether up it
might be strong enough to hold another tether
of equal mass, but more likely it will only
be able to hold a fraction of its own weight,
so you bring up shipments of the stock material
in small amounts along the starter tether
and manufacture up there.
Your first Terminus Station is going to basically
be a big tether manufactory.
I’ve seen cost estimates as low as 6 billion
and as high as 40 billion, and I’ve seen
even higher plus I’m a pretty conservative
person where such estimates are concerned
so I tend to automatically double them, but
that’s a very affordable cost even if we
take the high end one of 40 billion and double
it.
Even pessimistically it drops the cost per
kilogram of material moved to space to about
$100, whereas it cost several thousand dollars
a kilogram right now.
So those savings stack up pretty quick especially
if you are increasing the amount of stuff
you are sending into space.
Which you would be too.
If you build it they will come, because there’s
all sorts of scientific, commercial, and industrial
applications to space we don’t use right
now because of the cost to transport things
to and from space.
Lots of folks would pay five figures for a
vacation up there and you could haul whole
film crews up there for months at a time to
film a science fiction movie or TV series
in actual zero-gravity for a change.
So why haven’t we built one?
Well first off the cost.
To break even on such a thing, which will
surely have maintenance costs too, you need
to be transporting a lot more up into space
than we do now.
Second and most important, of course, we can’t
actually build one just yet.
We don’t mass produce graphene and certainly
not as big long cables.
We need a while to get to that kind of production
scale and then we’ll need to take kilometer
long chunks of it and stretch it and see what
its actual tensile strength is in real terms,
not just on paper.
It works on paper but so do a lot of things
that later fall apart in practical design.
When we get to that point we can start coming
up with specific designs and better estimates.
And it might turn out to be impossible.
As mentioned earlier, graphene’s breaking
length is a lot shorter than the necessary
cable length, tapering, having it wider up
top, and the diminishing gravity as you get
higher, might be enough, but it will be close
and when we start making cables out of the
stuff the real-world breaking length of those
might not be viable.
On the other hand we might find something
even better than graphene or carbon nanotubes.
So space elevators aren’t guaranteed, at
least not for Earth, they work just fine on
anything with less gravity like Mars or the
Moon, but they are promising and something
we could easily see even twenty years from
now.
Too soon to say, but there’s lot of room
for optimism.
It is also not our only option on the table,
as we will see with sky hooks in two weeks
even much shorter tethers can help a lot with
getting into space, but as a I mentioned near
the beginning this idea predates super-strong
tensile materials.
We can build tall towers instead, exact same
dynamics only it requires an alternative to
tensile strength, something we call active
support, which we talk about in another episode
too, and which opens just as many interesting
doors as super-tensile materials.
And we’ll be looking at a lot of those in
the upcoming episodes.
Next week though we will be looking at Quantum
Computers, a topic that like Space Elevators
has a lot of misconceptions about it, showing
a lot of promise and also a lot of hype.
We’ll clear away the noise next week.
After that we will return to this series for
a look at Skyhooks, then we’ll segue the
week after that to discuss not getting into
space but staying alive when you’re up there.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode, please like it
and share it with others, and join in the
discussion down in the comments section or
at the channel’s Facebook and Reddit groups,
Science and Futurism with Isaac Arthur.
Until next time,
thanks for watching, and have a great week!
