This episode is brought to you by Brilliant! 
We hope to one day send spaceships to distant 
stars and settle the worlds around them,  
but first we have to find the systems 
and planets which are habitable.
So today we’ll be asking how we go about surveying 
the galaxy for places we might want to settle,  
or ensuring we have the information we need 
to best prepare any expeditions to the area.  
Now principally we tend to be thinking in terms 
of our telescopes back here on or around Earth,  
but we have 3 basic approaches for garnering 
information in the context of sending ships.  
and that’s only one of them. If we can settle a 
system, that means we have ships to get people  
and gear there, so that also means 
we can get probes there for a flyby,  
or probes and scouts there for in-depth looks. 
Flybys represent their own category because of how 
spaceflight works. It takes immense energy to get  
a ship up to interstellar speeds, but the same 
energy is required to slow it down upon arrival,  
and even more energy to get that probe up to 
speed while also carrying its slow-down fuel. Thus  
two identical probes, one doing a flyby and one 
traveling and halting in a system, have different  
speeds. The flyby probe can move twice as fast 
as the one planning to stop and that matters a  
lot when we’re expecting centuries of flight 
time to even nearby star systems. That flyby  
probe can’t get as much done in a given system 
but it can get there faster and it can probably  
carry several additional systems that allow for 
a wider variety of information to be collected. 
So we will be arguing that each of those three 
categories should be done for any system,  
home astronomy, flyby, and protracted on site 
surveying, and generally in that order, but we  
also need to be looking at several different 
ways to do each and many of these will be  
complimentary with each other too. Fundamentally, 
due to time constraints, we won’t be able to do  
these probes in as much detail as I’d like today, 
so we’ll be giving them a deeper look in their  
own episode, Interstellar Probes, next month.
But they still need to be part of the conversation  
for today, and we’ll do those 3 categories, Home 
Astronomy, Flybys, and Protracted Local Scouting  
in order of operations, as it were. So let’s talk 
astronomy first, then briefly discuss the flyby,  
and finally the scouting portions, which may 
also need a follow up episode of their own.. 
Now I don’t want to get too into the 
weeds on telescopes today, but basically,  
we need to discuss what we’re looking for ideally, 
what our telescopes can actually see, and what  
sort of strategy that implies. We also need to 
distinguish between looking for habitable systems,  
inhabited systems, and ones with technological 
life. Those last two, both would have signatures,  
biosignatures or techno signatures, and even if 
we decided we didn’t want to colonize any world  
with life on it, a system showing biosignatures 
is obviously of interest for protracted study,  
but also indicates other planets in that system 
that might be good candidates for colonization. 
As an example, we wouldn’t expect to 
find biosignatures around a system that  
had giant gamma ray flares or novae any 
time in the last couple million years,  
but that’s hard to spot astronomically. You might 
have some distant binary black hole partner that  
swung by and detonated as it picked up gas from 
the inner system, then meandered off for a hundred  
thousand years before returning for a repeat 
fireworks show. If it turns out that simple  
photosynthetic life evolves all the time and 
leaves oxygen rich atmospheres, then systems  
lacking those biosignatures, that otherwise 
look ideal for them, suddenly become suspicious. 
And I’d use that term - suspicious - because 
when it comes to colonization and sending  
tens or even hundreds of thousands of folks on a 
colony mission, then these stars stop becoming a  
mundane catalog number and start becoming major 
investigations. We could almost see it as a hunt  
for a murder culprit, for why a system isn’t 
inhabited, and the various causes being our  
murder weapons. You’ll have big detective teams 
trying to figure out all the relevant colonization  
options from the data, and this is likely to be 
something comparable to a billion-dollar industry  
with entire consulting firms of hundreds of 
experts analyzing data, mined by potentially  
thousands of massive telescopes and astronomical 
arrays. We’re talking about something that amounts  
to the selling of an entire planet, or several, 
even if it's not actually a business transaction,  
the resources involved both in colonization and 
in its eventual development are staggering. So  
even a post-scarcity society able to 
send colony ships to places on a whim  
isn’t likely to skip or skimp on their initial 
homework and collecting of astronomical data. 
This data may still not be enough, but it’s 
likely a colonization effort would be launched  
before a flyby had arrived, indeed since the flyby 
can travel faster it might be launched at roughly  
the same time, and it might be that colony ships 
are sent with a primary target in mind but a list  
of backups further out that they could divert to, 
all of which have flybys en route to them as well. 
Colony ships would need to carry some extra 
fuel to be able to change course a few degrees,  
and just generally need a lot more devoted to 
cargo and redundancy, so we should also be able  
to get non-flyby scout missions there well ahead 
of the ship, even if they left at the same time,  
enough that they might get a report back to 
the colony ship or fleet before they’ve had  
to initiate their slowdown deceleration burn 
and thus could divert to the next candidate  
with minimal fuel expenditure. There’s also 
some low-fuel options for turning around a star  
they could employ with lots of advanced notice.
Now that has more to do with planning a colony  
mission, a topic that might make 
for a good episode of its own too,  
but it gives us an idea what our margins of 
error are, and it also tell us we don’t really  
need to be ruling out one-in-a-thousand types of 
scenarios where we can’t really tell till we get  
there with a flyby or even vanguard scout, because 
we probably can divert a colony fleet to the next  
decent candidate and can expect to have better 
and more detailed information, as those other  
probes moving faster than the fleet arrive. Plus, 
it’s likely that a fleet could arrive, stop, see  
it was a bad setup for a colony after all, refuel 
from local resources and move on. Possibly leaving  
interstellar infrastructure and outposts behind.
Nonetheless, that represents years, if not decades  
of lost time for settling folks who thought 
they were going to their future dream home,  
in a pale shadow of it. So, it goes without saying 
that maximum data is desirable back home, before  
the ship launches. And of course, at the moment 
we’re not even launching ships to distant stars,  
we still have a hard time launching telescopes to 
Earth’s own orbital space. But as we contemplate  
the data we need, we need to remember that we 
will also be able to put vastly more effective  
telescopes into play as we begin getting 
the resources and infrastructure to launch  
interstellar missions. See our Megatelescopes 
episode for some of the truly extreme examples  
of what that might look like in centuries to come.
Currently, we’re hunting for exoplanets that might  
be in the habitable zone of a star, and for 
stars that might actually have habitable zones.  
Many are pretty unstable and really aren’t 
likely to offer any planets that are classically  
terraformable, as opposed to some of the 
more artificial and ambitious approaches  
to world building we often contemplate on 
the show, which can go nearly anywhere. 
What is a habitable zone and how do we find it? 
This one isn’t too bad as we’re looking for a star  
whose output doesn’t vary by more than maybe 10% 
for a period of several days during an observation  
period of as long as we can get. We need to know 
and calculate how much temperature variation,  
in the context of sunlight, that a planet of 
a given size and composition could handle.  
There won’t be any hard and fast criteria there 
either, a planet with a thick atmosphere and lots  
of greenhouse gases, should be able to handle much 
more temperature variation, being more insulated,  
but probably also can’t handle as much light 
overall because it is insulated and would get  
hotter. It might be able to handle a much 
more eccentric orbit around a star too,  
retaining heat when far from the star and 
heating more slowly as it neared perihelion. 
The simple version of a habitable zone is that it 
is where liquid water can exist on a world with an  
atmosphere that is neither too thick or thin to 
potentially be breathable and it’s always viewed  
as merely a quick approximation. It’s a good 
guideline to see if a planet might have water  
or be able to hold it if we gave it some.
Can we see if a planet has water? 
Yes, in terms of astronomical tells, water 
and ice both have albedos different from rock,  
as do water clouds from, say, the Sulfuric 
Acid clouds of Venus. It’s also fairly  
easy to determine a planet’s temperature by 
looking at the peak of its infrared emissions  
and watching them over the course of a year, along 
with the absorption spectra of that atmosphere. 
When we say year, mind you, we mean that planet’s 
year not ours, and that might be a few months for  
a habitable planet around an Orange Dwarf 
or bigger Red Dwarf, or multiple centuries  
for bigger stars like Alpha Pavonis, as we 
discussed in our episodes Colonizing Red Dwarfs  
and Colonizing Giant Stars. Every planet, indeed 
every object, including stars, emits radiation  
into the vacuum of space based on its temperature 
and size, and the wavelength of that radiation is  
determined by temperature. So once we get our 
eyes onto a given exoplanet, we can determine  
its diameter and average temperature simply from 
that infrared spectrum of that heat radiation. 
We can determine its day length just by watching 
how those emissions, and those of reflected  
sunlight, vary, assuming the world is not 
homogeneous of surface. If the whole surface is  
more or less the same rock or one big ocean or all 
frozen ice this method doesn’t work but if it’s  
got continents and oceans then those each reflect 
light differently. The side of our planet covered  
almost entirely by the Pacific Ocean, reflects 
and emits a much different spectrum than the  
side where most of the continents are, and we can 
determine day length by watching when they repeat. 
Ideally anyway. What’s being reflected would alter 
a lot, based on the weather, though that would  
average out over many observations and at least 
tell us it had an atmosphere of some sort. Also,  
the light it reflects is not what we get to see, 
we get to see what it reflects in our direction,  
and if we’re looking at it from above or 
underneath its poles then the daily change is  
a lot different than if we had an equatorial view. 
There’s no guarantee its poles are perpendicular  
to its plane of rotation either though due to 
how star systems and planets form this will  
tend to be the case. But Venus orbits backward 
and Uranus on its side, and those make up 25%  
of the planets in this solar system so that 
implies that’s, at best, a guideline not a rule. 
Regardless, any time we’re dealing with a planet 
whose day length is much smaller than its year  
length, we should be able to spot how long that 
day is, fairly quickly, just by the repetitions  
of patterns. As our telescopes improve we 
might even be able to find larger moons  
around exoplanets from back here and that not 
only helps with pinning down a planet’s mass,  
but we can also look at how that moon’s reflected 
light varies as a way of pinning down more on  
that planet’s day, after all, Earth reflects 
sunlight quite brightly onto its Moon, and also,  
a lot of our weather, and its astronomical 
telltales, shifts with the lunar month and tides. 
We don’t necessarily need to know what the 
spectrum means, merely that it's periodic and what  
that period is. But generally, these things all 
mean something and one example of a biosignature,  
or candidate for one anyway, is lots of 
oxygen in the atmosphere. Unlike noble gases,  
which don’t like to pair up on the chemical dance 
floor with anything being snobby and aristocratic,  
oxygen is everybody’s best friend, and pairs 
with or groups up with nearly everybody. 
As a result, it really shouldn’t be hanging 
around in skies in great quantity unless  
something is releasing it, in favor of 
being sequestered into land and sea.  
The oceans, by mass, are 89% oxygen, and oxygen 
comprises 46% of the Earth’s crust by mass.  
So basically all of Earth that’s visible 
for astronomy is saturated with oxygen,  
89% of the sea and 46% of the land, and ironically 
the atmosphere is the least oxygen rich part of  
our world’s surface, being only 20-21% oxygen, 
depending on the humidity. Most of that atmosphere  
is nitrogen and yet nitrogen’s crustal abundance 
on Earth is only about 300 parts per million,  
not even a thousandth of oxygen’s abundance in the 
crust, and it’s fairly minimal in the sea as well. 
Now nitrogen isn’t a bio-signature, frosty 
Titan around distant Saturn has 94% nitrogen,  
and there’s more nitrogen in Venus’s 
boiling atmosphere than in Earth’s,  
being only 3.5% of Venus’s atmosphere but that 
atmosphere being nearly a hundred times more  
massive than Earth’s. Rather, it's that 
free oxygen not bound to anything else,  
that we view as the possible biosignature because 
oxygen in molecular form is emitted by plant life  
and takes a long time to find something 
to bond with that isn’t already bonded. 
How do we know how much oxygen 
is floating around that sky? 
Well oxygen is going to be 
coming in multiple formats,  
not just diatomic oxygen of two oxygen atoms but 
also short-lived triatomic oxygen, what we call  
ozone, and various other short-lived molecules, 
also, water, and here on Earth, Nitrous Oxide.  
Much as every object in space will have 
a characteristic blackbody emission of  
heat radiation, every molecule type 
has characteristic spectrums too. 
Now Nitrous oxide is principally emitted by the 
soil as part of the nitrogen cycle and thus is  
another potential biosignature too, and one 
favored for Super Earths around cooler stars.  
Cooler stars meaning orange and red dwarfs 
and those of course make up over 90%  
of all stars and thus are most of our 
candidates for potential colonization,  
even if we like yellow dwarfs better, 
simply because of supply and demand. 
Now let me put a caveat on that. There are about 
500 yellow or G-type stars within 100 light years  
of Earth, and even if there are 20 times as many 
red dwarfs, those yellow stars are probably going  
to be one of the first places we launch colony 
ships to. Odds are good we would be able to get  
closer looks at those red and orange dwarf stars 
from their yellow neighbors that we settled first. 
Nonetheless, Segura et al’s 2005 paper, 
“Biosignatures from Earth-like planets around  
M dwarfs” or red dwarfs, highlights a lot of the 
basic biosignatures we could expect on planets  
orbiting these cooler stars. Methane, 
nitrous oxide, and chloromethane also  
known as methyl chloride were all labeled as 
good candidates as biosignatures because they’d  
have longer lifetimes and mixing ratios than 
on Earth or other worlds around hotter stars. 
Why? Well mostly ultraviolet light, bigger 
hotter stars produce more of UV as part of their  
spectrum, and it tends to rip up molecules. Ozone, 
oxygen molecules composed of three oxygen atoms,  
isn’t stable and falls apart after around an 
hour but constantly gets made in our atmosphere,  
as ultraviolet of roughly 200 nanometers 
can tear a diatomic oxygen molecule apart  
and those two free oxygen atoms can find a 
new home. One of those might be a diatomic  
nitrogen molecule, creating N2O or Nitrous oxide, 
another is a diatomic oxygen molecule, which would  
make ozone. It can also be made by electrical 
disturbances, e.g. lightning, so don’t think of  
it as only around the skies of planets around 
hotter stars, but it’s also something that’s  
destroyed by Ultraviolet Light, especially the 
nasty UV-C range that’s brutal on known lifeforms. 
Additionally, many other potential biosignatures 
would be destroyed by ultraviolet light too,  
and it's very hard to see an atmospheric 
biosignature unless it is in the upper atmosphere,  
so anything susceptible to rapid 
decay, especially from UV light,  
is a bad biosignature around hotter stars.
What this means is that a reliable biosignature  
for one system isn’t one on another and things 
will be even more confused in binary systems  
with circumstellar planets orbiting 
stars with different characteristics.  
What we’ll end up with is more like a 
checklist of possible things to hunt  
for on a given exoplanet in a given system. And 
that’s for biosignatures, not simple habitability,  
which is also a very sliding scale depending 
on how far you’re willing to go to terraform  
a planet. Technically, we don’t even need a 
rocky planet to call a star system habitable,  
because a nice asteroid belt or the moons around 
a gas giant, are potentially a lot more initially  
attractive to an inbound colonial fleet.
As we detailed in our Life in a Space Colony  
Series, when you’ve spent the last century or two 
living inside a rotating habitat on a spaceship,  
embedding that in a nice icy asteroid or moon 
and living there while you build others and  
setup your interplanetary infrastructure is a lot 
more appealing choice than dumping your colonists  
down a deep gravity well, onto a planet that 
they’ll need to spend centuries or millennia  
terraforming before they can walk around it 
without a environmental suit or under a dome. 
Now that said, a world is pretty habitable 
if we find it having a non-oxygen atmosphere  
and plenty of water, like Earth was back before 
the Oxygen Catastrophe circa 2 billion years ago,  
at least a billion years after life began on 
Earth. Oxygen is a waste product of plant life,  
at least Earth-based plant life, but initially, 
it was getting sequestered by all the rock,  
and was what we would call a weakly reducing 
atmosphere, where oxidation is prevented or  
limited by the removal of oxygen and other 
oxidizing gases and vapors. The Faint Young  
Sun Paradox, with our Sun being about 70% as 
bright back then – stars get hotter and brighter  
as they age – has still not been resolved, but we 
assume that back then, the atmosphere was still  
mostly nitrogen, heavier in carbon dioxide, 
and also carbon and nitrogen-bearing gases  
we see from volcanic activity, and we also 
assume way more methane, a great greenhouse gas,  
so as to allow Earth to have liquid water then, 
rather than just ice. I should note that the faint  
young sun paradox makes life on Venus early on 
more likely and ancient life on Mars less likely. 
It's a good example of how we might need to shift 
our entire view on finding habitable planets.  
Stars warm slowly, over billions of years, and we 
don’t want to plan our colonization around such  
waits. However, at a fundamental level, the idea 
of looking for a world which is ‘warm enough’ for  
life, but lacks the conditions to support it right 
now, is really only useful for finding existing  
worlds with life. We will not find an unoccupied 
planet that humans could live on from Day 1,  
because our living conditions are a byproduct 
of other life. Without life existing on a planet  
for a very long time, we will be unable to 
live on it outside of enclosed habitats.  
Once we start talking about changing a nice 
Earth-like world in temperature and gravity and  
possessing a nitrogen rich atmosphre into one 
with more oxygen, then we need to acknowledge  
that it will be a slow process and no easier 
– and indeed harder – than simply grinding up  
and smelting a few metal rich asteroids into some 
big, thin solar mirrors we can stick in an L1 Halo  
orbit or Lagite position, to heat a planet up, 
or a big solar shade, to cool that planet down. 
Just for context, the bulk cost of 20 micron 
thick Aluminum foil is about $2400 a ton,  
and such a ton would cover 12,000 square meters 
of mirror surface, or shade surface and could  
easily and fairly cheaply be reinforced with 
reflective dyneema tape, or similar. You might  
seriously alter a planet’s thermodynamics with 
about 12 million square kilometers of the stuff,  
one billion tons of foil, which comes in at the 
considerable price tag of 2.4 trillion dollars,  
which is comparable to about 5 months of US 
government spending. That’s a lot of money,  
but not to buy a planet, so to speak. Amusingly, 
if you’re setting up a space infrastructure  
before a planetary one, for interstellar colonists 
doing this backwards from us, that aluminum would  
be cheaper since, on Earth, its costs would come 
mostly from the electricity needed to make it and  
the fuel needed to launch it, but with the right 
infrastructure, doing that in orbital space is  
much easier, where the sun is always shining… or 
suns, you might be in a binary system after all. 
Thus our whole concept for a habitable planet 
has to be both broadened and narrowed. Our odds  
of finding an oxygen-rich atmosphere on a world 
of oceans and continents with no life on it, is  
pretty slim. However, our tools for terraforming 
make so many others viable. It’s really more about  
what sort of mass the planet has, because 
even worlds baked free of all their water,  
or rather hydrogen, by being ultra-hot like Venus, 
can have large hydrogen beams aimed at the planet  
in conjunction with solar shades to cool its seas.
Nonetheless, worlds which would only need life on  
them to keep oxygen levels right are probably 
still the most appealing. We seed those with  
cyanobacteria producing oxygen, but you 
can’t just wait on that. Photosynthesis is  
a great oxygen producer, assuming you’ve got 
carbon dioxide and water readily available,  
as it will convert 6 molecules of each into a 
sugar molecule and 6 diatomic oxygen molecules.  
However, they use the same number of oxygen 
atoms to break that sugar down and use it. The  
estimates I’ve seen put the excess oxygen produced 
from this process at perhaps as low as 0.0001%.  
We actually don’t have a good firm estimate of how 
much oxygen our biomass puts out per year but it's  
on the order of low gigatons, and there’s about 
1.2 million gigatons of oxygen in our atmosphere. 
In the absence of animal life breathing that 
oxygen, we might see a rich cyanobacteria layer  
on a planet push out a thousand gigatons of oxygen 
a year but that seems optimistic especially since  
we have no oxygen-saturation already in place. 
See, as soon as that oxygen is created, the  
rocks and so forth on an un-oxygenated world are 
going to oxidize and rust and largely absorb it.  
So I think even if transplanted or engineered 
cyanobacteria did amazingly well on a new world,  
then we’re likely still talking minimum timelines 
of millions of years to get an oxygen atmosphere.  
This instead implies using options 
like zapping it out of existing water,  
ice, or rock and sequestering things 
which would reabsorb that oxygen. 
Now, naturally speaking, we believe that, based on 
where banded iron deposits end in the geological  
record, that the Great Oxidation event or 
Catastrophe on Earth ended 1.85 Billion Years Ago,  
and that banded iron peaked about 2.5 
billion years ago and this oxidation of  
iron in our seas, settled to its bottom, which 
we believe indicates the beginning of oxygen  
production by photosynthetic organisms in the 
Precambrian, and would seem to indicate that  
the natural timeline for oxygenating an atmosphere 
is on the order of hundreds of millions of years,  
though I could see shrinking it to much less.
For looking for habitable systems though,  
finding worlds where this appeared to be in 
progress already, would be a good biosignature  
and also a good one for contemplating settlement 
of ourselves depending on how we chose to view  
the life on that planet. That’s a whole different 
problem of course, but given that the first and  
very simple brain didn’t evolve on Earth for over 
a billion years after the Oxidation Event ended,  
we are talking about incredibly simplistic life 
and ones requiring relatively small ecosystems  
in terms of natural ‘xeno-preserves’, or zoos.
Critically, all these sorts of signatures are  
detectable most easily by atmospheric composition. 
Obviously, you have to spot the Exoplanet first,  
but once we do, it's about building the right 
kind of telescope to hunt for a possible sign.  
You just have to decide if you’re hunting 
for biosignatures or existing life,  
or signs a world is uninhabited and 
would be easy for us to inhabit.  
For Gas Dwarf planets – a type of Super Earth or 
Mini Neptune rich in hydrogen, we think that the  
James Webb Space Telescope could find ammonia’s 
signature as a possible biosignature on those. 
For worlds around red dwarfs, as we mentioned, 
we can hunt for those biomarkers that Ultraviolet  
light is unkind to, because that system has 
less of it. Looking for oxygen is obviously a  
good one for Earth-analog planets, and there are 
many more that have been suggested, and again,  
every chemical we could find in an atmosphere is 
going to have an absorption or emission spectrum  
we can hunt for in the infrared, ultraviolet, or 
even visible range. Then it's just about building  
a big enough telescope up in space to stare at the 
candidate planet and realistically, building many  
of them. Ultimately I would not be surprised if 
a colonization-era humanity tended to commission  
a spectrum of telescopes for any new planet 
dubbed a possible candidate for colonization,  
focused only on that planet for years 
or decades. Indeed, given the value of  
different observational angles, it may be a large 
business for Oort Cloud colonies in our system. 
Nonetheless we begin to see the limit of 
astronomy, and enter the realm of flyby  
probes that can get a real resolution 
on a planet and additional angle,  
and on-site missions in orbit of a planet or even 
down on it. We’ll discuss those in more detail in  
the upcoming Interstellar Probes episode but 
let’s close today by briefly looking at each. 
We were talking about atmospheric 
biosignatures and they’re fairly limited,  
especially in telling us anything more than, 
say, the rough amount of biomass a world has  
that produces oxygen, which itself doesn’t tell us 
much and which to be honest is a real stretch to  
get. Outside of the realm of megatelscopes, which 
to be fair we might build even this century, the  
reality is that your resolution of an exoplanet 
from back here is 1 pixel. It’s not an image,  
anymore than a TV screen that’s all white is an 
image. It is a light source though, and we can  
measure its brightness overall and its brightness 
in any given frequency. We can tell a lot by that,  
and probably some surprising things we haven’t 
thought up yet, but there are real limits to  
it and that’s where a flyby comes into play.
As I was saying, when it comes to planets,  
or even entire stars, at best, our telescopes are 
only likely to see one pixel. Back when I was a  
graduate student running my college’s observatory 
on Friday nights, for public showings, something  
I often heard from folks, especially if we’d 
started by looking at our own neighboring planets,  
was how surprised they were that the 
stars were brighter through the telescope  
but still just a little point, whereas the planets 
got wider and detailed. And that’s because your  
eyes have pixels too, so to speak, and even nearby 
stars are still just a single bright pixel to us  
on all but the most enormous telescopes. Mars, 
at its closest, is still 10,000 times further  
away from us than it is wide, so appears as 
a single point, unless we use a good pair of  
binoculars or a telescope - in which case we 
can see many pixels and its various features. 
However, nearby stars, even though far bigger 
than a planet, are so far away that we’re  
talking distance to diameter ratios of many 
millions even for close ones, not thousands,  
and even more for tiny planets. A telescope able 
to see a planet like Earth around another star,  
as well as we can see Mars from Earth, would 
need to be a million times more powerful.  
Now as we discussed in Megatelescopes, that 
is buildable, same as we can build mirrors  
and shades big enough to cool entire planets, we 
can make telescopes in that scale. Indeed we can  
make planets into Telescopes, such as with the 
Kipping Terrascope. But all things considered,  
a flyby makes more sense much of the time.
This need not be a tiny probe either. The key  
thing about these probes is that they can use the 
same fuel to go twice as fast as a ship designed  
to slow down at the end of its trip can. Early 
probes would be as small as we can build them and  
get useful equipment to another solar system 
intact and powerful enough to transmit home,  
maybe postage stamp sized ones like 
the Breakthrough Starshot Initiative  
aims for. But later stage ones might be rather 
enormous, less like the Voyager Probe in size,  
and more like the Starship Voyager, from Star 
Trek. And as we’ll see in our Interstellar  
Probes episode, even the early ones will 
likely be bigger than the Voyager Probe. 
Now much like astronomy from back home, there’s 
likely to be a lot more data acquisition options  
and information we can pull from a flyby than 
at first we would suspect. For instance, some  
hundred-ton space probe moving at 50% of light 
speed could have a handful of tungsten rods or  
needles that they could fire off to hit a planet, 
slowing the probe just a little and giving the rod  
a tiny kick, so that it arrived a few minutes or 
maybe days before the probe did its nearest flyby. 
Some 100 kilogram rod slamming into a planet at 
half of light speed is going to kick up a serious  
amount of debris. Indeed more debris than a 
full scale nuclear war on Earth would have,  
coming in at around 14 or 15 thousand 
megatons, a million Hiroshima bombs.  
That’s going to give you a nice amount of debris 
for accurately determining crustal composition.  
Now that’s probably overdoing it and you 
also might want 10 smaller ones hitting  
different spots, but that’s an example of how 
a flyby probe can get some surface samples,  
by blowing a crater into the target and running 
spectrometry on the debris scattered by it. And  
that spectrometry might even be visible not 
just to the probe but the telescopes back home  
or on board a colony ship halfway there, who 
could verify with their own instrumentation. 
Now that colony ship, in truth, is not in a good 
position to do much astronomy, due to interstellar  
gas hitting it at relativistic speeds. Indeed 
they might launch flyby probes themselves,  
able to benefit from the ship’s existing cruising 
velocity, especially as doing so would be free  
deceleration for them, and they would probably 
have to slow down more slowly than an unmanned  
probe would, see our Generation Ships Series 
for more discussion of the problems in slowing  
down multi-kilometer long ships containing entire 
ecosystems. Astronomy is easier done to the side  
or behind the ship, or probe, where all that 
relativistic dust is not slamming into it,  
and also, big dishes and mirror arrays are limited 
to the normal size of the ship, since otherwise,  
they give extra things for that gas and dust 
to hit, and the noise of all that is massive. 
With that in mind, they may opt to be sending 
unmanned probes or even manned scouts in smaller  
ships that maybe just departed when 
the main ship or fleet began to slow,  
and they didn’t slow with the rest of 
the fleet, maintaining full velocity  
a while longer since they are able to slow 
faster. A big ark ship might be limited to  
a deceleration of 0.05 g to avoid problems for 
the ecologies in a spin-gravity environment,  
and if they’re coming down from 25% light speed, 
that means they need 5 years to come to a halt,  
whereas a manned probe, able to handle a 1-g burn, 
need not decelerate till it’s three months out,  
and an unmanned probe, able to handle 
a 100-g burn, could do it in a day,  
all using the same fuel, in theory anyway.
So that spaceship, five years out,  
or about a six-tenths of a light year, could fire 
two unmanned probes out, each with the same fuel,  
but one accelerating with that fuel to do a flyby 
that would arrive almost 4 years before they did;  
an unmanned probe that will arrive more than 
2 years ahead of them, potentially orbiting  
or landing, and a manned probe arriving 
a few months after that last unmanned  
probe with nearly 2 years to get work done.
Indeed, if it’s a fleet, then that might be  
an entire ship, and they might be very busy 
with projects in orbit, down on the ground,  
or even building large solar arrays near that 
star, to both slow the fleet, and maybe incoming  
follow-up colony ships, via stellaser, and to 
use that same array for terraforming efforts.  
Enormous star-powered energy beams have all sorts 
of handy applications, and that includes pushing  
other probes up to speed or sending-on all, 
or part of your fleet if the planet doesn’t  
seem all it was cracked up to be and some 
people want to move on to other prospects. 
There’s an awful lot more to say about Surveying, 
let alone Interstellar Probes and actually  
exploring alien planets, but we’ll close out here 
for today, and as mentioned we’ll do that deeper  
dive on probes next month and maybe also what life 
as a Planetary Explorer would be like after that. 
For now though, we have no interstellar 
probes or ships, just telescopes in orbit  
and here on the ground, but as we saw today 
there’s a lot we can do with those and there’s  
a lot more to determining if a planet is habitable 
than most folks realize, but when it comes to star  
systems themselves, with a bit of determination, 
ingenuity, and effort, there’s no such thing as an  
uninhabitable star system.
[outro]
