One day we may settle thousands 
of planets and trade between them,  
but what would a space freighter be like, who 
would crew them, and what would they carry? 
A lot of times we’ve looked at the sheer immensity 
of interstellar empires and Kardashev scale  
civilizations, where you might have billions 
of times our population and need billions of  
times more people in every type of job then we 
have nowadays. But we don’t zoom in on the real  
logistics very often, and last year we had a pair 
of episodes on Hive Worlds and Hungry Aliens and  
both spent some time talking about the realities 
of trying to feed huge mega-metropolises covering  
whole planets or giant growing space empires.
But we skipped a lot of the logistics as it  
was getting a bit into the weeds and off topic 
for either episode, and one big piece of that  
is moving everything around. So we produced 
a short companion episode on Nebula for both  
on Space Freighters, and I said in that episode 
that the topic probably needed more than a  
short bonus companion piece, it’s own episode at 
least, if not series, and today we’ll be taking  
an expanded look at the topic, particularly 
to discuss what sort of cargos they’d carry  
and how much cargo they might carry, as well as 
how much crew they’d have and what their lives  
might be like. So if that sounds interesting, or 
if you’d like to see more episodes on the topic,  
make sure to hit the like and subscribe buttons, 
then rummage around your own cargo bays or fridge  
for a drink and snack to enjoy while we take a 
look at space freighters, their cargos, and crews. 
Space freighters or trade ships are 
a staple of science fiction but don’t  
get much serious scientific or economic 
analysis, and understandably so as it’s  
hard to do either without knowing way more 
details about the specific technologies,  
civilizations, and economies in play.
Now you don’t have to have watched either of those  
other episodes, Hive Worlds or Hungry Aliens, to 
watch this one, but if you saw Hive Worlds, some  
points we made there was that food can actually 
be pretty compact, in terms of both mass and size,  
so that those enormous ships that are ubiquitous 
in science fiction could carry enough food for a  
whole planet, or from a dedicated farming planet, 
and that such dedicated agricultural planets could  
each probably feed hundreds of billions, if 
not more. Even without getting ultra-compact,  
the amount of food one person needs for a 
year is on an order of a cubic meter or ton,  
and less if we focus on dehydrated foods or 
calorie-dense options like fats and oils. A cubic  
meter of olive oil for instance, 1000 liters, 
contains just over 8 million food calories, more  
than ten times what a person needs for a year.
So a ship on par with an aircraft carrier,  
oil supertanker, or big container ship might carry 
enough food for tens of millions of people to eat  
for a couple months. Alternatively some massive 
kilometer long ship of the kind popular in science  
fiction like Star Wars or Warhammer 40,000 could 
potentially be carrying enough food for a billion  
people to live for an entire year in its holds.
They could also carry billions off, so planetary  
evacuations or aid missions really are believable. 
If your technology permits it, the big freezer or  
stasis bins that let you move fresh food 
to a planet can be crammed with refugees  
on the way out too, and having them on stasis 
removes the major problem with a refugee ship,  
which is keeping those folks safe, healthy, 
and out of the crew’s hair for the journey. 
Of course there’s no guarantee a classic 
sci-fi stasis pod or bay would ever be a thing,  
limiting you to foods you could freeze for 
long times, or were otherwise very durable,  
and to other goods besides food that were durable.
The question then becomes if it could ever be  
economically viable to ship something as bulky 
as food around, and that is a case that’s even  
harder to make in an interstellar context, 
in a no-FTL Universe, one without warp drives  
where light speed is the limit, since unless 
you’ve got some sort of awesome stasis devices,  
the idea of a fresh delivery a couple decades 
later would seem ridiculous except maybe in  
the case of certain products we like to 
age, such a wine or cheese or whiskey. 
Even then, a ship might spend a decade 
or more delivering one load of cargo,  
during which time it has to pay its crew, if 
any, its investors, if any, the shipyard that  
made the ship, or the bank they borrowed the money 
from at interest, and the maintenance costs. All  
while some local ship running cargo around a solar 
system might be doing months or a year per trip,  
getting dozens more trips in, and selling dozens 
more cargos. The situation is even better for  
those on lunar or cislunar and orbital trips 
around the swarm of habitats and other space  
stations we’d expect near settled planets, which 
might be trips of a few days or even the same day,  
allowing hundreds of pickups and deliveries 
a year, and a thousand during the time an  
interstellar trip delivered just one cargo.
Now the interplanetary case is an easier one,  
as is shipping down from high orbit like 
moons or artificial space farm megastructures,  
though both are still tricky. However, I think 
we should acknowledge from the outset that folks  
talk pretty casually about bringing in whole 
atmospheres and oceans to planets like Mars,  
and for a little context, Earth’s ocean mass is 
currently estimated at 1.35 x 10^21 kilograms.  
We often imagine bringing in parallel 
figures to create robust topsoils too. 
That’s over a billion-billion tons, and as we 
noted in Hive Worlds, if you’re aiming to conserve  
mass, then a person can be kept alive on something 
like 100 kilograms of food a year, and with plenty  
of room to spare. We assume in this context a 
lot is probably dehydrated and that a lot of  
fast growing or quick rotting fruits and veggies 
like lettuce get done locally in hydroponic farms,  
down on the planet or in orbitals coming down via 
space towers or elevators. We’re not necessarily  
assuming the most diverse, pleasant, or even 
healthy diet here, though again it’s not that  
conservative a figure and we’re not talking 
classic scifi nutra-paste or food cubes, let  
alone Soylent Green or 40k-style Corpse Starch.
Anyway, if you’re oceans mass a billion-billion  
tons and you can feed ten people a year off one 
ton, than the same effort needed to bring in an  
ocean can bring in food for 10 billion people 
for a billion years, till that star burns out  
basically, or 10 trillion for a million years, 
or a quadrillion people for 10,000 years, which  
is itself usually on the high end of the sort of 
timeline people imagine for terraforming a planet.  
And I suppose one way to bring those oceans and 
soil in would be to just not bother dehydrating  
the food in favor of just recycling that 
food, post consumption, for water and topsoil. 
So any situation in which you’re seriously 
contemplating moving literal mountains,  
or mountain ranges, worth of raw materials 
to planets strongly implies you could very  
economically ship bulk cargo of other types 
around. Especially if you’re using options  
like space towers and orbital rings for your 
ground to orbit, and orbit to ground movement.  
And if you can do it for food, I think it 
becomes plausible for almost anything else. 
The next question becomes: how big 
a freighter are we talking about? 
Engineering-wise, bigger isn’t always better, but 
it usually is for moving huge amounts of bulk from  
a big collection point to a big distribution 
hub. That’s why we have supertankers and giant  
container ships. As to those hubs, in this case 
it might be from some huge space farm or habitat  
or agriworld to another planet or some very 
urbanized space station, asteroid, or moon. 
Cost isn’t necessarily as constraining as we 
would tend to think. A lot of us feel the pinch  
of recent inflation on food prices but a lot of 
that cost is coming from processing, packaging,  
and local storage at a store, or restaurant, 
as opposed to the farming cost or bulk cargo  
transport from them, and thus wouldn’t necessarily 
translate onto moving it between worlds. Moreover,  
as much as that cost is high, close to $2000 
a year per person for groceries, in the US,  
the per capita income is 40 times that too, so a 
civilization can get away with that portion rising  
quite a bit, for importation needs, especially 
if they are technological advanced and have  
a vastly higher production per individual 
than what is needed for basic subsistence,  
which historically has been closer to a half 
just for food, not a few percent, like now. 
It might surprise folks, but the output 
of American farms is not even quite 1%  
of the US economy, and agriculture, food, and 
related industries are just over 5% together,  
and just over 10% of the jobs. That can be a 
tricky count with farmers at times, as many are  
small farms whose owners are not full time and 
not principally employed in that. My wife and  
I would both count as that. We own a farm, it's 
where we live and where I make these episodes,  
and we do actually produce off it, and are 
not hobby farmers, but it’s not either of  
our primary jobs in terms of time or revenue.
That’s a thing to keep in mind in the context  
of the future. A spaceship requires very 
little actual navigation and piloting on  
what are fairly long journeys. A lot of the 
work for the crew of a cargo ship is at the  
front and back end of the trip, and likely a 
lot would be done by personnel at those ports,  
not just the ship crew. But they would still be 
busy then, and this implies a lot of free time  
for other activities during the journey.
Thus, it’s possible a ship’s crew are all  
moonlighting in other careers. That can 
change the economics of a situation. So  
can being a post-scarcity civilization 
with lots of robots and cheap energy,  
and that latter is strongly implied by even 
having an interplanetary economy. Moonlighting  
might be unrelated, or it might be a perk of 
their job is some free cargo space they can  
use to buy and fill with luxury items they plan 
to sell at the next destination. Historically,  
letting your crew have some cargo space of their 
own that they could fill with goods bought with  
their own pay from the most recent leg of their 
journey was a fairly common perk, and something  
for them to do with that money besides blow it 
all at the local dockside taverns and brothels. 
In terms of an economy, that might be a planet, 
or it might be that planet and its orbitals,  
or a system-wide economy, or even a Dyson swarm. 
In that last case I can comfortably say that  
inter-object shipping is totally economical since 
it would take less fuel or energy in most cases  
to travel to neighbors than it does nowadays. 
Your typical Dyson Swarm is less population  
dense than the most deserted desert or tundra on 
Earth, but it’s got trillions if not quadrillions  
of space habitats separated by vacuum and with 
no gravity of note to spend fuel escaping from.  
So you only need enough fuel to get up to 
a comfortable speed and back down again. 
A freighter wanting to make the hundred thousand 
kilometer trip to a neighboring cluster of O’Neill  
Cylinders, unless it is carrying bananas or some 
other food known for having minimal shelf-lives,  
probably can afford to spend a week on that 
journey. It’s just coming down to whether or  
not the cost for more fuel to go faster 
is going to cancel out your other costs  
like more wages for the longer trip and 
more maintenance and debt service on that  
freighter. But that means for a week-long 
trip its cruising speed would only need to  
be 165 meters per second or 370 miles per hour, 
the same speed as a lot of commercial planes,  
not spaceships. And unlike a plane, it only 
burns fuel to get to that speed, not maintain it. 
Even assuming it can't get a boost running 
down a launch ramp or launching off the side  
of a spinning habitat, which it probably can, and 
that it has to do that with modern rocket fuel,  
it still needs less fuel than cargo. Which for 
context, probably means even in modern terms less  
than a dollar a kilogram shipped for fuel cost. 
That means there would be precious few things you  
couldn’t ship around a Dyson Swarm or the smaller 
orbital swarms around planets for economical rates  
even with modern technology for the shipping.
Of course we could rebut that by noting that  
with very good 3D printing and automation 
that it is possible nothing really will be  
economical to ship because it would 
always be cheaper to make locally,  
because they can do it for the same cost and need 
no shipping - except of course for raw materials.  
Those are pretty much always going to be durable 
and marginal, meaning huge ships with tiny crews. 
Even there though, some luxury market for those 
who just have to have an original or authentic  
good, not one locally printed, is likely to remain 
and make up at least some small part of what is  
on some bulk freighter, even if we're talking a 
room-sized locker full of luxury goods on a ship  
the size of a supertanker full of raw materials 
like iron or ice. But my hunch is specialization  
will still reign supreme and places will be known 
for importing and exporting certain products. 
But let’s go with Gross System Product or GSP for 
now, and assume the more urbanized elements can  
comfortably afford at least 1% of their economy 
be spent on shipping food in, specifically,  
that’s the transport cost, or room for revenue 
and profit for our freighter. It’s obviously an  
intentionally round figure but not arbitrary, 
it’s pretty close to what it costs nowadays,  
and loosely speaking whatever farms sell 
for is roughly tripled or quadrupled by  
the time it gets into a home refrigerator, 
and a lot of that is shipping and handling. 
Now we might assume a very productive and 
high-tech economy has a lot less of its economy  
made of food, and a much smaller portion of it 
as staple crops, much as it’s a smaller fraction  
nowadays compared to the subsistence farming most 
of our ancestors did until relatively recently.  
Having far more production though probably 
just makes shipping more economical overall. 
Let me add in the quick note that for 
ease of discussion we are using our modern  
economy as our touch point. We can imagine a 
civilization with no money, Star Trek style,  
and we’ve looked at that before in other episodes, 
but a lack of money doesn’t mean a lack of an  
economy and you still need to provide goods and 
services and move stuff around, except in more  
extreme cases like we looked at in the Hermit 
Shoplifter Hypothesis of the Fermi Paradox. 
By that same notion, almost anything could be 
automated but we tend to assume at a certain  
point of intelligence, an artificial intelligence 
or robot just becomes a different type of person,  
as opposed to a machine, and thus is still a 
crewmember. It probably will be compensated in  
some fashion too, just like a person will, even 
if the pay is in something other than traditional  
money, like social points or filling your 100 
hours a year of mandatory public service required  
to get your various privileges and rations. From a 
practical perspective this may not be identical to  
a modern economy but seems to have enough points 
of overlap that it works for our discussion today. 
I also don’t think you’d ever have truly 
uncrewed cargo ships, too much valuable material,  
too little reason not to have at least some crew 
for handling weird eventualities, like hijacking,  
piracy or scams, you wouldn’t trust to something 
not bright and versatile enough to get the title  
of ‘person’. The episodes this one is originally 
a companion piece to were pretty dystopian,  
thus assumes a lot of humans working full time 
jobs or worse, but a utopian one is not likely  
to be one where people don’t work at all, 
feeling useless and without purpose isn’t  
really utopian, so you might as well have crew.
In any event, let’s assume for the moment that  
your space freighter is only eking out a 1% 
profit after all other costs but salaries for  
the crew - fuel, maintenance, spare parts, bank 
loans, docking fees, investor shares. If only 1%  
is available to be paying your crew, and only 1% 
of the economy is for this bulk cargo, say food,  
this still means the money is there for about 1% 
of 1% or 1 in ten thousand people to be working  
in shipping of food through space specifically.
That would mean each crew member would need food  
for 10,000 people to offset themself. 
That’s on the very high end I think,  
but it does mean some megaton freighter carrying 
enough food to feed 10 million people for a year  
could get away with doing just one delivery 
per year and having a crew of a thousand,  
or a thousand people living off the dividends of 
the ship or whichever. We’re treating food as a  
commodity currency in this case to keep it simple. 
And again that’s on the low side. I suspect even  
being able to allocate 1% of GSP to paying 
sailors would be plausible enough. Maybe more. 
I would say that rather than 10,000 to 1 though, 
that 100:1 is a lot more plausible for freighters  
in general, especially for less bulky items. 
And if we’re assuming the ship has a maximum  
density of water - like what any sailing ship has 
nowadays, then some ship with a cargo capacity of,  
say, 5,000 tons, might be something on an order of 
a ship 50 meters long and 10 meters wide and tall,  
or 164 feet long and 33 feet wide and tall, making 
20 deliveries a year, 2 week journeys with a few  
days of turnaround at the port. And that might 
be a crew of one doing well or a handful barely  
scraping by, if we were assuming bulk cargo 
at that 10,000 to 1 ratio, or it might be a  
crew of dozens doing very well for themselves 
while the captain might be quite wealthy, even  
by the standards of a post-scarcity civilization.
Just to follow up our hiveworld example though,  
where we are a lot more dystopian and not 
post-scarcity, we could imagine a scaled up  
version of that last ship, 5000 meters long 
and 1000 wide and tall, or 3 miles long,  
carrying more like 5 billions tons of cargo, 
loaded up from a collection point of big high  
orbit space farms just over once a month, or 10 
times a year, bringing in enough food to feed half  
a trillion people for a year. And you might 
have hundreds of space towers where one or more  
of these ships is unloading at any given time.
In a case like this, even in your more dystopian  
scifi examples where this ship might have of a 
million borderline serfs or galley slaves on board  
that are mostly compensated with room and board, 
this would barely scratch the food supply on that  
ship or its space. You would need ten million 
of them to use up even a millionth of the food  
on the ship, which is probably way less than got 
damaged by loading and thus won’t keep well for  
later unloading, so you might as well feed your 
crew with it, and even for that full ten million,  
you would be using less than 1% of it space for 
living and sleeping quarters without even having  
to pack them in as tightly as we do on submarine 
crews nowadays. Anything less than a million would  
feel like the ship was empty, given that it 
might have a billion square meters of decks. 
One can imagine entire communities on those ships 
that mostly were not terribly productive compared  
to robots simply because the ship’s more senior 
crew would rather feed people to work than buy  
robots too, especially given that for those 
shipping food, they will always have some  
damaged in shipping they can use for feeding 
their crew, which makes them cheaper than  
robots. Or maybe they get a kick out of having 
their own personal kingdom. Ship’s like this,  
you’re the governor of a state or CEO of a 
megacorporation, only you’re a captain so in more  
ways like an autarch or absolute monarch, and the 
captain’s chair probably is more like a throne. 
Crunching those numbers though, it would mean 
that when they got into port, each person out  
of that million was responsible for getting 
5 thousand tons of cargo on and off the ship,  
or 500 tons if we had a full ten million crew. 
That’s not even including fuel or any other work  
besides loading and unloading, so we’re not really 
talking about work gangs moving the stuff on their  
backs, unless the crew number in the hundreds of 
millions, but more like entire fleets of cargo  
trucks running constantly down the boarding ramp 
or an actual train track unloading the cargo bays.  
And a railroad running continuously as one long 
train might be moving 10 or 12 tons of cargo a  
second, nonstop cars moving down that track, 
and you would still need a thousand of those  
tracks to load and unload that ship in a few days.
This is the reason why I would tend to think this  
was the upper limit of freighter size and probably 
passed it for how big a cargo ship might be,  
because while it’s cool to speak of or animate 
ships miles long, that packing and unpacking  
issue is not helped by scaling up, and becomes 
reminiscent of the bottleneck caused by the  
elevator conundrum that we talk about in our 
arcology and space tower episodes. It is still  
doable though, even if you have to have the crew 
physically carrying the cargo off themselves,  
or using forklifts, or fairly automated 
forklifts that mostly drive themselves. We  
might even be able to make much more high-tech 
and efficient versions of pallets and barrels. 
We always talk about how automated spaceships 
might be, and in theory anything can be automated,  
but at this scale it really is not hard to imagine 
that you really would need a crew of a million  
just to oversee and maintain all the automation 
involved in loading and unloading that ship,  
even if most of the manpower and equipment was 
from the port itself. We really can imagine a ship  
of any size being navigated by a small crew of a 
dozen, especially with enough machines and robots,  
but when we dig in we see a need for a lot more.
Just as another example, we usually say a single  
custodian can clean 10,000 square feet or 1000 
square meters of floor in a single work day,  
some ship like that with decks, say, 5 meters 
high, for 200 total decks, would have a billion  
square meters of deck, and even if it only got 
cleaned every 10 days, that’s 100,000 custodians  
swabbing decks. You automate that obviously, 
but now maybe you only need a thousand folks  
who each maintain and monitor 100 roombas each.
To wrap it up, and realizing that I could easily  
expand on this topic into multiple full length 
episodes - not that there’s anything new there, we  
can do that for almost all our topics on this show 
- there is the question of fuel and propellant,  
but that is actually rather trivial in a fusion 
economy or even one with good power beaming,  
because it’s really just hydrogen, be it fuel or 
propellant, and so long as you can pull that out  
of a gas giant’s gravity well relatively cheaply 
- which you can in a number of ways including  
relatively low tech options - then it’s all about 
the assumption that most ships can go at about the  
exhaust velocity of that propellant out of the 
ship. And even if that’s only 10 kilometers a  
second, which is low for an ion drive, then you’ve 
got all the speed you need for interplanetary  
shipping and even expedited cis-lunar transport.
Definitely a topic I’d like to expand more on,  
even after nearly doubling the script between 
its original airing on Nebula last year as a  
companion piece and its release a year later 
here as an expanded piece. We didn’t even  
get to look at non-food cargos or shipping 
routes or the impact of various different  
drive systems or much of a dip into what life 
as crew or captain on these might be like,  
though I think we’ve established that even a 
society that puts hard limits on AI and automation  
not too far beyond what we have nowadays could get 
away with economical bulk freighters and without  
having crew who would envy the guys on submarines 
or 19th century dockworkers. Indeed it might be a  
rather lavish lifestyle by modern standards 
even for the lowliest and most junior crew. 
However, that’s all the time we have today. 
I think we’ve established that there’s a  
pathway to a future in which the freighters 
we see in so much scifi are a reality. Again  
if you enjoyed this content and want to 
see more on this topic or related ones,  
make sure to hit the like and subscribe 
buttons, and leave a comment on the episode.
We were talking about spaceship crews today 
and I wanted to say a quick thanks to the  
crew here on the SFIA ship for the years 
of help editing scripts, making graphics,  
moderating forums and pages, and a hundred other 
things that help keep SFIA sailing into the future  
and delivering episodes every week. That same is 
also true of our sponsors, especially Brilliant,  
who is our longest running sponsor on this show 
and has made it possible for us to make quality  
content for you every week for years now, and 
quality content is something they understand. 
As many of you get ready to sail off for the 
summer from school, I’d like to encourage you  
to think of learning as a constant process, enjoy 
the break, get ready for a new life, but focus on  
trying to learn something new everyday. That way 
the knowledge you worked so hard for doesn't get  
lost from a lack of practice, and instead grows, 
and that in turn lets you grow, personally and  
professionally, and have fun while you’re at it. 
And Brilliant can be your partner on that journey. 
Brilliant helps you build real knowledge in 
minutes a day—with fun lessons you can do whenever  
you have the time. Learn through problem solving 
and doing, with hands on interactive content  
that’s fun, immersive, effective, and intuitive.
You can try everything Brilliant has to offer  
for free for a full 30 days, just visit 
brilliant.org/isaacarthur or click on  
the link in the description. You’ll also 
get 20% off an annual premium subscription 
So that is it for today and we’ll wrap up 
the month of May with a trip to Ganymede,  
the largest of the moons of Jupiter and indeed the 
largest moon in our solar system, and we’ll ask  
if perhaps humanity might settle this moon. After 
that we’ll head into June to look at what sorts of  
Jobs in Space and the Space Industry there are, 
both now and in the future. Then we’ll return  
to the Fermi Paradox and continue last week’s 
discussion on the nature of intelligence to ask  
if our mind’s themselves may be a ticking 
time bomb waiting to inevitably ruin us. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can 
also help support the show by becoming a member  
here on Youtube or Patreon, or checkout 
other ways to help at IsaacArthur.net.  
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes 
early and ad free on our streaming service,  
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content like 
Machine Monitors, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
