This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
Science fiction delights in showing us humanity’s
future on strange new worlds we will find
out among the stars… but it is very likely
our future will be on massive artificial worlds
and megastructures of our own creation.
So welcome to Science & Futurism with Isaac
Arthur, and I am the aforementioned host,
Isaac Arthur.
Just under eight years ago the channel began
with an episode cataloging a number of what
we call megastructures, huge artificial constructs
that in many cases would rival entire planets
in size and serve a similar role, as our future
homes.
Back in the day, the graphics on the show
weren’t terribly impressive, indeed most
megastructure visuals in existence were made
after that episode, many for this show, and
the audio was terrible.
It was the first episode of this show and
the only one not to include the episode transcript
in as captions because there wasn’t one.
As time went on our audio and graphics improved
and I got some speech therapy for my speech
impediment, and Folks have often asked why
I’ve never redone that episode, when almost
every other early episode has gotten a redo
or reboot or even an entire extended series.
Indeed we gave many megastructures their own
episode in our megastructure series, but it
did indeed seem time to catalog all of them
again in summary form, including many new
ones we and others have dreamed up since then.
Needless to say, even keeping it quick, this
one is going to be a long, long episode, easily
beating out our previous record-holder, the
Fermi Paradox Compendium, which was over 70
minutes.
So get yourself a drink and a snack, or even
two, and let’s get started.
Also in the interest of preserving my vocal
cords, my wife and livestream co-host, Sarah
Fowler Arthur, will be alternating narration
with me between entries.
Now, obviously, even giving ourselves an extended-length
episode isn’t going to give us much time
to get into details, but we’ll be trying
to approach this categorically and that’s
rather tricky because a megastructure pretty
much means anything artificial and enormous,
but the majority of them are artificial habitats
designed around terrestrial ecology and humans.
Some exist for maximum efficiency and practicality,
things we might build in a century or two,
like the O’Neill Cylinder or Stanford Torus,
others for the sheer ridiculousness of them,
what we call a BWC or “Because We Can”
Megastrcutre, like flat planets or cube shaped
ones.
Some rely on concepts that need explaining,
like spin-gravity, and will apply to several
structures.
In the end though the determining factor for
format is just that I know I’ll think of
ones I forgot while I’m writing, so we’re
just going to do them alphabetically, and
those concepts relevant to megastructures
that aren’t megastructures themselves, like
spin-gravity or gravity plating, will get
their own entries and we’ll just reference
the concept in the Megastructures.
With that in mind, let’s begin our list
with one of the most important engineering
tricks for mega-engineering, Active Support,
then we’ll look at a megastructure needing
it, one of the most impressive megastructures
out there, the Alderson Disc.
Active Support
Active Support is a method that can be employed
to build structures that no known material
could support via compressive strength.
While it comes in many forms, the most conceptually
simple way of thinking of it is as a hose
when you’ve turned the water on, and grows
stiff as that water flows into it.
For objects like a Lofstrom Loop or Orbital
Ring, it is assumed that it will be high-speed
metals moving inside magnetic confinement,
accelerated by applying electromagnetic shoves,
and contained inside a stationary sheath.
In high-tech megastructures, this may be a
magnetically-shielded structural support with
warm temperature superconductors inside it,
limiting the need to apply additional power
to keep the active support intact and rigid.
These objects can be arbitrarily strong and
large.
Most common shapes would include a circle
or ellipse, such as an Orbital Ring, or a
straight line, such as an Atlas Pillar or
Space Tower.
They form the foundation of many megastructures.
See also: Atlas Pillar, Lofstrom Loop, Orbital
Ring, Shell World, and Space Tower.
Alderson Disc
The Alderson Disc is an immense flat planet
built, with a top and bottom side you could
live on, around a star at the center of the
disc.
It was first suggested by Dan Alderson, a
scientist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
who was active in sci-fi circles and talking
with sci-fi writers, particularly with Larry
Niven, who wrote about so many megastructures.
In simple form, an Alderson Disc around our
own Sun would be a flat plate with a hole
in the middle stretching from as close as
you could get to the sun right out to the
distant, frozen depths of space, and of such
immense mass that it would dwarf the star
at its center.
The default Alderson Disc masses roughly 3000
solar masses, a billion Earths, but could
be built around bigger stars or red dwarfs,
or entirely artificial suns.
The critical problems with building an Alderson
Disc are two fold.
First, it takes immense strength to keep the
disc from collapsing either downward into
a flatter plate or inward into a sphere.
Second, most of the sunlight is completely
wasted, going above or below the disc, and
what light does come in arrives from the side.
This places the entire disc, top and bottom
side, in perpetual twilight, growing dimmer
as the distance and air interfere.
This results in a warm center and frigid outer
layers, virtually none of which are livable.
Some suggest addressing this by bobbing the
star up and down in the center, so it rises
above and below, and this is technically possible
since the star is the smaller object and could
be placed on a ultra-eccentric orbital path
through the central hole, however there is
no plausible natural path that would produce
anything like a 24-hour day and such an orbit
would require constant stabilizing efforts.
For all these reasons, an Alderson Disc is
often considered an example of a BWC Megastructure.
To address the first problem, the disc collapsing,
in the absence of arbitrarily strong materials,
we make use of countless orbital rings, each
a circle just a bit wider than the last, each
having an angular momentum appropriate to
orbit at that distance, keeping in mind that
the star’s own mass is soon dwarfed by inner
rings of the disc.
We then place a sheath above and below these
nested rings to create the disc and keep them
separate by utilizing Atlas Pillars to keep
the top and bottom from crunching down on
each other or the orbital rings below.
Care must be taken to include segment walls
to prevent all the air, water, and even land,
from rushing to the center; these segment
walls may be disguised as mountain ranges.
Large subterranean pumps may move air and
water back to the places they need to be,
to assist in this.
Additionally by varying the mass and density
of the rings to increase their own gravity,
we may cancel out some of the central pull,
keeping gravity pointing straight down throughout
the disc.
To provide power for all the active support,
the inner ring inside the plate nearest the
star may be a solar power collector.
To permit a 24 hour day or seasons, we may
place large statite or lagite solar mirrors
and shades above and below the north and south
pole of the star, at distances comparable
to the disc’s radius, to reflect sunlight
back down onto the planet.
The wide statite discs may include wedges
of reflective material and shades, or simply
have tilted reflective bands, to cause the
sun to reflect down on places for the chosen
time period and strength, and thus replicate
a day-night and seasonal cycle.
While this structure is popular in science
fiction, it would generally be one we would
deem physically possible but not a practical
approach to building living area, however
it does have the advantage of being one of
the largest structures you can make, that
allows a continuous Earth-like living area,
so long as you include the polar statites,
being bigger than even a classic Dyson Sphere,
though smaller than a Birch Planet.
See our episodes: Megastructures 6: Discworlds
or Megastructures: Flat Earths for more details.
See also: Active Support, Discworld, Lagite,
Orbital Ring, and Statite.
Arcology Megatower
Arcology megatowers are envisioned to be very
tall and wide buildings which are ecologically
self-contained in whole or in part.
This is typically assumed to mean towers dwarfing
any modern skyscraper and including not only
their own internal power sources and water
and air processing, but also food production.
In science fiction, these are usually seen
in the dystopian settings of trash-strewn
and graffiti covered steel and concrete jungles,
but these might range from utopian to dystopian,
big or small, and given their scope, would
be more likely to be an equivalent to a gated
community than a slum.
A space outpost with all its own internal
life support, in tower form, would most likely
be the first true total arcology, though it
can also come in underground form, as it need
not be specifically tall, and could be wide
or underground.
The term arcology, being a combination of
the words architecture and ecology, was originally
meant to simply encompass any group of structures
built to be ecological and self-sufficient,
the giant skyscraper concept comes later but
is better known and thus we distinguish it
formally by calling these an Arcology Megatower.
See our episodes Arcologies and Arcology Design
for more details.
Ark Ship
An Ark Ship, conceptually based on the idea
of Noah’s Ark, is meant to be an interstellar
spaceship able to carry humans and terrestrial
biology to another world.
This is usually in the form of a giant cylinder
habitat with a spaceship drive and towns,
gardens, farms, zoos, and nature habitats
inside that habitation drum able to live there
via artificial lighting and power, until the
ship arrives at the colony planet.
Generally speaking, the immense amount of
energy needed for artificial lighting and
life support, even for many centuries, is
still tinier than the amount of energy needed
to get the ship moving at interstellar speeds
or to slow it down on arrival.
These are also often known as Generation Ships.
A second-style Ark Ship, one containing frozen
or digital samples of lifeforms, would generally
be smaller and not qualify as a megastructure,
and we often call this style a seed ship.
See our Generation Ships & Interstellar Colonization
Series for more information.
Artificial Sun
Artificial suns and stars come in many forms,
this could be an entirely normal star simply
made by people or one using normal stellar
processes but made from an atypical material,
like pure Deuterium, to allow a smaller size,
or could be ones with a Starlifting Apparatus
to remove helium and heavier elements to extend
life and allow refueling.
This can also include non-fusion options like
black holes producing power by pouring matter
into them or by Hawking Radiation.
Often in the context of megastructures though,
it represents the artificial lighting in the
habitat to produce sunlight for the ecology.
This may include traditional electric lighting
or mirrors bringing lighting in from an external
source.
This may orbit an unlit rogue planet, to produce
a geocentric world, or it may be vast pillars
in the form of Suntowers rising above the
landscape.
See our episode: Making Suns, for more details.
Asteroid Colonies
Asteroid colonies are more of a location for
megastructures than a megastructure themselves,
but given that such minor worlds outnumber
traditional planets several thousand to one,
they are likely to be one of the most common
settings for them.
The most likely megastructures in one, would
be a cylinder habitat built inside mined-out
areas, or next to it and enclosed in the mining
spoil till it merged.
The asteroid offers protection from space
debris and attacks, and possibly concealment.
One special note, it is often suggested you
could carve out an asteroid and spin it to
live on the interior with spin-gravity.
In practice, your typical asteroid is a loosely-bound
ball of gravel and should not be spun at any
rate.
Instead, you would hollow it out, put a thin
shell inside to buttress it, then place the
cylinder habitat inside that, rotating around
on its own.
Larger asteroids might contain hundreds of
individual cylinder habitats chained together,
or later be turned into thin outer shells,
full of networks of cylinder habitats, such
as Buckyhabs.
Such hollow shells would likely be far wider
than the original asteroid.
See also: Buckyhabs, Cylinder Habitats.
Atlas Pillars
Named for the Titan Atlas, from Greek Mythology,
who held up the sky itself, the Atlas Pillar
is a type of Active Support Structure able
to hold up the sky or repeating layer of land
above it.
Typically envisioned inside Matrioshka Shellworlds,
where concentric shells covered in land and
sea, and artificially lit, allow us to maximize
the use of mass for generating gravity and
using as living area.
Atlas pillars could potentially be made of
some type of unobtanium that was vastly strong
in compressive strength but would most likely
have an interior track in which magnetically
accelerated materials ran.
If technology permits, this may be magnetically-shielded
superconducting tracks, requiring little to
no additional coolant or power input.
Alternatively they might be built of very
temperature-resistant materials and the waste
energy used to heat or even light the lower
layers of many-layered habitats.
Strong ones may also hold artificial lighting
or even additional shelves of habitats running
up the atlas pillar, like leaves on a tree.
They might also have spirals around their
outside to allow walking directly between
layers of a habitat.
See Active Support, and Matrioshka Shellworld.
Banks Orbital
A Banks Orbital is an enormous ring habitat
unique for its natural day length.
Named for science fiction author Iain M. Banks,
who first described one in his novel Consider
Phlebas, where they also have the nickname
of God’s Bracelet.
A Banks Orbital has all the normal features
of a ring or cylinder habitat but varies in
3 ways.
First, the required tensile strength vastly
exceeds any known material.
Second, it is large enough that it can have
rim walls holding the air that are shorter
than its width or radius, allowing an open-air
habitat.
So you can fly your spaceship straight into
the atmosphere and land inside the ring, like
on a planet but unlike a typical closed habitat.
Third, there is a unique radius and spin rate
for any combination of given day length and
desired gravity.
A Banks orbital rotates once per day, and
its orbit around a star is slightly cocked
at an angle, to allow the sun to shine on
the inside of its farside, creating a day
of normal length and characteristics, including
sunrise and twilight.
Seasons can also be emulated by tilting the
ring more.
The width of a Banks orbital is arbitrary,
but given that the purpose is to use the natural
day, the ring’s band width is expected to
be considerably skinnier than the ring’s
diameter.
For an Earth-simulating diameter, every 48
kilometers or 30 miles of width to the band
represents an additional Earth’s worth of
surface area for the habitat.
In the case of Earth gravity and day length,
this is 1,843,509 kilometers radius, or 1.15
million miles.
This is the size typically under discussion
but for cases where one would need to distinguish,
we might call this a Terran Banks Orbital,
while one seeking to emulate Martian gravity
and Day Length would be a Martian Banks Orbital,
roughly 700,000 kilometers in radius.
You might also have a Venutian or Lunar Banks
Orbital.
The radius of such an orbital is proportional
to the desired gravity, or the square of the
desired day length, thus a Venutian or Lunar
Banks Orbital would need to be far larger
as their days are much longer than Earth’s.
The Bernal Sphere
The Bernal Sphere is one of the oldest Megastructure
concepts, having been proposed by John Desmond
Bernal in 1929 and is a hollow rotating spherical
shell.
They can be of any size the material’s tensile
strength can permit but the original design
was 5 miles or 8 kilometers in radius.
This gives it 314 square miles or 803 square
kilometers of interior surface people could
live on, and he estimated 20-30,000.
This is essentially a pressurized sphere where
spin is producing the gravity, and thus will
be highest at the equator and non-existent
at the poles.
Gerard K. O’Neill, known for the O’Neill
Cylinder, also known as Island Three, had
250 meter radius and 900 meter radius versions
of the Bernal Sphere as Island One and Two.
The Bernal Sphere would likely make use of
ring-shaped tiers inside the sphere running
as bands, with the widest at the equator,
to keep the land flatter inside.
See also O’Neill Cylinder and Spin Gravity.
Birch Planet
Paul Birch, who detailed such concepts as
the Orbital Ring for active support, suggested
they could be used for building massive hollow
shells we might fill with matter to make artificial
planets from, what on this channel, we call
shellworlds, and he suggested these might
even be built around giant black holes, such
as we find at the center of many galaxies.
While those built around normal black holes
fall into our category of Mega Earths, those
built around these truly enormous galactic
core black holes we call a Birch Planet, in
his honor.
The one in the center of our own galaxy is
estimated at roughly 4 million solar masses,
or 1.3 Trillion Earth masses, and thus a single-layer
shell around such a world emulating Earth’s
own gravity, would have 1.3 trillion times
the surface area, and living area, that Earth
does.
This is considered the smaller end of Birch
Planets, as they may have many layers, one
with 750 such layers would have one quadrillion
Earth’s worth of living area.
They may also be built around bigger black
holes.
You can feed nearly a trillion solar masses,
or an entire galaxy, into a black hole before
its event horizon would extend out beyond
where its gravity was equal in force to Earth’s
surface, and thus would be the maximum limit
to any Birch Planet seeking to emulate Earth’s
conditions and built outside a black hole’s
event horizon.
As tidal forces near that black hole are minimal,
we can not rule out attempts to build down
inside that horizon either, effectively removing
them from our Universe.
Though, in practice, frame-dragging would
likely prevent building a Birch Planet to
quite this size.
A Maximum sized birch planet contains an entire
galaxy or even multiple and may have thousands
of layers, potentially reaching over one sextillion,
or a billion-billion Earth’s worth of living
area.
It is one of the few megastructures best measured
by how long light takes to traverse it, as
larger ones can measure a light year wide.
The Birch Planet is the largest known megastructure
allowed under known physics in terms of continuous
habitable Earth-like living area.
Lower levels can have time running significantly
slower than on higher levels due to relativistic
distortion near the event horizon.
Such habitats are essentially isolated Universes
in of themselves as they could consume all,
or nearly all of the matter in a region that
is gravitationally bound, and could be powered
for eons by slowly adding in mass to the black
hole to generate the power for artificial
lighting of the habitat, probably via Suntowers.
Birch Planets have an enormous escape velocity,
being easy to reach but hard to leave, and
are considered by the Channel to be one of
the more plausible fates of Earth, or the
home world of any civilization that would
prefer to use automated mining to bring matter
home, thus mining the entire galaxy out to
expand their home world till it became a Birch
Planet.
A multi-layered Birch Planet can make the
lowest level much thicker and space subsequent
layers to achieve self-gravity without the
central black hole, and is called a Supraself.
See also: Banks Orbital, Black Hole Gravity
Generator, Matrioshka ShellWorld, Mega Earth,
or Suntower.
Bishop Ring
The Bishop Ring is a spin-gravity continent-class
habitat proposed by Forrest Bishop in 1997
to take advantage of the greater tensile strength
of materials such as carbon nanotubes and
graphene.
With a proposed radius of 1000 kilometers
and width of 500 kilometers, it would be comparable
to India in size, at 3 million square kilometers
or 1.2 million square miles of internal land
and sea.
While large enough to be an open air habitat,
even with rim walls and air leakage, it’s
debatable if any point is served by not having
the ring enclosed as a cylinder, with rim
walls all the way to the axis, or over top
to form a torus.
Its open air format is principally an acknowledgement
that it is large enough for that to be possible,
not necessarily preferable.
A Bishop Ring 1000 kilometers in radius would
rotate every 33 minutes to produce Earth-like
gravity, which might be slow enough for the
motion of the stars not to be nauseating during
night cycles, but this structure still requires
an artificial sun for a normal day, either
by use of mirrors or powered lighting.
We would anticipate a bishop ring would have
tethers running up to the hub like spokes
on a wheel, for easier transport, and possibly
vacuum trains running on the outer side of
the ring, which rotates at 3.1 kilometers
per second, a very good speed for releasing
spaceships at.
Like many larger spin-gravity habitats the
speed of the drum may be advantageous for
saving fuel for space ships docking or embarking.
Bishop Rings would be large enough to serve
as a home to a billion people or serve as
a nature preserve for even the largest ecologies.
See also: Carbon Nanotubes, Cylinder Habitat,
McKendree Cylinder, Ring Habitat.
Black Hole Gravity Generator
Artificially created black holes, or even
natural occurring ones for Mega-Earths, can
serve as a source of mass for generating gravity
for artificial worlds.
As a point-like object, it avoids normal problems
with material density, thus allowing even
modest asteroids to have earth-like surface
gravity, Mini-Earths, or create Earth-like
gravity on truly enormous worlds such as Supramundane
Planets or Mega Earths.
As with any natural gravity source, the amount
of surface area existing at the desired gravity
is proportional to mass, thus a black hole
4 times more massive could permit 4 times
as much surface area on the globe.
Black holes do not eliminate the need for
larger amounts of matter to produce gravity,
but they do allow less useful and hyper-abundant
materials like hydrogen and helium to be used,
as opposed to carbon or iron, or potentially
even dark matter, which makes up the supermajority
of mass in the Universe.
While helium and hydrogen dumped into a black
hole cannot be used for fusion, the power
generated by dropping matter into a black
hole tends to be at least an order of magnitude
higher than fusion could produce, thus minimizing
their value as a fuel for fusion power.
See also: Birch Planet, Black Hole Power Generator,
Shellworlds, Mini-Earth, Mega-Earths, Supramundane
Planets.
Black Hole Power Generator
Black holes may generate power in multiple
fashions, small ones typically by Hawking
Radiation, large ones by dropping matter into
them and collecting the radiation coming off
them from their acceleration or orbital collision
in the accretion disc.
In all cases, the power produced tends to
be a high fraction of the mass energy involved
and thus is considerably more efficient as
a power source than even fusion, and other
than the creation of the black hole, power
collection is relatively low tech.
As such black holes of various sizes may serve
as everything from a power source on a large
spaceship or personal space habitat to the
super-stellar power source of birch planets
and other constructs larger than Dyson Spheres.
Because of their very efficient nature they
offer incredible service lifetimes, with a
100 Megawatt Hawking Generator having a service
lifetime of 10 Trillion Years, and at a mass
of 1.9 Gigatons, able to generate comfortable
gravity to a large personal habitat or building.
Alternatively, drip feeding the Sun’s mass
into a Black hole to supply power, at perhaps
20% mass to energy conversion, at a rate of
20 megatons per second, would produce the
same energy as our Sun but for 3 Trillion
years, hundreds of times longer than our own
sun’s currently estimated remaining lifetime.
If micro-black holes may be formed, rather
than only as the byproduct of a supernova,
they represent the best power source under
known physics and would be expected to be
a centerpiece of not only a civilization’s
power and infrastructure, but its literal
center as a source of artificial gravity too.
See our Black Hole Series for more discussions
of their uses for worldbuilding and ship propulsion,
as well as weaponization.
Bubblehab
A Bubble habitat is one designed to float
by buoyancy in an atmosphere and is essentially
a large blimp, though these may range from
the size of a modern blimp to being continent-sized.
On many worlds, such as Venus, you may have
an atmosphere whose main makeup is heavier
than air on Earth, thus allowing oxygen and
nitrogen to be used as a lifting gas instead
of helium or hydrogen.
Advanced materials may allow building materials
filled with hydrogen that do not leak, or
even which are vacuums on the inside, and
thus would perpetually float or have a longer
useful lifetime comparable to many building
materials like wood.
Bublehabs based around biotechnology might
be grown instead, either as an equivalent
to buoyant coral reef or tree, or possibly
a very large parallel to a whale or blowfish.
See our episodes Void Ecology and Space Whales
for more discussion of such concepts.
Buckyhabs
Buckyhabs are connections of cylinder habitats
to form a buckyball, forming a cage-like structure
of 90 identically long cylinder habitats connecting
in trios at 60 hubs, forming a soccer ball
shape.
This number of habs and edges is mostly noteworthy
because a buckyball is a carbon-60 atom very
tied in with carbon nanotubes and graphene
in early speculation of super-sized habitats.
In practice we would expect people desiring
more living space would build larger numbers
of cylinder habitats connected together rather
than making individual habitats longer or
wider than was deemed optimal from experience.
One composed of Island Three O’Neill Cylinders
would contain 90 such habitats totalling in
at 145,000 square kilometers or 90,000 square
miles of living area, comparable to Michigan
or Minnesota.
Alternatively, one composed of McKendree Cylinders
might be double Earth’s available area.
As Cylinder Habitats are likely to often have
additional non-rotating sections and other
supplementary facilities, as well as benefiting
from a non-rotating superstructure, such buckyhab
arrangements are ideal for shared ancillary
facilities and permit a thick spherical outer
skin for protection, heat radiation, and solar
power collection.
Such polygon arrangements could easily be
Platonic Solids and may have nested layers,
a smaller soccer ball inside the large one,
connected in-between by additional cylinder
habitats.
BWC Megastructure
BWC or “Because We Can” Megastructures,
is a nickname for those types of megastructures
which are interesting as concepts but wildly
impractical enough that we would only expect
them to be built for prestige or tourist value.
Though in a system of potentially millions
of more normal habitats and worlds, such rare
oddities might be built economically for their
novelty value.
Examples include Cube-shaped and Disc Shaped
Planets, though it should be noted that sometimes
they can have specialized values as, for instance,
a coin-shaped world allows identical seasons,
temperature, and weather at all points, ideal
for a beach resort planet, that a spherical
planet lacks, with frozen wastes at the poles.
Needless to say what qualifies as a BWC Megastructure
is somewhat subjective and many might feel
virtually all megastructures fall into this
category.
Caplan Thruster
A Caplan Thruster is a method for moving stars
proposed by Matthew Caplan in 2019 for using
statites to concentrate solar energy and erupt
solar wind in a beam out from a star, which
would then pass through an enormous Bussard
Ramjet Assembly and jets of Oxygen-14 to push
a star at a faster rate than a traditional
Shkadov Thruster would allow.
See our episode: Fleet of Stars, for more
discussion of potential methods of moving
stars.
See also: Helios Drive, Nova Drive, Quasar
Drive, Shkadov Thruster, Starlifting, and
Supernova Drive.
Carbon Nanotube
Carbon Nanotubes, or CNT, are a type of carbon
allotrope that along with Buckyballs, represent
materials considerably stronger than diamond
that, in the 1990s, popularized the idea we
might create megastructures relying on super-tensile-strength
materials, such as space elevators and Bishop
Rings and McKendree Cylinders.
These are materials that are virtually impossible
to tear apart, no matter how hard you pull
them and how much tension you place them under,
and along with graphene, became commonly referenced
as the foundation material for megastructures.
For this reason, they are ubiquitous in discussion
of megastructures and many other sci-fi or
futurist topics.
See also: Bishop Ring, Graphene, McKendree
Cylinder, and Space Elevator.
Chain Worlds
A Chain World is an example of linking several
hoop worlds or other torus-shaped habitats
into a long chainlink arrangement, potentially
wrapping around a star.
This has limited utility but would allow airplanes
to fly directly between all those connected
worlds.
Airborne seeds or avians might also be able
to traverse between the hoops, though, overlapping
the hoops’s atmosphere would be likely to
generate powerful perpetual storms at the
intersections while the ground above and below
it, so to speak, rotated past.
Chandelier Cities
The concept of a Chandelier City in the clouds
of gas giants was explored in our episode:
Colonizing Neptune, and relies on the idea
that tensile strength is every bit as reliable
as compressive strength, so that hanging buildings
down from large orbital rings around a world
allows upside-down chandelier-like cities
suspended from the Ring.
These might be common features on gas giants,
ice giants, or thick-atmosphere Super-Earths
and any other world where living on the surface
was not viable.
Though the technology works on any world,
including Earth or airless planetoids.
Clarketech
Clarketech is not a megastructure but is often
a feature of many proposed megastructures
requiring special properties or built to do
exceptional tasks, like wormhole networks.
The name is derived from Arthur C. Clarke’s
famous quote that “any sufficiently advanced
technology is indistinguishable from magic”,
and is the name for various technologies that
folks have suggested that would not seem possible
under currently-known physics and can include
seemingly impossibly-strong materials or other
types of unobtainium as well as faster than
light systems and perpetual motion machines.
See our episode: Clarketech, for more discussion
of these near-magical technologies.
See also: Unobtainium, Wormholes.
Cube World
Cube-shaped worlds, a sub-type of polyhedral
worlds in general, classify as examples of
BWC Megastructures.
Construction would require heavy use of Atlas
Pillars or other Active Support, and by default,
would have their gravity highest at the middle
of each of the six faces, and lowest at the
8 corners, furthest from the center.
Gravity would also aim at that center rather
than perpendicular to the surface, though
strategic variation of density throughout
the cube and some rippling in the surface
might minimize the discrepancy of down not
being in line with your head and feet.
As with other flat worlds using normal gravity
there will be a tendency to bulge the air
and water towards a spherical shape which
can be counteracted with enough effort.
Many other shapes, such as dodecahedrons or
bucckyballs, follow similar rules and limitations
as cube worlds.
See also Active Support, Atlas Pillars
Cylinder Habitat
Cylinder Habitats are expected to be the megastructure
type on which the bulk of humanity lives in
the future, if humans remain a dominant species
and seek to emulate earth ecologies around
them.
Cylinder Habitats operate on two critical
principles.
First, that gravity can be mimicked by rotation,
using the same centrifugal force effect that
washing machine spin cycles use.
Second, that it takes far less mass to build
a cylinder or ring habitat than an equal amount
of naturally gravitating surface area on a
planet.
Generally many hundreds of thousands of times
more living area per unit of construction
materials, so that a world like Mars might
be disassembled to grant us a hundred thousand
Earth’s worth of living area, not a fraction
of Earth’s.
For a detailed explanation of how Spin Gravity
functions and differs from normal gravity
see our episodes: O'Neill Cylinders and Life
on board an O’Neill Cylinder.
As discussed in those episodes, while cylinder
habitats are typically portrayed as spinning
freely in space, it is most likely to either
be part of a large complex of space infrastructure
or paired up with a twin cylinder, or several
more in a Buckyhab configuration.
A Cylinder habitat is likely to be inside
a slightly wider non-spinning or slow-spinning
outer cylinder to provide shielding, or inside
an asteroid, or with other facilities inside
a superstructure.
We expect them to make up the bulk of residential
habitats and nature preserves in space, as
well as to be common features of any spaceship
with humans on board and long travel times,
such as an interstellar ark ship.
In such cases we often call the cylinder portion
of that ship the Habitation Drum.
You can nest multiple habitation drums inside
each other or give a drum multiple levels.
Size of cylinder habitats in terms of diameter
is controlled by the available materials in
terms of tensile strength, where conventional
steel or titanium can allow a cylinder that’s
several kilometers wide, and graphene might
allow one over a thousand kilometers wide,
known as a McKendree Cylinder.
Unobtainium or Active Support might be used
to craft even wider habitats.
There is no maximum length to a Cylinder habitat,
very long ones are known as a Topopolis.
A Kardashev-2 civilization of humans seeking
to maximize O’Neill Cylinders around a star,
would require roughly a quadrillion such cylinder
habitats, each home to potentially hundreds
of thousands of people.
See also: Banks Orbital, Bishop Ring, McKendree
Cylinder, Ribbonworld, Ring Habitat, Ringworld,
Rungworld, Topopolis, Unobtainium.
Dark Sky Station
On the smaller side of megastructures, especially
in terms of mass, JP Aerospace’s Dark Sky
Station is an enormous starfish-shaped buoyant
platform, potentially kilometers across that
would sit 43 kilometers up in the air and
be a midway changeover point between ground
to station and station to space traffic.
These may see heavy usage on other types of
planets with thicker atmospheres.
See also: Sky Cities.
Discworld
Flat Earths and Discworlds are often classified
as BWC megastructures, but in practice, a
discworld rotating like a spinning coin in
orbit of a star is not a particularly bad
use of mass for gravity compared to a typical
shellworld.
While you get slightly less surface area per
unit of mass than a sphere, you do not get
an extreme temperature difference between
poles and equator.
Thus a discworld might be considered optimal
for those seeking to create a uniform climate
and ecology.
As a BWC megastructure, it is only likely
to be built by civilizations that already
have so many artificial worlds of more efficient
types, that such specialized worlds might
be probable anyway, such as a world of many
shallow seas and snaky coastal islands for
a beach resort, or one given over entirely
to one specific ecosystem and apex organism,
like a planet built principally for preserving,
at a large scale, elephants, blue whales,
or the Amazon Rainforest.
Discworlds have limits on how big they can
be and spin on an axis to simulate day and
night, and must have non-uniform radial mass
distribution to keep gravity pointed down
at the ground not tilted to the center, with
air and water to follow.
See our Megastructure series episodes Discworlds
and Flat Earths for more details.
See also Active Support, Alderson Disc, Sombrero
Planet.
Dyson Sphere
While originally proposed by Freeman Dyson
as a swarm of orbiting bodies around a star,
the concept has stuck in the popular imagination
as a hollow shell around a star that people
live inside, where the lit surface is more
than a billion times that of Earth.
In the absence of some sort of artificial
gravity, there would be no gravity on the
surface of such a shell and those inside would
fall into the Sun, followed by the shell itself,
unless made of an impossibly-strong and rigid
material.
So too, there is no night time inside such
a sphere which must then be wider than Earth’s
Orbit from the Sun to avoid all those inside
burning to death from the endless daytime.
For this reason the Dyson Swarm is considered
better, however a Dyson Shell is possible
with some variations.
First the inside could be a large solar collector
and people could live on the outside with
artificial lighting, as an example of a Mega
Earth, or in this case a Giga Earth.
Second, a ring-shaped slice of Dyson Sphere
made of a super-rigid material could be spun
around the star to produce artificial spin-gravity,
and this is the concept of a Niven Ringworld.
A collection of many of these rings tilted
at different angles can produce a quasi-Dyson
Shell, or Ring-Dyson.
It is also possible to create a very wide
ring or abridged sphere with caps that would
have lower gravity at higher latitudes than
at the equator and leave the poles off, in
favor of rim walls and possibly having statite
solar mirrors or power collectors at the polar
regions.
This still requires incredibly strong materials
beyond anything permitted under known physics,
except for the use of active support similar
to what we can use to construct a Niven Ringworld.
Such a partial sphere could be made wider
if the polar caps reflect sunlight down into
the main sphere, and result in the same total
living area of 2 billion Earths.
Day and night shading can be accomplished
as with a Ringworld, with an inner ring of
sun mirrors and shades.
Dyson Spike
A Dyson Spike is a type of Dyson Sphere where
a rigid shell has been placed around a star,
using unobtainium, but where artificial gravity
is not possible, and so the surface is dimpled
with billions of cylinder habitats that generate
spin gravity inside them.
This setup can also work if the shell is a
statite principally for power generation,
but to which a small portion is given over
to living area, such as homes and environments
for people living in conjunction with a Nicoll-Dyson
Beam platform.
External spikes also allow better radiative
cooling to such a shell.
See also: Dyson Sphere, Dyson Swarm, Matrioshka
Brain, and Nicoll-Dyson Beam.
Dyson Swarm
When Freeman Dyson originally envisioned a
Dyson Sphere, he was discussing a large collection
of orbiting bodies in a cloud or swarm around
a star, rather than a rigid shell, however,
the idea of a hollow shell around a star with
people living inside it has been popularized
as a Dyson Sphere.
A Dyson Swarm is the term we use to speak
to Dyson’s original idea rather than the
hollow shell.
Such a swam could be composed of any single
type of megastructure, but we tend to assume
that most Dyson Swarm Civilizations - also
known as Kardashev-2 Civilizations - would
use a large collection of many different types
of space stations and structures.
In this regard a Dyson Swarm is considered
a megastructure in the same way a city is
considered a building, which is to say, Dyson
Swarms of things composed of many megastructures.
It is usually assumed that civilizations will
trend towards building Dyson Swarms around
every star eventually, though in practice,
many civilizations might disassemble stars
in favor of using them to power fusion reactors
or black hole power generators.
Nonetheless, spherical packing of habitats
together into immense swarms or clouds that
were outwardly identical to Dysons Swarms
would still be expected, as it provides for
minimal travel times and communication lag,
as discussed in the second episode on this
channel, the Dyson Dilemma.
See our episode: Dyson Dilemma 2.0, for details.
Ecumenopolis
An Ecumenpolis is a city which covers an entire
planet.
This presumably would include dwarf planets,
super Earths, and moons as well.
While usually assumed to turn an entire planet
into one vast sea of concrete and steel, in
practice this is likely to be a world with
many vertical levels and vertical farming
in play.
The main restriction on population is expected
to be heat dissipation.
See our episodes Ecumenpolis and Can we have
a Trillion People on Earth?
Edersphere
An Edersphere or Ederbubble, named for Dani
Eder, is a balloon-like megastructure, typically
of gas giant size ranges.
Unlike most Active Support Supramundane Worlds,
the Edersphere uses the pressure of the gas
as it compresses, to resist the gravity of
that gas pulling on the membrane above it.
People live on that surface shell, which can
be covered in a thin terrain, allowing a world
potentially many hundreds of times larger
than Earth in living area.
The shell is likely to be thick steel or other
strong metals, not rubber or any other flexible
or thin material, as at that scale, almost
any material would be flexible enough to act
as a membrane.
It is is likely that such a shellworld would
still include active support members, such
as Orbital Rings or Atlas Pillars, that could
be turned on in an emergency, conserving power,
or which could work in tandem with a pressurized
gas to allow a wider range of artificial worlds
than an Ederbubble alone might allow.
See also Active Support, Atlas Pillar, Orbital
Rings, Shellworlds, Supramundane Worlds.
Fusion Candles
A Fusion Candle is an enormous fusion drive,
placed in orbit of a gas giant, designed to
suck hydrogen, deuterium, or even helium out
of the atmosphere, run it through a fusion
reaction, and use the energy released to send
out two super-heated rocket jets in opposite
directions, up and down.
The lower levitates the platform while the
higher goes into space to shove the gas giant.
By this method, you can move a gas giant to
a different location, such as if you wanted
to move one closer into a system to warm its
moons for terraforming.
See our episode: Colonizing Jupiter, for more
discussion.
Graphene
Graphene is a carbon allotrope of immense
tensile strength whose discovery opened the
door to the serious consideration of building
rotating habitat megastructures far larger
than O’Neill Cylinders.
They have many other useful properties as
detailed in our episode: The Impact of Graphene.
Grav Plating
Grav Plating is a catch-all term for any technology
that could be used in the floor of a spaceship
or space station to produce artificial gravity
without rotation.
It is usually assumed to operate via unknown
scientific principles in science fiction settings.
In practice the only known way to produce
grav plating under known physics would be
to create many charged micro-black holes and
arrange them inside a floor in a hexagonal
pattern.
See our episode Moon: Mega City, for more
discussion of black hole gravity plating.
Hammer Hab
A Hammer hab, also called a Bolo Hab, is a
spin-gravity habitat where minimal living
space is needed, so that the living module
itself is suspended from a long tether that
is swung in a circle, usually around a larger
ship, itself in microgravity.
It can also be paired to a twin with no hub,
or you may have many such habitat modules
or docking spaceships on tether from a central
hub, resembling a ferris wheel.
Helios Drive
The Helios Drive is a variation of the Shkadov
Thruster that incorporates Starlifting Technology
to move stars and can accelerate a star faster
than a Shkadov Thruster but achieve a slower
maximum velocity, because it uses accelerated
plasma as the drive.
By turning mirrors towards a star instead
of reflecting its light in a single direction
like the Shkadov Thruster does, we can cause
a stream of hot matter to come off that star
like a rocket flame.
This technique works well for moving dangerously
large stars which might go supernova out of
a region of space, as it takes far less time
to get that star moving at interstellar speeds
and also reduces the mass of that star, potentially
extending its lifetime.
A variation of this using Bussard Ramjets
to fuse the plasma as it comes off that star
to provide more thrust is called a Caplan
Thruster.
See also: Caplan Thruster, Shkadov Thruster,
Starlifting, and Stellaser.
Hoop World
A Hoopworld is a donut-shaped planet that
classifies as a BWC, “Because we can”
Megastructure, and would be expected to have
highly variable gravity over its surface as
the matter inside the hoop will pull the most
on the outside equator, and least on the inside
equator where the other side of the hoop’s
gravity pulls in the opposite direction, and
at an angle, least on the pole lines, as the
hoop world has no conventional north or south
pole.
Storms on this planet, due to its high rate
of rotation and varying gravity, would likely
be extreme.
The Default Hoop World of Earth-like conditions
is 11 times the surface area of Earth itself.
See our episode: Megastructures Hoop Worlds,
for more details.
Hydroshell
A hydroshell is a megastructure designed with
the intent of maximizing the use of water
to generate gravity, as one of the most abundant
materials in the Universe, while simultaneously
using it for aquatic living space.
A hydroshell is hollow like most shellworlds,
but lacks a black hole or neutron star at
the center, simply allowing the water itself
to generate gravity.
As a result, the lowest layer at the shell
itself has virtually no gravity while the
top layer has the most, and pressure rises
very slowly with depth.
Hydroshells can be constructed to produce
many thousands of times the normal marine
living space as a planet with the same overall
mass.
See our episode: Oceans in Space: Marine Space
Habitats, for more discussion.
See also: Shellworlds, Suntower.
Interstellar Black Hole Highway
As black holes represent a very good way to
accelerate and slingshot spaceships to interstellar
speeds, naturally occurring ones may be commonly
used as hubs for interstellar travel, including
as turning points for ships wishing to save
fuel.
As such there may be long lines of traffic
moving on lines between the various black
holes in our galaxy, forming a highway network.
Additionally, black holes make excellent power
plants for powering enormous lasers to serve
as pushing beams to accelerate or decelerate
spaceships.
Interstellar Laser Highways
Bouncing laser beams off the back of large
mirrors allows solar sails to be far smaller
and high-powered than relying on simple sunlight,
and may be generated anywhere you can make
power.
With this is mind, any civilization with fusion
or black hole power generation has the option
of setting up long relays of laser-beaming
stations between stars, to circumvent the
rocket equation and allow rapid and far more
economical interstellar transport at a high
fraction of light speed, and without the problems
of attempting to keep Stellaser systems or
Nicoll-Dyson Beams focused over billions of
kilometers or more.
This can be a large array of space stations
stretching between any two stars, or an entire
galactic highway system, either receiving
pushes from many such arrays between stars
or merely as one passes by a star with a beaming
system.
The technique may also be adapted for intergalactic
travel, though it is not thought to possible
to achieve a ship velocity with a Lorentz
Factor much above 100 - where time moves at
a hundredth its normal speed for those on
board - as the blue shift of even cosmic microwave
background radiation would represent to strong
a drag force.
See our episode: Interstellar Highways, for
more details.
See also: Interstellar Black Hole Highway,
Nicoll-Dyson Beam, and Stellaser.
Jenkins Swarm
A Jenkins Swarm configuration is designed
to produce a Dyson Swarm around a star as
a wide torus or donut, which might be part
of a larger swarm of donuts tilted at different
angles.
This is believed to allow more stable orbits
than the basic Dyson Swarm configuration.
Kalpana One
Named in honor for astronaut Kalpana Chalwa,
who died on the Space Shuttle Columbia, Kalpana
One is a cylinder habitat on the small side
of megastructures, taking advantage of the
idea that spin-gravity to avoid nausea should
probably be limited to no more than 2 rotations
per minute.
Only structures in excess of 250 meters radius
can be spun at 2 RPM or less and still produce
a full 1-g of Earth gravity, and so Kalpana
is 250 meters in radius, and 325 meters long,
with roughly half a square kilometer of surface
area inside, almost exactly one-billionth
of the surface area of Earth, and thus what
we sometimes call a nano-Earth habitat, in
contrast to a Mega Earth.
However, with a mass of roughly 7 megatons,
you would be able to construct roughly 850,000
billion such habitats out of Earth’s own
mass, 850,000 times the living area, demonstrating
the idea that cylinder habitats are vastly
more efficient ways to get living area than
traditional spherical bodies.
Kipping Terrascope
The terrascope is a concept for taking advantage
of the refraction of planetary atmospheres
to use them as an enormous lens, allowing
a small telescope in orbit of a planet to
act as a far more powerful telescope.
Developed as a concept by exoplanet astronomer
David Kipping in 2019, it is believed it would
allow a telescope as small as a meter across,
to see exoplanets in sufficient detail to
detect landmasses and mountain ranges.
Such telescopes can also serve to enhance
signal detection and would also function around
larger worlds such as gas giants.
Lagite
Lagites are a variation of statites and normal
orbital mechanics which were suggested by
Isaac Arthur in 2016 as a play on the terms
‘Lagging Satellite’ and ‘Lagrange Point’.
A lagite uses either light pressure or solar
wind on a wide thin satellite to obtain a
non-Keplerian orbit by using a combination
of inertia, gravity, light pressure, or solar
wind to create normally impossible orbit paths,
as well as false lagrange points.
As with statite and quasites, this requires
a much thinner satellite than normal, but
not necessarily as paper-thin as a typical
statite.
They can be particularly useful for keeping
beaming mirrors in position around planets,
where the gravity of the planet can be used
to keep a beaming mirror from floating away
into interstellar space.
See also: Quasite, Shkadov Thruster, Statite.
Lofstrom Loop
A Lofstrom Loop, or Launch Loop, proposed
by Keith Lofstrom in 1981, utilizes active
support to suspend a 2000 kilometer long runway,
high in the atmosphere, to serve as a launchpoint
for a spaceship.
The metal track running inside the loop by
active support can also provide the energy
to the ship as it accelerates, which in turn
is accelerated by power generated by conventional
or nuclear power plants on the ground or on
naval vessels.
A Lofstrom loop may be lowered or raised to
avoid bad weather, and is believed to be constructable
with known technology for perhaps as little
as 30 billion dollars and a launch cost of
just $3000 per ton.
It is a very parallel technology to the larger
orbital ring, but does not allow as much acceleration.
See our episode: Launch Loops for more details.
See also: Active Support, Orbital Ring.
MagMatter
Magmatter is a hypothetical material that
may be possible to create if magnetic monopoles
exist, and if so, would potentially allow
the construction of megastructures whose tensile
strength requirements surpassed even graphene,
such as Banks Orbitals and Niven Ringworlds.
Magmatter is expected to have a strength a
trillion-trillion-trillion times higher than
conventional matter and a density many trillions
of trillions of times higher than normal matter.
For this reason, we would expect magmatter
to be used as infinitely thin structural lines.
It is also assumed to have a melting point
hotter than the core of the hottest star and
a whipcord of it could cut through any known
material, better than a lightsaber.
It is usually assumed it would be formed as
magatoms into buckytubes, much as with carbon
nanotubes.
See also Carbon nanotubes and graphene.
Matrioshka Brain
A Matrioshka Brain represents both a specific
structure and the general concept of a computer
or computers built to run on the output of
an entire star.
The Matrioshka portion, named for the famous
nested Russian dolls, runs on the idea that
successive layers of a stellar engine, each
further from the star, can use the radiated
waste heat of the prior layer to run more
processing on.
Stars themselves are not radiating fusion
power directly, but rather, are incredibly
hot from absorbing all the fusion byproducts
at the core, and glow as a result, giving
off sunlight rather than gamma radiation.
One might place processing layers at each
halving of temperature, where the next layer
is positioned to absorb the blackbody radiation
of the prior layer and re-emit it at a wavelength
corresponding to half the temperature of the
prior layer, resulting in roughly ten layers
between the typical star’s first layer and
where the ambient radiation inside a galaxy
would result in diminishing returns from additional
layers.
As colder computation is more efficient and
a Matrioshka Brain can also act as a stellar
engine to move a star, it has been proposed
that Matrioshka Brains would tend to migrate
to the galactic rim or intergalactic space
itself.
A Matrioshka Brain though, is also a bit of
a blanket term for any computer running on
star-levels of power and can generally be
expected to be many billions of billions of
times more powerful than any modern computer,
even if no further improvement in processing
per unit of energy occurred in the future.
As such, it is believed to be powerful enough
to emulate entire universes, and the uploaded
minds of the inhabitants of that Universe,
if every single planet was terraformed to
current Earth-like conditions and populations.
See our episode: Megastructures: Matrioshka
Brains, for more details.
See also: Dyson Sphere, Planet Brain, Shkadov
Thruster.
Matrioshka Shellworld
One problem with Shellworlds is that they
use immense amounts of mass to create gravity,
compared to cylinder and ring habitats, or
those using hypothetical artificial gravity.
Two methods for handling this are to generate
the gravity with far more abundant materials
such as hydrogen and helium, or even dark
matter.
The other method is to construct many nested
shellworlds, rising one over the other, to
share the mass below for gravity, which can
be maintained at the same level by including
the mass of each additional layer to generate
gravity on the one above it too.
Spacing and support may be maintained with
Atlas Pillars, however you must bring in artificial
lighting and you cannot support many layers
before heat dissipation becomes a problem.
This is considered one of the more probable
eventual fates of Earth, see our episode:
Matrioshka Shellworlds, for more discussion.
A multi-layered Planet can make the lowest
level much thicker and space subsequent layers
to achieve self-gravity without the central
black hole, and is called a Supraself.
See also: Active Support, Atlas Pillars, Shell
Worlds, Orbital Rings.
McKendree Cylinder
McKendree Cylinders, suggested by Tom McKendree
in 2000, represent the adaptation of an Island
Three O’Neill Cylinder to using graphene
instead of steel for the cylinder, allowing
for one that is hundreds of times wider and
longer.
The default version is 5 million square miles
or 13 million square kilometers, as big as
Russia or Antarticia, and larger than Europe
or Australia, qualifying them as a continent-class
megastructure.
What’s more, a McKendree Cylinder is wide
enough to allow multiple nested cylinders
inside, so long as cooling is used to handle
heat issues with artificial lighting, allowing
McKendree Cylinders to roughly match entire
planets in living area.
Megatelescope Arrays
One of the limitations on modern telescopes
is Earth itself, as air and gravity deform
mirrors and limit their size.
Space Based telescopes avoid these issues
and potentially allow tinfoil-thin mirrors,
the size of planets, to be created, able to
see distant worlds in as much detail as current
ones can see our own moon or neighboring planets.
In addition, telescope arrays may be built
in the Oort Cloud, allowing thousands of times
the distances that Earth’s own orbit around
the Sun grants us, for resolving objects and
parallax.
Using these methods, we may be able to pick
up ETI radio signals, even from other galaxies
or see exoplanets in great detail, thousands
of light years away.
See our episode: Megatelescopes, for more
details.
Mini-Earth
An alternative to building worlds bigger than
Earth, is to go smaller, and since the amount
of mass needed to produce earth-like gravity
on the surface of a sphere is proportional
to the surface area of the sphere, the implied
economics for mass, would at least seem to
indicate that there’s no big difference
between making one world a thousand times
the size of Earth, a thousand shellworlds
the size of Earth, or a million worlds a thousandth
the size of Earth.
Assuming micro black holes the mass of a modest
moon can be created, it is likely to be easier
to make orbital rings which are smaller than
a planet, and so small spheres for miniature
planets might turn out to be a preference.
There are some difficulties making sure your
atmosphere stays on such mini-planets, but
a thin glass or transparent aluminium shell
around a world would prevent that, and would
be easier to engineer than the world itself.
As to the minimum size, hypothetically, nothing
prevents one smaller than a modest town.
These need not be spherical either, as discs
or other geometries become more appealing
when contrasted to a sphere that is sharply
curving.
Mushroom Hab
A mushroom habitat is a concept developed
for the episode: Colonizing Mercury, where
on airless Cthonian Worlds, blasted by intense
sunlight, a large reflective umbrella shade
can be placed over a habitat, which itself
stands above the ground, on top of thermally
insulated stilts, resembling a mushroom.
This allows the habitat to remain cool, even
on worlds like Mercury.
The umbrella may also be used for power collection.
The habitat may also include spin-gravity
features to allow for higher gravity if the
world has lower surface gravity than desired.
A mushroom habitat may also be used in orbit
of a star to keep a cylinder habitat protected
from sunlight, such as a habitat being used
for those living on a cylinder habitat who
tend solar collectors or stellasers dangerously
close to a star, to distinguish between the
two types, these are called orbital mushroom
habitats.
See also Rotacity Habitat, Parabolic Habitat.
Neptunian Chainsaw
The importance of scooping gasses out of the
atmosphere of gas giants, ice giants, or gas
dwarfs, for use as fuel or for terraforming
airless worlds, suggest a number of methods
for mining them, and one of those is a massive
excavator with buckets running on an elliptical
orbital ring.
This concept is first discussed in our episode:
Colonizing Neptune, which along with its appearance
gets it the name of the Neptunian Chainsaw.
Nicoll-Dyson Beams
The Nicoll-Dyson Beam is a variant of a classic
Dyson Swarm, suggested by James Nicoll, as
converting a star into one massive laser platform.
There’s a number of methods for doing this,
including the Stellaser, and it is a capacity
of any Dyson that it should be able to direct
a large portion of its power into beam weapons,
but a Nicoll-Dyson Beam is essentially a Death
Star version, only, physically larger.
It should be noted that even our Sun’s entire
power output hitting Earth would still take
roughly a week to vaporize the entire planet.
Those around larger stars might be able to
do fire beams able to annihilate planets in
mere moments.
Its peacetime use is assumed to be pushing
spaceships up to relativistic speeds, though
it is likely its military use would be accelerating
many relativistic kill missiles, or RKMs,
to near lightspeed over some weeks, to arrive
in a single moment, rather than a beam hitting
a planet directly.
See also RKMs, Stellaser.
Nova Drive
Nova Drives, along with their big brother,
the supernova drive, are a method of moving
dead stars such as white dwarfs, by delivering
a stream of hydrogen to them to cause a small
nova.
This is a parallel technology to the Orion
Drive, which propels a ship with nuclear bombs,
only vastly bigger.
See our episode: Fleet of Stars, for more
details.
O'Neill Cylinder
The O’Neill Cylinder, originally known as
the ‘Island Three design’ by Gerard K.
O’Neill, is perhaps the most famous megastructure
designed for habitation.
It is a cylinder habitat usually given as
5 miles or 8 kilometers wide and 20 miles
or 32 kilometers long, and this O’Neill
Cylinder could house hundreds of thousands
or serve as a nature preserve for endangered
ecosystems, protected by the vacuum of space
from invasive species and contamination.
They are probably the most-discussed megastructure
on our show, see our episodes: O'Neill Cylinders
and Life on board an O’Neill Cylinder.
See also: Cylinder Habitat, McKendree Cylinder.
Orbital Plates
Orbital plates are a type of Megastructure
parallel to a Sky City that we would anticipate
if anti-gravity was invented, where a large
domed island might be floated as a spaceport
above the landscape, possibly even ones the
size of continents, able to float above a
world.
In practice this can be achieved through various
active support technologies, or through a
conventional orbiting habitat that’s plate-shaped,
using grav-plating or the same methods we
used for creating discworlds, if a dense enough
material can be found, such as stabilized
neutronium.
They have appeared in a variety of science
fiction over the years but the name comes
from the Warhammer 40k setting, where Orbital
Plates are common around the most important
and industrialized worlds.
Orbital Ring
The Orbital ring is another technology heavily
discussed on this show, for its utility both
as a space launch option and as the literal
backbone of many enormous megastructures such
as Shell Worlds.
A type of Active Support structure proposed
by Paul Birch, the most basic orbital ring
is a simple wire wrapped in orbit in a circle
above the equator of a planet.
Outside of this is a thin tube, called the
sheath, which also circles the planet and
contains electromagnets.
We then run power through the rings and shove
the inner wire up to higher than normal orbital
speeds, while slowing that outer sheath.
By default, we will stop the sheath when its
speed has reached the same rotational rate
as Earth, causing the outer sheath to remain
stationary relative to Earth, like a geostationary
satellite but potentially mere tens of kilometers
above the surface of the world, rather than
tens of thousands.
Orbital rings may then drop a tether down
to Earth, one requiring vastly less strength
than a conventional space elevator.
These may also be stretched out at angles,
to service a wide band of Earth’s Surface
around the Orbital Ring.
Using these as guy-wires allows the Ring to
be tilted off the Equator to service different
latitudes and counter its tendency to precess.
This allows travel to space for dollars per
kilogram, and the track may then be used like
a Lofstrom Loop, to launch a spaceship without
rocket fuel, only to considerably higher speeds
than the Lofstrom Loop Allows.
Orbital Rings may be built as ellipses as
well, and a world is likely to have many orbital
rings at different distances from Earth, possibly
connected to higher rings by tethers to the
next lowest ring.
They allow hypersonic travel between cities
on Earth with minimal cost, potentially allowing
millions of people to travel to space everyday,
and home that same night, with normal modern
commuting times and costs.
They may be used in tandem with space elevators
and space towers.
Orbital rings of much higher radius can be
built in layers with tethers between them
to serve as a ladder to deeper space, what
we’ll call an Orbital Ladder, not to be
confused with Jacob’s Ladder, which along
with Orbital Tower and Beanstalk are older
alternate names for Space Elevator options.
The Orbital Ladder, as an alternative to a
classic space elevator, of tethers between
Orbital Rings, has the advantage of requiring
less tensile strength.
These may be built arbitrarily big, and many
tipped at different angles can form a spherical
shell known as a shell world.
See our episode: Orbital Rings, for more discussion
of the technology and uses.
See also Active Support, Atlas Pillar, Lofstrom
Loop, Shellworld, Space Elevator, Space Tower.
Paperclip Maximizer
A paperclip maximizer is a popular example
of artificial intelligence run amok, the notion
being that an automated paperclip factory,
told to maximize its production of paperclips,
may seek to cannibalize all available resources
- including the planet it is on, and the people
on it - into paperclips.
This can follow many unexpected paths, see
our episode: The Paperclip Maximizer, for
more.
This popular idea is basically that any automated
machinery tasked with a simple goal, may run
amok if left unchecked.
Simple self-replicators told to reproduce
themselves are known as ‘grey goo’, in
reference to an assumed sea of gray metal.
Terraforming machinery set loose on a galaxy,
turning every world - including inhabited
alien worlds - into copies of Earth, or entire
endless cylinder habitats, is another example,
and sometimes called Greenfly.
Given that megastructures are often assumed
to need a vast amount of automated constructors,
there is a regular concern of such machinery
producing one of these scenarios.
Parabolic Hab
The question often arises, how far out can
we usefully survive on sunlight? and a parabolic
habitat is a method for extending that, and
they were designed in tandem with the Mushroom
habitat concept.
Earth typically receives on an order of several
hundred watts of power per square meter of
surface area throughout the daytime, and any
surface colony out near Saturn, would need
a hundred times the sun-gathering surface,
concentrated to achieve an Earth-like condition.
However, as only very thin films are needed
for reflecting light, it is not difficult
to construct a parabolic dish hundreds of
times larger than a given habitat or asteroid
to focus light down into that habitat, or
into a smaller mirror that then bounces light
into the habitat.
The dish itself is likely to rotate to maintain
its shape by spin.
Solar power collectors can also be made to
function in relatively deep space by using
cheap and light-reflecting dishes to focus
light on a solar panel or solar thermal generator.
By default, we would expect a cylinder habitat
with a parabolic dish beyond it, resembling
an umbrella or mushroom with a skinny stalk,
but it could also be a large dish.
Utilizing Statite, Lagite, and Quasite concepts,
this can even be adapted to large self-gravitating
bodies such as planets or moons, by using
a mix of radiative pressure and orbital mechanics
to hang one at a Lagrange Point or Quasi-Lagrange
Point.
Such mirrors and dishes can also be used for
cooling planets or melting icy bodies for
transport, including by focusing light on
a section of a comet to cause an eruption
of superheated steam from it to serve as a
rocket engine.
See also: Helios Drive, Lagite, Mushroom Habitat,
Quasite, and Statite for details.
Planet Brain
Planet brains, including examples like a Jupiter
Brain, are a blanket term for a computer the
size of a planet, such as Earth itself in
Douglas Adams Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.
It is assumed such machines either run minds
so immense as to be nearly godlike or seeking
answers to the most fundamental questions,
such as was the case with Earth in that series,
though in that case it was seeking the question
to which the answer was 42.
Planet Ship
Planet ships are artificial worlds designed
to serve as immense interstellar or intergalactic
colony ships.
This is typically intended around an entirely
artificial world, where a more classic interstellar
ark is deemed insufficient to the goals, which
might be maintaining civilization and ecology
for a multi-million year intergalactic colonization
effort, though similar techniques would be
used for moving an existing planet, like Earth,
to another solar system.
However, artificial worlds, such as a shellworld
full of fusion or black hole fuel, can be
built to allow for better acceleration and
deceleration and for fueling the trip, as
well as shielding from interstellar radiation
and dust collisions.
See our episode: Planet Ships and What if
Earth became a Rogue Planet?
For more details.
Planet Swarm
A Planet Swarm is a younger brother of a Dyson
Swarm, in that it is a large swarm of habitats
and megastructures around a planet rather
than a star.
See: Colonizing CisLunar Space, for more discussion
of the concept.
As Cislunar Space and even beyond the Moon,
to Earth’s Hill Sphere, is hundreds of times
wider than Earth, the cross section for solar
power collection and heat dissipation is more
than a hundred thousand times that of the
planet, and thus, while an Ecumenopolis might
hold several trillion people, a Planet Swarm
might hold a quintillion.
In conjunction with a Terran Ring, which it
might form the crownstone of, a Planet Swarm
might contain more people than most hypothetical
sci-fi galactic empires, and may well be where
the majority of humanity lives even if we
have already colonized the entire solar system
and thousands of nearer systems.
See also: Dyson Swarm, Ecumenopolis, Terran
Ring.
Planetary Cycler
Also known as an Aldrin Cycler, for Buzz Aldrin,
who proposed it for an Earth-Mars Cycler,
these are large spaceships, stations, or potentially
megastructure habitats, that move on a very
elliptical orbit passing near two planets
on a long cycle.
They themselves do not orbit those planets
or pause at them, rather smaller vessels dock
inside them as they approach that planet,
or disembark there.
As they need only the original fuel to get
them into that orbit and some for station-keeping,
they can afford more massive vessels protection
from radiation and can offer superior life
support with a multitude of systems of redundancy
and can also offer better living conditions
for the long voyages between worlds, or even
between stars.
See our episode: Interstellar Trade and Cyclers,
for more discussion.
Power Beamers
Running an advanced civilization requires
immense power, and that may require moving
power millions or even billions of kilometers
from generator or collector, to the user.
Power beaming systems can come in many forms
but the default version is likely to be a
huge solar array that converts sunlight into
microwaves which can then be transmitted in
a tight beam to a rectenna receiver.
Fundamentally, how far you can keep a beam
tight is based on the size of the emitter,
and the ability to gather a beam as it spreads
out, on the size of the receiver, so we may
see some truly massive beaming and receiving
facilities, able to move power across solar
systems or even further.
Quasar Drive
The Quasar Drive is a scaled up black hole
drive, capable of moving planets or entire
galaxies and is the ultimate engine for moving
large objects, being both faster than a Shkadov
Thruster to accelerate stellar objects, and
more efficient, allowing faster final speeds.
The quasar drive takes a charged black hole,
artificial or natural, builds a structure
around it to attach to it magnetically, and
injects matter into it to produce power production
as is typical for a large-scale black hole
power generator.
This is then used to run a drive able to achieve
a decent fraction of light speed.
The name ‘Quasar drive’ is derived from
Quasars, the super bright objects which are
typically thousands of times brighter than
entire galaxies, as a result of matter falling
into the black holes in the centers of many
galaxies.
Used carefully, a Quasar Drive on a supermassive
black hole in the center of a galaxy, can
move that galaxy, especially if used in tandem
with many other drives throughout that galaxy,
gravitationally dragging that galaxy along,
which may permit a sufficiently advanced civilization
to counteract hubble expansion in a large
region of space, such as a galactic supercluster.
Planet Ships using Quasar Drives represent
a plausible approach to intergalactic colonization
of even galaxies more than a billion light
years away.
See our episode: Fleet of Stars, for more
discussion of this.
See also: Planet Ships, Shkadov Thruster.
Quasite
A Quasite is a variation of a Statite, suggested
by David Kipping in 2019 as a possible technosignature
for hunting for extraterrestrial intelligence,
in the form of a statite that had become dirty
or damaged and thus was orbiting in a non-Keplerian
fashion.
Quasites can also be intentionally made to
create satellites that remain with a planet
when not normally permissible by orbital mechanics.
See the cool worlds episode for more details
about Statites and Quasites
See also: Lagite, Statite.
Red Globular Clusters
The Red Globular Cluster or Red Globular Galaxy
is an example of an artificially-optimized
galaxy based on the idea that stars of roughly
one quarter our Sun’s mass can fuse all
their hydrogen, over trillions of years, eventually
becoming blue dwarfs, and thus are the most
efficient star.
The notion developed by Isaac Arthur and Steve
Bowers is that a civilization might intentionally
work to only allow stars of that mass to form
and may use stellar engineering to crowd them
into a tight space, so that the entire area
was bathed in sunlight at a level comfortable
for life.
A dyson swarm composed of as much as a trillion
such stars, might be home to trillions of
trillions of people for trillions of years,
but condensed into a volume only several light
years across, not hundreds of thousands, allowing
a single civilization with no more time lag
between most distant elements than between
near neighboring stars in a natural galaxy.
Eventually the dying stars themselves, as
blue dwarfs cooling trillions of years from
now, can be shepherded into black holes of
Birch Planets or other post-stellar megastructures.
See the original entry at Orion’s Arm for
more details.
Relativistic Kill Missile
Relativistic Kill Missiles, or RKMs, weaponize
the mass energy of objects moving at relativistic
speeds, where they might carry hundreds of
times more damage potential than a nuclear
weapon of the same mass.
They have the advantage over beam weapons
in that they move at nearly light speed but
can have computers and guidance onboard, potentially
even AI, and can be slowly charged up.
In this way, something like a Nicoll-Dyson
Beam, which might need a week to atomize a
planet, can instead put a week’s worth of
energy into accelerating several RKMs which
may be timed to arrive simultaneously and
instantly blow up a planet.
Ribbon Worlds
Ribbon Worlds are variations of Ring and Cylinder
Habitats that base their size around the minimum
gravity required for their purpose, as opposed
to what’s comfortable for normal humans
and terrestrial ecology, and as such, can
be far bigger than conventional 1-g habitats
using the same construction materials.
These may be common as an outer ring around
planets where they would work as spaceports
and launch systems, and secondary conventional
rotating habitats might be attached to them,
like beads on a bracelet, where those other
habitats might serve as the various homes
or commercial centers.
Ribbon Worlds might also be commonly used
for space farms, where lower gravity is probably
sufficient for plants and economics prefers
cheaper and weaker hulls.
Civilizations adapted to lower gravity might
prefer RibbonWorlds as primary habitats.
The largest Ring Habitats would likely always
be Ribbon Worlds.
A Ribbon World built around the Earth-Moon
system, out past the Moon’s L2 point, where
a Lunar Space Elevator might reach, would
allow spacecraft to run on the outside of
the ribbon at 1-g of turning acceleration
and launch at 66 kilometers or 41 miles per
second.
See also: Cylinder Habitat, Ring Habitat,
Space Elevator.
Ring Habitat
Ring habitats work on the same principle as
cylinder habitats, by using centrifugal force
to simulate gravity, called spin-gravity.
A ring habitat however, generally uses a wide
thin ring, which requires stronger tensile
strength than a cylinder habitat of the same
surface area, and thus is assumed to be used
where a wider radius is necessary.
In the case of small habitats, we expect rings
as the living area of many spaceships where
the goal is to produce a relatively small
living area with minimal rotation rate, as
many RPMs can cause nausea.
On large habitats, such as a Niven Ringworld,
the goal is to be far from the Sun at Earth
distance, and for a Banks Orbital, to produce
a wide skinny ring that is open to natural
sunlight.
See: cylinder Habitats, for further discussion
of how spin-gravity works.
Ringworld
The Ringworld first appears in Larry Niven’s
novel: Ringworld, as his suggested alternative
to a classic Dyson Sphere, by taking an equatorial
slice of such a sphere around a Star and rotate
it to produce spin-gravity instead.
That results in a Ring roughly the radius
of Earth’s orbit around that star.
The typical design calls for giant rim walls
around the edge to keep air from spilling
out, taller than any mountain range, potentially
a thousand miles tall, but still dwarfed by
the width of the Ringworld, which may be arbitrarily
wide but in Niven’s classic is a million
miles wide, giving the Ringworld 3 million
times the living area of Earth.
One built 6 times wider would have roughly
1% of the living area imagined by a classic
Dyson Sphere, and a hundred such objects turned
at different angles around their star could
enclose one to effectively serve as a Dyson
Sphere.
Niven Ringworlds are normally assumed to be
constructable only with Unobtainium, in the
book’s case, the virtually indestructible
material ‘Scrith’, however, we can get
around this for both Ringworlds and Banks
Orbitals by use of Active Support.
This is done by having a second, slower turning
and far more massive ring just behind the
habitation ring in which it spins inside,
pushing off the heavy outer ring magnetically,
to keep from being torn apart.
For further explanation of this technique,
and other Ringworld advantages and challenges,
see our episode: Ringworlds.
See also: Dyson Sphere, Ring Habitat, Rungworld.
Rotacity
A Rotacity, also called a Bowl Hab, is typically
envisioned as a habitat built inside a crater
or artificial well, on a low gravity world,
and spun, to combine the natural local gravity
and the spin gravity achieved by rotating
the bowl shape.
In practice, if the gravity of the world or
moon in question is not at least half what
the desired gravity is, the bowl shape will
be much steeper, like an urn, approaching
a more classic cylinder habitat.
It can also be a wide ring with the floor
angled steeply relative to the ground and
natural down.
These may see use on Mars or even the Moon.
See also: Cylinder Habitat.
Rungworld
A Rungworld is a cousin of the better-known
Ringworld that can be constructed around a
star using only conventional materials.
In it we place two tethers in a circular orbit
around a star, one above the other.
Between these we place classic cylinder habitats,
so that they appear like rungs on a ladder,
the ladder itself being twisted into a circle
around a star.
These habitats might be O’Neill Cylinders
or the more gargantuan McKendree Cylinders.
Much as several Ringworlds, each tilted at
a different angle, may enclose a star, many
Rungworlds may be built with slightly different
angles and diameters, to enclose a star.
So too, empty space between Rungs can be filled
with solar panels or ancillary equipment.
A Topopolis may also be substituted for the
tethers between habitats.
Additionally a Rungworld may skip the appearance
of Rung in favor of arranging habitats in
a mesh format or even the more three dimensional
formats of a Buckyhab.
See also: McKendree Cylinder, O’Neill Cylinder,
Ringworld, Topolis.
Shellworld
Shell Worlds are an attempt to save on construction
mass by building a thin rigid shell, akin
to the crust of a planet and filling the middle
with a more abundant source of mass, such
as hydrogen, helium, or dark matter.
Such a shell is usually assumed to be made
rigid with either Unobtainium or by using
Active Support techniques like Orbital Rings,
though can be maintained by a mixture of gravity,
surface tension, and gas pressure, like the
Edersphere, which is essentially a big balloon.
Most often, we imagine millions of orbital
rings formed into a spherical shell and covered
with a shell and land and sea above, and below
a gas giant, or even a stellar remnant such
as a white dwarf, neutron star, or black hole.
In particular, black holes of sub-stellar
mass are a popular approach to allowing shellworlds
of any given size, bigger or smaller than
Earth, but with the same gravity as Earth
on the surface.
These can vary in size from a modest park
to something measured in light years, like
the Birch Planet, and additional layers may
be built as concentric spherical shells, a
Matrioshka Shellworld.
See our episodes: Mega Earths and Shellworlds,
for more discussion.
See also: Active Support, Black Hole Gravity
Generator, Birch Planet, Edersphere, Matrioshka
Shellworld, Mega Earth, Mini-Earth, Orbital
Ring, Supramundane World, Unobtainium.
Shkadov Thruster
A Shkadov Thruster is a type of stellar engine
designed for using a star’s own power to
move it, by surrounding the star in orbital
mirrors or statites which reflect light in
one direction.
With this method, stars can be slowly accelerated
up to a small fraction of light speed.
Bigger stars accelerate faster as they have
a higher brightness to mass ratio, whereas
small dwarfs can attain higher ultimate speeds
as they burn a larger percentage of their
fuel.
All versions are slow though, and because
of the acceleration time, it is a relatively
minor difference in effort to move them across
a galaxy or even between galaxies, compared
to simply moving them a few systems over.
See our episode: Shkadov Thruster and Fleet
Of Stars, for more discussion.
Sky Cities
Sky Cities or Cloud Cities are examples of
floating cities that hang in the air via buoyancy
or aerodynamic lift, as opposed to anti-gravity
approaches such as Orbital Plates.
These might be individual homes, cities, floating
space launch facilities like the Dark Sky
Station, or even continent-sized affairs on
worlds like Venus.
Materials able to hold hydrogen or helium
better than modern materials, such as graphene,
may make these options vastly more economic
and safe.
By and large, these structures are necessarily
big when based on buoyancy.
One example is the Cloud Nine Sphere, which
takes advantage of how geodesic shapes grow
stronger as they get bigger, to use large
buoyant balloons in buckyball form, essentially
a habitat that’s shaped like a soccerball.
See our episodes Cloud Cities and Colonizing
Venus for more discussion of floating cities.
See also: Dark Sky Station, Orbital Plates.
Skyhooks
A skyhook, also known as rotovator, is a long
tether that hangs from orbital heights to
a lower height, for spaceships to connect
to, in order to save launch fuel.
They come in both stationary and rotating
form, and are a parallel concept to a space
elevator, relying on tensile strength.
A skyhook loses momentum when giving it to
a spaceship as it lifts and speeds it up,
but if larger, can slowly regenerate momentum
between hookings by options like solar powered
electrodynamic tethering.
Skyhooks are a launch assist technology, typically
designed to be incorporated in tandem with
either hypersonic spaceplanes, Lofstrom Loops,
or mass drivers.
See our episode: Skyhooks, for more details.
See also: Lofstrom Loop, Space Elevator.
Smoke Ring
In Larry Niven’s 1987 novel, The Smoke Ring,
we encounter a naturally-occuring gas cloud,
surrounding a star in its habitable goldilocks
zone as a wide torus of breathable air with
a native ecology.
This may also be constructed as a megastructure,
in which case it would have a living volume
comparable to a Dyson Swarm, and specifically
a Jenkin’s Configuration.
This concept also arises in Peter Hamilton’s
Commonwealth Saga, where we see entire islands
floating through this immense star-encompassing
atmosphere, or atmo-torus.
We could conceive a civilization with either
artificial gravity or the capability to manufacture
micro-blackholes and Mini-Earths, filling
such a torus with an Asteroid Belt of such
islands whose gravity would keep the air in
that torus rather than disbursing to interstellar
space, or we might see a vast, transparent
hollow donut in which the ring was contained.
See also: Dyson Swarm, Jenkins Swarm.
Solar Mirrors
Solar Mirrors are a method for directing large
amounts of light onto a planet, power collector,
or Megastructure that take advantage of the
incredible thinness of reflective materials
compared to thickness of habitation and power
megastructures and planets in general.
A single micron thick sheet of a metal, polished
to reflect, like aluminum foil might double
the light coming in on a megastructure habitat
at a millionth of the mass of that habitat.
In this way small asteroids, which number
in the hundreds of thousands, can be converted
into a shade able to significantly alter a
planet's temperature, such as warming Mars,
and indeed a statite dyson shell around a
star would generally require only the mass
of a modest-sized moon.
Solar Mirrors are also instrumental in stellaser
and power beaming technologies, for powering
worlds or driving spaceships.
See also: Parabolic Habitat, Solar Shades,
Statite
Solar Shades
Solar shades are a parallel concept to solar
mirrors, allowing planets to be cooled, or
giving them artificially different day lengths,
while making use of simple and cheap technology.
Any material that can be woven thin allows
for shades weighing only a tiny fraction of
the typical megastructure even when of gargantuan
size.
While these can be employed as single large
shade, it is quite possible that many smaller
ones would be used together instead.
Additionally, in some cases, it may be considered
preferable to use inflated spheres rather
than flat sheets, such as filling a L-1 Lagrange
Point with many balloon shades to bounce around
its metastable region or floating mirror-topped
balloons in an upper atmosphere to, shade
the area below, rather than placing them in
orbit or lagrange points or various statite
and lagite orbits.
See our episode: Winter on Venus, for discussion
of using Solar Shades to terraform hot planets.
See also: Lagite, Parabolic Habitat, Solar
Shades, Statite
Sombrero Planet
This variation of a Flat Earth Megastructure,
is an attempt to manage the difficulty of
gravity on a disc pointing not just down to
the disc but toward the center, by making
the disc wider and containing more mass near
the end, and by having a bulge near the center.
See also Disc World.
Space Elevator
Space Elevators can be either long tethers
hanging from space, relying on tensile strength,
or huge space towers reaching into orbit,
relying on compressive strength, but tensile
strength versions are more commonly discussed
in modern times, typically expected to be
made of carbon nanotubes or graphene.
Because a mechanical climber can use electricity
on the cable, or beamed power to pull on the
cable, cost for ascent to orbit is almost
trivial, on an order of dollars per kilogram.
A Space Elevator typically would run to above
geostationary orbit where a ship leaving there
would be able to exit at interplanetary speeds,
as the elevator’s end tip is moving faster
than orbital speed at that point.
They are most easily built at the equator,
but if a material is strong enough, multiple
tethers may extend up from north and south
of the equator to meet at a geostationary
orbit.
A severed elevator tether will see the top
spin off into space and the bottom fall to
Earth, though given that virtually all of
the tether is in orbit above the atmosphere,
a break in the atmosphere would most likely
cause a slow outward spiraling tether that
could be reconnected and the lower end to
fall to the ground like an electric cable
from a tower, possibly slowed by a parachute.
See our episode: Space Elevators, for more
discussion.
See also: Carbon Nanotubes, Graphene, Skyhook,
Space Tower.
Space Farm
Space Farms are a blanket term for any structure
principally devoted to agriculture in space,
on the grounds that if they have gravity at
all it may be lower and the habitat may be
constructed cheaper and thinner as it is likely
to be mostly hydroponics or thin soil full
of plants tended by robots.
Space farms are an option for worlds such
as Ecumenopolises where landing the food on
the planet requires less energy and waste
heat than growing it there would.
We would also expect them to be an ancillary
facility to most spacehabs, where food for
humans may be grown while leaving the primary
hab free for residences and parks.
Indeed these may also be used to supplement
local wildlife to allow park and garden interiors
of habitats to have a higher wildlife population
than the habitat would otherwise support,
essentially bird and squirrel feeders.
The Space farm itself might be attached to
a smaller but more sturdily built hab ring
for workers or livestock or both.
Space Farms are likely to be one of the most
common, if unglamourous, megastructures.
See our episode: Space Farming, for more discussion.
See also: Ecumenpolis.
Spin Gravity
Spin Gravity is the nickname for how centrifugal
force inside a spinning structure, be it a
cylinder habitat or washing machine, simulates
gravity for most practical purposes.
Typically the larger the spinning structure,
in terms of diameter, the better the simulation.
Spin gravity relies on the premise that Einstein’s
assumptions for general relativity are correct,
that acceleration and gravity are effectively
identical.
It is also the reason why people on the space
station feel no gravity, as their constant
acceleration around Earth is precisely countering
the gravity of Earth below.
See also Cylinder Habitat and Ring Habitat.
Space Tower
Space towers, also called space fountains,
utilize active support to keep impossibly
tall structures erect, those able to rise
above an atmosphere and even up to geostationary
orbits.
Technologically they function on the same
principle as an Atlas Pillar, and like the
Atlas Pillar, one of their greatest values
is what they can be used to make, not simply
as colossal skyscrapers on their own.
Though, given that such a space tower might
have millions of floors, and a square footage
equal to an entire continent, a space tower
built for habitation can be a world in its
own right and home to entire civilizations.
See also: Active Support, Atlas Pillar, Space
Elevator, Lofstrom Loop.
Stanford Torus
With the possible exception of the O’Neill
Cylinder, there is no more popular recognizable
space habitat than the Stanford Torus, a 10
Megaton donut 1.8 kilometers or 1.1 miles
in diameter.
This diameter was chosen to be well inside
material limits of steel and what is required
for Earth-like 1-gee gravity at 1 rotation
per minute.
The Innerside of the torus is clear to allow
light to be reflected in and has a view of
the hub which is connected by spokes to the
torus and the hub is where we would expect
ships to dock at.
Secondary mirrors around the hub direct sunlight
into the habitat to mimic a 24-hour day-night
cycle.
It was designed as a comfortable home for
roughly 10,000 people, though, like most habitation
megastructures, it is assumed to have a number
of additional facilities attached to it including
space farms.
See also: O’Neill Cylinder, Space Farms.
Starlifting
Starlifting is a technology that seeks to
mine the stars themselves, by magnetically
drawing in elements from the upper regions
of a star, often by also stimulating more
solar wind or flares.
Our sun is mostly hydrogen and helium, but
contains vastly more heavy elements than all
the planets in our Solar system combined,
with roughly 30,000 Earths worth of metals.
Star Lifting apparatus is itself a megastructure
but also allows the construction of entire
Dyson Swarms of habitats without needing to
disassemble the planets in a star system.
It also allows the colonization of stars lacking
any planets.
Furthermore, it allows the removal of helium
from stars, to prolong their lifetime, as
well as the lowering of stellar mass to extend
the star’s lifetime or prevent it from going
supernova, and forms the backbone of some
star-moving technologies such as the Caplan
Thruster or Helios Drive.
See our episode: Starlifting, for more details
of the technology, methods, and additional
applications.
See also Caplan Thruster, Dyson Swarm, Helios
Drive.
Statite
Statites are the brainchild of Robert Forward,
who suggested the name in 1993 as a mix of
static and satellite.
A Statite is able to hang directly above a
star, rather than circling it in a typical
orbit.
These make use of the radiant pressure of
sunlight to allow very thin objects perpendicular
to the Sun, to hover in place by balancing
the amount of force the sunlight exerts against
the gravity of the Sun.
A Statite must be carefully balanced in terms
of its cross-section density so that it doesn't
float further away or fall closer, and thus
would likely include the ability to adjust
its cross section and tilt to allow it to
engage in station-keeping or even moving as
a solar sail.
The critical factor of statite function is
surface or cross section density, how thick
the statite is, and this will generally be
on the order of tinfoil.
As the strength of light and gravity both
fall off inverse to the square of distance
from the Sun, a statite of a given surface
density functions regardless of its distance
from its star, however it would not function
around any star with a different brightness
to mass ratio.
Statites are far easier to make function around
more massive stars -which are far brighter
- than they are around less massive dwarf
stars, as stars vary by up to a factor of
100 in mass but more than a billion in brightness
for that range.
Variations of these can also use magnetics
to deflect solar wind ions, as an alternative
to sunlight or in combination with them.
So too, the use of focused sunlight from solar
mirrors or beams can be used to allow heavier
statites.
See also: lagite, quasite.
Stellar Pinwheel
Much as a reflective pinwheel can orbit inside
a vacuum, propelled by sunlight bouncing on
it, a large solar collector configured as
a statite could spin like a pinwheel driven
by light or solar wind or both to generate
power.
One hanging above the pole of a star could
bounce the light back down into that star,
causing it to be reabsorbed and re-emitted.
Such devices might be used with some versions
of starlifting.
Stellaser
The Stellaser is both a specific concept using
enormous mirrors inside a star’s corona
to create a massive laser, and a blanket term
for any enormous laser powered by a star.
The Stellaser is the brainchild of Steve Nixon,
who proposed it as means of using material
in a star’s corona to serve as a lasing
medium.
Large thin simple mirrors are deployed near
a star, using spin to keep them rigid, and
possibly as close to a star as they can be
without melting.
Light from the stellar body bounces between
the two mirrors through the star’s thin
corona to generate a laser in the normal method.
Such a beam can be both enormously powerful
and possessed of a huge focal range, making
it ideal for propelling lightsail craft.
The term has become a catchall on the channel
for any type of powerful laser running near
a star and drawing power off it, including
a conventional one using solar panels, but
the original concept was discussed in more
detail in our episode Colonizing the Sun.
Spaceships using Stellaser propulsion would
be able to achieve a high fraction of light
speed, and could be slowed at their destination
by Stellasers as well, which might be deployed
ahead of an arriving colonization fleet, as
a solar sail approaching the star and slowing
from conventional radiant pressure before
entering an orbit and forming the stellaser
to slow the main fleet, as discussed in our
episode: Exodus Fleet.
As such, they represent a possible keystone
of interstellar colonization and trade.
Their potential value for terraforming or
planetary power supplies is also enormous.
Suntower
There are a number of ways we can move large
amounts of energy to a planet and a number
of reasons why, but most will generate huge
amounts of heat in the atmosphere.
A Suntower is one such way of getting around
this, if we were seeking to alter a planet’s
day length, by building super-towers on a
planet above the main atmosphere with reflective
mirrors at the top that a light beam could
be put on.
In this way, like a water wheel, a planet
could have a flow of light placed on these
towers as it turned to speed or slow planetary
rotation.
Similar methods can be used to push a planet
closer or further from its sun, or to adjust
axial tilt.
It is also possible to mount a rocket engine
- presumably a fusion or ion drive - on top
of such towers, to avoid atmospheric heating,
or to mount magnets, against which a beam
of particles could be directed.
Suntower is also used for very tall towers
with either a mirror or artificial lighting
for keeping a layer of a habitat lit or the
surface of a shell world.
In some cases, such as a vertical reef for
lighting marine habitats, the tower itself
might glow its whole length and it may be
covered in fiber optic cables bringing in
light from elsewhere.
See also: Stellaser.
SupraMundane Worlds
SupraMundane Worlds are a category of spherical
megastructures where, typically an existing
planet, such as a gas giant, has been wrapped
with orbital rings or ribbons or enclosed
inside a shell to form an Earth-like planet
but one dozens or even hundreds of times bigger.
Saturn for instance has the right mass and
density that if enclosed in a shell just above
its atmosphere it would make for a planet
surface 95 times that of Earth but the same
surface gravity as Earth.
Supramundane Worlds can have micro-black holes
in their centers as well, but are usually
assumed to be around gas giants or brown dwarfs,
which may be leached of their hydrogen and
deuterium to provide power via fusion reactors.
Larger ones must be egg-shaped and have their
poles wider than their equator, to ensure
relatively uniform gravity if you are spinning
the planet once every 24 hours, so that centrifugal
force at the equator is neutralized by the
slightly higher gravity of being above a narrower
equator.
See our episode: Mega Earths, for more discussion
of the challenges to building such worlds.
See also: Mega Earth, Mini-Earth, Shellworld.
Terran Ring
In terms of fuel, the orbital path of Earth
represents the easiest region of space to
traverse, outside of Cislunar Space, and thus
it is plausible that the ring or torus swept
by Earth’s orbit of the Sun may be the most
densely populated and first-developed region
of our solar system.
It is potentially economically viable to have
food production for Earth and its Planet Swarm
in such a ring so that a very dense population
could be housed on Earth and in Earth Orbit.
Indeed, actual tethers could be maintained
between habitats and other megastructures
in such a ring, to allow rapid cable car transport
entirely around this torus around the Sun.
This may develop alongside or eventually into
a Rungworld.
Such cables, if strong enough, could link
directly to Earth via various space tower
or orbital ring arrangements.
See also: Orbital Ring, Planet Swarm, Rungworld,
Space Farm, Space Tower.
Topopolis
Every object, no matter how stiff it seems
to us, if long enough compared to its diameter,
becomes a flexible rope you can tie in knots,
even a solid steel beam as thick as a human,
if long enough.
The Topopolis takes this a step further and
produces one immensely-long cylinder habitat
that’s thousands or even millions of times
longer than it is wide, which can wrap around
an entire star, or in theory, between two
stars or even a whole galaxy.
In this way, the Topopolis can potentially
rival Dyson Swarms or even Birch Planets and
Supraself for living area and requires no
advanced technology.
By default, a Topolis can be pictured as a
long skinny cylinder with a river running
down it, and the local areas wrapped around
it potentially stretching billions of kilometers.
The ‘width’ might be comparable to an
O’Neill Cylinder or a McKendree Cylinder,
or whatever your technology permits.
See our Topopolis episode for more details
and various subtypes of this structure.
See also: Birch Planet, Dyson Swarm, McKendree
Cylinder, O’Neill Cylinder.
Unobtanium
Unobtainium is a common term for any material
in theoretical scientific or sci-fi discussion
with properties viewed as fantastic or unobtainable
inside modern known science.
This might be a stable transuranic element
or a material of unbelievable strength or
possessed of a property we would not expect
to find in nature, like absorbing neutrinos
to emit gravitons.
See also Clarketech.
Valley House
Valley Houses are where very large craters
on airless or low-gravity, thin-aired worlds
are glassed-over to create a habitable area,
parallel to domed cities.
To be megastructures these would cover valleys
parallel or larger than Earth’s Grand Canyon
or Noctis Labyrinthus on Mars.
Worldhouse
A worldhouse is where para-terraforming of
domes on a planet, such as Mars, have encompassed
the entire world inside a massive greenhouse,
or perhaps even a single crystal sphere has
been placed around it to keep an atmosphere
in.
This may be an early state of a planet during
classic terraforming, or it may be a permanent
arrangement for low gravity or lower escape
velocity moons and mini-earths, where maintaining
an open atmosphere might be difficult.
Wormhole
Wormholes are a hypothetical object for circumventing
the speed of light that would likely be a
vital megastructure if they are possible to
build.
Wormholes and Wormhole Networks represent
a possible Clarketech solution to interstellar
travel that would supersede Interstellar Black
Hole Highways though likely still be in use
with Interstellar Laser Highways for inter-system
traffic.
See our episode Wormholes in our faster than
light series for more discussion, and that
series for more discussion of how civilizations
might incorporate technologies such as wormholes,
warp drives, hyperspace, and other hypothetical
FTL methods.
So we’ll be getting to our schedule of future
episodes in a moment along with some announcements
and show notes, but first I wanted to also
note that while we were looking at Megastructures
of the future, they’re not just a thing
of the future…
We have many already and indeed have been
building them for a long time, it is part
of why I’m so confident the vast structures
we looked at today will be part of our tomorrow.
If you’re curious for more on megastructures,
you can check out Megastructures: Gardens
by the Bay and the Roman Megastructures over
on Curiositystream for some more mega engineering
of our past and present.
Also, even though this episode is almost 4
times longer than that original episode of
our show it’s updating, we did miss a critical
component of that original discussion.
In that episode I made a case for why megastructures
were often better than planets, both for humanity’s
use and in the context of why scifi authors
should use them more in their settings rather
than always planets.
Today’s episode is already way too long
for adding that in, even as an extended edition
on Nebula, so I’m just going to give that
topic its own standalone video on Nebula instead,
Planets vs Megastructures.
Nebula is our streaming service created to
give youtube creators more flexibility and
not be at the whim of Youtube’s algorithms
for our content, or any other platform.
It is the largest creator-owned streaming
service in existence, and all of SFIA’s
content is up there, ad and sponsor free,
and released a couple days early.
We also release an extended edition or two
every month, and have some exclusive content
like our coexistence with aliens series, and
now, Planets vs Megastructures.
It’s a great way to help support some of
your favorite channels while getting ad free
content.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos like Megastructures: Gardens by the
Bay and the Roman Megastructures.
So we can offer Nebula for free as a bonus
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using the
link in our episode description.
That lets you see the amazing content on Curiositystream
and Nebula for less than $15 a year, just
use the link in the episode’s description.
So this episode obviously ran longer than
any other we’ve had and was quite a lot
of work and I wanted to thank my wife Sarah
for helping on the narration and all editors
who helped on the script clean up as it ran
over 18,000 words, to ensure that there was
a proper transcript and subtitles on the episode,
something the original didn’t have, though
every episode since has.
Another thing that the original didn’t have,
and we introduced a few episodes in, is a
credit roll at the end, something that’s
a bit of rarity on youtube for some reason.
I wanted to mention that because over the
years we’ve had over a hundred folks contribute
to editing or animating or letting us use
their music or even composing songs for the
show, and we always put those folks in our
credits to get them some well-deserved recognition
and thanks.
Amusingly today is the first time we’ve
ever had a co-narrator on an episode that
wasn’t a collab episode with another show,
we’ve even had a dozen or so co-written
episodes before today and yet weirdly, for
a show where the host has a big speech impediment,
no other narrator.
Anyway I wanted to thank all those folks who’ve
contributed over the years, to this episode
and to the 470 other entries on our big chronology
spreadsheet, which includes over a 100 bonus
episodes and livestreams and collabs, I know
the production number on the show says episode
346 but I only count the regular Thursday
episodes toward those as they’re really
my production week numbering these days.
I also wanted to say a big thank you to the
National Space Society for hosting me at their
International Space Development Conference
last week.
I’d been set to attend 2 years back and
collect my Pioneer Award from them, but then
Covid came and so two years later I finally
got to give a talk there and revisiting that
original topic of Megastructures seemed a
good topic, and that evolved into this episode.
You can catch the recording of that talk too
as it was substituted in for our normal monthly
livestream Q&A.
So too, a lot of that first episode’s original
content was inspired by the collection of
futuristic ideas and structures at Orion’s
Arm, and it’s been a great source of futuristic
content for a couple decades now, with both
visual and text entries on many topics, in
their Encyclopedia Galactica, but also with
many stories written by its member dealing
with life in the future and often on such
megastructures.
All right, that wraps us up for today but
not for this week, as we have our Scifi Sunday
episode, the Silurian Hypothesis, coming up
this Sunday, June 12th.
This is the concept that some ancient civilization
like intelligent dinosaurs might have once
dwelt on Earth long ago.
We will also ask what would remain of humanity’s
accomplishments millions of years from now
if we suddenly died off.
And two weeks from now, we’ll be looking
at the concept of Interstellar Probes, where
we’ll begin our two-part story of traveling
to an anomalous system to investigate it,
concluding with Life as a Planetary Explorer.
We’ll pause between those two episodes to
look at the concept of Crawl-onizing the Galaxy,
how humanity can still settle the stars even
if we are limited to spaceships moving at
less than 1% of light speed, and what that
will look like.
One more thanks, and that’s to all of our
donors over the years.
You’ve made the show possible, whether it
was on patreon or by paypal or subscribestar
or snail mail or Nebula, and I’m beyond
grateful.
This show wouldn’t exist with out your support.
For anyone who would like help support future
episodes, you can got to our website, IsaacArthur.net,
which we’ve recently relaunched new and
improved, and all those other options are
linked in the episode description, along with
our social media forums like facebook, reddit,
and discord, where you can chat with others
about today’s episode and many other futuristic
ideas.
And thanks to all the admins and moderators
on those forums for their hard work too.
And don’t forget to like this episode and
subscribe to this channel, and leave a comment
below.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
great week!
