This episode is brought to you by Brilliant!
In the future we will need to create Earth-like
environments on hostile, barren worlds, so
we can grow food, plants, and animals at those
outposts.
But what if we could also grow those outposts
themselves?
So today we will be looking at the notion
of self-growing habitats, bases able to grow
from relatively small seeds into large habitats
with little to no human assistance, and we’ll
be examining this notion in the context of
some current designs for Moon or Mars Bases,
all the way up to the notion of a tiny probe
not much bigger than a normal plant seed,
that might be able to impact on an asteroid
or Moon and turn it into a giant colony waiting
for humans to move in, or perhaps even growing
the humans there too.
But we should begin with the basic concept
and why it’s so appealing for space.
In simplest terms, it's about two things:
First, not needing to carry much equipment
and building material to a site for a base,
sourcing those in situ, and second, to minimize
human effort once there, especially if the
base needs some time and effort to provide
basic life support.
Now neither of those are new ideas, indeed
as a semi-nomadic hunter-gatherer species,
the problem of having to carry your home with
you has been pestering humanity for as long
as we’ve been around and has quite a few
interesting answers in nature, as we see with
animals like the crab, that carries its home
around with it.
This is also a key notion in the seeds of
most plants, but especially lightweight ones
meant to be carried far away by the wind.
So, we can learn some answers from nature
and also from modern business.
I mentioned how a habitat or base might need
to be able to be ready for humans the moment
they arrived, or as quick as it can be.
Right now, being an astronaut is a heroic
and pioneering thing, but I suspect as time
passes and we begin building or growing bases,
outposts, and colonies on ten thousand minor
planets in our solar system and a thousand
on each of the major planets, that a lot of
that allure will go away.
It will seem less like a bold exploration
and more like moving to a sparsely inhabited
swamp with no electricity or running water,
except for the swamp water running through
the cracks in your shack.
With that in mind, getting people to voyage
out there might require offering a lot more
than basic necessities on arrival, and we
can take a page from the books of various
hotels, motels, resorts, and AirBnB’s.
The general notion there is that it should
be easy to find, easy to check in, and as
soon as you walk in the door you’ve got
all the basic comforts right there, especially
some comfy bed, chair, or couch to rest your
weary self in.
So we want to be contemplating more than just
having air and water available when our astronauts,
or settlers, arrive.
A warm bed and a hot meal waiting when you
walk is probably ideal.
Sometimes it might need to be ready before
they arrive too, especially in the case of
things like Stellasers, big pushing beam platforms
you build around stars to push whole fleets
of spaceships up to interstellar velocities
and which we assume they would build at their
destination too, allowing cheaper and faster
travel between any two systems which have
one.
It’s a lot nicer if some small vanguard
ship or probe can arrive before the main colonial
fleet does, to build such a stellaser and
save them the slow down fuel or let them travel
there faster, like building an airport at
a destination so you can fly in rather than
trudge through tangled forests on foot the
first time.
In the short term though, when contemplating
a trip to the Moon or Mars and having a base
there, our two big objectives are minimizing
the mass they need to carry there and minimizing
setup time of the living space and its life
support gear.
Inflatable habitats are very interesting to
us in this regard, as are options like robot
construction crews who could bulldoze the
local rock and regolith in, to form shelters
or reinforce them.
Air, water, and shelter are the immediate
needs and shelter is the heaviest one of those.
To be sure, a thin inflatable wall might do
the job, indeed we can imagine an ultra-strong
bubble made of just a few layers of graphene
that can keep the air in and the vacuum out,
or the hostile non-breathable air of some
world like Titan or the swamp world of Dagobah,
breathable but smelly.
The thing is, you have to worry about micrometeors
and radiation in a lot of environments and
your best protections against both is a nice
thick layer of mass, to substitute in for
all that missing atmosphere.
Handily a lot of airless worlds will non-coincidentally
be low in gravity, which makes building easier.
Your typical cinder block weighs about 35
pounds on Earth but only about 6 pounds on
the Moon.
Incidentally it would be 16 kilograms in both
places, a kilogram is a measure of mass not
weight and thus is the same anywhere in the
Universe, whereas weight is the product of
mass and local gravitational force.
It is mass that protects us from radiation
though, so it's handy that on the moon, an
inflatable structure no thicker or tougher
than a modern tire inner tube could easily
have several tons of material stacked on top
of it.
We have a lot of options for those materials,
and of course the basic version is usually
whatever regolith is lying around, but water
is a pretty good option too, especially as
you need that to live.
Packing that loose regolith into some compact
and sturdy block you can build with is trickier.
We have a lot of proposed methods, and one
I recently got to hear explained by Christopher
Maurer of Redhouse Studio, is being experimented
with at NASA’s AMES with Dr. Lynn Rothschild,
and also down in Namibia, to create homes
and food, and it's all about mushrooms.
There we see a plant that has run rather amok,
damaging ecosystems and farming and sucking
up water, that isn’t good for animal grazing
either but is excellent as a substrate for
growing mushrooms in, they can then eat or
sell those mushrooms and use the remainder
of the substrate to compress into a building
brick for homes.
Very innovative and very easy to see in play
on early outposts where you need to be using
and reusing everything in every way you can,
like having your plants do quintuple duty
producing food, recycling air, recycling water,
and serving as your fibers and building materials.
The project in Namibia and these bio-bricks
or mycoblocks are a fascinating approach,
and one of many examples of new materials
being made from mushrooms – in this case
a building block as strong as concrete and
dimensional lumber – and more than we can
discuss here today so I will link the Namibia
Bio-Hab project in the episode description
for you to check out.
But the basic idea of adapting this to off
world bases is that you are going to inflate
your habitat as a twin-walled and many chambered
tent, then you’re going to fill those chambers
with water and grow algae in them.
That algae will later be dried out and used
as a substrate for growing mushrooms or other
mycelium for food and the waste matter compressed
into sturdy building blocks, which can later
be composted for soil if you want.
In the meantime, the water and algae are absorbing
radiation and recycling carbon dioxide.
There’s a melanin-rich fungi that can absorb
and transduce radiation into biomass, radiosynthesis.
That accumulated melanin can promote radiation
attenuation through compton scattering.
There’s also radiation absorbing lipids
formed by mycelium metabolization.
We have types of fungi and also algae that
produce fats and lipids which are better at
absorbing some radiation than water, and we
have types that are melanin-rich and good
for ionizing radiation…
you’ve probably heard about the fungus growing
around the ruins of Chernobyl.
Both algae and fungus have a wide and growing
versatility of applications and are not terribly
picky about where they grow.
One of current special interest is Fat Choy,
colony forming diazotrophs potentially able
to fix nitrogen from Martian Air, though the
algae is principally for making biomass.
This technique might work on some worlds better
than others, for instance while Mars doesn’t
have a lot of atmospheric nitrogen, it still
has way more than the Moon, whereas Venus
and Titan have more than Earth and we could
potentially be trying something like literal
hanging gardens on Venus by having buoyant
floating growth chambers high in the Venusian
atmosphere rather than domes deep down on
the molten surface.
Indeed we might with even better biotech having
growing balloons that self-inflated from their
gas exhalations and byproducts.
Interesting sidenote, mushrooms hold the status
of being the protein source with the lowest
water needs, which makes it potentially an
ideal crop for a lot of settings out in space.
One can easily imagine a sunlight and ice-poor
asteroid being very reliant on mycoculture
for protein, clothing – mushrooms make a
create leather alternative – and as fiber
feedstock for building materials and 3D printers,
and the same for fungi in general and algae
as well.
New space habitats will generally be both
small for ecosystems and simplistic in biodiversity
initially and so fungi, algae, and microbes
in general, are ideal for those locations.
We may be able to come up with tailored blends
of those organisms, that could take a mix
of water and the local regolith and break
it down into soil and nutrients for more picky
terrestrial plants.
Or break down regolith and release oxygen
gas as a byproduct, for breathing and inflation.
And as we are seeing, while trying to set
up a livable habitat and biology on another
world is no easy matter, transplanting the
biology of Earth, using that same biology
of Earth, offers a lot of possible solutions.
This is not to downplay the mechanical and
electronic roles, or those for robots and
artificial intelligence, but we have a tendency
to picture biotech, growing organic structures,
or of robots building inorganic ones.
My own belief is that we will see a constant
hybridization going on, and that this will
all be Grown Architecture, but that this will
come in a lot of forms.
Early on, expect a lot of robots to be dumped
out of spaceships, onto the moon, and remote
controlled directly from Earth, by people,
since the signal lag is just a few seconds,
and some of those vehicles could be carrying
a lot of inflatable structures and power generators.
Expect the robots to be all about manipulator
arms and scoops.
With that in mind, don’t think of inflatable
as weak.
Indeed you can make it quite rigid and sturdy
by dropstitching and segmenting as we see
with a lot of modern inflatables for camping.
That’s a great reminder too how technology
developed for space can be used down here
and vice-versa, camping gear alone is a multi-billion
dollar industry.
Drop Stitch incidentally is basically having
a lot of connecting strings betweens the walls
and membrane and that can potentially be quite
a mesh, especially as things start growing
on it, and even more especially if you are
adding in your own light rather than raw sunlight,
your algae filler can grow a lot faster and
better if the LEDs or fiber optics bringing
in light are also your drop stitching, making
your light source permeated through a given
chamber, not just the edges.
It’s an interesting option for the Moon,
where your cycle is algae or something else
photosynthetic that you grow using sunlight,
then use the remains of, for growing fungi
on, in the dark, since the moon has a day
that lasts a month, 2 weeks of light, 2 weeks
of dark.
That can be very rough on a lot of larger
plants, but the fast growing and simplistic
microorganisms seem to handle that better.
So you might do that in a month-long production
cycle, like growing cyanobacteria for two
weeks, harvesting it, then letting the leftovers
be a mycoculture substrate for two weeks,
getting those mushrooms, and then baking and
compressing it when the sun returns in solar
kilns and presses.
Speaking of meshes inside inflatable chambers
though, I should also note that when it comes
to lightweight filler, that aerogel is likely
to be your king.
We can spin that out of carbon or silicon
so long as we have both the power to do so,
and a supply of either of those two materials,
and silicon is very abundant on the Moon’s
surface, and carbon and silicon are plentiful
on many asteroids too.
And it is decently likely that we could get
aerogel manufacture running on the moon.
Aluminum is also common there, and honestly,
there’s not many places you’d have problems
finding silicon, carbon, or aluminum, or oxygen
or iron.
There’s a lot you can build out of those
five elements and that includes rocket fuel.
When it comes to robots on the Moon, and one
reason I favor a Moon Base before Mars, you
can control everything from Earth, letting
you prototype all your equipment there, and
I would say our robotics is already up to
the task.
Automated robots run by even simple AI far
from Earth, like Mars or an asteroid, is another
story but I’d rather get the mechanics down
first, then worry about the AI controlling
it where we cannot.
Though in many cases you’d have processes
that humans could control, either accepting
the light lag for communications or being
done by astronauts in orbit or on their ship,
before debarking.
Truth be told, given that the spaceship needs
to be designed to keep people alive for extended
periods anyway, the only thing the landing
site absolutely needs built before arrival
is the actual landing pad.
Obviously you can skip that too, as we did
with the Apollo missions, but those same missions
taught us why a dust-free solid pad was not
a luxury.
A ship landing and unloading its delicate
cargo or people and gear on a dust-free hardened
pad is going to make your life much easier,
you do not want nasty lunar regolith getting
into your gear.
This is not just an inconvenience either,
we’re honestly lucky we didn’t lose any
of our Apollo astronauts to regolith damage
to them or their gear or other complications.
Self-growing or self-repairing concrete is
a material that would be amazingly useful
here on Earth, and obviously great for space
colonies, but in any case, landing a robot
with a bulldozer and a hydraulic press to
scoop and tamp till you’ve got something
decently rigid and dust free would probably
do.
Mid-term, I think we would see solar kilns
for making our building material beginning
with something that can take regolith, separate
out the aluminum, and then melt and roll that
into shiny sheets we could use as mirrors
for more solar kilns.
Your first ones would probably be inflatable
reflective mesh panels brought along from
home.
The image we paint then, is one of bots for
obtaining ice, and scoop bots, scooping materials,
for construction, or manipulation into other
forms, and those bots would likely bring along
the electronics and rarer materials that they
might need.
It’s building huge tanks of algae and huge
arrays of mirrors for aiming at solar kilns
or solar panels or other solar thermal applications.
A lot of the furniture for people is likely
to be inflatable too, since we already have
some nice inflatable furniture and humans
weigh less there, making those a better option.
This is probably what our early moon bases
look like on Day 2, where Day 1 was the arrival
of the astronauts.
They probably bring all their personal gear
and furnishings with them.
We usually imagine months or even years early,
we are dropping robots and not just once but
following up with additional inflatable structures
and construction supplies, and with extra
air, water, and food as redundant backups
for the astronauts.
That gives more survival modes for a screw-up,
since as an example, it's not hard to imagine
your landing pod getting damaged on the actual
landing, and wrecking a lot of your supplies,
and getting the people out and the gear out
before that happens is needed for survival,
but not if you only need the people because
they have those supplies as backups.
Prepositioning spares is in many ways as important
as pre-building the base.
But we wouldn’t expect these to be all that
self-growing, just self inflating and maybe
good at stockpiling rock, air, water, and
maybe reflective materials, building materials,
and raw biomass for plastics or bioreactors
or soil.
Which is a lot but we’re not talking about
some pea-sized seed, landing on the Moon and
becoming a whole community, and with that
in mind, as we move into the deeper future,
it stands repeating both what ‘self-replicating
machine’ really means and also how a single
type of replicating robot, like a tiny little
nanobot, isn’t the be all, and end all,
of self-replication.
We don’t currently utilize simple self-replicators
on Earth not just because they’re technologically
tricky, but because there’s no real benefit
yet, to developing the technology, solely
for Earth-use; there is very little that a
self-replicating machine can do on Earth,
that humans couldn’t already do for cheaper,
using simpler methods, or off-the-shelf components.
A big factory or a Walmart is already a self-replicating
machine, it just includes humans as part of
that process, the Walmart isn’t undergoing
mitosis to spawn a new pair in the parking
lot, it’s relying on us to plant it, but
so is a seed inside a tasty berry that some
bird ate and later left fertilized far away.
We don’t actually need self-replicating
buildings and structures here on Earth.
They offer no tangible advantage compared
to self-repairing or self-assembling structures,
or those which do so in some fashion that
requires little attention or effort or cost
on our part.
Drones that repair your road for you are just
as appealing as some organic road that heals
itself.
So too, as we’ve discussed elsewhere, while
you could probably send a harddrive the size
of a pea across interstellar distances full
of terabytes of data and diagrams and just
a few hundred tiny nanobots able to copy themselves
and build things, and from that colonize an
entire planet, there’s no advantage to doing
so.
You could as easily plant that pea on an asteroid
here at home and tell it to turn that into
a thousand giant colony ships instead.
Small seeds are useful and are focus for the
remainder of the episode, along with what
we can do with them, but we should not assume
that this automatically means we will hurl
a trillion of them out across the galaxy as
opposed to armadas of classic self-replicators…
which is to say, fleets full of people with
resources, energy, a goal, and willpower.
One modest asteroid of the size of which we
have thousands here in our solar system, contains
the raw materials to build millions of ships
that would each dwarf an aircraft carrier,
and if only 1 in 10 of them successfully arrived
in another solar system and repeated that
blossoming and sent out more of themselves,
the galaxy would be filled up pretty quick
and easy, with no appreciable time difference,
over sending a colony seed out to each system
directly from Earth.
With that caveat aside, just because we can
build bigger doesn’t mean that we should.
If a tiny self-replicating pod gets the job
done, it is presumably no harder to build
a hundred more of them than one a hundred
times bigger.
Now there are reasons why you can’t throw
something tiny up to ultra relativistic speeds
and expect it to survive the trip with its
data intact, and it’s the same reason we
want to be able to get mass in situ for moon
bases.
Radiation blocking is principally about mass
and density and thickness.
Space is full of dangerous photons and particle
radiation, and at fast enough speeds, even
regular photons you or I can see are so blue
shifted, they’re damaging things.
So you need a nice thick-walled ship and it
kind of stands to reason your ship should
have as much cargo as it does hull plating.
And things containing dense data, like frozen
embryos or ultra-miniaturized computer memory,
tend to be the things most vulnerable to radiation
damage.
But that might just mean your minimum interstellar
‘seed’ was a 10 ton lead sphere rolling
through space with a 1-ton core full of frozen
fertilized eggs, digital memory, and microscopic
self-replicating bots.
You don’t need that much computer memory
for DNA either, DNA data is vastly compressible
as there’s a ton of overlap between species,
and inside a species, the differences are
virtually nil, you could probably get them
all on a single modern hard drive.
Plus while there are many millions of species,
not just the several thousands of big animals,
bacteria have short DNA strands and any non-microscopic
species, so rare, we don’t even know of
it yet, probably is not irreplaceably critical
to life on some new world under an alien sun,
or inside a giant cylinder habitat.
If it is later found, a digital copy of its
DNA can be sent to that colony at light speed
anyway, and printed.
So more likely, any large harddrive on a pod
would not only include their DNA or historical
highlights or great novels, but also be copies
of their minds.
You might not be waiting for colonists, just
growing them bodies or building them android
shells and downloading their minds into them
on their arrival.
So what do we really mean by a self-growing
habitat and what would one really be like?
Well it is possible to send DNA, frozen or
digital, and grow it on site.
Indeed it need not even be sent with the pod,
you could beam the data there after it arrived.
So a self-growing base could absolutely include
a seed that had seeds for all sorts of other
lifeforms.
This is actually a really good lifeboat or
nature preserve option.
You can design hypothetical ecosystems back
home, load up the right DNA and parameters,
and ship it off to find or build a suitable
world.
This definitely requires sophisticated AI
however; it’s not just playing Noah to a
lot of existing animals on a ship.
It has got to grow and birth each species’
equivalent of Adam and Eve, and raise them,
though I should be careful using the term
‘it’, as it might simply be an uploaded
human mind.
I can easily imagine us being reluctant to
rely on an Artificial Intelligence to make
new worlds or grow new humans.
It really would not be hard to imagine getting
asked to let them copy my mind to send off
to countless worlds to go build the place
and raise its first generations.
I’d probably say yes and I suspect many
of our viewers would too, and since you can
make copies, you don’t need that many volunteers.
Of course if you can do that, there’s no
real reason you couldn’t send the minds
of those first generations or a whole uploaded
civilization, rather than one lone advisor
and parent.
Indeed you could copy the same digital colony
for use on many worlds, or use variations
drawn from a slightly larger pool to have
many varying colonies, built from the millions
of perturbations of colonist copies.
This is part of why I would expect bigger
ships as seeds.
You can only send the really small ones if
you’ve got great self-replicators, in which
case your only real limit on ship size is
available spare mass, because building and
equipping a spaceship is no longer like carefully
hand-tailoring a pocket watch, it’s like
growing a field of wheat instead.
Some folks who have grown wheat or corn or
some other staple crop, might now be saying,
“Yeah Isaac but that’s not super easy
either, you’ve got the weeds and pests issue”
and I’d say “great point, thank you for
that awesome segue” because while on the
surface we wouldn’t expect self-growing
habitats to have to deal with pests or weeds,[a]
as we initially tend to assume sealed, sanitized
environments, it would seem that an environment
of self-growing architecture or space habitats
would almost inevitably get its mutants, weeds,
viruses, and so on eventually and at the scale
of trillions of habitats all with different
control measures and exchange rules.
For context, Imagine a self-growing O’Neill
cylinder, one of many sprouting off the side
of some asteroid, growing until ready to be
cut free, like fruit off any tree, one of
millions produced this way or by other methods.
That’s not an environment a known virus
or cold can spread through, the void of space,
empty of everything but radiation and hypersonic
debris, but if our habitat can be said to
grow there, then that means other things can
too.
Just probably not very natural things, but
same as we have symbiotes, parasites, predators,
and invaders in our own ecosystem, I can’t
really imagine a solar system packed full
of self-growing habitats wouldn’t get them
too, even if they were only created by a handful
of malicious people.
It’s more likely you’d have all sorts
of overlapping programs and species of self-replicator
and habitat grower or species forger that
just accidentally got dropped somewhere or
transplanted.
I could imagine that as a handful of tiny
nanobots that came over in a bottle of wine
from some other habitat’s vineyard, and
now kept trying to repurpose any dead tree
into vine supporting trellises, and maybe
folks even wake up one morning to see that
a kilometer of telephone poles and cables
has been turned into trellises, complete with
the wire bound up like it was a grapevine.
An amusing case, compared to say, your cylinder
habitat getting a cancerous growth where some
foreign replicator was trying to grow antennae
and radiators, and yet that amusing case is
the sort of thing I’d expect, as it would
just be a low priority for trying to get rid
of and folks might find it an amusing prank
to dump it somewhere.
Civilizations with good self-replicators and
AI just smart enough to do their job can get
some weird things going on too, like they
are all banned from growing or copying humans
themselves but are built to want colonists
and are allowed to advertise for them, so
one goes and parks itself near an inhabited
world and grows a giant banner or figurehead
of whatever it sees as the most popular topic
or meme on the internet, which to keep the
show family friendly we will assume will be
a picture of a cat asking for a cheeseburger.
Or it playing commercials saying it is such
a family-friendly habitat it populated its
entire ecosystem out of various creatures
that look like kittens, puppies, and ponies,
and that’s not a single sharp corner anywhere
in it for kids to hurt themselves on.
Weird examples but probably a case where reality
would be even stranger than fiction, or those
examples.
To make a self-growing habitat that has to
manage and create a viable ecosystem, all
the way down to the bedrock and superstructure,
means giving it a lot of creative control
and brains to manage all the perturbations
that will occur in the system as it grows
and establishes itself.
This could result in a lot of strange options,
especially if it was allowed access to some
open-source colonial equipment and organism
database, a Standard Template Construct, which
is something I’d almost take for granted
would develop inside the next millennia or
so.
It is also very likely any such self-growing
habitat, be it a big home base or an individual
home for a family, a cylinder habitat or a
terraformed planet, would have some sort of
prime directive and various secondaries of
various priority.
Whether that’s ‘take care of people’
or ‘attract new colonists’ or ‘hoard
resources’ or whichever, that leaves a lot
of room for Perverse Instantiation and Paperclip
Maximizer types of scenarios.
I should note that having actual humans on
site guiding these decisions or implementing
them is no sort of barrier to weird developments
either, quite the contrary I’d think.
It seems almost inevitable that we will be
wanting to develop these sorts of self-growing
habitats to get out there in space, and they
are likely to vary a lot in purpose, independence,
and variety, and evermore so, the further
forward in time and deeper out in space we
go.
One thing that seems sure though, as our habitats
grow, whether under our direct oversight or
not, mostly built or mostly grown, much like
our own ecosystems here on Earth, they will
only grow in variety and diversity.
Just like the ecosystems and civilizations
contained inside them.
One of the 
things we try to do on this show is encourage
people to rekindle their love affair with
science and curiosity about the Universe around
us, past, present, and future.
Watching videos like today’s is a great
way to get an overview and learn the basics
of different topics, but to gain an understanding
of “why” and “how” concepts work the
way they do, you have to try it yourself,
and for that, I recommend heading over to
Brilliant, today’s sponsor.
Brilliant is an interactive STEM-learning
platform that helps you to truly understand
concepts in math, science, and computer science
by guiding you through engaging, hands-on
courses.
And if you feel stuck, Brilliant provides
in-depth explanations to break down the material
for you even more.
Haven’t touched these subjects in years
and need a refresher on the basics?
Don’t be intimidated, even pros often need
refreshers, just try Brilliant’s new Everyday
Math course, which takes you through foundational
subjects with their trademark interactivity.
For instance, a lot of people have struggled
with fractions, but when you approach them
in a visual way, they make a lot more sense.
With Brilliant, you will be presented bite-sized
pieces that you can learn at your own pace
when and where you want.
To get started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or click on the link in the description, and
the first 200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
So we’re done for today but we have our
scifi sunday episode, Multi-Species Empires,
coming up this weekend, followed next week
by asking what would happen if Earth lost
the sun and became a rogue planet?
After that we’ll ask how people travel around
planets once they settle there, be it hang
gliding through the clouds of Venus or darting
between shadowy craters on sun-roasted Mercury.
Then we’ll take a look at the concept of
a Technological Singularity, an artificial
intelligence of stunning capability appearing
seemingly overnight, and ask if that outcome
is inevitable.
Now if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe
to the Channel and hit the notifications bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below.
You can also join in the conversation on any
of our social media forums, find our audio-only
versions of the show, or donate to support
future episodes, and all those options and
more are listed in the links in the episode
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
[a]We envision a sealed sanitized environment,
totally sterile except for the exclusive growth
of cyanbacteria then mycelium .
FYI at the Oniel cylinder conference i went
to (https://space.nss.org/space-settlement-summit/)
they were amendment that all the food growing
compartments would be very separate from human
domains.
A very clean untouched environment as well.
and if there was contamination, they could
"burn it down!"
