This episode is sponsored by Brilliant.
Geoffrey Chaucer said that all good things
must come to an end.
But this channel is not the place for that
kind of pessimism.
So today we’ll be discussing ways we might
postpone the Heat Death of the Universe, and
possibly even delay it entirely.
To do that we must first discuss what the
Heat Death is and why we think it is going
to happen.
The best place to begin is to note that there’s
a bit of difference between what we normally
think of as heat and what the term means in
physics.
Heat, to us, in a casual and day-to-day sense,
is how warm it is.
But in a physics and thermodynamics sense,
it refers more to how entropic a system is,
essentially what portion of its total energy
is heat energy.
Heat is random motion of particles, and we
can only get work done using such a system
if it’s got other energy still stored in
it in other ways or if we connect it to something
colder.
As an example, the Sun is very hot, so we
can easily get work done off it by connecting
to something cooler, which we obviously have
plenty of choices for.
It is making that heat by converting hydrogen
into helium, photons, and neutrinos, converting
mass energy into heat energy in the process.
A system is at maximum entropy when all those
options have been used up, and everything
is converted to heat that can be, hence Heat
Death.
It’s a bit confusing though since we’d
expect this to happen, nowadays, when it’s
rather cold, but beyond that term really meaning
maximum entropy, we should keep in mind that
our cosmological models have changed over
time.
As an example, we often talk about how you
can’t hide a megastructure like a Dyson
Sphere because it needs to radiate away all
the heat it’s been absorbing from its own
star or get cooked, and when we think of space
as cold, it’s easier to forget that not
only is it not cold, but most of the mass
in our solar system for instance is blazing
hot.
There’s very little heat, as heat energy,
in empty space, but that’s not temperature,
the temperature of outer space near Earth
is about 283 Kelvin, a temperature of 10 Celsius
or 50 Fahrenheit, light jacket weather.
There’s just virtually no particles around
actually containing heat in a near vacuum
but those that are around are warm enough.
Alternatively, 98% of the Solar System’s
mass is inside the Sun and boiling hot, and
half the remainder is in Jupiter and quite
hot too.
We used to think we lived in a Steady State
Universe, one which does not expand, or is
infinite but basically homogenous.
Go anywhere and find about the same density
of stars, all bits more or less the same.
In such a Universe, a Heat Death can be pretty
literal, all the mass energy that can be converted
to heat eventually does get converted as even
photons made in this process eventually get
absorbed somewhere and even those emitted
as heat radiation by warm objects will just
get absorbed somewhere else down the road.
Your whole Universe turns into warm objects
bathed in a flood of photons of about that
temperature’s blackbody wavelength.
We’ve not discussed Olbers’ Paradox in
detail here before, mostly because it’s
not a paradox anymore under new cosmology,
but you can look that up if you want details
on this notion.
Short form, in a static and non-expanding
infinite Universe, you have a star in every
direction you can look, so the sky is bright
white, not mostly black, and everything gets
real hot.
This is even true in a Universe that isn’t
infinite in size or age too, if it isn’t
expanding, and in such a Universe a Heat Death
is quite literal in the normal meaning of
Hot too.
Alternative cosmologies like the Big Rip also
circumvent our normal concept of a Heat Death
too, though by killing everyone on a shorter
timeline.
It’s only in an expanding Universe that
our particular form of Heat Death can occur,
be that universe finite or infinite, because
it means the total volume of space is constantly
on the rise – and yes an infinitely large
object can keep growing even though infinity
plus infinity is still infinity, infinity
is not a number.
The size of a Universe doesn’t matter for
this purpose, just that it keeps expanding
and thus eventually you get distances big
enough that the expansion rate between galaxies
is faster than light can catch up to.
That’s what lets us get around Olber’s
Paradox, and why the Cosmic Microwave Background
Radiation, or CMB radiation, which is left
over light from when the Universe was younger
and hotter, is redshifted all the way down
to chilly microwaves.
Originally, when those photons were first
emitted, they were mostly visible and high-infrared.
If the Universe weren’t expanding constantly,
we’d be bathed in those original photons
at their original energy.
It has been suggested that if we could somehow
stop Dark Energy and stop the Universe expanding
we could stop the Heat Death, but quite to
the contrary, that would actually kill us
faster.
We can keep extracting work from matter only
as long as we have some cooler places to move
that heat, and if expansion ends, everything
would just start warming up because none of
those emitted waste heat photons would have
anywhere to go but other bits of matter they
eventually ran into.
Everything would also start falling back together
into a big clump, unless the Universe was
actually infinite so that stuff was pulling
equally strongly with gravity in every direction,
and even then you’d get a lot of local clumping
ending in giant black holes everywhere eventually.
Had this expansion stopped back when the Universe
was smaller and that CMB radiation first emitted
itself, around the year 300,000 ABB, After
Big Bang, the Universe would be a thousandth
its current size and about 3000 Kelvin everywhere
and bathed in photons of about that frequency.
Instead, that expansion is fast enough that
everything is on average cooling down.
Regardless of whether or not the expansion
of the Universe is accelerating, and whether
or not that acceleration is a good thing,
that expansion itself is a very good thing
for us, both that it was expanding and that
it continues to expand.
A quick note on that idea, that you can’t
travel faster than light but that these galaxies
are separating faster than light, which obviously
confuses people.
First, it’s not that stuff can’t go faster
than light, a shadow for instance can.
Rather, it’s that information and cause
and effect can’t go faster than a certain
speed, and that objects with no mass happen
to move at that speed – such as photons
of light and presumably gravitons – and
we just happened to discover photons first
and name that speed the speed of light.
Second, those objects aren’t exactly moving
away in a classic sense.
Everywhere in the universe little pockets
of new space are popping into existence, presumably
very, very, very tiny bits of space, probably
Planck Volumes, a space so small it makes
atoms seem galactic in scope, and probably
appearing inside you and me this very moment.
Locally this is irrelevant because all those
normal forces binding matter together easily
compensate for that, though in a Big Rip Universe
the rate at which these new bits of space
pop into existence keeps increasing until
they start popping up so fast and numerous
that even electromagnetic forces binding your
molecules together can’t yank them together
fast enough to keep you together.
Right now it’s slow enough that even gravity,
the weakest force in nature though the only
one that meaningfully functions at galactic
scales, can keep galaxies together and with
their nearest neighbors too.
Above this scale all those little new pockets
of space add up to so many that the new bits
of space between two objects are emerging
quicker than the light between them can cover,
so photons or gravitons emitted by those objects
never reach the other object.
Those galaxies are moving away from each other
faster than light, but because new space is
popping up between them faster than light
can cover.
This can be confusing because we believe the
vast majority of the actual Universe is already
beyond this point and more gets added everyday,
moving away from us faster than light.
We then turn around and tell people nothing
can move faster than light, even though virtually
all the matter in the Universe is moving away
from us faster than light, it can be a bit
perplexing.
In any event, we know what this cosmological
future holds for us, more or less.
The Universe expands and every galaxy merges
with any nearby neighbors into slightly larger
galaxies that get left as islands in a locally
empty Universe.
In a couple hundred billion years all the
Universe we can really see except as red-shifted
galaxy ghosts will be our big new merged galaxy
about an order of magnitude more massive than
currently and various isolated small stars
and clusters that were moving away from us
a bit too fast to get yanked into that merger
but not yet shoved far enough away by expansion
to have disappeared.
Like a big continent with islands and archipelagos
of stars drifting further away.
All those other galaxies we can see now will
be off and gone and in their own dark pockets
of space, each considerably bigger than the
current Observable Universe.
Emphasis on Observable Universe, because most
of the Universe is presumably already further
away from us than we can see, over the Cosmological
Horizon, as we explained a moment ago.
This is not the Heat Death of the Universe,
star formation will have slowed a little bit
by then but as far off as this date is, around
ten times the age of our current Universe,
star formation won’t significantly slow
for considerably longer and shouldn’t start
heavily ebbing off for at least ten times
longer than when this period begins.
Indeed most of the stars alive nowadays will
still be alive then.
Our Sun may only have a lifespan of 10 billion
years and will be getting ready to enter its
death throes when our final galactic mergers
begin, but our star is on the big and short
lived side.
Most stars are red dwarfs and live hundreds
of billions or even trillions of years.
Indeed, while we might then say our Universe
at this point is a big empty one far larger
than in the present day and centered on a
conglomerated large galaxy, ‘our universe’
is pretty debatable.
We probably can build ships fast enough to
have caught up to those fleeing galaxies before
they got too far away and too fast to catch.
However, for those folks still living in our
galaxy at this point, or its larger merged
form, we’ll have to say goodbye to our cousins
who made that voyage by this point.
Or any alien civilizations that arose in them
and that we’d struck up conversations with.
Unless we’d discovered actual faster than
light travel by then, and if it’s possible
I’m sure we would have as a hundred billions
years is a lot of time to do research - especially
with galaxies worth of colonies to add their
efforts to the research.
For my part I don’t expect we ever will
get a work around to light speed, but many
such technologies offer their own options
for postponing the Heat Death, and we’ll
get to those shortly.
First let’s finish up the forward progress
to the Heat Death.
It will take a long time but those stars will
eventually stop forming as often and dying
off and we’ll go dark, a Universe of random
gas floating around dead suns and slowly drifting
apart or falling into black holes.
Whatever mass remains cannot be used to extract
more work.
Now in an inhabited Universe, folks have probably
stockpiled lots of mass they can feed into
fusion reactors or make new suns with.
But that will run out eventually.
They can also feed that matter into black
holes and extract energy that way – see
Colonizing Black Holes for details on that,
and indeed they might help super-size our
local galactic merger by even shoving slightly
more distant galaxies together, as we looked
at in Fleet of Stars.
But in the end, everything is either too scattered
out to reach or in those black holes, and
this is the default End of the Universe.
As we discussed in Civilizations at the End
of Time, even once all that matter is down
in those black holes, they are thought to
slowly decay and give off radiation and you
can theoretically live off that.
Since the Universe is going to keep expanding
and cooling, those black holes should all
eventually evaporate too.
Right now they don’t lose mass even when
they’ve no matter nearby to suck in because
of that CMB radiation, it’s everywhere and
as thin and weak as it is, it’s still stronger
than the Hawking Radiation emissions of even
the most powerful natural black holes, so
they emit a little bit of Hawking Radiation
but suck in more CMB radiation and grow in
mass from that alone.
As that weakens and thins out as we expand,
they’ll start hitting tipping points where
more comes out than goes in, and less massive
black holes emit Hawking Radiation faster,
and emit it ever faster and more powerfully
as they shed mass.
Eventually any black hole will have reduced
in size to something emitting enough power
you can usefully collect energy off it.
Hawking Radiation off a natural black hole
for instance couldn’t even power a light
bulb continuously, even if it emits insane
amounts of energy, just because it does it
so slowly.
Capturing that energy and maintaining the
equipment that does it over timelines of trillions
of trillions of trillions of years is no easy
challenge, and indeed might be impossible.
Whereas gathering power off a black hole by
dumping matter into it is actually quite easy,
see the Black Hole series for details.
But they generate far more power as they evaporate
and shrink in mass.
One that’s shrunk to about 20 billion tons
of mass would be giving off a megawatt of
power, and would continue to do so for a couple
billion years, slowly rising in power as it
did this.
A civilization could carefully add set amounts
of matter to black holes, getting power as
they dropped mass down into them, but cutting
off the flow when they hit a certain mass
on each, and measure a bunch of them up to
slightly differing masses to stagger their
lifetimes out so they were giving off useful
amounts of energy one after the other in series.
Of course ‘useful’ depends on your technology
and your nature too.
As we discussed in Black Hole Farming, a post-biological
civilization living as uploaded minds should
take way less energy to run a mind on a computer
than biology does, potentially billions of
times less, and thus might be able to run
a pretty massive digital civilization on something
like a single megawatt black hole power plant.
However, the Universe does cool and the theoretical
minimum amount of energy needed to flip a
bit on a computer, or several to produce a
digital person’s thought, is proportional
to the switch’s temperature.
We call this the Landauer Limit, and in a
cooling Universe it means you get way more
computational bang for your buck, you can
do ten times the calculation with the same
energy at a tenth the temperature, or a million
times the computation at a millionth of the
temperature.
Again see Black Hole Farming for further discussion.
That of course merely postpones things for
civilization, though in a massive way, and
either by staggering your black holes masses
or getting more effective at colder computation
or both, you can keep this running for trillions
of trillions of trillions of trillions of
trillions of trillions of years.
Indeed, if proton decay doesn’t occur, and
we have little evidence to indicate it does,
you might be able to survive this way to the
end of the black hole era and maybe even stretch
things out to the Iron Star era somewhow,
a period of time so far in the future that
it makes even that Black Hole era look like
an eyeblink of time, and that era is already
so long that it likewise makes the entire
period of the Universe stars would occur in
look like an eyeblink.
That’s a pretty good postponing of things,
and none of it requires any new physics though
for much of it you need some beyond impressive
improvements in engineering to take full advantage
of it, though the staggered black hole mass
trick requires only the ability to make black
holes less massive than stars and we ought
to be able to do that using some of the techniques
we discussed in our Black Holes series.
Even if you can’t make black holes less
massive than a large asteroid, by imploding
giant balls of iron wrapped in nukes, which
should be doable, such things should be short
enough lived we could huddle around reserve
power sources or trickle feeding mass to other
natural black holes till they started expiring
and giving off useful amounts of power.
This is nothing like the great and glorious
digital period that a post-biological civilization
that’s mastered artificial micro-black hole
generation could enjoy, but it would allow
at least some remnant on par with modern population
numbers to dwell on for ridiculously long
periods of time under known physics.
But let’s start considering some options
for unknown physics.
I mentioned faster than light travel earlier
as a work around to the Heat Death, and one
of those methods is that FTL is usually the
same thing as time travel and as we mentioned
some weeks back in our Time Travel episode,
you can always jump back in time to an earlier
period of your Universe, or possibly a different
Universe, and escape the heat death that way.
Needless to say any technologies that permitted
travel to newer or younger Universes, assuming
they exist, also allows this option.
And not just for escaping either.
Entropy or Heat Death is what happens when
a system runs out of available work-energy
in a closed system, you can always add more
energy from outside or connect that system
to another system that’s colder and run
a heat engine between them till they reach
equilibrium.
So if you can travel to new universes or dimensions,
and travel back and forth, you can postpone
the Heat Death of our Universe that way.
You just open a gateway to a younger or lower
entropy place.
Or one where that concept doesn’t even apply.
We don’t want to assume the sum total of
reality is merely different variations on
the events and age of our own but with the
same rules.
After all there is always that irritating
question of where all the Energy in this Universe
came from initially and where all that Dark
Energy came from.
And as a side note, while some folks in Cosmology
like to occasionally suggest it might not
need to have come from anywhere, and while
that is presumably possible, there’s nothing
even vaguely scientific about that claim at
this time.
We know nothing more of what’s come before
or outside this Universe than we knew back
in the time of folks like Plato and Socrates,
with the exception of having a bit clearer
view on how space and time are merged together
and run, and while I entirely sympathize with
a lot Cosmologists and theorists wanting to
weave that into our current models, it’s
all very hand-wavey and maybe a bit irresponsible.
Time in this Universe doesn’t have to have
had a beginning and presumably doesn’t have
a zero minus one moment, but that doesn’t
just let you say cause and effect at a grander
scale do not exist.
Of course it might not, we just don’t know,
but critically, we don’t even have a hint
of the tiniest clue at the moment, scientifically
speaking.
That’s not just me poking at theorists for
speculating a lot on stuff without evidence
to back it up, but also a warning since we’ll
be doing that ourselves for the remainder
of the episode.
From this point on while we’ll be sticking
to concepts with at least decent theoretical
framework behind them, we are moving outside
known science or strong theory.
So grain of salt, or dump truck of salt perhaps.
First, it’s always possible that expansion
of the Universe is not an eternal thing and
eventually dries up into a non-expanding or
steady state one, or that the broader multiverse
or whole grand Shebang is effectively steady
state and all those other Universes and realities
you might be mining for energy would dry up
too.
However, such a case leaves the door open
for random reset, what we call a Poincaré
Recurrence.
Shuffle a deck of cards enough times and it
will eventually return to the order it was
originally in.
Take anything random and changing and it will
eventually repeat states, and when we’re
discussing it in entropic terms, it need not
perfectly reset either.
A deck of cards will return to its original
state but along the way it will form a lot
of patterns, like having several cards in
a row be in numerical order, or lower entropy
so to speak.
The amount of time involved for this to happen
even for a simple deck of cards, 52 objects
in 52 possible states each, are simply enormous,
and grow vastly more enormous for each element
and possible state added.
However, the bigger your deck, the more small
patterns or randomly lower entropy spots you’d
have emerging.
If you could find and access those in our
analogous universe, you could presumably run
a civilization off them indefinitely.
But all that assumes you can’t either reverse
entropy in some deliberate fashion or create
reversible processes.
It may be possible to do reversible computing,
cases where you can flip, unflip, and reflip
bits without expending any net energy or raising
entropy.
However, from a practical standpoint it’s
rather debatable if this really allows true
and lasting computation in the context of
thought and memory, since you’re arguably
undoing the computation or thought when you
reverse it, and of course you always get some
loss around the edges on any system so Reversible
Computing might only allow a postponement
of entropy, rather than a stand still or reversal.
The same will generally be true for any reversible
process besides computation too.
Can you reverse entropy though?
Break the Laws of Thermodynamics?
Turn back the growing chaos of a system without
doing so by adding more chaos to another system?
We don’t know for sure of course, and folks
have often suggested ways to do it or even
claimed to have accomplished it, and not simply
random loons or scam artists offering perpetual
motion machines.
Back in 2016 researchers at Argonne National
Labs came up with a way we might be able to
do negative entropy gain at a local, temporary,
and quantum way and quantum does seem to offer
us some avenues that might permit local entropy
drops.
This does not necessarily mean they actually
do, or that such a thing could ever be scaled
up to the macroscopic scale, taking advantage
of quantum behavior by simply scaling it up
or building huge numbers of copies of it does
not generally work, or at least is insanely
more difficult than folks tend to assume.
Though I’m not too pessimistic about such
avenues, most of our theoretical notions for
where all the stuff for the Big Bang might
have originated from usually do tie into quantum
where stuff can just appear out of nowhere
anyway.
Although let me caveat that by saying we just
tend to say ‘appear out of nowhere’, we
don’t know that it does any such thing,
and use the phrase to mean ‘we don’t know
where from, possibly from nothing at all’
rather than ‘yes, this definitely appeared
from nothing at all’.
Its problematic when discussing how to escape
or delay the death of the universe when you
don’t know where it came from or what the
underlying quantum structure is beyond that
there seems to be one and it seems to constantly
foam and froth with vast amounts of hazy potential
particles and energies.
If we could learn to tap those, basically
the concept behind Vacuum Energy, then that
might let us get around the Heat Death too,
though maybe not since they seem by their
nature to be random and it’s not possible
to get work done from randomness, that’s
basically the notion behind the Laws of Thermodynamics
in the first place.
Of course, playing around with that, if we
ever start figuring out how to and assuming
it’s actually possible, might change our
outlook on the matter.
Amusingly, if darkly so, it might also have
the opposite effect of postponing the End
of All Things.
There’s a bit of concern that if you poked
around at that stuff you might effectively
poke around at the bottom of the Universe
and metaphorically drain it away, and you’ve
probably heard of the notion of the False
Vacuum.
The Universe is mostly empty space but not
quite a true vacuum, little bits float around
in it and any given bit of it has photons,
such as CMB radiation, passing through it.
But even if you remove those, create a true
vacuum, it still isn’t one.
It also has vacuum fluctuations, little bits
of things popping in and out of existence
at the quantum scale, a false vacuum, not
quite a lowest possible state of energy.
We’ve some reasons to worry you could accidentally
poke this, or that Vacuum Decay might happen
naturally, so space in a spot did drop to
a true lowest state and that this lowest state
would then begin expanding at the speed of
light in every direction, basically wrecking
the Universe in an expanding bubble of true
nothing.
Such a thing might already have happened somewhere
in the Universe, naturally or in some alien
lab, and be working its way here even now.
Or of course have happened in some prior iteration
of the Universe, and our Universe resulted
from that cataclysm.
That’s an amusing answer to the Fermi Paradox,
where all the aliens are at in this huge and
ancient Universe, since so long as we don’t
assume intelligent civilizations are too common,
not more often than once per galaxy every
few billion years, this might account for
their absence.
They figure out how to access this false vacuum
and accidentally ignite a vacuum decay, which
spreads out at light speed eating their planet
and even catching up to any of their colonies
and slower-than light ships.
Only their early and weak signals would precede
this catastrophe to anyone out there listening,
so they’d probably miss the signal, and
regardless, even if they heard it, would only
have a short time before the vacuum decay
reached them anyway.
Or that every civilization that first emerges
in a Universe eliminates themselves and everyone
else by doing this.
It’s not really a Fermi Paradox solution
you need in a no-FTL Universe, but it works
for ones in which FTL travel is assumed to
be possible since it offers you a way to kill
off those species before they’d discover
how and removes the problem to the Fermi Paradox
of having to deal with the absence of aliens
if we have to include one spawned in far distant
galaxies including those over the Cosmological
Horizon.
Though perhaps not, since Vacuum Decay happens
at light speed and expansion can occur faster
than that.
However, while it’s often noted that anything
useful for bettering our lives can be made
into a weapon, the reverse is also usually
true, your swords can be turned into plowshares,
so potentially such a cataclysmic option like
Vacuum Decay might be in some way usable as
a controlled power source too.
We don’t know how to mess with that False
Vacuum yet, assuming it even exists or exists
as we think it does anyway, but the ability
to mess with it implies a potential ability
to manipulate or contain it, and that could
open the door to flat out making new bits
of matter and energy or even whole new Universes.
For my part I think that’s a much more interesting
Fermi Paradox solution, that folks learn how
to play around with stuff to make new matter,
energy, or spacetime, and finding it better
and easier to pursue that option for expanding
their civilization as opposed to building
giant slow generation ships to colonize new
worlds.
The Heat Death of the Universe, and postponing
or reversing or evading it, ought to be the
top priority for any advanced civilization,
and to end the episode on a hopeful note,
since that would be the Grand Work of any
ancient and vast civilization, an alternative
to us not seeing ancient alien empires all
over the Universe might not be that they simply
don’t exist, but rather that they solved
the whole problem of finite resources in an
entropic and decaying universe and thus had
no need to venture far out from their home
world to find new resources to let them expand
into to grow or stockpile against the grinding
engine of entropy.
If they did, then that means we can too, and
All Good Things don’t have to come to an
End.
As we mentioned the fundamental concept of
the Heat Death of the Universe is all about
Statistics, Entropy, and the Laws of Thermodynamics.
If you’re interested in learning more about
those and other statistical concepts I’d
recommend the Quizzes on Thermodynamics in
Brilliant’s Classical Mechanics Course,
or their Statistics Fundamentals Course, with
over two dozen interactive quizzes that will
help you master statistics, one of the most
valuable areas of math and reasoning to know.
Brilliant is an online learning community
with over 60 interactive courses and many
quizzes and puzzles, plus Daily Challenges
that help get the brain warmed up for the
day.
Those Challenges provide a context and framework
that you need to tackle, so that you learn
the concepts by applying them, which is the
best way to learn new concepts.
Brilliant makes learning fun and easier, and
their online community gives you places to
discuss the material or ask questions, and
their mobile apps offline feature lets you
take courses even when you’re not getting
a good signal.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
So today we were talking about potential distant-future
calamities like Heat Death and Vacuum Catastrophes,
and next week we’ll be looking at ways to
fix or mitigate catastrophes a bit closer
to home in both space and time, in Climate
Change Mitigation, where we’ll explore what
options we have now or in the near future
for everything from greenhouse gases to volcanoes
and asteroid impacts that might mess with
our planet’s thermostat.
We also discussed some post-human civilizations
in passing today that might live around black
holes one day, and in two weeks we’ll look
at something similar but also sooner on the
horizon, as we discuss DNA Manipulation in
Living Subjects.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And if you’d like to support future episodes,
visit our website, IsaacArthur.net, to donate
to the channel or check out some of the awesome
SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a Great Week!
