Ah, Genetic Engineering, the field of science
that will one day let us ride around dinosaurs
 throwing pokemon at each other.
    So our topic today is bioforming and
gene-tailoring, both basically extensions
on genetic engineering, and initially I had
thought we would keep it pretty practical
and down to Earth, discuss things like CRISPR
and the ways it can be used to fix health
problems.
We would look at ethical issues and potential
benefits and concerns about this technology.
And we will get to those, but then I found
myself thinking, lots of folks have discussed
that and discussed it well, and this channel
does not generally focus on ‘Down to Earth’.
Heck last episode I was talking about moving
galaxies.
So yes we will talk about the near-term applications
and the ethical issues but we will push the
envelope out a bit and explore some novel,
even zany, applications of this sort of technology,
though we will keep it the realm of what is
allowed by known science or at least not forbidden
by it.
Which includes making dinosaurs, as in Jurassic
Park, because honestly I can't think of many
things cooler than riding around on a dinosaur
and if you don’t think that’s awesome
I think something is probably wrong with you,
because that has to be ten times cooler than
a horse or a Harley Davidson.
Of course it is not as easy as in Jurassic
Park, because DNA does get preserved for millions
of years, but we will see today how you could
do it anyway.
How this technology can be used to recreate
long extinct species and even engineer ones
that never existed, like unicorns or chupacabra.
Or even things which probably could not naturally
evolve, like dragons or multi-headed hydras
or intelligent trees.
We also have potential practical applications,
not just stuff like a species of corn that
grows twice as much food or some algae that
could tailored to be perfect for making biofuels
and plastics but less obvious stuff like roads
that grew and repaired themselves in ways
similar to how coral reefs work or plants
that could suck trace metals right out of
the ground so we could harvest them rather
than needed to mine them.
Or even plants that might replace solar panels
and let you just plug in to the field or forest
for electricity.
Stuff that just could not evolve naturally.
Which does bring up the question of how we
do this stuff and if it is ethical to do it.
Yes it should be possible to make an intelligent
tree or a human-horse hybrid, a centaur, or
a human-fish hybrid, a mermaid, but is it
ethical to do so?
And how do we do so?
For the ‘how?’ part there are a lot of
options, but there are four approaches I wanted
to look at briefly today.
One is CRISPR, an exciting new technology
people have been talking about a lot.
Another is similar, use of retroviruses to
go enact changes to DNA throughout an organism.
The third is straight DNA Printing, which
gives us the option to make strands of DNA
from scratch straight off a computer model.
And lastly we have the option of using nanotechnology,
the Universal Assemblers we discussed some
episodes back, to just get in there and make
the changes at the molecular level if necessary.
Before we jump into those, and we will be
keeping them brief, I did want to take moment
to differentiate Bioforming from Gene-Tailoring
and both from Genetic Engineering.
Bioforming we discussed in passing back in
the Terraforming episode, as the alternative
to Terraforming.
When terraforming a planet you are trying
to make it more Earth-like so people and Terran
Flora and Fauna can live there.
Bioforming, sometimes also called Pantropy,
is the reverse, where you adapt Earth Organisms
to live in Alien Environments.
This does not necessarily have to be all that
high-tech or alien, if you are dealing with
a world already a lot like Earth but devoid
of life.
If it is not much like Earth, or already has
life on it, you probably need to do some massive
overhauling.
Outside of science fiction you cannot land
on an alien world with alien plants and animals
and start eating them or introducing your
own plants and animals.
In all probability the best thing that will
happen if you eat a bunch of alien fruits
and nuts is that you will get very sick and
spend a lot of time in the bathroom expelling
those things from one or another of your orifices.
A lot our own plants can be quite toxic, heck,
as I was reminded when watching a recent episode
of Cody’s Lab, a lot of regular edible plants
contain cyanide, just in low enough dosages
that we have adapted to be able to survive
eating them.
There might be some planets that work on similar
enough biochemistry that you can eat the food,
or some of it, but in all probability you
cannot and if you introduce Terran Flora and
Fauna either it will die out or it will wipe
out the native life.
Most of us would say those would be bad things,
so the alternative is a fairly massive overhaul
of our organisms to mix in with those native
to that planet.
This doesn’t necessarily mean tinkering
with humans themselves, we might be able to
make microorganisms we can introduce into
our guts to helps us digest the food, but
tinkering with humans themselves is on the
table for today.
So, obviously, is the ethical issue attached
to that.
Gene Tailoring is a bit different, it has
no formal definition but it comes with an
assumption you are making unnatural changes
to an organism.
It would not just be replacing a defective
gene in a person with the one of the other
existing versions of it in other people but
probably making up a new gene from scratch,
which is where DNA printing comes in.
So for instance, color blindness tends to
be hereditary and red-green color blindness,
which affects a pretty large chunk of the
male populace, could be fixed by taking the
functional gene from someone without color
blindness and sticking it in the color blind
person.
This is controversial but not nearly as much
so as the idea of taking some genes that let
you develop cones in your eyes able to infrared
light and putting them into a person.
Either adapted from some other critter or
cooking them up in a lab from scratch, or
just on a computer model and printing them.
So for the purpose of this video, when I say
Bioforming I am talking about altering an
organism to exist in some new environment,
rather than altering the environment, though
you could do both.
When I saw gene tailoring I am talking about
alterations to people through genetics beyond
the basic form.
So not so much replacing a defective gene
which causes diabetes or near-sightedness,
and more about giving yourself a body that
can win Olympic medals without practice or
eyes that can see infrared radiation or getting
wings grafted on to your body or a becoming
a horse from the torso down.
This also includes the mental aspects, improving
or altering the brain or nervous system, as
opposed to just fixing problems like Dementia
or Alzheimer's or my own more benign neurological
condition that makes my hands tremble and
face twitch but otherwise leaves me sound
in mind and body.
It would be nice if we could snip out the
defective genes causing that sort of thing
and by and large those are not considered
particularly controversial.
There are folks who think even doing things
like that is going too far, but too be fair
there are people whose definition of natural
would seem to exclude anything more advanced
than sharp sticks and fire.
I’m never entirely clear why I often encounter
these people on the internet, but I think
maybe smartphones and tablets are exempted
from their worldview of evil technology.
Of course that itself is a good example of
bias since I am well aware that various primitivist
approaches have wildly different technologies
they disapprove of and reasons for doing so.
For some it is simply about self-reliance
and personal challenge, and it isn’t like
we mock mountain climbers for not taking a
helicopter to the mountain peak.
We will be discussing the ethics of this stuff
and trying for some neutrality, and indeed
there are a lot of strong arguments against
some applications of this sort of technology
and a lot of others types too, but there is
also a line between reasonable concerns and
the ridiculous.
I can easily respect the opinion of someone
who thinks engineering people for higher intelligence
is dangerous, but while can respect a person
who believes we should not use unnatural chemicals
as medicine, in favor of all-natural approaches,
I cannot respect their view on the matter.
Simply their right to have that view and their
right to expect courtesy equal to what they
offer me.
It’s a hazy line but I will try to keep
on the proper side of it for today.
So let us talk about methods, and again I
want to keep this fairly brief.
I outlined four a few minutes ago.
CRISPR, retroviruses, DNA printing, and Universal
Assemblers.
Those are just some of the methods and I wanted
to touch on certain aspects of each before
we move on.
CRISPR has become a big news item and you
can get details about how it works elsewhere,
but essentially a CRISPR is a chunk of DNA
where you get a repeating pattern, the pattern
is the same forwards and backwards and is
short, twenty to forty base pairs, essentially
a sentence long snippet in the bookshelf that
is your DNA.
That sentence keeps repeating but in between
it are short bits, the equivalent of single
words, called Spacer DNA, and those don’t
repeat, each one is different and it looks
like they are essentially identifiers for
pesky viruses and such your body has encountered
before.
When it encounters new ones it lays in another
segment, a new bit of Spacer DNA and another
repetition of that sentence.
That’s CRISPR.
But nearby that segment is an associated sequence,
a CRISPR Associated or Cas gene.
These basically can unzip DNA and cut it up,
and are a major part of our immune system.
What make it handy for genetics is that we
can take the Cas and attach something else
to it, a sentence of our choosing.
And if we stuck it in a cell it would go find
anything that looked like that and can add
or delete it.
So the CRISPR/Cas-9 stuff you keep hearing
about is essentially hijacking an existing
part of us, one that prevents viruses from
hijacking our cells, and using it to snip
out bad DNA.
And it shows amazing promise as a tool to
be used to let us cut out or add or modify
DNA.
Before this the popular talk was often of
retroviruses.
In most viruses DNA is transcribed into RNA,
then translated into proteins.
Retroviruses do that somewhat backward, their
RNA gets transcribed into the host’s DNA
which starts making copies.
Like CRISPR we have the option of hijacking
this to be used to modify DNA.
Of course you could get into someone’s DNA
with very tiny forceps and scalpels and change
it.
The problem is that for any case where you
are not working on a single cell embryo, like
an adult human with trillions of cells, it
is kind of hard to get at all those trillions
of DNA helixes and alter each and everyone
one.
DNA printing, which is just spitting out the
chemicals that make up DNA one molecule at
a time in the right sequence, is obviously
handy for letting us make one copy of DNA,
we can make anything our minds can imagine
and which is chemically possible.
The problem, besides us needing a way to deliver
changes to trillions of cells, is that DNA
is very long.
And while we always show DNA as a pair of
long strands, it generally is like a big ball
of yarn, not like a long wire hanging between
two transmission towers.
It’s got something like 3 billion base pairs
for a human, and genes usually are made up
several thousands base pairs and you’ve
got several thousand genes in your DNA.
A normal ball of yarn might be a few hundred
meters long, a few times longer than a football
field, but our DNA yarn ball, if it were normal
yarn width, would be thousands of kilometers
long.
An individual gene would often be as long
as a football field.
When the whole thing wraps up in a ball it
would be about your size.
Needless to say printing something out, one
hairbreadth at a time but thousands of kilometers
long is pretty time consuming.
So DNA printing is awesome for making one
segment, one gene, or even one complete set
of DNA, but not for mass manufacturing billions
and trillions of copies for every cell in
a body.
That’s what CRISPR, retroviruses, and some
other techniques are for.
What is cool about DNA printing is you do
not need an existing gene, you can design
one from scratch, so we do not have to find
fossilized DNA from a dinosaur to make one,
we can just make educated guesses about what
it needs and compile it from scratch on computer.
We can then print it, stuff it into an egg,
and proceed.
And if we like we can give them a temperament
and intelligence more in line with, say, a
horse.
Of course that is essentially turning DNA
and RNA and viruses into machines, which they
already are but I mean in the artificial sense.
We can potentially skip that by using the
sorts of tiny little nanomachines we have
talked about before, particularly the kind
called a Universal Assembler, or specifically
the Universal Molecular Assembler.
Which you can tell to build a copy of itself
or tell to go find a bit of DNA and cut it
up and assemble it how you want.
Now my main reason for mentioning this one
is that I like to remind people that we do
not have to use and either or approach with
technology.
Fiction likes to show us futures where people
are genetically engineered supermen or cyborgs,
not both.
They tend to skip that such critters would
probably be both, even from birth.
Same as we have mitochondria in us that is
effectively an alien organism present in every
cell in your body, you could have machine
DNA equivalents that hung around doing jobs
like replacing an organism's bones with hollow
titanium or growing the various brain implants
contemplated in Transhumanism.
There are no unicorns, or at least I’ve
never seen one or met anyone who has, at least
while sober, but a horse with a horn on it
is not exactly a weird thing that could never
evolve naturally.
Horns are handy and common features in nature
so there probably is some planet somewhere
that’s got them.
Alternatively something like a dragon, I mean
a giant flying reptile that weighs more than
elephant and breathes fire, well that is not
too likely.
Dragons are also awesome so science fiction
is full of plenty of examples of them where
the author spends a lot of time fudging around
with how they could exist with some gene-tailoring.
Maybe so, but they can certainly exist if
you do not mind going a bit above and beyond
genetic engineering to include either DNA
that can make little machines too, or symbiotic
passengers like mitochondria.
So your dragon is otherwise organic but it’s
got hollow bones made of titanium or kevlar
or graphene and maybe its wings and scales
incorporate those features to make it very
strong and light.
Maybe you include a photosynthetic element
on the wings so it can feed itself partly
on sunlight when it stretches out to subathe
on the noon-time desert sands.
There’s no rule that says a genetically
engineered plant could not suck metals out
of the ground and weave them into its own
structure to make it sturdier than what cellulose
and lignin permit.
Maybe it is incorporated into their core structure
or maybe they deposit it like coral into a
long spire they grow up around.
So you can modify the existing organism or
make one up from scratch, and a lot of time
you will need to modify the brain for many
of things I’ll mention in a moment too,
you cannot just give someone cones in their
eyeballs that are sensitive to infrared and
ultraviolet light and expect them to see new
colors beyond the rainbow, you need to get
in the brain and do some re-wiring too.
Uplifting, the name for when you take an animal
and give it a human-level intelligence, tends
to assume the reverse case.
For better eyes that can see additional colors
we need to tinker with the brain also, but
for a better mind on a cat or dog or dolphin
we might need to tinker with the physical
form too.
Giving them different vocal cords or more
nimble toes that can grasp tools.
Probably tinkering with its reproductive system
too since a lot of animals reproduce much
more quickly than us and with intelligence
and tool use comes a much lower chance of
natural death.
Not what we usually mean these days as a euphemism
for old age.
In nature a natural death usually means ending
as someone’s dinner and before you’ve
reproduced, which you can do much younger
than humans can which is important since humans
live a long time and take a long time to develop
during which we need a lot more parental care
and attention.
So if you are uplifting animals to make them
sentient and sapient you probably need to
be thinking about a lot of other things you
need to accompany with that.
Like longer lives, tool using hands, slower
reproductive rates with single births not
litters, and slower maturation rates.
So you can use it to make your pets smarter
or maybe make entirely new pets like that
cute critter from the old gremlins movie,
or real life pokemon.
Now, what people might do to themselves doesn’t
interest me all that much except in terms
of pondering the ethics.
I honestly do not much care if someone wants
to get their body tweaked, genetically or
cybernetically, so they are ten feet tall
and built like a linebacker with a souped
up heart to support all that new mass.
Needless to say it could be used to let people
switch genders or be both genders or neither.
Or if they feel like getting scales or fur
or feathers or a third eye or extra pair of
arms.
That could look pretty awesome or scary or
disgusting, but again it is Halloween when
this episode comes out so I’m content with
scary.
What does interest me is useful applications,
a type of corn that can use more light to
grow with for instance.
Our plants mostly use red light for photosynthesis
and don’t use much green or infrared, and
most of what the sun emits is infrared light,
and most stars in the galaxy emit even more
of their light in that part of the spectrum.
Our yellow ‘dwarf’ star out masses about
95% of stars and is hotter than them, meaning
that it produces much more of its light in
the visible range than they do.
Needless to say a little tweak that let plants
use that spectrum for growth could hugely
increase the biomass on a planet or make terraforming
planets around other stars much easier.
It would be pretty neat to be able to tinker
with how plants deal with carbon and carbon
dioxide to be able to use it to sequester
carbon out of the atmosphere.
The strongest materials we have now are made
out of carbon so it would be nice to suck
the excess out of the air and maybe put it
to use making those.
It would also be neat to have plants that
could be planted on toxic soil full of heavy
metals and not only thrive but maybe have
fruits that grew on them full of those metals,
so we could collect them for reuse or safe
disposal.
We cold have vats of black algae that used
the entire spectrum to grow very quickly and
could be turned into biofuel or plastics,
algae is already very promising in this regard
but one tailored to use every ounce of energy
it got shined on it would be even better.
Trees that grew meat… sounds kind of freaky,
but if it’s identical to bacon in taste
and chemistry, it’s nicer than killing a
pig, I’d say.
So you could make a cow that produced more
milk, which we’ve been doing through selective
breeding for centuries, or you could cut out
the middleman and have a bunch of bacteria
that just grew milk.
And since apparently almost everything tastes
like chicken I’d imagine we could find a
recipe for growing that too, we have been
making pretty good strides in lab grown meat
after all.
So plants that could produce their own fertilizers,
plants that can maybe suck the trace amounts
of valuable minerals out regular soil and
concentrate it for you, essentially plants
that can be used as machines for specific
purposes, in this case mining.
You might be able to grow computers, you might
be able to have organic structures that grew
according to blueprint and repaired themselves.
You might be able to grow solar panels as
plants.
Maybe you could make roads that repaired themselves
too, with some equivalent to how coral reefs
work or critters that grow shells.
Maybe you don’t need vats of algae growing
biofuel but can have a tree that you can tap
for ethanol like we do for maple syrup.
Maybe you can make an organism that will actually
grow plastic, shiny transparent plastic, in
some nice dome form that you can use for greenhouses
in the desert or domes on Mars.
Plants designed to live in toxic atmospheres
or ones to dense or thin for life or ones
designed from the ground up to live in the
vacuum of space.
You could potential create entire ecosphere
in a solar system.
Maybe ones that could migrate between solar
systems and seed whole galaxies.
Lots of random ideas tossed out there, some
probably are absurd, some others probably
are not but sound that way.
Just some imagination fuel, when this topic
got suggested it came attached with the request
to offer out every crazy idea we might use
it for and I think I just nailed that.
These are potential options for genetic engineering
when you open the doors to full blown gene
tailoring, especially if you are not just
limiting yourself to the strictly organic.
    Okay, so we’ve explored the basics
of why and how, and we have talked about both
some of the useful things we are doing now
or might do soon, and a lot of quite zany
ideas too.
So I suppose we ought to raise the ethical
issues at last.
When I started thinking about the ethical
aspects though, trying to lay out the arguments
for and against, two common themes struck
me.
The first was that almost all of them are
not limited to just genetic engineering.
For instance the ethics of using gene tailoring
to enhance human intelligence or strength
or endurance is essentially the same as those
for using cybernetics to do it or performance
enhancing drugs.
The second is that these were not new arguments.
We have been using rituals and herbs to try
to make people healthier or smarter since
long before we had science, and we have been
using selective breeding of plants, animals,
and even people for a quite long time.
That science and technology make these things
easier, and actually works, is irrelevant.
Or it would seem so to me.
In the past we have tried to do these things.
Sometimes it didn’t work, even if maybe
we thought it did, like many of our folk remedies
or superstitions, sometimes it did work but
imperfectly, also like many of our folk remedies
and superstitions.
Whether it worked or how well it worked does
not change the ethics of doing it, for the
same reason trying to murder someone with
a stage prop sword and failing is still attempted
murder.
So we can say it is unethical to modify children
so they grow up to be geniuses with the bodies
of supermodels and professional athletes.
We can say that it is doubly so because it
pressures other people to do it to their own
children.
For that matter, what right do we have to
modify a person without their informed consent?
A thing which is impossible with a young child.
And yet, we already do these things, and have
for a long time.
This does not make it ethical, we do a lot
of things we probably should cease doing for
ethical reasons and we certainly have tons
of things we used to do and stopped doing
because they were unethical.
And yet we can frame many of the ethical issues
of genetic engineering in the context of existing
ethical issues.
Throughout history we had tons of cultures
that engaged in selective breeding for traits,
and they knew they were doing it.
People often do make decisions for their children,
someone has to, and often those are not ones
we would applaud.
People already do feel pressured to do things
to benefit their children which are questionable
and do try to do things to give their child
an edge, or to make sure they can keep up
with the others.
The line between encouraging your child to
succeed and pressuring your child to do so
is decidedly thin and ill-defined.
Is it ethical to alter DNA?
I don’t know but we’ve been doing it,
deliberately, for generations, and the only
difference is we did not know what DNA was.
Is it ethical to alter someone’s DNA without
their consent?
I don’t know but it seems to me that it
is akin to any other situation where you would
act without the target’s consent.
It may be wrong to force someone to have surgery
to remove a brain tumor, even though it is
clearly damaging their judgement and ability
to make informed decisions.
But if that is not unethical, why would it
be so to give gene therapy to correct a similar
ailment, like Dementia?
Similarly, if is okay for people to refuse
medical treatments for their children, then
it would be for gene therapy too, I should
think, and vice-versa if a parent can refuse
a life-saving procedure for their child like
a donated heart, then they can also refuse
the gene therapy which might fix the defect.
If we cannot ban such things as organ donation,
then on what basis would we ban the gene therapy
equivalent?
If we can ban performancing enhancing drugs,
can we ban performance enhancing genes, and
what is the difference between the two which
might make one bad but the other not?
It may be unethical to tamper with the genes
of plants and animals, yet we have done this
for a long time too and typically not with
that organism's best interest in mind but
our own.
I cannot say I always approve of such things,
but regardless, be they right or wrong, they
seem little different than intentional genetic
alteration, except, again, that we are much
more skilled at it doing it.
And when it comes to bioforming, altering
organisms to live in alien environments, I
am not sure what the difference is between
altering a dog to live on the Planet Dune
where it never rains, and altering the local
wildlife to adapt to it raining, but it seems
no more or less ethical to do that then to
wipe out the giant desert sandworms that dwell
there and are killed by water or to tinker
with them so they can now live in oceans not
just the seas of sand.
So, as is often the case when we talk about
the ethics of this or that bit of technology
on this channel, we do not come up with a
yes or no, but we maybe come away with a clearer
picture of what we should be considering.
I suspect almost every aspect of genetic engineering
will have its own case-by-case problems.
So some food for thought, and I’d be curious
to hear what you think about these matters
in the comments section of the episode, or
over on the Facebook or Reddit Groups, Science
and Futurism with Isaac Arthur, which are
often more conducive to discussion if you
want to talk with others about the ideas we
looked at today.
Next week is going to be my collaboration
episode with Joe Scott, where we will look
at Dark Flow & the Great Attractor.
The week after that will be the Stellar Compendium,
where we are going to look at the big zoo
of star types, including the strange ones,
and demystify some of the terms used to discuss
them.
Subscribe to the channel if you want alerts
when that and other episodes come out, and
if you enjoyed this episode, please share
it with others and hit the like button.
Until next time, thanks for watching and have
a great day!
