One of the trickiest things about traveling
through the vast vacuum of interstellar space
is that it isn’t a vacuum.
So today we are going to be taking a look
at some of the difficulties involved in interstellar
spaceflight and some features of spaceships
we haven’t discussed before for time constraints.
We’ve looked at spaceships many times and
interstellar colonization too, but today’s
topics take some time and were never absolutely
vital to the topic at hand.
Here are those key topics we will be covering
today:
1.
How fast Ships can go
2.
The Non-Vacuum of Space
3.
Collisions and Protection
4.
The Shape of a Ship
We will also be rejoining our Gardener Ship,
Unity, from the Life in a Space Colony Trilogy,
you don’t need to have seen those episodes
to follow along with the discussion today
but it saves some time to use them, and I’ve
grown rather partial to the ship.
As a reminder, that ship massed in at a couple
hundred million tons, was a half a kilometer
wide, and a few kilometers long.
We’ve visually rendered it before but that
was always more conceptual then accurate.
It had a crew of two hundred thousand when
it left Earth for the Tau Ceti system, and
as it traveled at 10% of light speed it needed
120 years to arrive there.
They had a lot of people born during the trip,
and also enjoyed massively extended lifespans,
something we’ll discuss more next week,
plus they were receiving constant if delayed
tech updates from Earth, and you can make
a lot of technological progress in a century.
All of which meant they had more people when
they arrived than originally planned, and
the technology to do the job better and with
less people.
Many of the folks had adjusted to thinking
of the ship as home and been raised to think
of colonizing solar systems as their life
purpose, and their worldview probably would
have altered to view that as one of the greatest
accomplishments a person could labor towards.
So it was no big surprise they decided to
continue their journey onward, planting colonies
like seeds in a great big galactic garden
on an eternal journey toward the edge of the
galaxy and maybe beyond.
But the ship was not designed for that and
again they’ve got a century of technological
progress since the ship was built, so they
decided to retrofit Unity before leaving Tau
Ceti.
They pick as their next destination 82 G.
Eridani, a system around a yellow sun that
like Tau Ceti is a bit older, smaller, and
dimmer than our own Sun.
It is more or less in the same direction Tau
Ceti is from Earth just a bit further along.
Tau Ceti is 12 Light years from Earth and
82 G. Eridani is 20, but it’s about 12 light
years from Tau Ceti being off at a bit of
angle.
So it will take them as long to get there
as their first trip.
They’d like to do it faster, and not need
120 years to cover 12 light years, the engineers
say they can boost the speed to 20% of light
speed and a 60 year journey.
However they are leaving with just a bit over
50,000 people so they still need to repopulate,
but you don’t need a century to double or
quadruple your population especially when
folks are not aging, they don’t die off
and they can keep having kids indefinitely.
So they have no problem rapidly increasing
their numbers in a few generations, though
generation ceases to mean anything in this
context, people are still having kids while
their grandchildren are.
They’re thinking they need a larger ship
too, not just a faster one.
So we need to retool the ship, and the captain
calls a meeting of all the senior staff, ignoring
for the moment that we have been assuming
this was a democratically operated civilian
vessel who probably has an elected provisional
governor calling such shots.
Same captain as before, she looks mid-twenties
but has been commanding ships since the old
interplanetary vessel Hyperion so there’s
a couple centuries of experience there and
her actual rank or rating is probably something
like Grand Admiral by now and she runs a ship
that has more people in it than most top tier
navies have personnel.
“How fast can we go?”
She asks, “and why can we go faster now?”
Her science officer speaks up and says that’s
not how this sort of thing works.
We can go as fast as we want, the problem
is it takes exponentially more fuel to go
faster.
Every type of fuel that classifies as a rocket
has an exhaust velocity, how fast the stuff
comes out the back.
To get your ship up to that speed you need
for 63% of it to be fuel.
That’s just how it is.
And if you want to be able to slow down at
the end you need it to be 86% fuel.
A ship that doesn’t need to slow down can
get twice as fast as one with the same fuel
ratio, if you’re curious.
If you want to get to double your exhaust
velocity, and not slow down, you need to be
86% fuel.
If you want to slow down you need to be 98%
fuel, leaving only 2% of your mass for ship
and cargo.
If you want to get to triple that speed and
slow down you need to be 99.75% fuel, meaning
you’ve got 400 times as much fuel as your
ship and its cargo.
This is why we need rockets the size of tall
buildings to get ships the size of cramped
apartments into space from Earth, because
the exhaust velocity of normal rocket fuel
is considerably less than the escape velocity
of Earth even ignoring air drag.
Getting to higher and higher speeds, compared
to your rocket exhaust velocity, requires
exponentially more fuel.
Their ship, Unity, used fusion, which has
vastly higher exhaust velocities than chemical
fuels, usually estimated at a decent if low
percentage of light speed.
The science officer says what has changed
is the new reactor designs from Earth let
them achieve a more efficient degree of fusion
and results in a higher exhaust velocity,
twice what it was before, we’ll say it used
to be 5% of light speed that the fusion products
and leftovers flew out at before and now its
10%, that’s on the conservative lower and
higher end of what we anticipate from a good
fusion drive.
It also means that whatever the mass of the
ship and cargo is, when fueled up it will
be about 50 times more massive than that,
and when it is done accelerating after some
weeks or months to its cruising speed, it
will still be about 6 times more fuel than
ship.
The captain asks why not just go with a higher
ratio, even more fuel?
After all, there is no shortage of hydrogen
available nor minerals to make the tanks out
of, but that’s where the weapon’s officer
chimes in.
It won’t work, he says, the current system
was designed to let them avoid collisions
in interstellar space at 10% of light speed.
By going twice as fast they will encounter
those objects twice as often and each carrying
four times the energy and damage capacity.
The science officer nods, and picks that up,
as he’s a bit of long-winded fellow who
usually needs 20-40 minutes to get to the
point.
He says the interstellar medium, all the gas
and dust between the stars, is quite thin,
and most of it is hydrogen and helium gas
molecules, with the supermajority of the tiny
amount remaining being very tiny motes of
dust containing a handful of atoms too.
Those are not a problem, they act like radiation
and you just make your forward shielding a
bit thicker.
Ours will mostly be thin metal containers
full of fuel, hydrogen, because hydrogen is
quite good at stopping radiation.
What we have to worry about is things that
will make big holes, or even trash the ship,
and since smaller particles are a lot more
common than bigger ones, we will run into
a lot more of them.
As a very loose rule when it comes to meteoroids
and micrometeroids there’s about an inverse
relationship between mass and frequency.
You expect to encounter stuff twice as massive
about half as often.
Meaning that since everything is hitting us
with four times the energy, since we’re
going twice as fast, something with a quarter
of the mass will do the same damage as when
we were going half the speed.
But those objects are now 4 times as frequent.
To make it worse, since we need to vaporize
this stuff, and are going twice as fast, we
will be encountering them twice as often,
so 8 times the frequency of stuff we need
to shoot down, and we need to detect them
twice as far out to have time to react to
them.
We need to detect smaller things further away.
Even worse yet, our little Local Bubble of
the galaxy is rather low in density compared
to the galactic normal, which is about 10
times thicker than the interstellar medium
is locally.
This ship is not going to remain in that bubble
and indeed may pass into areas where the density
is far higher, so best prepare now, while
we are making our ship bigger, faster, and
better.
Nor is the medium homogenous, you might go
through short patches where density is hundreds
of times higher.
Needless to say this all gets worse the faster
we get.
At the speed we are going your typical grain
of sand weighing about a milligram would hit
us like half a ton of dynamite, or around
a million times the energy of the average
bullet.
We can easily armor the hull against normal
bullets but these are pinhead sized objects
that will penetrate rather deeply, leaving
small long holes.
So even one just carrying that much energy
is something I’d rather not be hit by.
Even as huge a target as Unity is, being half
a kilometer wide and tall, we still will only
encounter about the equivalent of a bucket
of sand during a century long trip, in terms
of cosmic dust and most of that will still
be too small to hurt us even at these speeds,
but it is still enough that you might expect
to run into a grain of sand as often as once
an hour and something the size of pea, which
would hit us like a small nuke, maybe once
a month.
But something carrying bullet force?
That we would run into almost every second
and it would be only a handful of micrometers
across, the width of the thinnest hairs.
We need to see that tiny mote far enough out
to target it with a laser and vaporize it,
and we are traveling 60,000 kilometers a second.
Fast enough to travel from Earth to the Moon
in 6 seconds, fast enough to get to the sun
in 40 minutes.
Even computers need time to get an accurate
track on an object and aim, which usually
involves moving something, then shoot and
hit something smaller than a grain of sand,
though we’d probably use a wide beam and
go for overkill to compensate for positional
uncertainties.
Needless to say it takes a very powerful radar
system to get returns off something that small
far enough away to help us.
And it can’t be classic radar either, using
radio waves, because you cannot detect and
track something smaller than the wavelength
of light you are sending at it.
When you listen to a FM Radio channel, those
waves are about 3 meters long, so a Radar
using them would have problems seeing and
tracking something the size of a person, even
millimeter radar isn’t good enough for us,
not even microwaves are.
We need infrared.
Most types of dust and sand also absorb infrared,
often reflecting only a few percent of most
wavelengths, giving us weak returns on our
radar.
Handily many are very reflective of about
1-3 micrometers wavelengths, which in this
case is what we need.
So our Weapon’s Officer shakes his head
and says, “Look Captain, I think we can
buff up our current systems to handle this
but I can’t make a lot of guarantees, maybe
we ought to just stick to the same speed and
be happy we can carry a lot more cargo on
a lot less fuel than before.”
But fuel is cheap, she doesn’t really care
how much we use, any of a million small comets
hanging around any solar system will have
plenty of hydrogen even without needing to
try diving into gas giants to get fuel.
So if there is any chance of safely shortening
the trips, she wants to take them, so she
asks the Science Officer if there are any
other options.
“Plenty”, he says, “But none of them
are pretty.”
The captain says she doesn’t care if they’ll
take a lot of time to add on and maintain
and he say no sir, he’s being literal, most
of the options just don’t conform to a nice
looking stream lined ship from ancient science
fiction.
She reminds him that they weren’t planning
to enter the ship in a beauty pageant and
since they are going where no man has gone
before it is unlikely we’d encounter any
anyway, and to get on it with it.
So the first option is thicker armor, when
we’re done expanding the ship, its dry weight
– its weight minus fuel for speeding up
and slowing done, is going to be around a
billion tons of ship and cargo.
The front cross section of the ship is about
200,000 square meters, so if we were making
our armor out of big meter wide metal shelled
cubes full of hydrogen weighing a ton apiece,
that would only be 200,000 tons out of a billion,
doing those five layers thick would only be
a million tons.
Tiny holes a few micrometers thick through
a centimeter of metal won’t leak gas fast.
But over a century those would empty out easily,
and it’s awkward to patch and repair that
area with all the radiation and micrometeors,
doable but kind of rough.
So we could set it up like a conveyor belt.
The front isn’t a big sheet anymore, it’s
the ends of thousands of little conveyor belts
where the belt is made up of metal cubes full
of hydrogen, they rotate out and back in again
and at the back side they get repaired, and
the belt widens out at the front to provide
a few layers of overlapping armor and we slide
a new section forward whenever one takes an
impact.
Let the robots do the repairs in the rear
and keep some spares on hand.
It hardly needs to be airtight just packed
close enough that almost nothing can slip
through and we’ll have another layer of
more normal armor behind that.
In fact we’ll store most of fuel up front
with habitation sections behind them.
If a big collision happens and you need to
replace a big chunk of the assembly though,
we have another option, we can shoot a small
solar sail ahead of us, itself just a micrometer
thick.
Just launch it and have it unfurl and act
as a temporary shield.
Most stuff hitting it is going to slam right
through but fragment a lot or be deflected
to the side just enough.
It would act a bit like an umbrella.
It would slowly drift back into the ship from
collisions and you could grab it then and
drag it back inside and recycle it.
Just a tin foil thick shield, even if we couldn’t
recover it the total loss of mass would be
just a few tons out of a billion.
The Captain asks why we can’t make that
foil-shield thicker, and the Science officer
shrugs and says we can but we would be better
off having several of them ahead of us, spaced
way out in front, not meters or kilometers
but whole light seconds ahead of us.
She points out that the front one will just
be shoved back into the next one and so on
until they get slammed into the front of the
ship.
The Weapon’s Officer points out that they
will also get in the way of the ship’s radar
and lasers, so it won’t work, but the Science
Officer shakes his head.
We will place them far enough ahead that the
last one is just outside our minimum engagement
distance, say a tenth of a second, more than
enough time for the ship to still locate,
target, and fire on something that makes it
through.
But it doesn’t matter, because we will keep
the shades strung out at the right distance
by pushing on them with our own lasers, just
using them de-focused.
They are a solar sail after all.
And we will put sensor packages on them too,
adding a little weight but not much, and we
can power those by having a few solar panels
we will target diffuse lasers on.
When they get scrapped we will give them a
little side shove and let them drift back
to us on the side and just snag it and drag
it in for recycling and repair.
We’re going to put a lot of our lasers off
to the side ship, extending on big long thin
telescoping antennas to keep them rigidly
locked to the ships and to provide power and
data flow back to the ship.
At the end of those will be a big laser and
radar, give us better detection and an angle
to shoot at, also letting us more easily push
things to a side.
Those telescoping antennae or arms won’t
be very massive.
You have a dozen or so of them telescoping
out several kilometers to the side, radiating
out like spokes on a wheel.
If one gets damaged, and they might because
they won’t be much shielded, you just reel
it back to the ship and repair it.
Even if one gets snapped off it won’t drift
much or fast and you just shoot a grapple
off to snatch it and reel it back in and repair
it.
We can also shoot probes ahead of us, either
with their own fuel supply or pushed and powered
by lasers, just expendable things to detect
stuff ahead of us and maybe even some weapons
of their own.
Even if they each weighed several hundred
tons we can deploy them on a regular basis.
Indeed if we can mizro-size our fusion drives
enough we might want to send many out ahead
of us to slow down and park on some comet
along the way to act as a fuel supply for
a big radar and signal relay.
Maybe even with lasers to help clear our path
for us, or just have them keep going and do
a flyby of our path and destination.
We’ve talked about using laser highways
as an ultra-cheap and fast way of traveling
between existing colonized systems, and there’s
a lot to be said about laying that down on
the original trip, this would be a good way
to get that started if we wanted to and had
drives small enough.
The Head of Maintenance complains they’ll
be constantly having to fix, build, and repair
stuff but the Captain shrugs and points out
they are essentially a massive factory ship
and always have to anyway, truth be told this
would seem to require very little personnel.
She says all right, let’s do it, and the
science officer asks which system and she
says all of them.
They wouldn’t seem to interfere with each
other or need much mass or energy to operate,
and they’ll go ahead and scale the ship
up too, but only in length, no point adding
more cross-section to armor and defend.
A ship twice as long doesn’t need twice
as much frontal armor if you’re are just
making it twice as long, not twice as wide,
and that means the same amount of armor still
guards twice as much ship.
This is a key reason why when we discuss interstellar
ships on this channel I so often treat them
as objects more akin to flying city-states
than a classic small crew ship of cast of
half a dozen or even big ones like on Star
Trek with a crew of hundreds.
We look at ships that are thousands of time
more massive than modern battleships or aircraft
carriers crewed by hundreds of thousands if
not millions not because they need that much
crew, they don’t, the ships would probably
mostly run themselves and just need a couple
dozen people to make decisions and handle
unexpected events.
Even then only if the ship didn’t have human-level
artificial intelligences on them, when in
all likelihood they would, or something smarter.
The same kind of automation that lets you
have ships that only need small crews or none
at all to operate for decades trillions of
kilometers from home is the kind of automation
that lets you build leviathans like we look
at quite cheaply.
The problem with smaller ships, especially
tiny probes, are manifold, and I discussed
those more in the Space Warfare episode, but
there they had the advantage of being harder
to intentionally hit, but we’re not expecting
to be shot at, and by scaling up in size we
benefit in a lot more ways.
The small ships needs just as much radar,
just as many lasers, and so on.
They also need some sort of power supply and
the fact of the matter is that even if you
could make a fusion reactor very small, so
it would fit in a car, it is just the nature
of such devices to be more efficient when
larger.
There’s only a few realistic options for
going faster than fusion, we’ve discussed
them before and they pretty much all require
using photons or maybe neutrinos as your rocket
exhaust, if you have exhaust.
One is laser-pushed ships, where being bigger
does help since your aft-mirrors for getting
pushed on can be bigger allowing more distance
for those pushing lasers to target you.
These let you get very fast, since the rocket
equation doesn’t apply, no fuel, but have
the issue of slowing down, requiring either
slow down fuel or something like the interstellar
laser highway we discussed in the Interstellar
Colonization episode back in Year 1.
Another option is black hole starships, which
we gave a whole episode over to, and those
had to be massive ships just by their very
nature, as we discussed there.
The only serious option for a faster ship
then fusion can give you, while being smaller
than an aircraft carrier and being able to
slow down is anti-matter.
The main byproduct of combining matter and
anti-matter is photons, which obviously have
an exhaust velocity of the speed of light.
That doesn’t mean you only need an amount
of it as implied by the Rocket Equation to
get near light speed though.
We worked with speeds today and in the past
where could almost entirely ignore Special
Relativity.
At 10% of light speed you are getting a gamma
of just 0.5%, a meter long object is half
a centimeter shorter, your clocks are running
slow by about one second every three minutes
or about seven minutes a day and object need
just a little more energy to get to that speed
than Classic Newtonian equations say.
At twenty percent those effects have jumped
up to about 2%, a meter is 2 centimeters shorter,
clocks lose about a second a minute relative
to Earth-normal.
So a 50 year trip on Earth’s Calendar only
took you 49, and there’s a small but noticeable
increase in energy over Newton.
Even at 50% of light speed these effects aren’t
too huge yet, they jump to 15%.
At 86% of light speed they double, even your
light speed exhaust velocity is straining
to get you any faster and beginning to need
huge ratios of fuel to ship and cargo, and
every object you hit whacks into you with
energy of its mass in anti-matter.
At 94% it’s tripled, and 97% quadrupled,
quintupled at 98%, 7 times higher at 99%,
10 at 99.5%, and it keeps getting worse.
Now at those speeds space really does have
enough drag that you want to be thinking about
aerodynamic shapes too and nothing could push
a ship this fast as an onboard fuel you carried,
not even antimatter at fuel mass ratios of
thousands to one, and you’ll need to constantly
add in more energy just to maintain this speed
against that drag from space gas, and all
but the tiniest motes of dust need to be vaporized
so they don’t smash your ship like a nuke.
You’d probably need to punch those molecules
with a laser so hard they ionized so a magnetic
field around the ship might shove them aside,
and that would need to be one heck of a magnetic
field.
And yes most ships probably would have big
magnetic fields because they will provide
a little protection from anything carrying
an electric charge, and a decent fraction
of the stuff in interstellar space is ionized
or will be when you’re zapping them with
lasers, especially if those are in the Ultraviolet
or X-ray range of the spectrum.
It won’t help with collisions but it will
decrease the ambient radiation from all the
stuff too small to shoot.
It’s why I don’t ponder faster than light
travel much, beyond its dubious nature as
what is basically a mathematical gimmick,
it’s not like even getting near light speed
is a real option because it requires obscene
expenditures of energy compared to just going
half as fast and there are other things you
can do with that energy which are better alternatives
than trying to get there a bit faster and
having to employ the kinds of radar systems
that would glow like miniature suns and need
massive supercomputers just to track everything
so you aren’t annihilated by a random grain
of sand.
Those collisions and radiation begin becoming
the real problem and no cool space drive is
going to magically make those go away.
Your best bet for real interstellar travel
to places you’ve already been to is to have
a long chain of fusion-powered laser relays
shoving ships around and constantly tracking
everything in their corridor to keep it free
of dangerously large space dust.
Again that laser highway.
Even then, especially since those ships need
large sails for targeting with lasers, I wouldn’t
ever aim for more than 86% of light speed.
Same for antimatter, it just isn’t worth
going faster even if you can produce that
substance for peanuts and store it safely.
Frankly both are kind of silly speeds anyway,
you don’t engage in routine interstellar
travel unless you have either biological immortality
or can freeze and thaw people, and as I’ve
discussed before the latter ability almost
requires the former.
In which case time doesn’t matter much,
everything still takes many years that your
destination experiences and you either don’t
or don’t care about it because you’ve
got as much time as you want.
That’s our topic for next week, life extension,
something we looked at briefly last year but
will look at in more detail.
So on ship speeds, for fusion, depending on
how good it gets, anywhere from 5-30% of light
speed, though the latter is really pushing
it unless you’ve got some material that
can reflect neutrinos.
Micro-Black holes can do better, especially
if you can feed them, ditto anti-matter and
laser-sails, but realistically not much over
half to maybe 90% of light speed.
As to shape, your typical interstellar ship
ought to look like an unsharpened pencil,
and as we’ve discussed before the energy
needs just to get up to tiny fraction light
speed so dwarf the energy needed to operate
life support and operations that even on a
wasteful glutton’s budget over centuries
they would look like a rounding error compared
to your fuel needs.
Our lasers and massively over-powered mega
radar will add to that, but not too much.
Yet while the main body of the ship might
look like a pencil it will probably have those
frontal foil shields stretching over millions
of kilometers ahead and thin projections sticking
off to the side like spokes on a wheel, another
reason why the outer hull of the ship either
does not spin or does so very slowly, even
though you’d have big rotating habitat sections
inside.
250 meter radius is probably as wide as you’d
ever build a ship since that is our estimate
for the widest you’d need to maintain Earth-like
pseudo-gravity that people didn’t get motion
sickness from.
Hopefully by now you’ve got a pretty good
idea why these sorts of ships never have maximum
speeds put on them or almost always get described
as very long and narrow.
Totally different ball game from interplanetary
ships, though they’d also probably be long
cylinders with a big forward shield telescoped
out ahead of it and spoke like projections
for sensors and collision lasers.
Just scaled down a lot.
Spaceship designs are never going to look
very cool, or maybe we’d change our notion
of cool, after all planes and sports cars
and motorcycles and rockets are not objectively
that cool looking but we come to view them
that way for all the implied speed and power
of the design.
Okay, we will stop there for today.
Next week we will look at life extension in
some more detail and look at how that might
actually happen in our lifetimes, along with
the some of the implications of that on society.
We’ve discussed it before in bits and pieces
but this time we’ll focus down more on the
technology, the hurdles and challenges, and
the impact of it on civilization.
Make sure to subscribe to the channel for
alerts when that and other episodes come out,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please like
it and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
