This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. 
Get access to my streaming video service,  
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
In the deep empty immensity of interstellar space,  
some few people may find a home far 
from any star to call their own.
 
Space is big, really big, really really big. 
We live on the thin surface of a rock far more  
immense than all our civilizations and ecosystems 
combined, and yet it is nothing but a pale blue  
dot as seen by the Voyager 1 Probe when it was 40 
times as far from Earth as Earth is from our Sun.  
This distance is often called the edge of 
our solar system, and all our major planets,  
all the way out to Neptune, and all their moons 
and the asteroid belt, are all inside this volume.  
That pale blue dot on which we are but a 
thin skin around the rock and magma below  
is insignificant compared to this volume, 
which is 50 trillion-trillion times larger.  
This is the same as a single grain of 
sand compared to our entire planet.
 
Inside this vast expanse of space, we have 
our 8 major planets, over a hundred moons  
and dwarf planets, and millions of minor 
planets and asteroids. One day this volume,  
trillions of trillions of times larger than our 
entire world, will see each of those millions  
of minor planets colonized or reshaped into 
vast habitats and megastructures. Civilizations  
beyond our ability to meaningfully count will 
arise inside this expanse, in our solar system,  
and perhaps become what we call a Dyson Swarm 
or Kardashev-2 civilization. In time, we will  
see civilizations around every one of the half a 
trillion stars in our galaxy, which will grow to  
become such swarms themselves, turning us into a 
Kardashev-3 civilization swallowing up every star  
as we spread out over the whole galaxy.
And yet, our solar system and its worlds are  
but a pinprick compared to the far more immense 
volume separating us from neighboring stars and  
them from each other, which in turn is nearly 
a trillion times larger than that vast expanse  
contained inside what we call our solar system. 
And it contains many worlds and minor planets and  
comets people may one day claim as their home.
Today, we will contemplate the idea of creating  
space settlements outside of star systems. 
The deep space habitats. Why we are going to  
build them and what purposes they may 
serve and who lives on them and why.
 
Now, we have discussed this before, many years 
back in our episode: Colonizing the Oort Cloud,  
and more recently in our episode Crawl-onizing 
the Galaxy, and there we suggested that we might  
string out relays between stars to serve as parts 
of laser highways between neighboring systems.  
Those might number hundreds of thousands or even 
millions, possibly spaced only light-hours apart  
and on paths between our star and hundreds 
of neighbors, and yet this is still only a  
fraction of that space, much like a rail line or 
freeway moving through a desert or mountain range  
of vast expanse of wilderness. In truth, such 
laser highways are even smaller comparatively,  
like a thin string of yarn stretched across 
a whole continent with the occasional bead  
on it every kilometer or so, representing a 
station… even that analogy falls short of the  
scale of emptiness. Space is just that huge. 
Such stations can also clear debris and dust from  
their lane, allowing faster and safer transport, 
so it makes some sense that they might seek to  
colonize their relay line to be a thicker tube of 
controlled space clearing material and permitting  
more ships to travel the lane and faster. Even if 
they started having satellite facilities in such a  
wider tube though, it would still be comparatively 
small compared to the huge gulf between stars.
 
This vast expanse beyond the planets would seem a 
place ideal for folks who wanted more elbow room,  
at least in the context of being 
far from civilization, the space  
habitat itself might be fairly tight-packed 
depending on their resources to build with.  
Relay stations might be subsidized or might make 
lots of money on their interstellar toll roads,  
to spend on extensive habitat construction, 
or they might be convicts or troublemakers  
sent to some non-relay habitat to mine ice. 
When it comes to being far from civilization  
though, this is a good place to be, especially 
if we’re talking about folks leaving a solar  
system besides our own, in a distant future 
where the galaxy is colonized and every star  
near them is a Dyson Swarm already, circa 
1 Million AD. We do need to keep in mind  
though that needing elbow room itself might 
be a little absurd in a classic context.  
Interplanetary space is already so immense that 
even fully populated Dyssons swarms, with billions  
of times Earth's current population, would have 
lower population densities than our deserts do.
 
So we could imagine some crazed cult seeking 
to sneak into the depths of space where their  
nearest neighbor might be weeks of communication 
lag and years of travel time from them. I wouldn’t  
imagine the powers-that-be would be okay with 
them controlling a relay station but those are  
just the fertile river valleys of deep space, 
most stations would be elsewhere and isolated.  
But we probably need to ask how this helps their 
goal anymore than just huddling inside a typical  
O’Neill Cylinder in orbit of our Sun, 
thousands of kilometers from a neighbor,  
when normally, a place would be considered an 
isolated compound because it had no one within  
a kilometer or so of it, here on Earth. It is also 
hard to recruit new members far from anyone else.
 
Additionally, we need to keep in mind that we said 
such habitats might be important to crawlonizing a  
galaxy, where speeds of ships were between 0.1 
and 1% of light speed requiring many centuries  
to reach even the nearest star, but that they 
also might pop up in a civilization with easier  
power access. Consider, a lot of empty space 
is very handy if you have easy fusion power,  
in order to radiate heat away, and become 
vastly more valuable in a black hole economy.  
But if we’re talking about warping space, we 
probably should not rule out people in the future  
figuring out how to tap into whatever dark 
energy is as an actual power source. 
 
Consider, we often talk about how hubble expansion 
is tearing our galaxies apart from each other,  
and apparently doing so at an ever expanding 
rate, fueled by dark energy. And we will give  
that figure as around 70 kilometers 
per second per megaparsec. However,  
we usually assume these new bits of spacetime 
bubbling out of apparently nowhere are doing so  
virtually everywhere all the time in pockets 
about the size of a planck length, a length  
so tiny it makes atoms look as big as solar 
systems. Down at the human scale we would say  
expansion occurs at a rate of about 2.2 x 10^-18 
meters per second per meter, or that a cubic meter  
should be getting something like 10^-53 cubic 
meters of new space per cubic meter per second. 
 
You don’t need to memorize any of those numbers, 
there’s no quiz coming up and I’m doing napkin  
math for them anyway, but a Planck volume is 
actually ridiculously tiny compared to that,  
4.2 x 10^-105 cubic meters, about 51 orders of 
magnitude smaller. So something like a couple  
thousand-billion-billion-billion-billion 
of the new planck volumes of spacetime  
are popping up in any given cubic meter of 
space in any given second. Untold trillions  
of trillions of them are emerging in the palm 
of your hand every moment. There is a lot of  
disagreement on how much energy is in an empty 
packet of spacetime, see our Dark Energy episode  
for more discussion of that, but a popular figure 
is about a nanojoule of energy per cubic meter. 
 
This is that vacuum energy folks 
often mention and is problematic  
because the other estimated figure is 
120 orders of magnitude higher, 10^113  
Joules per cubic meter, and in that case each 
cubic meter of space would have about 10^60  
or a trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion 
joules of new energy emerging into it  
every second. Now I don’t care which 
it happens to be at the moment,  
something barely powerful enough to keep a light 
bulb running if you used a volume ten thousand  
light years across or one that can run entire 
supernovae-bright bulbs on a cubic centimeter. 
 
Rather it’s the notion that if you have the 
ability to tap new bits – or old bits - of  
space-time for power, then having a lot of 
space to get that from and to radiate out your  
waste heat so you’re not burning everyone around 
you, makes deep space habitats more appealing.  
An indeed this is one of the handful of 
workarounds to things like the Dyson Dilemma  
of the Fermi Paradox, along with extragalactic 
Sanctuaries, which we’ll look at next week,  
as to why we might not see civilizations just 
crammed into a tight a space around their star  
or artificial quasi-star as they could. They 
spread out because they’re farming space itself,  
either for power or for material floating around 
it, like dust and gas clouds, or for its property  
of letting you disperse heat energy into it.
Now, I think we will see deep space habitats under  
just about every technological scenario, even 
if we never get better power than natural stars  
and atomic fission plants, but each scenario has a 
very different characteristic. For that matter, we  
also need to keep in mind that “Deep Space” is a 
pretty vague term, here today, we mean things out  
past Neptune but there is a big difference between 
levels of deep space, like in the Kuiper Belt and  
Scattered Disc versus the outer Oort cloud.
Except in that particular case where the value  
in space is because a huge empty region 
is valuable for resources or energy,  
folks are out there because they’re being 
paid to or they really don’t want to be back  
in among everyone else. And we’re going a bit 
beyond the classic person who likes isolation.  
I live in the country out on my farm, my wife 
and I like our space, and while I quite like  
my neighbors, I wouldn’t mind exchanging them for 
even more empty space out to the horizon, but not  
at the expense of not having high speed internet 
or amazon delivering or that most of the stores  
I need are within 20 minutes of home. That’s how 
most of my neighbors and most of our other rural  
friends feel, though often not how their kids feel 
who eventually immigrate to the bright lights of  
the big city and so on. Very few folks really want 
to be a total hermit and for them, a deep space  
habitat isn’t appealing anyway because there’s 
all those other folks there on that habitat.  
Only in the case where we have fairly compact 
fusion power and very good automation and 3D  
printing could people have their own modest sized 
personal habitat to properly hermit in, or as a  
post-biological lifeform, though admittedly both 
of those scenarios strike me as quite plausible.
 
Otherwise it's a huge cost for a single person 
and something bigger is presumably subsidizing  
the operation. So, that’s one example, we might 
build habitats meant to be true nature preserves,  
not zoos, in which case, distance might be seen as 
handy, and someone might agree to be the keeper on  
one of those. Very much your classic druid of 
the D&D or Radagast the Brown kind of flavor.  
Also for the keeper of telescopes, and there 
is likely to be a lot of hyper-sensitive  
scientific equipment that doesn’t like any sort of 
gravitational, magnetic, or EM signal interference  
and deep space is a good place to go to minimize 
noise in that regard, extragalactic space is even  
better. Note that the ‘person’ watching these 
objects might not be classically human either,  
semi-organic caregivers and post-biological 
minds in virtual worlds are entirely plausible,  
as are folks who hibernate and awaken only 
when maintenance or reports are needed.
 
Same for mostly automated labs or weapons 
bunkers, where you need something intelligent  
and trustworthy as a failsafe on more automated 
processes. You’ve got your big antimatter storage  
far from everywhere else and some human or truly 
sentient AI is on site to play guardian… or  
possibly an actual warden on dangerous prisoners 
or even dangerous lab samples or doomsday weapons.  
It’s hard to imagine what sort of things an 
advanced civilization with many trillions  
of scientists working for thousands of years 
might dream up, but if nightmares can be made  
reality they’d probably find a way and that’s 
the sort of thing you want to keep tucked far  
away from anything you care about. Deep space 
is a good place to banish your nightmares to,  
compared to uninhabited solar systems rich 
in exploitable material they might consume  
before making a return visit home.
Note that these are cases for single people,  
or AI, probably not couples or small families 
as that implies at least a limited fondness  
for social interaction, and solo operations 
are likely to be rare when it comes to trust,  
not many of us are going to picture the most 
trustworthy person and think ‘how about that  
ultra-reclusive guy hanging out in the hills?’. 
So, such a place might be engineered by that  
person and occupied by their choosing. Think of 
Doctor Morbius from the sci-fi classic: Forbidden  
Planet, studying the vanished Krell as the lone 
survivor of colonists, except his daughter,  
and having no desire for company even 
to help, nor trusting them to help.  
Or Freeman Lowell from the film: Silent 
Running, who is the self-appointed  
guardian of a spaceship dome with the last 
forest in it, after he kills his crewmates,  
excluding the simple robots Huey, Dewy, and Louie, 
who keep him company before he nukes the place.
 
Of course, when we’re talking about lone 
occupants, we might also mean artificial  
intelligence or uploaded minds or transhumans, and 
we also might mean a large computer intentionally  
sighted in deep space to allow it to remain as 
cold as possible to maximize computing efficiency.  
So, another thing we might find in deep 
space is huge archives or virtual worlds,  
places designed to be able to run on some 
internal powerplants for half of eternity, either  
storing digital copies of minds on ice, safe 
even from Supernovae, or active digital minds. 
 
Truth be told, I would expect this to be one of 
the more common examples of deep space habitats,  
as people running in a virtual community, or 
running on various shared or private virtual  
worlds, really only want to be synced with 
the rest of civilization for patches and  
updates and possibly the occasional shipment 
of raw materials, specialized gear, or reactor  
fuel. All of which can either happen at light 
speed or by some automated slow moving boat  
working its way out there once a century.
Detector Grids are another one of those things  
you would expect to be all over deep space, 
and if they’re active arrays then whatever is  
powering them, be it beamed-in power or locally 
generated, is likely to be a lot more than you  
need for running a small habitat. Mind you, you’re 
not necessarily going to have some telescope  
hundreds of kilometers long that’s got a small 
cylinder habitat attached to it, it’s probably  
going to be set a ways away, possibly millions of 
kilometers, but in scale, that’s like saying you  
put a telescope on the tallest hill or mountain 
in every country or larger state or prefecture,  
and its service personnel lived at 
the bottom of that hill or mountain. 
 
Same for weapons platforms, especially as you 
probably want those moving slowly but perpetually,  
like submarines, making them hard to track. 
One example would be bomb-pumped lasers,  
only scaled up a lot, where its just a big tube 
with a bomb at the end, and a receiver, and maybe  
a tiny RTG to run it, floating round space waiting 
for an activation code and firing solution, then  
it quickly turns that way, detonates its nuke, and 
microseconds later, itself as the bomb, generates  
that one-shot fire-and-forget super-powerful 
laser, see Project Excalibur for more details. 
 
I should note that this is more likely to be 
how a minefield in deep space would operate,  
rather than a classic bomb waiting for contact. If 
you do have bombs in space you’re exploding them  
with the intent of their debris clipping a vessel 
moving through the area at relativistic speeds  
with space debris, and its own inertia is going 
to make those fragments nuclear in strength.
 
Those telescopes we discussed are not really 
for scientific value in most systems either,  
we’re talking military defense or economic 
usage. Our solar system might one day have  
deep space telescopes to be used for 
astronomy of the Universe around us,  
out in the Scattered Disc and even the 
Oort cloud, I’m honestly sure we will,  
but in a colonized galaxy of half a trillion 
star systems in the year 1 million AD,  
there’s not likely to be a lot of astronomy left 
to do strictly for scientific aims, and you’re  
looking around to get advanced notice of war 
fleets or incoming trade freighters, or to try to  
get faster information on distant systems before 
it would arrive by relays, which would not always  
be moving in one straight line, information that 
might be very valuable to whoever gets it first.
 
So, you might be occupants of a cylinder 
habitat that’s out in the middle of nowhere,  
owned by a nation or corporation or some of 
your citizens or in some egalitarian trust.  
The habitat might be getting its expenses paid 
for by trade or subsidy by some group or nation  
back home or a thousand different nations and 
defense conglomerates in the inner system,  
close to your Sun, maintaining their detectors 
and space mines and fire-and-forget lasers for  
your region of nowhere, and making extra cash on 
the side sending hot tips to the merchant cartels.  
You probably take your payment in whatever you 
don’t provide locally, which might be fuel,  
raw materials or hard to replicate items for your 
industrial base, or it might just be raw data,  
entertainment to watch and schematics 
for your 3D printers to print. 
 
Or maybe it’s how you pay your space 
taxes. I’m sure those will still be around,  
whether it’s the year 2100 or 21 
Million AD. I suspect even Hive Minds  
would find some reason for them to exist still.
I’m not sure where people will tend to draw the  
boundaries on solar systems but I’m guessing when 
tax time comes around, they’ll be a lot broader  
with where those boundaries lie. Which amusingly 
means there’s probably somebody whose job it is to  
fly out to space habitats that have gone off the 
grid and got delinquent on their space property  
taxes. If history is any guide, the job of a 
taxman visiting isolated spots to collect-up  
is a risky one to say the least. I’d also wonder 
what the property tax equivalents will be.  
Maybe on volume, maybe on volume but dependent 
on the local density of the interstellar medium,  
maybe on surface area in terms of solar cross 
section, how much sunlight you get, so to speak.  
Maybe some volumes, like those directly between 
two stars, or rich in gas, have much higher rates.  
A barren asteroid the size of a mountain might 
be a proverbial gold strike, but the property  
tax on it might be huge and prevent casual 
colonization by an individual or small group.
 
Now, what’s your community doing out there? Well 
of course they might just be folks who migrated  
to where there’s a living, though traditionally 
heading off to the middle of nowhere isn’t the  
best option for finding a way to make a living. 
Still, people do get paid to live in Alaska,  
in the form of getting an even share of their 
oil royalties to encourage people to move there  
and stay, and there’s been a lot of programs down 
the centuries to encourage people to migrate to  
places, free land or subsidy for instance. And 
penal colonies too, something we examined more  
in our Space Prison Colonies episode. Getting 
chased out into exile is pretty common also,  
though I think we’ll discuss that scenario 
more next week in Intergalactic Sanctuaries.
 
Let’s close by looking at a sample deep space 
habitat and its history and development, so  
we can look at a few technology and size levels. 
We’ll name this station: Deep Space 9,876,543,210,  
or Deep Space 10 or DS-10 for short. It’s not 
a very important station, it is 16 light years  
from Earth, roughly north of our solar system in 
the Constellation Ursa Major in the halo regions  
of Groombridge 1618, a dim orange dwarf star about 
two-thirds of the mass of Sol, our own sun. DS-10  
is about 3 light months from Groombridge 1618, 
a star of little consequence but considered well  
inside the inner sphere of human civilization by 
the time DS-10 was founded in the year 4022 AD  
and most star systems within 100 light years 
had colonists at them or en route to them. 
 
Most of our founders came from a few of the 
relay stations between Groombridge and AD Leonis,  
a red dwarf also north of Sol with whom 1618 does 
minimal trade and who got first dibs on a space  
rock mostly made of ices about 20 kilometers wide 
and about three light weeks from the nearest of  
those relay stations. Back when we started we had 
a mining colony that was less interested in actual  
mining than securing long-term rights, and while 
there are thousands of different stellar empires  
in the 41st century, the standing custom is 
that you’ve got to live there and work the  
place and that the scope of your claim can’t be 
wildly beyond what you can exploit if you want  
exclusivity. Which is to say, in the 41st century, 
if you land a thousand colonists on a nice planet  
like Mars, other folks are free to land on 
a different continent of that planet too. 
 
So, when the call went out for colonists for 
the rock, a lot of people migrating down those  
relay lines signed on, some individuals, some 
families, a few large groups of shared cultural  
or ideological background and DS-10’s main hab 
drum walls got manufactured from existing material  
reserves at one of the relay stations and credited 
out of North Sol Pioneer Fund. Most relay stations  
keep a few sections of standard 250 meter radius 
hab drum around as its fairly standard in size,  
your classic 2 RPM hab, and relay stations are 
often expanding or they supply nearby deep space  
stations or even passing ships needing repair 
or wanting to expand. The mid-air refueling  
equivalent of trying to get people, fuel, and 
supplies to ships hurtling by at a decent fraction  
of light speed is an impressive and dangerous art 
that most relay stations practice for hefty fees.
 
The Sol System has a lot of space nations 
and investor funds that do long term loans  
with payments that they take in cash or kind, 
usually preferring volatiles to be used in the  
vast habitats swarms around Sol. Sol itself mostly 
pays for stuff with vast supplies of information,  
entertainment, and technology, but 
tends to be a big importer of raw mass  
and they basically charged our ancestors a 
thousand times the mass of the habitation drum  
and other gear we got due at the nearest 
relay station no later than year 4322,  
a 30 decade mortgage basically, but truth 
be told that’s a pretty good deal for us,  
our hab drum is about 4 square kilometers of area 
or 1000 acres and masses in at 4 megatons, a very  
basic shell we will install inside the icy rock 
that becomes DS-10. We owe the NSPF 4 gigatons  
of ices, but that’s about a tenth of a percent of 
the mass of our new home, so, not a bad deal. 
 
We have a good old deuterium-deuterium fusion 
reactor, a time-tested design that’s been in use  
since the 26th century and indeed we got our 
reactor used with just 9300 kilo-hours of  
operating time, and it can be run at anywhere 
from 1 gigawatt up to 100. Literally billions  
of these things have been manufactured down the 
centuries, a super reliable design improved with  
time and practice. Many of them built in the 
Chandelier Cities of Neptune itself, like ours,  
though our serial number is 0000010, which we’ve 
decided is good luck and adds vintage value. 
 
Back when it was first settled, there were just a 
couple hundred folks on DS-10 and a couple hundred  
more that filtered in during that first decade 
and they’re mining out ice mostly to get to the  
rock below and pay for other things the colony 
will need. Megatons of raw materials head back  
along the relay lines every day and we may be 
loaned out at an exorbitant rate to get our  
drum and claim licensing, but they pay well for 
more of it. We just wanted to make sure we had  
plenty down the road to keep Reactor 0000010 
running for thousands of centuries to come,  
though the reactor’s warranty appears 
to have expired in the year 2522.
 
Flash forward to the year 4322 and we’re 
no longer a 20 kilometer-wide iceball,  
but a foil covered sphere a bit larger than 
the original rock with our original habitat,  
and our rock has a lot of smaller habs and 
facilities in it, with an effective living  
area about the size of an O’Neill Cylinder keeping 
our reactor running near its top setting, and now  
that loan back to the NSPF is paid off, our local 
government can afford to buy a second reactor for  
our populace of 50,000 folks, themselves a mix of 
regular humans, cyborgs, posthumans, and a small  
colony of uplifted walruses. In addition to the 
50,000 living on DS-10, there’s a few thousand  
more living on smaller stations nearby, just light 
hours away, or spaceships that collect smaller  
icy rocks or care for our section of the relay 
detector grid. We have an array of powerful lasers  
that can be used for self-defense, slowing or 
speeding ships locally like the little brother of  
a true relay station, and for vaporizing dangerous 
debris if it can’t instead be claimed and used.
 
Come the year 5022, we’ve melted, smelted 
and imported until we have become a big giant  
soccerball-shaped buckyhabitat, 160 kilometers 
wide, composed of 90 O’Neill Cylinder Habitats,  
each 8 kilometers in diameter and 32 long, 
arranged as the edges of our soccerball habitat.  
Inside the protective superstructure, we have 
many smaller space farms, some private habs that  
are smaller than the original habitat, and lots of 
gas and metal storage. We now run on a trio of 10  
Terawatt hydrogen fusion reactors. We are 
home to 10 million folks, though we could  
comfortably house 10 times that, and are the 
largest habitat within two light weeks. 
 
Cargo ships coming in from the vast wispy gas 
nets that suck up ionized matter in our territory  
bring new fuel and material in every day by the 
ton and we currently have 200,000 gigatons of  
hydrogen on hand to feed our reactors. Based on 
current consumption, which is about 2 kilograms  
of fuel a minute, or 1000 tons a year, that would 
let us keep the lights on for 200 billion years.  
So we’re definitely thinking of the long term 
here, inside our 100 mile wide habitat in space. 
 
We have a claim on everything within 12 light 
hours of our base, a radius of 26 billion  
kilometers, and we estimate that includes 
about 10 million gigatons of gas and dust,  
more than 50 times what we have stored in our 
tanks thus far. That stuff is not stationary as  
it migrates around the galaxy slowly, but these 
days, with colonization going strong and colonies  
successfully started hundreds of light years 
away, it is assumed colonization will keep going  
and eventually almost every bit of matter in 
the galaxy will be in active use or in storage,  
rather than floating around. Except dark 
matter, but there’s plans for that too.
 
Now it’s the year 20,022 and our population 
on the further expanded DS-10 has long since  
stabilized to one billion people, many digital, 
many not particularly human in appearance,  
many thousands of years old. We have a black 
hole power generator running in our basement  
that we feed matter into at a rate of roughly 
3 grams per second or 100 tons per year and we  
have over a million gigatons on hand these days, 
enough to run our civilization of a billion for 10  
trillion years. We’re still the biggest habitat in 
our area, and a sovereign state in our own right,  
but we’re considered part of the greater 
Groombridge-1618 Metro Stellar Community,  
which itself is home to many quadrillions. In 
the outer reaches of the system, we’re in the top  
1000 largest deep space communities, and one of 
the million largest deep space communities in  
settled space. Not including all the megahabs of 
the Sol System’s Kuiper Belt and Scattered Disc. 
 
The future looks bright for at least the next 10 
trillion years and there’s rumors back on Earth  
they’ve figured out how to economically capture 
dark matter, which would vastly expand available  
black hole fuel especially for deep space habitats 
like ours, since dark matter is evenly spread  
through space throughout the galaxy. A cubic 
light day almost anywhere in the galaxy would have  
nearly 100 million gigatons of dark matter in it, 
enough to keep us lit for a quadrillion years.
 
And there’s rumors about dark energy collectors 
being discovered, but you know what they say,  
dark energy is the energy of 20 millenia from 
now, and always will be. In the meantime,  
even though the nearest star is light months 
away, and barely visible to the naked eye,  
the future is pretty bright for those living 
from any sun, in the eternal night.
 
So we were talking about deep space today and 
we mostly focused on what that looks like in  
our little corner of the galaxy, but there are 
places where things are much thinner or thicker,  
like the Orion Nebula or horsehead Nebula or 
many more. Nebulae are fascinating places,  
often the birthplace of stars, and there’s a great 
episode, Cosmic Front: The Orion Nebula, over  
on Curiositystream that shows us Orion and many 
other Nebulae in beautiful and informative ways.
 
Speaking of Nebula, last month we released Planets 
vs Megastructures, a companion video to our  
two-hour episode, The Megastructure Compendium, 
that’s exclusively available over on Nebula along  
with our Coexistence with Aliens series. If you’ve 
managed to finish up the Megastructure Compendium,  
you’ll enjoy Planets versus Megastructures.
Nebula is our streaming service created to give  
youtube creators more flexibility and not be at 
the whim of Youtube’s algorithms for our content,  
or any other platform. It is the largest 
creator-owned streaming service in existence,  
and all of SFIA’s content is up there, ad and 
sponsor free, and released a couple days early.  
We also release an extended edition or two 
every month, and have some exclusive content  
like our coexistence with aliens series, and 
now, Planets vs Megastructures. It’s a great  
way to help support some of your favorite 
channels while getting ad free content. 
 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself but 
we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational videos 
like Cosmic Front: The Orion Nebula. That lets us  
offer Nebula for free as a bonus if you sign up 
for CuriosityStream using the link in our episode  
description. That lets you see the amazing content 
on Curiositystream and Nebula for less than $15  
a year, just use the link in 
the episode’s description.
 
All right, that wraps us up for today but 
we’ll be back this weekend for our mid-month  
Scifi Sunday episode, Primitive Aliens, and the 
challenges of interacting with them, on July 10th.  
Then next week we’ll continue our tale of galactic 
colonization with a look at seeking to escape to  
Extragalactic Sanctuaries on July 14th, and we’ll 
see just how enormous a challenge that can be and  
what almost incomprehensible resources those 
hunting for you might have at their fingertips.  
Then we’ll return to the Fermi Paradox to 
ask where all these enormous habitats and  
megastructures we discuss on the show might be 
and what their apparent absence indicates about  
the Universe. After that we’ll look at two of 
the most mysterious things in our Universe,  
Black Holes and Dark Matter, and if 
dark matter might be black holes.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social  
media forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
