As we peer out into the night sky and wonder 
if there are intelligent minds beside humans on  
other planets, is it possible that we will 
elevate other minds here on this planet,  
and lift them up with us to the heavens above?
In science fiction we often see encounters between  
advanced civilizations and those which are more 
primitive, sometimes those primitives are modern  
humans, in the technological sense, and sometimes 
they’re only modern in the biological sense,  
where we see a visit to a stone age civilization. 
There’s a lot of reasons to wonder if such an  
encounter might end badly for one or more of those 
parties, even if the more advanced civilization  
is not hostile to them, but today we’ll be 
considering the case where that civilization  
seeks to uplift the more primitive one.
The term uplifting comes to us from scientist  
and sci fi writer David Brin, in his 1980 
novel Sundiver, the first book of his Uplift  
Saga that deals with the ethics and morality of 
uplifting other species. In that series, every  
other civilization in the Galaxy has some other 
civilization that was its patron and uplifted it,  
and humanity is the odd case out in that we 
arose without any known benefactor and had  
uplifted a couple of other species native 
to Earth before encountering any aliens. 
It’s an excellent look at the topic of 
what the relationship might be like between  
patron and client species and the conundrums 
involved, and while we’ll cover those today,  
I strongly recommend giving it a read. This also 
isn’t our first look at uplifting on the show,  
and we covered it in our two-parter on Uplifting 
featuring John Michael Godier a few years back. 
Today I want to zoom in on the ethics of 
us doing this. But first let’s review the  
concept and its categories quickly. In the past 
I’ve broken uplifting into 3 major categories,  
Neurological, Technological, and Biological or 
Physiological, and those remain our big three but  
I’m going to add in 4 more special cases: Cultural 
Uplifting, Ecological Uplifting, Non-Darwinian  
Uplifting, and Post-Biological Uplifting too. 
We’ll cover all 7 quickly, alphabetically,  
and with a fictional example and then move 
into reasons for uplifting and how you do it,  
both in terms of the method and if you’re raising 
a species or small group to serve as guardians  
or ambassadors. Once we flesh out the landscape, 
we’ll contemplate the ethical dilemmas generally,  
but I’ll raise some for each category as we go.
Biological or Physiological Uplifting is the  
process of altering an existing organism 
to be better able to use technology,  
and an example here wouldn’t be altering a 
dolphin to be smarter, but giving it hands  
to manipulate tools. We often imagine this in 
conjunction with one or more types of Uplifting,  
but by itself it contemplates altering an already 
intelligent creature simply to be better able  
to use technology. And that could be hands for a 
dolphin or even lungs for intelligent marine life  
who would then walk onto land and presumably soon 
discover fire. It is quite possible that there are  
a lot of oceanic planets out there where critters 
kept getting smarter but couldn’t discover fire,  
and indeed grew much smarter than modern 
humans, so that very quickly after being  
brought on land they work it out and explode 
onto the galactic scene as super-geniuses. 
This is a case where it is possible to ask 
the species if they’d like to be uplifted,  
as their inherent intelligence means they can 
discuss the probable outcomes. Indeed, it’s a  
good one to begin framing our ethics conversation 
as it not only let’s consider if we should ever do  
uplifting involuntarily but if we can assume there 
are cases where we could meaningfully ask. Also,  
what the consequences of uplifting a species might 
be if it’s smarter or more fertile or aggressive  
than we are. Is it appropriate to uplift an animal 
or alien and reduce its fertility so it no longer  
breeds dozens of young every year or is less 
aggressive. And when would such changes start to  
transition them from being your client species 
or new friends you mentor into a slave race? 
Cultural Uplifting is perhaps the one we 
most tend to think of when worrying about  
concepts like the Star Trek Prime Directive or 
drawing parallels to our own historical colonial  
periods. We tend to regard us showing up to visit 
distant stone age cousins on some island as the  
beginning of a technological uplifting and this 
is not the full extent of what tends to happen,  
nor generally what folks of later generations 
have complaints about. Technology all by itself  
absolutely causes social and cultural changes 
but mostly later generations aren’t upset that  
you gave them metalworking or modern medicine, 
they’re ticked that something has supplanted or  
even erased their culture and traditions.
And yet while it has a decidedly negative  
connotation these days, I think we still need to 
consider it a form of uplifting – it’s ethics not  
withstanding – but it is ethics we’re focused on 
today and so we probably need to acknowledge that  
simply calling cultural uplifting a bad thing or 
a false form of uplifting is a bit too much of  
blanket approach. We might imagine coming across 
an alien civilization where they still regularly  
engaged in human sacrifice – or alien sacrifice 
- as indeed did happen occasionally in our own  
colonial era and not many folks think interceding 
to stop or at least discourage that was wrong. We  
can make a case we should keep our nose out 
of it and have no business stopping them but  
I would have a hard time saying someone was evil 
or wrong to go and encourage these aliens to stop. 
Though as a word of caution, if you find yourself 
reasoning that all morality is subjective and the  
aliens engaging in mass alien sacrifice have their 
own ways and morality, keep in mind that argument  
is fine except it leaves the same exception for 
any of us deciding that by our ethics landing  
legions of occupying forces to stop them is 
proper. It’s a bit hypocritical not to extend the  
same card to your own civilization. If it’s wrong 
to tell those aliens to stop murdering their own,  
then it’s also wrong to tell the Klingons 
to stop invading them or the Ferengi to stop  
ripping them off, and it’s wrong to tell some 
independent human colony not to do it either,  
or even our own folks. And strictly speaking, 
this line of reasoning doesn’t leave a lot of  
room for a meaningful definition of right 
or wrong or good or evil anyway. It’s a  
bit dubious to say morality is subjective, 
then start condemning any given behavior. 
That said, I think most of us tend to assume 
caution and restraint is the course of wisdom  
in regard to poking your nose into another 
civilization’s business these days and even on  
fairly extreme cases like ritual sacrifice caution 
is wise. In Orson’s Scott Card’s classic novel,  
Speaker for the Dead, a human colony finds their 
new world is already occupied by a primitive but  
intelligent race, nicknamed the Piggies. When the 
colonists realize their intelligence, they put a  
big fence around their settlement and restrict 
human expansion on that world beyond there. This  
is enacted with no complaint from the colonists 
who are not thieves and have no desire to take  
that planet from these new found intelligences. 
They will remain but not expand. There’s debate  
about contact with the Piggies, who do want 
that contact themselves but are very friendly,  
and there’s some limited anthropology, which 
shows they ritually sacrifice some of their own  
and take guidance from the equivalent of tree 
spirits. This anthropology is banned after the  
anthropologist is sacrificed, but his apprentice 
does it anyway, is met warmly by the Piggies, and  
gets himself sacrificed later too. Tensions rise.
That’s essentially the intro to the story and  
it’s too good to spoil, though I must partially to 
make the point. Skip ahead about 60 seconds if you  
want to avoid that. 3… 2… 1… Spoilers. The Piggies 
are not ritualistic butchering themselves because  
they’re primitives who worship bloodthirsty 
trees. Rather those trees are sentient and  
basically their mature butterfly form, when they 
die their organs plant themselves and they grow  
into a sentient tree, but when properly dissected 
and planted, they are a lot more likely to turn  
into a wise and talkative father trees. So, it’s 
an honor given to their most wise and respected,  
and they gave it to the two anthropologists. They 
assumed they messed it up the first time when no  
tree came and when the protagonist explains to 
them that we don’t turn into wise trees, we just  
die, they react with utter horror and shame at the 
realization they murdered innocent humans who were  
also heroes to them... a heroism mostly obtained 
by illegally sharing technology with them. 
That’s a good reminder that we rarely 
see the locals being asked about how  
they feel about the prime directive in Star 
Trek, but we’ll return to that in a bit. 
Ecological Uplifting is a broad category and 
to continue from our fictional example of the  
Piggies from the novel, Speaker for the Dead, 
their improbable-seeming biology seems to be  
the byproduct of a heavy handed example of 
either terraforming or ecological uplifting  
by another alien race encountered later in the 
series. This is also implied in a lot of sci fi  
like the Alien Franchise in the film Prometheus, 
where the creation of advanced life comes from  
aliens seeding Earth with some primitive life 
intended to evolve to intelligence one day. We  
see the same in the late-season Star Trek: The 
Next Generation Episode “The Chase'' where they  
hunt around the galaxy for some greater blueprint 
or message in various alien DNA that they think  
is going to be the blueprint for some advanced 
technology but instead is just a recorded video  
of a vaguely humanoid alien claiming to be 4 
billion years old and from a race that seeded  
the whole galaxy out of loneliness, and that’s why 
so many of the species in Star Trek are humanoid. 
Now seeding life that long ago is mostly an 
example of sci fi writers having no sense of  
scale, but we might imagine an alien race 
finding a galaxy full of lifeforms with  
some brains but nothing anywhere near 
human intelligence and tinkering with  
their environment to cause that to arise. For 
example, we think predator-prey relationships  
are the main engine driving the development 
of intelligence so you could craft a world  
that distinctively favored intelligence. Plants 
whose fruit was obtained by patient calculation  
or grew into hedge mazes with safety and food 
in abundance in the center of the labyrinth. 
This is a very broad category and has no 
unique ethical issues that come to mind.  
You are tampering with an entire ecosystem but 
that’s generally implied in other cases too,  
with some exceptions. I could also imagine aliens 
encountering a planet and deciding to build space  
habitats around it as nature preserves and those 
being tinkered with to allow a habitat more of  
the size of a county than a continent to be 
comfortably and sustainably self-contained.  
And you might have several of the same 
regional ecosystem and have slightly different  
variables in each which might cause profoundly 
different evolutionary paths to be followed. 
Ecological Uplifting can be cases where you 
encounter a planet with little to no land and  
engineer some islands or even introduce some 
parallel to coral or floating trees to make  
large raft islands. But it also runs hazily into 
neurological uplifting, in purpose, if we were to  
contemplate something like a planetary hive mind 
or even a regular but sentient mind made of an  
insect hive, where the insects themselves are no 
more the organism and mind than our neurons are,  
and their hive is essentially a large 
computer or brain, one that mind even find  
its components rather icky much as we often 
find with our own brains and other biology. 
Neurological Uplifting is what’s implied in most 
cases of Uplifting in fiction as it means you’re  
taking some already clever animal and rebuilding 
it much smarter. Your dog or dolphin made smarter.  
Also worth noting that uplifting doesn’t 
necessarily mean you made them as smart as you  
are. Many might be happy with dogs a bit smarter 
than now but may not be looking for a species  
smart enough to have existential dread or want to 
move out when it grows up or demand voting rights.  
Just something smarter than now, though that might 
result in a gradual improvement, especially as  
some might feel they were ethically obliged to 
make their smart dog smarter and independent. 
I would say a fair amount of existing intelligence 
in the organism is implied, as while you might  
make something intelligent from something mostly 
or completely without a brain – super-intelligent  
lobster or even a tree – you are in the range 
where you’re not so much rebuilding and upgrading  
the brain as the entire biology of the creature.
Note that this is identical in outcome to if we  
stick a brain enhancing computer chip in 
someone’s head but distinct in method,  
in the sense that you’re upgrading the biology. 
Your mileage may vary on which is more preferable,  
a chip in your head or a bigger head. We 
also see headgear that makes someone smarter,  
as with the dog in Rick and Morty or the 
chimp in Futurama. Also note that this  
isn’t just intelligence, and we would more broadly 
include tinkering with behavior as part of this. 
If critters are fairly smart but prone to get 
anxious or aggressive around each other, you  
might add some brains but also tweak that instinct 
so that they are able to form bigger and more  
functional tribes, as a prelude to civilization. 
And this might include options that weren’t  
terribly likely to arise by normal evolution.
Non-Darwinian Uplifting would be examples where  
you are making some change to an organism’s 
mind or body which we would never expect to  
evolve naturally. And again, this can be something 
physical or mental and an example of the latter  
might be a passive species. Generally, nature 
encourages aggression over passive behavior,  
but we’ve bred a lot of our livestock for the 
latter and it’s often suggested a species might  
be altered to be less aggressive to either curb 
their warlike tendencies, or turn them into a  
more servile client or slave race. Lowering 
their fertility rate might be an example too,  
especially if it’s not being done with 
the intent of allowing the quality over  
quantity reproduction strategy humans and other 
large animals with long maturation periods use.  
This can also include working in strange 
traits that would be overly-specialized  
so as to never evolve in nature.
On the physical side, we get the example  
of the G’Kek from David Brin’s Uplift Saga, who 
in addition to having four eyestalks from the  
top of their body also have wheels and pusher 
legs. The wheel is a simple device to design,  
one of the six devices classified as the 
simple machines along with the lever, pulley,  
inclined plane, wedge, and screw, but while a 
simple machine and an amazing means of locomotion,  
it isn’t one we would expect to evolve naturally, 
and the same for pulley. We might also imagine a  
species being given a modification to better 
handle surface radiation so they could move  
out of sheltered caves by giving them the 
ability to grow lead skin and not be made  
sick in the process of eating and processing it.
Technological Uplifting is giving intelligent  
aliens technology and is often intertwined with 
Cultural Uplifting but what we basically mean  
is showing a stone age civilization how to make 
metals or an iron age civilization how to make a  
computer. It is very hard to avoid cultural 
uplifting by accident, as dropping working  
blueprints for a device is likely to still cause 
those changes, even though you didn’t even speak  
to them. Indeed this is even done intentionally 
in the novel Life, the Universe, and Everything  
by Douglas Adams to turn the peaceful people 
of the planet Kricket into homicidal lunatics  
by giving them blueprints for a spaceship.
It’s probably the most debated type of Uplifting  
as it clearly reminds us of some less than 
admirable moments in our history, but one that  
doesn’t get raised very often is the conundrum of 
why it's wrong to give technology to other groups.  
In sci fi this is usually a handwave to allow 
super-powerful aliens to show up in the story,  
push everyone around rather smugly, then explain 
that they knew from experience giving technology  
away was wrong and thus the next episode of the 
show need not handle the ramifications of all that  
new technology hitting Earth. I appreciated that 
in Stargate SG-1 the protagonists often called  
advanced aliens out for this dubious copout.
Now those ramifications are very real and very  
definitely legitimate points of ethical 
discussion, but I think we are very bad  
about drawing a line on why it’s wrong for 
an alien to give us technology but not one  
of our own scientists. Or why science or 
technologies only one person invented and  
only a tiny portion of our population actually 
understands, is somehow okay for us to use? 
If an alien who gives us technology shouldn’t 
give their opinions on ethics, then should the  
same apply to scientists and innovators on 
Earth? Unsurprisingly as a techno-optimist,  
I tend to find discussion of civilizations being 
too primitive to use a given technology safely,  
a bit of an artificial delineation. Why are 
you or I in any way entitled to technology a  
given human invented and some alien entitled 
to the science some other alien invented,  
and somehow safer to use it? The answer of 
course is that we were raised around it and  
we have long-term evidence of how it impacts or 
messes with our civilization or culture already,  
but that’s a very weak argument for not offering 
it to the others, when you can also offer them  
all your lessons learned and warnings. It’s also 
a slippery-slope fallacy in that me showing some  
tribe how to make iron does not mean I need to 
show them how to make hydrogen bombs a year later. 
But scifi does give us a lot of good reminders how 
this sort of help can have negative ramifications,  
that tribe now equipped with iron goes and 
slaughters its bronze-armored neighbors, and we  
have seen civilizations here on Earth gain weapons 
technology from outside, like guns, and use it to  
attack a neighbor. So it's not just an academic 
or hypothetical scenario only seen in sci-fi. 
We explored that in more detail in our Prime 
Directive episode some years back and the  
reasoning is familiar to most scifi fans. 
For our purpose though it is always good to  
remember that all actions, including inaction, 
have consequences, and that while uplifting  
changes a species, all species are constantly 
in change anyway. Biology is not a static thing. 
Of course some folks might use Post-Biological 
Uplifting approaches and this is your brain-chip  
that makes your dog or chimp smarter, again 
like in Rick and Morty or Futurama but also  
you uploading or digitizing a mind to a virtual 
environment. This also includes a suit a dolphin  
could wear that gave it feet and hands for land, 
or cybernetic augmentation that did. I think we  
tend to assume uplifting would be something 
genetic – or even psychic, like ascending an  
individual or an entire race to a higher plane of 
existence, which we could call psychic uplifting,  
and this one is out of alphabetical order 
because it’s more of method than an outcome.  
You could use cybernetics to mimic biological or 
neurological uplifting. If psychic powers exist,  
you could do those that way too I assume. We also 
have technological options of genetic engineering  
or cybernetics versus chemical methods, some 
brain enhancing drug cocktail, or even simply  
education. And to stretch that case, you might 
have an alien that was ultra-fast adapting who  
consumes a bit of DNA and can mimic it or alter 
its own structure, up to ordering its body to  
begin growing more neurons, and could be taught 
to advance itself. Something we often consider  
for non-biologicals like AI, where we assume the 
AI grows smarter on its own or with our help, and  
that is a type of Uplifting too I should think.
Now, why would you uplift a species? Well fiction  
and contemplation offer a number of reasons, some 
more logical than others, though this is a case,  
since we’re talking motivations, where logic 
need not rigorously apply. I might uplift my cat  
because I’m fond of him and I want him to live 
longer – life extension is arguably uplifting  
and certainly at least loosely-correlated. 
I don’t know that I’d make my cat smarter,  
personally, but I’m fond of him because he’s quite 
intelligent compared to most cats I’ve had. I also  
heavily anthropomorphize my pets but I’m nowhere 
near as bad about it as some, so I think we can  
easily imagine folks opting to make their pets 
smarter simply because they wish them to be. And  
I have difficulty seeing that getting allowed 
without objection, or easily banned either. 
You could end up with a hundred cats sub-species 
in a few millennia that include those that were  
baseline cats, baseline in intellect but longer 
lived, smarter, but just enough to work a few  
simple tailored devices, ones of toddler 
intellect and others of half-cat half-human  
form who were nearly as smart as us, and another 
that was as smart, and everywhere in between and  
adjacent to those. Only for the smarter ones is 
there really any need to start thinking of them  
as no longer in the pet or child role where 
we need to contemplate them wanting to vote  
or have their own spaceships and colonies.
On the nastier side, you might be uplifting  
creatures to be smart enough to be servants but no 
more brains or free will then needed to be menial.  
We see this in a lot of fiction, sometimes it’s 
us uplifting primates to be useful workers as an  
alternative to robots, sometimes it’s a conquest 
oriented alien who finds existing races or apex  
animals on new worlds and tailors them to be 
useful servants. The dominion from Star Trek did  
this with their servants the Vorta and Jem’Hadar, 
even intentionally building in weaknesses  
to them for control or leaving out good but 
non-utilitarians traits from cool indifference to  
their servants having them. We also see something 
similar in Mark E. Cooper’s Merkiaari Wars, a good  
military sci-fi that deals with both transhumanism 
and uplifting, and where we see aliens who have  
definitely been altered and engineered to a role 
in wider multi-species caste society and empire,  
which is a common theme in scifi too.
This raises the notion of downshifting, where  
you might alter a species to be less intelligent, 
and less able to organize rebellions or develop  
weapons. John Michael Godier and I discussed that 
in our original episode on Uplifting together,  
I can’t remember which of us coined the term 
downshifting but he presented it as an option  
for a civilization that was not terribly kind but 
not prone to genocide. They encounter a primitive  
race and instead of uplifting those critters, they 
alter them to be less intelligent, or less able to  
use technology. As an alternative to wiping them 
out before they become a threat. This could be  
leaving their brains intact but making them less 
fertile or having a high infant mortality rate,  
like was done to the Krogan in Mass Effect after 
they were uplifted and employed to fight a war  
against a hive mind race of techno-arachnids, the 
Rachni, who were themselves uplifted for use as  
a weapon by another even older race. I loved that 
game franchise except the last 20 minutes of game  
3, and wish Indoctrination Theory had turned 
out to be canon for that game, but I digress. 
Now we keep talking about uplifting races 
or even whole planets but in practice you  
might simply be uplifting small groups or 
individuals, and this might be done as a  
way of creating an ambassador or guardian 
for a race. An alien might abduct a human,  
take them off for some enhancement and training, 
and use them as an ambassador or liaison between  
worlds. Or even more individually, we might 
imagine a civilization with mercantile traders  
running big space freighters between worlds taking 
on or hijacking people from a system to serve as  
their face for negotiations or insights into the 
locals’ minds, and with various augmentation. Or  
you might decide to protect a world or guide 
its advancement by recruiting some individuals  
to be uplifted and then serve as guardians or 
guides for that world’s development. Or even as  
a method of atonement, like if you accidentally 
dumped something dangerous there and wanted to  
give them long term protection against it.
We see something like this in Gary Seven,  
a character from a backdoor pilot episode 
of the original Star Trek series who gets  
a brief mention in the newer Picard series, 
but is an uplifted human whose ancestors were  
abducted thousands of years ago by aliens and 
uplifted to serve as an agent or protector to  
Earth. There’s some interesting and questionable 
canon background on him that implies the planet  
his people come from is the same as the one 
The Traveler from Next Generation came from,  
Tau Alpha C, and have him interacting with Khan 
Noonien Singh, and Khan would be an example of  
self-uplifting, in that it’s a race creating 
a sub-race of its own with superior traits,  
whereas the Deltas or Epsilons from the classic 
novel Brave New World, created to be menials,  
would be an example of self-downshifting.
So that’s the methods, types, and reasons  
for uplifting and I think we managed to 
get most of the key ethical conundrums  
covered while discussing them but 
let’s touch on a few more briefly. 
As I mentioned near the beginning, most 
types of uplifting don’t really assume  
any ability for the organism to give informed 
consent, and many stories have played with the  
uplifted creature feeling resentful of being 
uplifted afterwards. And that would seem a  
big issue with test subjects or if you weren’t 
raising groups of uplifted organisms together  
so that they looked or felt like freaks. Giving a 
dog hands and bigger head is very likely to make  
other dogs dislike that dog too, though as dogs 
already vary a lot in morphology and are used  
to living with other species – frequently not 
just humans but cats, cows, horses, sheep and  
more – they might handle it better than most.
Then there’s the question of if a thing,  
once given, can be removed. If we uplift 
some chimpanzees and they turn treacherous  
and dangerous to us, can we downshift them again 
or is altering them or sterilizing tantamount to  
genocide at that point. Does, “I brought you into 
this world, I can take you out of it” apply. And  
for that matter, do you have the right to remove 
or neutralize your own creations? And do you have  
a responsibility for them? If some lunatic 
made a race of aggressive sentient squid and  
unleashed it on an unsuspecting galaxy where they 
conquered primitive world after primitive world,  
do we have a responsibility to track them 
down and fight them? What if it wasn’t a  
lone lunatic but the past policy of a long-gone 
government, much as slavery was in the past? 
If someone makes a sentient dog who breeds 
more sentient dogs, are we required to give  
them voting rights and citizenship? Should we be 
integrating them into our society or helping them  
establish their own or both? Some might want 
to fly to space and make their own colonies,  
others might want to remain here and expect to 
be able to vote or run for higher office. How  
do we handle separatist canines, or humans for 
that matter, who want their own canine-only or  
human-only colony? What about non-uplifted dogs 
as pets, or partially uplifted ones that were not  
human intelligence? Would the canine be right 
to object to us keeping those as pets or would  
they perhaps like keeping them as pets too, or 
even pay a geneticist to downshift some human  
DNA to make pet humans? Would it be ethical 
for one of the uplifted canines to breed with  
a partially uplifted or baseline dog? What about 
those who would seek to engineer some werewolves,  
half human and half uplifted dog? Or wolf?
Now those all sound pretty disturbing but we  
should be mindful there are other options too, 
like the long-lived and slightly smarter cat or  
dog who is a member of the family for generations. 
Indeed the nature of medical testing is such that  
it is likely the first creature with a vastly 
extended lifespan would be a lab rat followed  
by a number of other animals like cats and 
dogs, long before it got approved for humans.  
A family pet smart enough to mostly take care 
of itself, especially in a fairly automated  
and post-scarcity civilization, and able to live 
centuries at the family home, is appealing to me,  
and I think it raises the question of 
if all of this might be in Inevitable. 
Today we ask about its ethics and its 
mostly academic, a matter of scifi,  
but the areas of improving intelligence and 
lifespan are too critical to humanity’s future  
for us not to experiment with and it is likely 
that will involve many and diverse experiments  
on animals. And we will inevitably trot them out 
– potentially even literally – for all to see the  
progress. And I have problems imagining 
bans on early experimentation or anyone  
ordering the destruction of various celebrity 
uplifted animals, your Mr. Ed’s and so on that  
the labs bring on the talk shows to introduce and 
humanize and ask for more funding and permissions. 
And any rule may last a generation or two in a 
given country but what about that one country  
that will flout the rules to attract laboratories 
and which nobody is willing to invade to make  
stop? And what about after Earth? Out on the many 
planets and space habitats, where we might use  
tailored intelligent organisms as an alternative 
to AI, might we see this develop? Might we see  
gradual increases in pet intelligence 
as generations roll by until gradually,  
in the year 4000 AD, we simply have a number of 
pets who have hit baseline human intelligence? 
Even longer term though, as we head out to 
the stars and need decades for messages to  
get to the nearest outposts and 
longer for responses to arrive,  
will some colonies abandon those restrictions? 
What if they are Uplifting native terrestrial  
organisms or experimenting on simple alien 
life we might find? What would we do about it? 
To be honest I don’t know, my hunch is that 
Uplifting is a Pandora’s Box technology that  
will get opened and will ensure the future galaxy 
is a pretty alien place even if every lifeform in  
it can trace its origins back to modern Earth, and 
we explore that possibility more in our episode  
Galactic Humanity, but as we’re seeing today, it’s 
very likely that humanity will head out in the  
galaxy but not alone, that in many ways it won’t 
be humanity colonizing the stars but Earth and its  
many children, with us just the spark that ignited 
the rocket, and time will tell if that’s a good  
thing or a bad thing. Though I imagine whoever 
is around then to give an answer will say yes,  
it was a good thing, albeit the language they 
use might be a sequence of barks or meows.
We were discussing moving species up, down, 
or even sideways on the evolutionary ladder  
today and if that caught your imagination 
then let me recommend Cell to Singularity,  
a free-to-play science-based game that lets you 
take life from a barren Early Earth era of the  
most basic lifeforms to dinosaurs and all the way 
through to modern animals and humans, then they go  
beyond into our future and out among the stars.
Cell to Singularity’s designers are also fans  
of our show so they take Science & Futurism 
seriously, while also giving the game a compelling  
science fiction flavor. Cell to Singularity is 
easy and free to play on Steam, iOS, and Android,  
and can fit comfortably into your day whenever you 
want to see how much entropy you’ve accumulated  
in the meantime and do some evolution. The 
game is accurate, based on real scientific  
data and research, and just fun to play, whether 
you're on your PC or phone, just search Cell to  
Singularity on Steam, Google Play, or iOS, and 
start uplifting your new civilization today!
As a quick announcement, as we move into the 
New Year we’ll be replacing our last sunday of  
the month Livestream with a regular episode, and 
transitioning toward having 7 episodes a month,  
one each thursday then 2 or 3 others probably 
on Sundays with maybe 5 or 6 shorts a month too,  
the shorts remain a bit of an experiment. 
Technically so was the livestream but we  
ran that experiment for over 5 years, and if 
you missed the last one or want to catch any  
of the 60 live streams we aired over the years, 
they’re still up for replay. We may return to  
doing something live at some point and I do live 
interviews on other folks' shows fairly often too,  
but I prefer our usual format of taking 
my time to write and narrate a script. 
Speaking of experiments, last year I switched 
away from doing extended editions of episodes  
on Nebula to short bonus episodes, and before long 
those became normal length monthly episodes and I  
will begin airing them here on youtube when each 
turns a year old, after they’ve been exclusively  
on Nebula for a year. Those will mostly start 
hitting this summer but we have our first one,  
Conformal Cyclic Cosmology coming up on 
January 28th, and in the meantime we have  
plenty of other episodes. Starting this weekend 
with our scifi Sunday episode, Aliens vs AI,  
to see which is the bigger threat and who would 
win in a conflict between the two. Then next week  
we’ll look at regulating space and in two weeks, 
what Lagrange points are, why they’re so valuable,  
and what settling them might be like.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early and 
ad free on our streaming service, Nebula,  
along with hours of bonus content like Giant 
Space Monsters, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
