This episode is sponsored by Audible.
However often the universe gives birth to
life, intelligence, and civilization, some
civilization had to be the first.
And that lonely, first-to-the-party civilization,
looking around wondering ‘where is everyone?’
might very well be us.
Looking out at the immensity of the Universe
with its billions of galaxies, each billions
of years old and containing billions of stars
and planets, it’s kind of difficult to imagine
we’re all that is, the only place with life
on it.
And yet in the century or so since we started
getting a grasp on how big the Universe is
and searching it for signs of life, we’ve
come up with no strong evidence of any other
civilization.
This we call the Fermi Paradox, the seeming
contradiction of just how big and old the
Universe is and how devoid of life it is.
Or at least of intelligent life making its
presence detectable.
Many explanations have been offered over the
years, but one of the most common is that
life just isn’t that common or at least
rarely manages to reach our current level,
and it would need to be further along a pathway
to space colonization or energy abundance
for us to be able to see or hear them.
We’ve discussed this possible solution and
the reasons for it in our Great Filters Series,
all the various factors that might filter
out candidates at various steps from newly
formed planet to interplanetary species.
This is the explanation I tend to subscribe
to myself, because while I don’t feel the
evidence for it is overwhelming by any means,
it does seem to be the Fermi Paradox Solution
with the most circumstantial and indirect
evidence going for it.
Today we’re going to examine what it would
be like for the firstborn civilization and
what the implications would be if that happens
to be us.
Like a lot of our Fermi Paradox episodes this
will be a longer video as we consider why
so many of us tend to subscribe to this idea,
so you may want to grab a drink and a snack.
And speaking of subscribing, don’t forget
to hit the like button and subscribe to the
channel.
All right, let's start with the reasoning,
and one big flaw in it.
Regardless of how common life is or isn’t,
be it native to nearly every planet or rarer
than one per galaxy, someone had to be first.
This needs some caveats though.
The first is that the place where life first
emerged is not necessarily the place where
it first achieved intelligence, it could have
popped up on some planet where it died off
quickly or evolved slowly or just down some
other path than intelligence, and some later
planet went on to be home to the first brains.
Indeed as we discussed in our episode on Panspermia,
there is an outside chance that back when
the Universe was about a thousandth its current
age and had an average temperature about that
of bathwater, even before the first stars
began, simple life could have emerged in giant
balls of water contaminated with some higher
elements.
This Bathwater Epoch was a fairly short period
of around ten million years starting about
ten million years after the Big Bang, and
very slim on heavier elements since the Big
Bang produced few of them and it was before
any stars and supernovae created them.
But stars and stellar systems begin to form
not long after that.
When bits of ice and dust get caught in each
others’ gravity, gravitational energy is
converted to kinetic energy in the form of
their falling into each other, and that energy
is turned into heat during the collision.
This energy is called the Gravitational Binding
Energy, and the heat it imparts on a newly
formed proto-planet sticks around for quite
a long time.
As we discussed last week in our Summer on
Jupiter episode, the Binding Energy of Jupiter
is equivalent to our Sun’s entire energy
output for a couple centuries.
So you could easily have had a lot of early
failed proto-stars, be it gas giant or brown
dwarf, that stayed quite warm and by sheer
luck absorbed heavier elements from any early
supernova and were able to get the needed
chemicals and warmth for life to form.
This isn’t super likely compared to normal
planet formation, but in something as vast
as the Universe it could easily have happened
a few times, and it would be a huge jump on
life timelines compared to the later metal
heavy terrestrial planets which probably only
started forming in any abundance 6-10 billions
years ago and continued to grow more common
as the abundance of metals arose.
That’s an important point to understand.
Life is a statistics game and we tend to look
for the most probable scenario.
But when you’re discussing that first case,
it is arguably a rather improbable one.
In other words, the universe started out not
fertile for life at all and very slowly became
more so for eons--so the very first life that
ever formed had to have gotten lucky and formed
at a time when the universe was a lot less
conducive to it than it would later be.
Continuing our caveats though, on this notion
that someone had to be first, we also need
to say the first ‘what’, because for the
Fermi Paradox we don’t really care if our
galaxy has a billion intelligent species on
a billion worlds if that level of intelligence
is sub-sapient or just never went the technological
route or blew itself up before we could detect
them or they could spread out to the galaxy.
What we really mean is first interstellar
species, something we could detect or communicate
with now.
There’s also the caveat of what we really
mean by first in a spacetime sense too.
If a species popped up in the Andromeda galaxy
2 million light years away 100,000 years ahead
of us, they still beat us out technically
speaking but we wouldn’t receive any light
or signals from them for another 1.9 million
years, barring the invention of some faster-than-light
communication method.
You could have the jump on everyone else by
a billion years and yet only those folks within
a billion-light-year radius of you would conceivably
be impacted by your emergence.
That is a huge volume but in Universal Scales,
ignoring expansion and just going by the current
size of the Observable Universe, that Observable
Universe is 100,000 times larger than that
billion-light-year radius bubble.
Just to illustrate that idea to scale, let’s
assume the Milky Way contained zero life 6
billion years ago, but there’s a .1% chance
of some life appearing in it in any billion-year
window.
That would mean there’s less than a 1% chance
any life formed before us—in other words
more than a 99% chance that we’re the first.
This probability isn’t static of course,
we’re just simplifying - the probability
would be rising with time as more planets
formed, and more time passed on older planets
for life to emerge and get smart.
Regardless, were that the case, we’d have
expected about a billion civilizations to
have arisen 5-6 billion years back, each with
a thousand entire galaxies to themselves,
but even here most of them would have emerged
into that Early Universe, still a billion
years before Earth even formed, to see a lot
of older and massive Kardashev-3 Civilizations
sitting around already.
Indeed most of them would have been safely
inside the colonization zone of such an earlier
civilization even if they were limited by
sub-light travels times, as you probably can
colonize even other galaxies and do so at
a decent fraction of light speed, see our
Intergalactic Colonization episode for details.
It's a bit hard to guess how fast life would
percolate out but any scenario where we assume
that it does, and can do so between galaxies,
and would also want to do so, pretty much
sees any local region of the Universe totally
colonized by whoever was born first there
before anybody else popped up, unless intelligent
life is ridiculously common, and it is highly
improbable you’d ever have an in-galaxy
colonization war, since galactic colonization
timelines are probably on an order of a million
years.
If life were that common, that two rival civilizations
could emerge in a galaxy in a million-year
window, then the Universe would definitely
be colonized down to every last single rock
by now, which it obviously is not.
So we’re really only contemplating scenarios
where intelligent life is rare enough that
you’ve got at least a galaxy to yourself
on average, and then from the timelines involved
you probably were kicking around space for
a goodly while before you heard from any ancient
empires half a galactic supercluster away.
So we also just mean ‘firstborn’ in a
local sense, someone who began with space
pretty much to themselves.
Now they might know others did exist far away,
which would tend to impact their view of the
Universe, but they’d likely hypothesize
that anyway, even without evidence.
Also, we were talking about Alternate Universes
and Parallel Realities a month back and those
could easily have inhabitants long predating
not just that civilization but that civilization’s
entire Universe, and they are likely to have
theories on that the same as we do, assuming
they haven’t figured out a means of visiting
such places too.
Still, hypothetical knowledge is very different
than proof, even if that proof is merely a
hazy distant detection of an older empire,
and again if they are first on their scene
locally and their nearest neighbor who predated
them was a hundred million light years away
and a 99 million years older than them, they
won’t see them for a million years after
their own emergence, when they’ve already
colonized their entire native galaxy.
Another thing though is that they really aren’t
likely to be surprised.
Unless evolution really does inevitably produce
intelligence wherever it emerges, there should
be a ton of other worlds, some a good deal
older, where non-intelligent life already
was around when you show up.
And even if it does inevitably lead to intelligence,
there would be a ton of worlds that were just
younger than you or slower to develop to that
than you that you’d run across.
And again, the odds of life in a given chunk
of space go up with time, as more planets
form, both from the longer period of time
and the rise of heavier elements as more stars
live and die and exhale their last gasp of
heavy elements to the cosmos.
Plus of course it’s more time for those
worlds that already existed to have life pop
up on them too.
We might hypothesize that the odds of life
emerging in any given region of space 4 billions
year ago – when it emerged here - was a
lot less probable than it is now, and that
evolution to intelligence on Earth happened
as a rather fast outlier compared to the norm,
and that would still leave us in a galaxy
with a ton of other inhabited worlds so that
we wouldn’t be surprised intelligence emerged
elsewhere too.
However, even a species that assumes its intelligence
was unnatural in origin, divinely granted
or an extreme statistical fluke, is still
unlikely to be surprised at eventually encountering
other intelligent life as they’re bound
to have at least contemplated that scenario.
You might say a civilization can’t reach
out to the stars without a good grasp of scientific
reasoning, which is true enough, but more
importantly they can’t have even gotten
to the point of considering science without
having minds configured to run a lot of what
if scenarios.
Indeed it’s quite likely a big chunk of
the survival advantage our brains gave us
– and you have to have that survival advantage
to have big brains as they aren’t cheap
– was the ability to run simulations.
We don’t work by trial and error, we work
by looking at a situation and guessing various
outcomes, by imagining – or simulating – how
they will play out and doing it over and over
again till we find the best option.
That’s the big advantage of a big old brain
capable of abstract thinking before you use
it to make technology, which as handy as it
is, is very recent.
We may have had fire for a million years but
we didn’t make pottery or metal for 99%
of that time and most of our primitive technologies
we associate to Neolithic civilizations is
decidedly high-tech compared to what humanity
had for most of its existence, our big brain’s
big survival edge wasn’t technology, it
was prediction and running hypothetical scenarios.
That’s likely to be the same for alien civilizations
too and “There might be other intelligences
besides ours” is a pretty obvious and probable
one for them to contemplate long before they
had technology, same as we did in the form
of hundreds of mythological creatures from
elves & dwarves to leprechauns & yeti.
So a firstborn species might be rather culturally
shocked by encountering or detecting alien
life, especially intelligent life, but not
to the point of utter surprise and that shouldn’t
last very long in the grand schemes of things.
A generation or two set against countless
ones before and after.
Though a caveat there too.
If your first positive detection of life comes
from some encounter a thousand light years
from your homeworld it's going to take a thousand
years for news to get home, and if you’re
a sprawling interstellar civilization that’s
already colonized a bubble that big, the folks
at the leading edge who first saw that will
have had generations of time to get used to
it already when the folks on the other side
of your civilization get their first shocking
news of the event.
A caveat on that though.
You aren’t likely to just bump into life,
except of the most primitive kind, in the
sense of just landing a ship and going “Holy
heck!
Little green critters”.
That could happen for microbes or life buried
under the ice in some subsurface ocean like
Jupiter’s moon Europa, but otherwise you’ll
be detecting this stuff astronomically.
Either by a direct signal or some waste product
or noise of that life, be it a huge amount
of infrared radiation as the waste heat of
a Kardashev 2 or 3 civilization or as atmospheric
signature of some chemical in abundance, like
a planet having too much oxygen in the air
for a geological process to explain.
That means you’re seeing it astronomically
and while proximity helps, it's more about
the size of your telescope, and we’d expect
those to be biggest and soonest near your
civilizations core, not out on the fringe
edge of colonization.
In all probability if some colony was alerted
to the possible existence of a nearby planet
with simple, non-technological life on it
so they could dispatch an expedition, they’d
probably have been alerted by Earth, far away,
not by their own probes or telescopes.
Light lag on the shock of the news of intelligent
life is an interesting one though, as news
would essentially move out virally in a big
wave, quite possibly with massive cultural
chaos attached.
So what’s this all mean?
Well, science fiction likes to play with the
idea of a precursor race that was the firstborn
and found an empty galaxy or Universe and
was around for a long time.
They often get dubbed precursors not just
for having been first but because they kindled
the other species that came after them in
some way.
It’s a nice notion but not terribly realistic,
at least as normally portrayed.
Sometimes they were lonely and started life
on those worlds to evolve, sometimes they
found primitive life and directly uplifted
it or slowly nurtured it.
Of all of those the direct uplifting seems
most likely because it doesn’t take as long.
Sci-Fi writers frequently have no sense of
scale and it's hard for me to imagine an advanced
civilization, even assuming they were functionally
immortal, to be so patient as to wait around
a few billion years for life to evolve from
some initial effort on their part.
A more realistic scenario might be the one
depicted in Arthur C Clarke's 2001 A Space
Odyssey, in which the aliens uplift a group
of starving hominids, show them some basic
technology like hitting things with sticks,
and then set an alarm to let them know when
these monkeys land on the Moon.
That's still pretty patient, more patient
than I would be, but 3 millions years is a
lot shorter than a billion.
However, if intelligent alien life started
life here in a simple form, it would probably
have been an accident of contamination with
simple microbes or a total negligence or indifference
to garbage or waste disposal.
In sci-fi we’re often seen as the descendants
of such ancient critters, in one fashion or
another, but rarely does that fashion include
saying our creation was from someone flushing
their space toilet and dumping their septic
tank on Early Earth.
Presumably because it is not a very dignified
origin story.
In and of itself, that is a probable enough
event, but it suffers from that scale of time
issue.
As we looked at in Ancient Aliens, the big
issue isn’t that aliens might have visited
in the past, during human history or a billion
years ago.
Rather, it is the question of what happened
to them since then.
This tends to get handwaved to the idea that
all empires fall eventually but this is really
abusing that notion.
We’re not talking about if some nation collapsed
or changed, you’re talking about a species
being wiped out to the last man, or critter.
Empires rise and empires fall, but humanity
has remained and in truth kept growing, appealing
to the idea that empires fall is a concept
mismatch.
And species die out too, but it's because
they got replaced.
As we’ve discussed before in regard to the
Fermi Paradox, stuff like aggressive artificial
intelligence or genetically enhanced supermen
or uplifted monkeys simply replaces those
around, and if they got nearly wiped out by
some event, well even a few thousands years
ought to be enough to recover their numbers
and strength, even if what recovered was very
different from the original.
Indeed, if we’re talking about a precursor
civilization that started us 4 billion years
ago, they could have been utterly wiped out
to the last man, or critter, and still have
returned to galactic rule from that one single
microbe that survived on one single world.
Remember, we currently believe life began
here about 3.8 billion years ago, but it was
around a billion years before that got us
multicellular or photosynthetic life.
Even those microbes were much more advanced
than the original stuff on Earth in our fossil
record so even that one single microbe that
survived a galactic apocalypse could potentially
have evolved back up to sophisticated life
a billion years ago.
The other suggestion, that they might uplift
us, fits better because it can be done quickly.
You find some chimps, or probably anything
alive you feel like if your genetic tinkering
skills are good enough, and you can have a
civilization thriving pretty quickly compared
to natural evolution.
Probably in a single generation, but even
if you were going slow and trying to maintain
continuity to that species and ecology you
were tinkering with, you can do it a lot faster
than in 4 billion years.
Now you don’t have to go fast but you’d
have to ask why you wouldn’t.
What exactly is the advantage of going slow?
Especially if your motivation is curiosity
and loneliness, or a desire to make life spread
because it's rare, in which case a slow effort
risks failure if you die off or your descendants
get bored.
A thousand year project is already a pretty
patient endeavor on human timelines.
The difference between a thousand year project
and a 4 billion year one is the difference
between a task that takes you ten minutes
and one that takes your entire life.
They might be willing to do something like
that but why would they bother if they can
do it in ten minutes?
Now if they really were into long term science
experiments and wanted to see how life evolved,
maybe, though you’d expect them to use a
computer simulation instead which might be
as elaborate and real, practically speaking,
as reality itself.
It's also not an experiment anyone would be
likely to do unless they’d already been
around a long time, so that it at least seemed
plausible they might see it to its finish.
Which would tend to imply they were even less
likely to just be utterly wiped out.
Nor does the notion that they ascended to
a higher plane of existence work very well,
as we looked at in Aloof Aliens.
There’s no reason they’d all have to make
such a migration and at the same time, so
you’d tend to figure there’d always be
a remnant left behind that kept growing and
also was probably composed of folks who didn’t
approve of the idea of ascending and instilled
that disapproval in their own offspring.
However, uplifting because you’re lonely
doesn’t make a lot of sense.
For one thing, it does kind of misuse the
concept of loneliness.
There’s not really a shortage of people
in some ancient star empire and it’s not
likely to be a loneliness for the new.
Such a place is going to be incredibly diverse
to the point of being more alien to each other
than the typical sci-fi alien is to us, as
we discussed in the recent episode Genetic
Divergence and Civilization.
Unless they really put an effort into monolithic
and homogenous civilizations and biology,
and that would have to be something that was
basically ingrained into them rather than
a specific national policy to endure over
that much time and space, which would tend
to imply those folks weren’t seeking out
for diversity in the stars either, except
maybe to find it and kill it.
Now, speaking of that, a precursor race, the
firstborn, might not welcome the rise of alien
civilizations and just sterilize them when
they found them.
However, as we’ve discussed before, if you
want to wipe out alien civilizations when
they’re young, it is rather easy and doesn’t
require waiting till they send out radio signals.
They might be universally genocidal to alien
life, be it technological civilizations or
microbes, or they might just like to wipe
out competition and otherwise leave alien
life be or even cherish it.
If the former, universally genocidal, they
only need to periodically sterilize worlds
when they develop some basic mold and algae
equivalents, say every hundred million years
or so.
Which means hitting around a thousand systems
a year hard enough to sterilize them or blow
their atmosphere off, and that’s well inside
the capacity of even a single-star Karadshev-2
Civilization with a Nicoll-Dyson Beam or relativistic
Kill Missiles.
Sending around probes to find sophisticated
animal life and rain down death on them can
be done for those just wanting to kill competition
off, but of course the easiest way is just
to colonize those worlds for themselves or
disassemble them for raw material, something
we’ll look at next month.
Now this gets contemplated in science fiction
sometimes too, generally in the context of
some ancient species or their mechanical offspring
culling worlds and them finally falling apart
just when its Earth’s turn, so that we get
missed or merely face a decaying menace who
is nearly unstoppable but no longer quite
unstoppable, as we see with the Inhibitors
in Alastair Reynolds’ Revelation Space Series.
An Ancient AI whose specific job is to kill
off any species that leaves its homeworld
to establish a major interstellar empire.
After a few billion years of doing that they
start mutating and decay and more and more
survivors are slipping through or lasting
longer before getting wiped out or contained.
Now it would be improbable that Earth would
be so lucky as to be the first species to
survive such a decaying force culling the
galaxy, but it is essentially the exact same
improbability as being the first to successfully
evolve which is why it makes a reasonably
decent Fermi Paradox Solution.
It does have some additional problems, this
particular version of being firstborn, or
first survived anyway, but it doesn’t have
as many flaws as most Fermi Paradox solutions
and makes for very good stories as it allows
humanity to emerge into an ancient and dark
galaxy of ruin with a reason why we both exist
– as opposed to being such a ruin ourselves
or Earth merely being an alien colony minus
humans – and a dark and terrifying but contestable
enemy to be the Big Bad Guy of the tale, fitting
in very well to the Cosmic Horror sub-genre
of science fiction we see in H.P.
Lovecraft, Revelation Space, Mass Effect,
or Warhammer 40k, where the Big Bad Guy tends
to spend a lot of time sleeping in between
awakening to consume worlds and civilizations.
Of course bad guys are usually only bad guys
from someone else’s perspective, not their
own, where they are often either doing something
from grim necessity or even heroic reasons,
though in the Cosmic Horror sub-genre they’re
often just the incarnation of madness or evil
or the decayed and corrupted remnant of something
once made for noble intent.
Let’s consider a scenario where humanity
was firstborn and ended up being the Big Bad
Guys of the Universe.
It’s conceivable, even probable, we’d
use automated fleets to act as our vanguard
exploring and colonizing the Universe, like
the Seed Ships we explored in our Generation
Ships series episode Seeding the Stars, and
if not, quite probably very dedicated crews
of ships, like the Gardener Ships we also
looked at in that series, in the episode Galactic
Gardening.
Even if we assumed our intent initially was
to colonize everything uninhabited and preserve
any inhabited planet we found, it’s not
hard to imagine the AI on those Seed Ships
mutating or the culture of the Crews on those
Gardener Ships changing over time to a more
hardline approach – wipe out anything they
encounter to make more room for humanity.
That could even be a fear reaction too.
Once it's been done on accident or by a small
minority of bad actors, they might decide
they’ve got no choice but to keep wiping
out everything they encounter and erasing
the evidence so we never found out nor did
any other civilization we encountered.
It's also not too hard to imagine an AI programmed
to follow something akin to Asimov’s 3 Laws
of Robotics, which requires them to protect
and serve humanity, to say that the biggest
threat to humanity was intelligence, and non-human
intelligence would not be under their protective
prohibition, and just start wiping them out.
Indeed they might start attacking any of their
peers who didn’t convert to that perspective.
An AI programmed to protect humans is going
to do that, no matter what, it would not sacrifice
a single human life to save an entire alien
world and would have no problem killing off
that world, or any of its peers, if it believed
they posed even a significant hypothetical
threat to humans.
Of course, you kind of have a duty to consider
such things and make sure they aren’t realistic
options in your probes before you start sending
those out.
That’s something Larry Niven and Jerry Pournelle
point out in the sci-fi classic, “The Mote
in God’s Eye”, in regard to a scientist
objecting to them attacking an alien probe
when it damaged the ship investigating it
because they didn’t know if its intent was
hostile or if the attack was merely an automated
anti-collision defense system firing at what
it might have thought was space debris.
If you’re sending out probes you’ve got
a duty to anticipate that they might encounter
something and put reasonable safeguards in
place, otherwise you don’t send it out.
The same would apply to automated terraformers.
That’s not just to be nice guys either.
Time does not work in the firstborn species
favor in all regards.
In a no-FTL Universe the farther you go from
your homeworld the farther back in time you
effectively are as tech updates and reinforcements
take longer and longer to reach you, while
those you encounter have had more time to
grow.
You might have had your whole region of the
Universe to yourself a billion years before
anyone else emerged but that means your colony
fleets, when they get a billion light-years
from home, are now encountering folks that
are a billion years behind your homeworld
and core systems but not your front wave.
You’re eventually going to run into someone
who can match you as you venture further out
and you’re going to run into that on all
sides.
Though that is something where the expansion
of the Universe might save you.
If you’re first on the scene, then intergalactic
colonization was easier for you as the galaxies
were closer together.
The farther you get from home the faster and
longer stuff is expanding, and I can imagine
some species just saying screw it, convinced
FTL would never be invented after trying for
it for eons and failing, and just trying to
push so far out that when they did meet resistance
on all sides, they couldn’t actually be
taken down because everyone attacking them
would have so many worlds and galaxies to
try to conquer while the Universe was expanding
to make each new front harder to reach.
Plus, they now have the uphill battle, as
they are the ones pushing further from home
and updates and reinforcements into your colonized
worlds which have been growing and receiving
updates from your core systems.
It’s hard enough to imagine wars between
Kardashev-3 true galactic empires, those who
would outnumber us a billion-billion to one
even before considering their higher technology,
but such wars of the kind we just contemplated
are Galactic Supercluster Scale, those fought
over many billions of years and quintillions
of stars.
The problem is, that’s exactly the scale
of civilization you have to contemplate when
pondering a Firstborn Stellar Empire, because
the context implies that they have at least
their own galaxy if not many other galaxies
to themselves when they first emerge and that
means the average time before another civilization
would pop up in that region is so large, many
millions of years at least, that they probably
could have entirely colonized that region
before any other inhabited world in it achieved
space travel.
It's both awesome and terrifying, because
it’s the most probable path for ourselves
based on what we can see.
If interstellar spaceflight and colonization
is both possible and practical, then we will
want to do it, and even if the folks back
on Earth get bored of sending out colony fleets
at some point, those colonies will occasionally
do the same, and over millions of years you
get a galaxy settled, and then the neighboring
galaxies too, as intergalactic space is not
a huge gulf but has tons of stars in it to
serve as waypoints.
No cultural cohesion is necessary, it just
keeps going on because the default nature
of life is to grow and wander off to new places
to grow, and any faction of a civilization
that doesn’t believe that won’t grow while
those that do will, and become the dominant
faction in the process, fueling more growth.
This is essentially the default attitude we’d
expect of any organism that clawed its way
up Darwin’s Ladder.
For that reason we would expect whoever was
firstborn in our region of the Universe to
take that approach, colonizing every further
outward, and if they did not, then more civilizations
would appear native to other worlds and some
of them would take that approach, and before
long would have grown in numbers to outmatch
those earlier non-growing civilizations and
likely soon outmatch them technologically
too, more people, more researchers and engineers
after all.
Because no one seems to have done that, no
one seems to have colonized Earth or neighboring
systems, there is no expanding blob of darkness
in our galaxy indicating a civilization growing
outward and englobing stars in Dyson Swarms
to darken them to our eyes, the Dyson Dilemma
we discuss so often on this show in regard
to the Fermi Paradox.
If that’s the case, maybe it’s because
nobody exists able to do it, yet, and we truly
are the firstborn folks.
And in many ways that’s just as terrifying
as the idea that some elder civilization might
be out there already, because it means there’s
a good chance one day someone else on some
distant alien world will be wondering if they
are alone and the first on the scene, then
we’ll arrive to convince them otherwise,
or our descendants will, and we can only hope
the form that convincing takes is friendly
and helpful, as opposed to some of the darker
alternatives.
To be the first is both a great opportunity
and a great burden, and as of now, it seems
decently plausible that it is our opportunity
and our burden.
At least if and until someone else shows up
on our doorstep to prove that wrong.
I mentioned earlier that one plausible scenario
for a firstborn species that was engaging
in shepherding younger species might be one
that simply only took notice and got involved
when some sign of growing sapient intelligence
got shown to them, in which case they might
only be looking at a million year commitment,
not billions.
That’s a long time but maybe not to something
that’s been around for a billion years themselves
already and there’s no need to assume the
folks doing it are only the species that first
evolved in that region of space.
It could be that they took the view that each
new species deserved fairly minimal intervention
and a place at the table afterwards, getting
a voice in the running of the galaxy and small
bubble of it to call their own, but expected
to continue the policy of keeping an eye out
for new life-bearing worlds and leave those
be, so that the firstborn become maybe more
the galactic police rather than conquerors.
We’ll be exploring that notion a bit next
week in Space Police.
And something like that is rather implied
by the mysterious aliens of Arthur C. Clarke’s
2001 series, especially with their mysterious
note to humanity after they ignite Jupiter
into a second sun, “All these worlds are
yours except Europa.
Attempt no landing there.
Use them together.
Use them in peace.”
Arthur C. Clarke was one of the greatest science
fiction writers who ever put words to paper,
while keeping strongly to the notion that
science fiction should have a lot accurate
science in it, and his 2001 series a great
example of that and is his best known work.
As it inspired this week and last week’s
episode, Summer on Jupiter, it is a great
choice for our Audible Audiobook of the Month.
Clarke wrote a great treasure trove of scif-fi
and you can find the 2001 series along with
all his other works on Audible.
Audible has an amazing catalog of audiobooks
and Audible members can choose 3 titles every
month: 1 audiobook and 2 exclusive Audible
Originals you can’t hear anywhere else,
including access to news, original audio shows,
and guided fitness programs, and since you
can listen to your audiobooks anywhere on
any device, and seamlessly pick up where you
left off, they’re great for commuting, running
errands, or going to the gym.
You can start listening today with a 30-day
Audible trial.
Choose 1 Audiobook and 2 Audible Originals
absolutely free.
Just visit the link in the episode description,
Audible.com/Isaac, or text “Isaac” to
500-500.
So as mentioned, next week we’ll be looking
at the idea of Space Police, both the near
term as we get into orbit and colonize our
solar system, and some far future scenarios
like Galactic Police, as well as some past
scenarios, like Time Police, along with some
of the more peculiar crimes the future might
include.
The week after that we’ll explore Graphene,
the super-strong material that might have
an enormous impact on our civilization and
permit the creation of some truly enormous
space habitats.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, visit our website IsaacArthur.net
to donate to the show
or look over our inventory of roughly 250
episodes or our awesome SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
