This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
It has often been a common belief that our  
world was alive, a superorganism or 
deity. Could that be true? And if so,  
might intelligent technological lifeforms 
flying spaceships be how planets reproduce? 
Earlier this year famous chemist and futurist 
James Lovelock died at the impressive age of  
103. Lovelock also had an impressive amount 
of work, both near term and speculative,  
that he leaves behind, on everything 
from cryo-preservation to geoengineering,  
and worked for MI5, the British Security 
Service, for decades, where he was described  
as “basically Q in the James Bond Films”.
He is probably best known for the Gaia Hypothesis,  
also known as the Gaia Principle or Paradigm, 
which comes in a number of variations these  
days but can be summed up quickly, and mostly 
accurately, as the notion that Earth itself  
is alive and self-regulating, a type of 
superorganism, arguably similar to how  
humans themselves have countless small cells and 
unrelated organisms inside us. That life on Earth,  
its biosphere, in conjunction with its other 
spheres like the atmosphere and hydrosphere,  
have regulated feedbacks to keep Earth optimal 
for life to continue. Such being the case we  
might extrapolate that it happens on 
other planets or the exact opposite,  
that it is a near-unique property of Earth’s 
emergent biosphere and the reason the Universe  
doesn’t seem to have ancient alien empires 
sprawling everywhere, the Fermi Paradox. 
Today we’re going to examine this notion in its 
various forms, the good and the bad for concepts,  
and also ask what it would imply toward 
the galaxy, the fermi paradox, and life,  
the Universe, and everything else. That’s a lot 
of ground to cover so you might want to grab a  
drink and snack before we get rolling, and don’t 
forget to hit those like and subscribe buttons. 
I feel obliged to say from the outset that while 
I’ve always liked the Gaia Hypothesis as a neat  
concept I’m very skeptical on it so as is typical 
for me I’ll try to shelve that skepticism and take  
a more advocative role for it today, though 
we won’t bypass its criticisms by any means. 
Now as mentioned, the Gaia Hypothesis comes in 
many forms so lets start with the original one  
by Lovelock. Emphasis on ‘by Lovelock’ because 
there’s nothing new about speculating that the  
world itself might in some way be alive or even 
conscious. A living world is pretty common in  
mythology of course, the hypothesis derives 
its name from the Greek goddess of the Earth  
who is the mother of everything, and that’s 
a fairly common theme in many mythologies and  
religions under different names. But we see it 
recurring even in modern times and in scientific  
speculation, particularly in the mid-20th century 
when telepathy and group consciousness were  
regularly part of serious scientific discussions.
This presumably influenced the name though Gaia  
Hypothesis was given to it by Lovelock 
at the suggestion of William Golding,  
the Nobel-prize winning writer best known these 
days for the novel Lord of the Flies. Lovelock  
began formulating the concept while at the Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory in 1965, and he had been  
working on ways of detecting life on Mars for JPL.
I’d imagine he was contemplating possible  
biosignatures given the paper he produced, 
“Planetary Atmospheres: Compositional and  
other Changes Associated with the Presence 
of Life”, with C.E. Giffin, as it is about  
how life could be detected at the planetary scale 
by atmospheric chemistry and signatures. He also  
wrote “A Physical Basis for Life Detection 
Experiments” for Nature that year, and it's  
good baseline material for what would emerge as 
our framework for searching for extraterrestrial  
life by atmospheric signatures, something which is 
finally underway nowadays as we grow our catalog  
of exoplanets and ability to exam them in detail.
At the time though we could look at Mars and Venus  
and the papers were basically explaining why 
their atmospheres, contrasted with Earth’s,  
could be taken as strong evidence against life 
being there, especially in any quantity. That  
might seem rather obvious nowadays, when we assume 
any life on either planet, if it exists at all,  
is fairly minimal even compared to a desert or 
tundra, but it was 1965, and the first probe  
of Mars by the Mariner 4 flyby happened that 
summer, no rover or landing, or even orbit,  
and probes of Venus over the few years before 
that had been at best mixed successes. We didn’t  
even confirm Venus had a retrograde rotation 
till 1964 and until the 1960s many folks still  
thought Venus was a paradise planet, because 
of its cloud layer. Now we know those clouds  
are made of acid and the sweltering hot planet 
below is less a paradise than a suburb of hell. 
That’s the state of play when Lovelock first 
proposed the Gaia Hypothesis, and again it had  
some revision over the years, by himself and 
others. Another thing of that era was that the  
term cybernetic still meant any complicated system 
with lots of feedback and regulatory processes,  
like traffic or supplies moving around a city, 
it hadn’t come to be synonymous with people  
with metal limbs or cyborgs, cybernetic organisms, 
another term coined around then. In the book Gaia,  
Lovelock himself explains the principles 
of cybernetics on a simple kitchen oven  
with a thermostat. So a cybernetic Earth or 
Earth with Cybernetic Feedbacks is another  
term in those early discussions that can be 
misleading, and I emphasize that because the  
Gaia Hypothesis tended to attract a lot of 
spiritual or new age elements, but they’re  
not really pertinent to the theory itself.
But it will sometimes get included as the  
Noosphere, a philosophical concept proposed by 
biogeochemist Vladimir Vernadsky and Philosopher  
and Jesuit Priest Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, 
both of whose names I probably just mispronounced,  
as an analogy to the geosphere, biosphere, and 
atmosphere representing the highest development  
of a biosphere’s development, as when humankind, 
or other intelligent life for other planets,  
capable of cognition and technology on conscious 
organization, begins seriously transforming the  
biosphere and planet, in our case beginning 
with early roads, canals, and irrigation. And  
they argue it was as legitimate a sphere for the 
planet as the geosphere, lithosphere, biosphere,  
atmosphere, hydrosphere, barysphere, 
and so on, which I tend to agree with. 
Beyond that it tended to drift into diverse 
spiritual realms of group consciousness or Omega  
Point speculation, which we’ll bypass for now, or 
in more modern times as a particularly high-tech  
version of the internet, and I’ve used Noosphere 
in that context myself occasionally and it’s  
popular in some scifi especially the cyberpunk 
genre, typically as a given planet’s complete  
communication, data, and computerization sphere.
Anyway, all those various spheres though,  
noosphere or not, tend to have feedback on each 
other. That in and of itself is neither surprising  
nor controversial, nor is that some of these 
feedbacks can help to push a system back into  
alignment. A predator that overeats can grow in 
population but only temporarily, then crashes down  
from a shortage of prey and higher probabilities 
of not just starvation but any number of  
food-shortage related things, like a higher chance 
of getting into fights with their own kind over  
territory and dying from an infection that’s 
harder to fight off because they’re running in a  
calorie deficit. These don’t have to involve 
lifeforms either, heat a planet with surface  
water up and it will get cloudier, clouds reflect 
sunlight away, which can have a cooling effect. 
But it’s important to note that the same effect 
can have both positive and negative feedback.  
Clouds also absorb infrared light from the surface 
and help retain it, and how high they are in the  
atmosphere controls which dominates. So too, 
ice and especially fresh snow reflects sunlight,  
which cools a planet, which is why we sometimes 
think the planet may have frozen over completely  
in the past, possibly repeatedly. If Earth ran 
into a particularly bad ice age and just froze a  
little more, across some threshold where too much 
sunlight got reflected and froze all the oceans,  
with ever less water evaporating to form 
clouds, and all freezes over and can’t  
melt. The cooling effects snowball until 
the planet is locked in ice. This is the  
appropriately named Snowball Earth theory. 
In such a case though, you could slowly have  
volcanic eruptions and space dust darken the 
surface till it absorbed more light and thawed. 
The Gaia Hypothesis reasons that life on a planet 
will become self-regulating, in conjunction with  
the atmosphere, hydrosphere, and pedosphere, 
the thin skin above the lithosphere where soil  
is and where soil formation is occurring at, from 
the Greek ‘pedon’, or ground. And again the idea  
that the planet has feedbacks, or even a planetary 
homeostasis resulting from lifeforms on it, is not  
a new idea and wasn’t even when Lovelock discussed 
it, but rather the Gaia Hypothesis argues we have  
a homeostatic balance of conditions on Earth with 
the goal of keeping conditions optimal for life,  
even in regard to things like volcanoes or 
external things like asteroid collisions. 
One big factor seen as being in its favor is 
that external conditions have changed a lot  
since life began. The Sun is now at least 25% 
brighter than it used to be, which in simplest  
models would see a planet be about 6% warmer, 
which is a big deal in absolute temperature or  
Kelvin. Earth’s current average temperature is 
about 14 Celsius or 57 Fahrenheit, 6 percent  
doesn’t sound like much on those scales, but our 
absolute temperature is 287 Kelvin or 517 Rankine,  
raising that by 6% is 304 Kelvin or 548 Rankine, 
which is 31 Celsius or 89 Fahrenheit, again 6%  
is much bigger in absolute temperature terms.
So the planet should have been a lot colder  
back then, even accounting for the higher 
temperature of the planet after forming and  
greater amounts of uranium decaying in the planet. 
The Faint Young Sun Paradox is still troubling us,  
50 years after Carl Sagan and George Mullen 
proposed it, as it indicates our world should have  
been an iceball for a long while. We have partial 
explanations, everything from more carbon dioxide  
to tidal heating from the Moon being greater when 
it was closer to us in the past, to the Earth  
maybe being closer to the Sun in the past, I’ve 
even heard local Hubble expansion suggested. 
Lovelock himself had suggested a higher methane 
composition in the early atmosphere, akin to  
Titan’s atmosphere. Overall though the Faint 
Young Sun Paradox tends to work against the Gaia  
Hypothesis being valid for Early Earth, that prior 
to maybe half a billion years ago there couldn’t  
have been a life-based self-regulating planet.
To some degree this is irrelevant since not only  
have we massively altered what we think the early 
conditions an Earth were since Lovelock’s time,  
repeatedly, but we don’t actually have a 
solid notion even now of what the atmosphere  
and temperature looked like. Anything before 
half a billion years ago is very thin and the  
picture doesn’t really get much more solid until 
after the dinosaurs are gone. Paleoclimatology  
does amazing work on little data but has 
its limit, so realistically we can’t take  
any early conditions on Earth into serious 
consideration for proving or disproving the  
idea that the planet self-regulates with the 
goal of keeping optimal conditions for life. 
The core hypothesis is very attractive to 
be sure, and many objections to it have  
been adapted for in newer versions, but it is 
not too hard to find problems. For instance,  
the Huronian Glaciation about 2.4 billions years 
ago is believed to be a series of ice age periods  
lasting around 300 million years, possibly with 
one or more Snowball Earth events. Life existed  
before this but was very minimal as before 
that time life was anaerobic, but this is  
when cyanobacteria evolved photosynthesis and 
exploded due this vastly more abundant energy  
source and resulted in tons of oxygen appearing as 
a waste product of this vastly more abundant life. 
Lots of things absorb oxygen, including methane if 
that was indeed abundant at this time, and iron,  
so the planet oxidized until it got saturated 
and we saw a rise of atmospheric oxygen. If the  
atmosphere was high in methane as we currently 
believe, then the oxygen would have bonded with  
it and produced water and carbon dioxide, 
same as when we burn other hydrocarbons,  
cooling the planet. You’re probably wondering why 
a sudden uptick in carbon dioxide and water would  
cool a planet, given they are both infamous as 
greenhouse gases, but everything is relative and  
methane is a much stronger greenhouse gas than 
carbon dioxide or water vapor, so ironically  
the spike in both from reducing methane into 
them cooled the planet, we assume. Once methane  
and the other oxygen sinks began diminishing, 
atmospheric oxygen built up to even higher levels. 
Which killed off most of the remaining life, 
but this period is thought to also be when  
eukaryotic cells – ones with a nucleus – and 
multicellular life, both first appeared. This is  
often viewed as the first and longest extinction 
event, sometimes called the Oxygen Holocaust,  
but given that it is a period of many millions of 
years it’s arguable if that is the proper term. 
This actually gives us what is called the Medea 
Hypothesis, coined by paleontologist Peter Ward,  
as an anti-Gaia Hypothesis, arguing that 
multicellular life and any superorganism may be  
inherently self-destructive or suicidal. Medea is 
also from Greek mythology, specifically Jason and  
the Argonauts. Medea is the granddaughter of the 
sun god Helios and a sorceress, and she initially  
helps Jason on his quest for the Golden Fleece 
and they eventually marry, happily ever after.  
However, in keeping with Greek Tragedies, they 
end up souring on each other and she also later  
kills her own children. Hence Medea as Earth or 
Life seems at first helpful to life surviving  
but in the end is ruinous to it. In this context 
microbial-triggered mass extinctions result in  
a return to a microbe-dominated state, which has 
been the case for most of Earth’s history. Indeed  
one could argue it’s never not microbe-dominated 
as they not only make up the overwhelming majority  
of organisms on this planet but the majority 
of its non-plant biomass, outmassing animals,  
even tiny ones, by about 25 to 1.
The Oxygen Catastrophe is one of those events,  
along with the Snowball Earths of the Huronian, 
and later, a period sometimes called Cryogenian,  
from 790 to 630 million years ago, which may 
have been Snowball Earth periods though this  
is very contested. We also have the 
Permian-Triassic Extinction event,  
or Great Dying, roughly 250 million years ago, 
which among other things is considered to be the  
largest known mass extinction of insects. Not that 
tons of other things didn’t go extinct too. It is  
usually placed at the feet of oceanic anoxia 
and acidification from large amounts of carbon  
dioxide. Peter Ward also suggests that current 
global warming would be another such Medea event. 
Now at this point I feel obliged to point 
out that both the Gaia Hypothesis and Medea  
Hypothesis have some philosophical issues from a 
scientific standpoint. Both are strongly implying  
intent here, albeit often in the same incidental 
way explanations of evolution do, where someone  
is trying to explain evolution and doing it 
badly and unintentionally gives an example of  
intelligent design instead or implies an intent to 
natural selection. And that does happen a lot with  
the Gaia Hypothesis, people using bad analogies 
for it or overextending what the basic theory is  
saying. The names probably don’t help for that, 
and while self-regulating cybernetic planets  
might have been a better pick in that regard, 
it’s a little late now. Furthermore, Lovelock  
prefered the name Gaia due to its emphasis on 
living planets as opposed to some alternative  
names suggested for the Gaia Hypothesis 
such as Coevolution or Earth System Science. 
Teleology is what we call it when a reason or 
explanation for something is based on its end  
state, purpose, or goal. My car is built around 
the purpose of getting me from point A to B safely  
and efficiently. If you’re describing evolution 
from a teleological standpoint – in terms of it  
having intended goals or outcomes, that can still 
be evolution but not Darwinian evolution, and  
indeed a lot of times when folks seek to describe 
survival of the fittest and natural selection  
it can slide into this area too. Saying that the 
purpose of a planet is to spawn life that can grow  
in complexity to either launch spaceborn organisms 
out or complex organisms like humans who can make  
spacecraft and spread life to other worlds, that 
is teleological. The existence of such a planet  
is not itself disproven by that though, should 
you bump into one, it presumably won’t vanish. 
Incidentally, evolutionary biology is a field 
from which a lot of the criticism of the Gaia  
Hypothesis came, even from scientists that often 
disagreed with each other such as Stephen Jay  
Gould and Richard Dawkins. Specifically, Dawkins 
felt it impossible for a planetary superorganism  
to arise by natural selection and insisted that 
the Gaia Hypothesis does not follow from his own  
concept of Extended Phenotype, the notion that 
genes can have physical manifestations outside  
the bodies they belong to, such as a beaver 
gene influencing the shape of a beaver dam,  
or a honeybee gene the shape of the hive and 
honeycomb, or genes of parasitic organisms  
influencing phenotypes of their hosts. 
That doesn’t mean Dawkins is right either,  
though I tend to agree, and this discussion is 
all collegial and theoretical, few folks criticize  
Lovelock’s skill as a scientist and thinker, but 
again it has the problem of being teleological,  
which tends to raise scientific objections.
That doesn’t make it wrong mind you, but it  
is implying either a consciousness involved or 
some guiding motivation, like God. Obviously this  
was fine for Pierre Teilhard de Chardin, when 
proposing the Noosphere and the Omega Point,  
given he was a Jesuit. The Omega Point, 
which could easily be its own episode, can  
be summarized and over-simplified as the idea that 
the Universe spirals toward a point of unification  
in a distant future. It has a lot of similarities 
with the concept of a Technological Singularity,  
including lots of supporters and detractors from 
different philosophical and theological camps.  
Sort of like today’s concept, it's one I 
tend to disagree with but find fascinating. 
Even in versions of the Omega Point where 
we have a retro-casual god or megamind,  
like a Matrioshka Brain or the Eschaton from 
Charlie Stross’s excellent novel Singularity Sky,  
this is one that evolves from nothing and can poke 
back in time to guide its own existence into play,  
and so you still have that guiding 
hand pushing things along, even if  
it has a temporal paradox stuffed in there too.
Teleological arguments are obviously frowned on  
by science but not necessarily wrong, for instance 
it's perfectly fine in sociology and economics,  
where you have many different people and 
groups openly with objectives they’re pursuing  
including regulating the system of our economy or 
civilization, but in biology, geology, chemistry,  
and physics they tend to be seen as red flags that 
a theory is walking on thin ice but again doesn’t  
have to be wrong. Even ignoring the obvious 
example, that the planet did have a collective  
consciousness or that there is a classic Creator 
God, you also have the example of terraforming.  
Odds are the most common way planets will get 
life, or have gotten life, is because some place  
that already had it sent out ships or seeds to 
go plant it elsewhere, including a lot of careful  
engineering and balancing, and that clearly 
would have intent and goals and purposes in mind. 
As a soft case of the Anthropic Principle and 
the Silurian Hypothesis, that evidence of past  
civilization wouldn’t endure many millions of 
years, if you find yourself on a life-bearing  
planet, it would seem statistically more likely 
that life did not arise there naturally but  
rather was planted from an older world, and thus 
most planets’ life would be shaped to a goal or  
purpose by an actual designer, the terraforming 
program or committee that first introduced it. 
Lovelock himself though denied there’s any 
teleology in the theory and blamed it on the name  
tending to predispose folks to that view of it. 
I’m inclined to agree with at least the last half  
of that. He said back in 1990, after his book, 
“Gaia, a new look at life on Earth” came out,  
that “Nowhere in our writings do we express the 
that planetary self-regulation is purposeful or  
involves foresight or planning by the biota”.
And that’s why I’ve been emphasizing that the  
Gaia Hypothesis comes in a lot of forms, 
because some of the versions of the Gaia  
Hypothesis that have been championed are 
explicitly teleological or openly spiritual,  
which again doesn’t necessarily make them wrong, 
but has certainly been where a lot of wrath from  
other scientists has been sparked and directed.
You can have self-regulation without consciousness  
or goals, obviously, there’s self-regulation 
in every organism. Local Ecosystems tend to be  
full of these, but they’re never truly stable, 
and why should they be? They’re not an actual  
mechanism after all, a mechanism has intent 
or purpose itself. It’s always a problem in  
trying to discuss biology, we tend to be prone to 
phrasing things with intent or purpose even when  
we’re trying not to. Its sort of like saying our 
survival instinct, where we tend to imply we have  
some wired command to not die like Asimov’s 3rd 
law of robotics, rather than a huge collection of  
unrelated traits that tend to make something die 
less in most cases and which affect our behavior,  
hence why people can commit suicide and an 
Asimov-ian Robot cannot. Evolution may not  
have goals but it's nigh-impossible to discuss 
the topic without accidentally implying it,  
and I think Lovelock’s point was that folks 
tended to do that with the Gaia Hypothesis. 
This has resulted though in what we could call 
weak, moderate, and strong forms of the Gaia  
Hypothesis, where strong Gaia would be organisms 
obeying a principle that makes Earth optimal for  
life while a weaker form would be merely favorable 
rather than optimal. A moderate form would be  
where it was simply a homeostatic mechanism. Some 
feel that’s still too strong but that we could  
have a Coevolutionary Gaia, or an Influential 
Gaia, where there’s a linkage and relationship,  
lots of feedback that tends to push toward the 
Earth being shifted by life to be more favorable  
to life, but nothing stronger. Neither of which, 
as I mentioned earlier, was new or radical thought  
in terms of already accepted discussion of 
natural selection, adaptation, and evolution. 
Since I’m physicist, not a biologist, I can get 
away with being officially neutral on the matter,  
though I would say anything beyond the Homeostatic 
Mechanism is a stretch for Earth itself. In terms  
of other planets it is certainly an option, we 
have discussed sentient planets evolving before,  
see our episode World Consciousness and Sentient 
Planets for more on that. And in the spirit  
of the Silurian Hypothesis, I suppose we could 
point out that Earth could previously have had a  
consciousness and limited self-regulatory ability 
as a superorganism, conscious or subconscious,  
and that it died off. It wouldn’t really be 
something we could detect especially if it  
wasn’t particularly anthropomorphic, 
especially millions of years later. 
I don’t think I’ve heard that idea 
used before in speculation or fiction,  
which might make for an interesting story I 
suppose. So we can call it the Pangu Hypothesis,  
as an example of a planet mind whose corpse we’re 
living on… that one is also popular in mythology,  
the world being made of dead gods, but most I 
can’t pronounce and were killed by some other god,  
like Tiamat being killed by Marduk, whereas 
Pangu of Chinese mythology just died unreplaced  
as I understand it. We’ll call it the Tiamat 
hypothesis when you get successive murdered world  
minds replacing each other, or sub-world minds, 
there’s also the CLAW Hypothesis, a cousin of the  
Gaia Hypothesis that is an acronym for its four 
originators’ last names, of which Lovelock was  
one, that is a proposed negative feedback loop 
between ocean ecosystems and Earth’s climate.  
One can imagine rival planetary consciousness or 
non-sentient driving forces colliding into each  
other. Possibly Uranus and Pontus to keep to 
the Gaian mythology. Again the Gaia Hypothesis  
doesn’t require that but it’s interesting for 
speculation and it is something we could see  
evolve elsewhere, or for that matter engineer.
Let’s wrap up by considering a bigger version  
of this though. Let’s imagine in all the starry 
Universe only one in a trillion worlds ever spawns  
life on its own, and yet the vast majority of the 
worlds presumably will end up either transformed  
into life-bearing worlds or disassembled to 
be turned into their more artificial cousins,  
space habitats. Presumably those few worlds 
that not only have life emerge, 1 in a trillion,  
versus the smaller percentage where it not only 
endures but eventually is able to spread itself  
to other places, would seem to be every bit as 
valid an example of adaptation and survival of  
the fittest as that first amoeba or protolife. And 
if we’re discussing civilizations as entities or  
even planetary consciousnesses, it’s worth noting 
that life in this galaxy a few million years from  
now might tend to be composed of things that 
would make even a world brain look primitive  
let alone a human, just as we are to an amoeba 
or whatever first had a basic brain eons later. 
To a galaxy like that, originated from one single 
world and yet composed of trillions of them,  
where humans might just be the equivalent of gut 
bacteria to those trillions of megaminds, things  
might seem very different. Looking back from 
potentially hundreds of billions of years from  
now, might they not view Earth and its journey to 
civilization and interstellar colonization, all  
those worlds in all those galaxies left together 
from Hubble Expansion, descended from just one  
world, little more than an egg or an amoeba?
I’m not sure if viewing us this way should be  
humbling or reeks of ego and destiny, maybe both, 
but it does certainly give a different view of  
things. Maybe we’re just part of the mechanism 
our world is using to grow and reproduce itself?
Science often surprises us with new truths at 
odds with our current understanding so maybe it  
will turn out the Gaia Hypothesis is right to 
one degree or another and the world is itself  
alive. That’s the neat thing about science, 
always another new and awesome discovery that  
changes our worldview, and in this case, maybe 
our view of our world itself. Math and Science  
are amazing to know and incredibly useful in daily 
life, but they can be intimidating to learn, and  
that’s where our friends at Brilliant can help.
Brilliant has thousands of lessons on Math,  
Science, and Computer Science, with exclusive 
new content added monthly, and a focus on  
Hands-on learning, which is hands down the 
best way to learn. Whether it's the basics  
or wanting to learn college level material in a 
tiny fraction of the time and cost, Brilliant has  
lessons that can help you, and help level up your 
knowledge of math, science, and computer science. 
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own pace, 
learn on the go, and learn a little something  
new every day. To get started for free, visit 
brilliant.org/IsaacArthur or click on the link in  
the description, and the first 200 people will get 
20% off Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
So next week we’ll be having our Thanksgiving 
Episode, Thursday, November 24th, for Reasons  
to Be Optimistic about the Future, followed by our 
Monthly Livestream Q&A two Sundays from now. Then  
it’s on to December to discuss what we should do 
if SETI every succeeds and picks up a signal from  
an alien civilization, and then the week after 
that we’ll contemplate what if they never do,  
and if it turns out Humanity is the First 
Civilization to ever arise in all the cosmos. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like to  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social media  
forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
