This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. Get 
access to my streaming video service, Nebula,  
when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
When we say our future in the solar system 
is to Become an Interplanetary Species,  
folks tend to think of a handful 
of planets, but as we’ll see today,  
our destiny awaits us on a 
million smaller worlds too.
 
So today we are continuing our look 
at becoming an interplanetary species.  
This is Part 5 of our series loosely following 
the National Space Society’s Roadmap to Space  
Settlement as our guide, and I’ve linked the 
complete document in the episode Description.  
Last time we looked at establishing our 
first colony on another planet, Mars,  
and today we’ll cover the roadmap’s Milestones 
26, 27, and 28 settling asteroids and moons,  
as well as orbital habitats of our own creation.
Now back in part 2 we looked at colonizing the  
orbital volume around Earth, and we talked about 
the importance of the Moon as a source of raw  
materials. An important point we made there was 
that because of the Moon’s lower gravity, only a  
sixth of Earth’s, and the fuel cost of lifting 
materials out of a gravity well, it’s actually  
much cheaper to move raw materials from the Moon’s 
surface to construction yards in Low Earth Orbit  
than it would be to lift them up from Earth’s 
surface only a few hundred kilometers below.
 
However, even though the Asteroid Belt is even 
farther away, hundreds of millions of kilometers,  
in many cases it will be even easier to bring 
resources to Earth from there than from the Moon.  
More to the point, it is a great place to get 
resources for other efforts in the solar system.  
So too, our Moon is but one of many in the 
solar system and all of them are easier to  
get resources off of than their planets.
So we will be looking at how to do this,  
why we want to do this, and how a basic 
solar economy will develop from it to fuel  
colonization of this solar system, and to set 
the stage for reaching and colonizing the next.
 
Milestone 26 is the Robotic Characterization of 
Asteroids, particularly the Near Earth Asteroids,  
those whose orbits make them the 
cheapest to bring materials back from.  
These asteroids happen to also be the ones 
that are the greatest potential threats to us.  
Telescopes and radar arrays in Earth orbit will be 
able to tell us a lot about asteroids, but probes  
like NASA’s Osiris Rex probe, will let us take 
direct samples and place beacons on these objects  
to make it easier to track and monitor them, and 
see which ones have which resources we want.
 
In the long term we will want them all, and there 
are millions of asteroids in our solar system.  
Each one may represent billions or even trillions 
of dollars of valuable resources, so the ability  
to catalogue these with cheap robot probes will 
be invaluable and one of the earliest manufactured  
goods we might expect to be built in space for 
use in space is likely to be those probes. 
 
This will be a continuing project of 
course, but early on we want to focus  
on those near-earth asteroids and on 
finding any with metal concentrations.  
Some of them may be easier and cheaper to get 
metal off of than the Moon, and for that matter,  
while we often picture our orbital habitats as big 
spinning cylinders, this is likely to only be the  
internal view. Wrapping those cylinders in a shell 
of cheap material, like rock from these asteroids,  
represents a great shield against meteor 
damage and to minimize leakage of air.
 
Milestone 27, the Utilization of 
Asteroids, is therefore not just  
about mining them for gold or other precious 
metals, but also their use in Milestone 28,  
construction of orbital space 
Settlements and other space habitats,  
where they will provide not only the metal for the 
structural elements, but also the bulk exterior  
shielding and the interior landscaping, 
all the dirt, air, and water we’ll need.
 
And though we call the parts of this 
roadmap milestones, they will all be  
ongoing overlapping processes we’d expect to 
see under constant upgrade and expansion. 
 
In the early days of asteroid mining the focus is 
entirely on finding the asteroids with the least  
delta-v relative to Earth, then finding the ones 
with gold and platinum on them, but eventually  
becomes about finding the very tiny ones because 
you want every drop of raw materials in those  
asteroids and every one of the smaller ones 
represents something of a navigational hazard.
 
In a similar vein, early orbital settlements 
will be about what is cheap – but then again,  
so will later orbital settlements, what changes 
is what is cheap, and as you get that asteroid  
utilization going, resource scarcities shift.
Sometimes it is suggested we might bring an  
asteroid back to Earth to place it in orbit. 
Now this is sometimes viewed as a bad idea  
because it might land on us, but that’s 
not really a concern. You would need to be  
careful to have redundancies and security 
on board when pushing the asteroid in,  
but you don’t exactly accidentally hit a planet so 
that’s a safeguard against intentional sabotage.  
Once it’s in orbit it's less of a concern.
There’s two reasons why you wouldn’t bring  
whole asteroids to Earth orbit, and the first is 
that asteroids are often just big balls of loose  
gravel, a great recipe for adding more dangerous 
space debris to Earth’s orbit. That’s easily  
rectified though by covering the asteroid in some 
shell of plastic or foil. The other bigger reason  
is the sheer amount of mass. If an asteroid is 
found to have a gold or platinum abundance of 1  
part per thousand, then we only want to ship home 
that one part per thousand, not blow a thousand  
times more fuel bringing the whole thing home.
Now as time goes by you’re interested in more  
and more of the materials in those asteroids, 
though often for local use as we colonize the  
Asteroid Belt. However, while we mostly don’t 
want to move asteroids, early on there is some  
motivation to bring small asteroids right back 
to Earth orbit, as ones a few hundred meters  
across might be nudged from their Near-Earth 
orbits into stable orbits in Cislunar space  
and converted into orbital settlements 
with a lot of mass and shielding available.  
This was often contemplated by the L5 Society, 
the precursor organisation to the National Space  
Society, as a way of sourcing the mass for 
large Lagrange Point Orbital Settlements.
 
Alternatively, last time in the series we were 
discussing Aldrin Cycler Castles between Earth  
and Mars, essentially large space stations on 
elliptical orbits that take them by both planets,  
and a lot of Near-Earth asteroids might be 
ideal for conversion into cyclers between  
Earth and other destinations in the solar system.
As we mentioned earlier in the series, we would  
always anticipate the majority of space habitats 
as Earth orbital settlements until such time as  
Cislunar space was truly crowded to capacity, but 
let us ask what other places we might have them?
 
A big factor in that of course is how 
well humans can handle lower gravity.  
If the answer is that even Mars has too low of a 
gravity for humans to comfortably live in, then  
humanity’s future in space will be principally 
in spin-gravity stations from the outset.  
If we can handle lower gravity like our Moon and 
the other large Moons of our solar system have,  
then we are likely to grow initially on those 
places and only begin heavy construction of  
spin-gravity stations like the O’Neill Cylinder 
when we have more people than Earth and all those  
other places could handle even if they were 
all converted in to Ecumenopolises – Planet  
Wide Cities – or in this case, Moon-wide cities.
Even then we would expect lots of these stations  
around Earth, in the Asteroid Belt, and probably 
as the Cycler Castles too. While Cyclers on their  
long elliptical orbits are hardly fast means of 
transport, they are ultra-low energy approaches  
to it, and big space stations serving in 
this role, complete with heavy shielding  
and life support options like hydroponics and 
gardens, are likely to become heavily used in  
the middle days of solar settlement. An Asteroid 
you’ve hollowed out and shoved onto a cycler  
trajectory between two large bodies of interest 
is potentially an ideal approach for this. 
 
When we say we want to hollow one out, we 
generally mean more like expanding it like  
a balloon. A rocky asteroid with a diameter of 
100 meters and a density of about 2 tons per  
cubic meter is going to mass about a megaton, 
or 10 Aircraft carriers, and if you ground it  
up and made a hollow sphere out of the rock half a 
meter thick, your 100 meter wide asteroid is now a  
hollow spherical shell 560 meters wide instead, 
encompassing around 90 million cubic meters,  
100,000 times what our space station’s volume 
is, and which has nothing like a half-meter  
of metal or rock as a protective 
skin against impact and leakage.
 
There are several thousand asteroids in this size 
category that qualify as Near-Earth Objects alone,  
there are many millions of asteroids that size in 
the actual asteroid belt. And I want to emphasize  
that difference real quick as when we’re talking 
about asteroid mining and asteroid utilization,  
the emphasis is mostly on the relative 
handful of them that are Near-Earth,  
which is again many thousands, not the Millions 
in the main Asteroid Belt. That all comes later. 
 
I would not be too surprised if virtually 
every Near-Earth Asteroid saw itself  
converted into a Cislunar Orbital Settlement 
or a Cycler Castle. They represent a minimal  
danger to Earth if brought into orbit, as an 
asteroid of this more modest size on a known  
and decently stable orbit is easily exploded 
without even resorting to atomic weapons. 
 
However they would be a heck of hazard 
to other things in orbit if you did that.  
So assume any asteroid brought back to Earth to 
serve as an orbital settlement would at least  
be having a coating of foil or ice or similar 
applied to minimize them kicking out debris  
from minor impacts. Many asteroids are basically 
just big balls of gravel loosely stuck together  
and same as you don’t want to be right behind a 
car driving down a dirt or gravel road spraying  
you with everything they kicked up, you don’t want 
any objects in orbit of Earth that are producing  
any more space debris than can be avoided.
What about actually colonizing the Asteroid Belt?
 
Well first we have to ask which belt we 
mean. The Asteroid Belt between Mars and  
Jupiter is actually multiple hazy belts, loosely 
defined as the Inner, Middle, and Outer Belt.  
We also have the Jovian Trojan Moons and the 
vastly larger Kuiper Belt out Beyond Neptune.  
On top of all that, same as Earth has thousands of 
near Earth Asteroids that aren’t part of the Belt,  
there are many thousands of large rocks in our 
solar system that don’t fall into the normal  
collection of Belts, Trojans, Moons, or Rings.
This is a big part of Space Settlement and  
becoming an Interplanetary Species, because 
it’s realizing that there are not 8 planets  
in our solar system, nor even a few dozen when we 
throw in Dwarf Planets like Pluto or Ceres or the  
Larger Moons like ours or Titan and Ganymede. It’s 
realizing that there are millions of minor planets  
in this solar system. Colonizing these is what’s 
going to turn us into an Interplanetary Species,  
not setting up a handful of dome habitats 
on Mars or floating cities on Venus. 
 
Of those millions of minor planets, each one has 
the potential to be turned into a space habitat  
the size of the Kaplana One space settlement, and 
around perhaps a million into full blown O’Neil  
Cylinders home to a million people each. That’s 
without even tapping into the Dwarf Planets or  
Larger Moons, each one of which has more raw 
material than all the asteroids combined.
 
This, then, is our true future 
as an Interplanetary species,  
because those millions of minor planets aren’t 
that minor, and what might begin as a small  
outpost for asteroid miners on most will likely 
transform over time into millions of city states.
 
Each one will develop uniquely, 
but let’s consider a few scenarios.  
We contemplated the future of the biggest 
asteroid, Ceres, in our episode Colonizing Ceres,  
and how it might become a trade hub and 
agricultural center for the Asteroid belt.  
Let’s look at another case, imagine a gold rich 
and larger asteroid, such as we believe 16 Psyche  
to be. It’s roughly 16th place in terms of size 
in the asteroid belt, and is an M-Type asteroid,  
meaning metallic, that we think may have been 
the remnant exposed iron core of a protoplanet. 
 
Our early solar system was a very different place 
with many more mid-sized planets, some merging  
together, others being gravitationally ejected 
from the solar system or swallowed by the Sun,  
and many remaining as moons or failed planets 
like Psyche. It’s also one of our earliest finds,  
being discovered in 1851, just a few 
years after Neptune and long before Pluto.  
It’s symbol is meant to be a butterfly wing and 
a star, as Psyche was the Greek Goddess of the  
Soul and that was typically represented by the 
butterfly’s wing. Back then we were still giving  
each new asteroid discovered its own symbol like 
all the planets had, in part because we were still  
calling these asteroids planets, all of them being 
larger examples of their type. We didn’t even know  
there was an asteroid belt yet, but we started 
discovering a ton more of them about this time  
and were running out of symbols, so astronomer 
J.F. Encke suggested we just use a circle with  
a number in it, in this case a 16, and within a 
decade we discovered around 100 more asteroids and  
any thought of naming each went out the window.
Psyche is of interest because of its exposed  
metal, and we’ve been talking about missions 
there for some years now. Many of you might  
remember articles in recent years talking about 
an asteroid having trillions or quadrillions of  
dollars in gold in it and those were generally 
referring to Psyche. Early in 2020 NASA awarded  
SpaceX a hundred-million-dollar contract to 
launch a satellite to orbit and probe Psyche,  
and the current launch date is planned for 2022, 
with a Martian gravity assist to arrive in 2026.
 
It seems probable that the first exploration of 
almost all bodies will be done by robots, so I’ve  
often wondered if folks living on those bodies 
in the future will commemorate that as a holiday.  
It would seem like the big 3 most would have would 
be the day the body was discovered by telescope,  
the day it got its first orbital probe or 
rover, and the day a human first stepped on it.
 
Of course, resource harvesting might be entirely 
automated, especially on smaller rocks where  
we might just envelope them in a Mylar bag 
and cook the materials out, but Psyche is a  
good deal bigger and basically is the Queen of 
Metallic asteroids. With a surface gravity of  
just 1.5% of Earth-normal – which is quite high 
for an asteroid, there’s still a recognizable  
up and down, and with an escape velocity of 
180 meters per second or 400 miles per hour,  
you don’t have to worry about accidentally kicking 
yourself into space from its surface or random  
mining debris drifting away, so you don’t need 
to bag or dome the spots you’re working on. 
 
We believe its surface to be composed of about 
90% metal and 10% silicate rock, and most of  
that metal is iron and nickel, same as our own 
planetary core. That’s great building material  
for space settlements, but the real initial 
interest is in precious metals. Earth has a lot  
of precious metals, but most of them are sunk in 
our planetary core which is why Psyche, suspected  
of being an exposed core of an early protoplanet, 
is of particular interest. That iron though is  
over a million times what we produce a year, and 
in the long term is probably its greatest value.
 
In the short term, “there’s gold in them 
there hills”, and platinum and so on,  
and we estimate the total amount of metals 
in it, sold at modern value would be several  
hundred quintillion dollars, more than a 
million times our annual planetary economy.
 
You don’t mine that all at once, and again 
it’s the size of a medium-sized nation or state  
so you don’t tow that home either. You set up on 
it and slow extract raw materials at the rate the  
market desires. You’ll be producing a lot of other 
metals as you’re extracting the precious metals,  
and those you’ll use locally or ship 
off to wherever the market is willing  
to pay the bill for shipping them. 
As you’d most likely be producing  
large numbers of tunnels, which are very 
easily shored up when gravity is 1.5%  
Earth normal, you can start building habitats 
inside those tunnels much like the lavatube  
colonization we often contemplate for the Moon. At 
roughly thrice the distance from the Sun Earth is,  
it still gets enough sunlight that domes on the 
surface, or with light reflected down via mirrors,  
could profitably grow food. You would never have 
decent gravity on the place, though we’ll discuss  
some options in the next episode for dealing 
with that like using artificial black holes,  
so if folks want to live there they would need to 
use spin-gravity habitats buried in those tunnels,  
and we discussed that more in Colonizing Ceres 
too. Alternatively, you might build orbital  
settlements around it, using all that iron 
and some of that silicate for making them.
 
We don’t normally think of building 
space stations in orbit of asteroids,  
since they already have such low gravity 
and no atmosphere it seems a bit pointless,  
in favor of embedding them down into the 
asteroid where they’d be protected from meteors,  
however this might not be too uncommon. Landing 
on a planet or taking off from one is always a  
bit of a pain, and a space station orbiting one 
would have only a very small delta-v. Indeed many  
smaller asteroids are spinning nearly as fast 
as their gravity can hold material on the ground  
so your equatorial orbital speed, relative to 
the ground, won’t be terribly high. Psyche is big  
enough we might consider building it with a mass 
driver track of its own, but it’s also low enough  
gravity you could erect monstrously tall space 
towers on it too. That’s a potentially interesting  
scenario because inside the asteroid belt there 
are so many smaller asteroids whose delta-v  
to each other or Psyche would be small enough we 
might just give them a shove into orbit of Psyche,  
if it had developed enough to have sophisticated 
refining and manufacturing going on.
 
So come for the gold, stay for the industrial 
titan the place is likely to become!  
And indeed, it might get fairly common to 
lasso smaller asteroids into orbit around  
the bigger ones and flat out tether 
them to each other for easy transport.  
That’s ready made to eventually end up as a 
rather large nation-state of many millions or  
even billions. Psyche alone has enough mass to 
forge a million full-sized O’Neill Cylinders.
 
I suspect that will be the path for a lot of 
asteroids though, especially the more modestly  
sized ones only a few kilometers across. A robot 
probe finds some nice deposits of valuable metals,  
folks go down and mine it for a few decades, 
and as the wealth pours in they expand their  
facilities and form a community. Even 
after valuable metals are exhausted,  
the remaining materials would be valuable to 
that settlement which is capable of mostly  
self-sustained growth at that point, and they 
diversify production to engage in trade with  
neighbors... and with Earth, which will be growing 
a massive cloud of orbital settlements by now.
 
Let’s consider one other pathway for asteroid 
utilization. Many of those near-Earth asteroids  
are only near occasionally. They have wide 
elliptical orbits that take them near us  
occasionally and have lower delta-v to reach than 
most Belt Objects. Many of these are ideal for  
early asteroid mining and we are likely to send 
that material back to Earth Orbit by some means  
like an electromagnetic catapult, solar or nuclear 
powered. When you’re hurling mass from something  
in space, you move that object too, and careful 
timing could let you nudge that asteroid over  
time into a Cycler Orbit between Earth and some 
spots in the Asteroid Belt, or other planets and  
points of interest. Having gotten materials 
out of them, and gotten them fairly settled,  
we could convert them into mobile waypoints as 
Cycler Castles, and this might become a preferred  
means of cheap travel as they’d essentially be 
Cycler Castles of the Space Habitat scale. 
 
Back at Earth, whose orbit is swelling with 
orbital settlements fueled by all this solar  
system resource extraction, we might begin 
seeing thousands or even millions of cycler  
castles of various sizes and pathways emerging 
as having Earth at one end of that cycle.  
And if you saw our recent episode on Interstellar 
Trade, where we discussed interstellar cyclers,  
we could employ some of those same methods to 
make for fast moving cyclers and space highways.  
Indeed you might set up laser pushing stations on 
dozens or hundreds of massive cycler castles on  
the same path to serve as the relay chain for 
fast moving spaceships pushed along by them.
 
This is the true path of interplanetary 
colonization though. Orbital space around earth  
growing heavy with installations in a giant 
cloud, even as the larger moons, asteroids,  
and planets become slow-growing replicas of 
that Earth cloud, and the Asteroid Belts and  
other minor planet swarms grew from mines to 
hollowed out giant habitats by the million.  
This might be accompanied with vast thin but 
enormous solar collectors closer into the Sun  
beaming energy out to places that needed it. 
This is Interplanetary Humanity, scattered across  
a million worlds without yet having ventured out 
of the solar system, not our usual image of a  
handful of terraformed planets and moons.
That may happen too though, especially as  
practice for colonizing other solar systems, and 
we’ll explore Terraforming, Para-Terraforming,  
and our steps out into the galaxy beyond next 
time. For now though just remember this, we do not  
need to colonize the galaxy to colonize a million 
worlds, we just have to colonize our backyard,  
this solar system is an immense place with immense 
resources, able to take us forward into being a  
civilization who scope and scale rivals any 
of the galactic empires we see in fiction. 
 
So today we saw how asteroid mining would help 
shape interplanetary settlement and trade,  
and last week we were talking about interstellar 
trade, but we also looked at trade with alien  
civilization in our Coexistence with Alien 
series, exclusively available over on our  
Streaming Service, Nebula. We also show all 
our new episodes there a couple days early  
and without ads. If you’d like to catch 
SFIA episodes early and without ads,  
and help support the show while you’re doing 
it, you can sign up for Nebula today, and see  
that Exclusive Coexistence with Alien Series along 
with other great content from our sibling shows.
 
However, we also have a deal running with 
Curiositystream, where if you sign up for them  
at the link in the episode description, you not 
only get a 26% discount, but free access to Nebula  
while you’re a Curiositystream subscriber. 
Curiosity Stream has excellent educational  
content of their own and they are running a 26% 
discount if you use the link in the description.  
That’s a great deal since it means you get a 
year of both Curiositystream and Nebula for  
less than $15, and it helps support this show 
and a lot of other educational content which is  
what Curiositystream and Nebula are all about, and 
again you can get a year of both for less than $15  
by using the link in the episode’s description.
We’ve been discussing colonizing space,  
huge colonies on asteroids, moons, and planets, 
and our destiny as an Interplanetary species,  
but mostly we haven’t looked at the life of 
the individual involved in colonizing space,  
so next week we’ll be taking a look at Life as a 
Space Colonist. That’s a future we might live to  
see, and certainly the next century promises to 
be quite interesting, with many challenges too,  
and in two weeks we’ll ask what it will take 
to Survive the Next Century so we can see that  
bright new future on other worlds. Then we close 
November out with our monthly livestream Q&A.
 
If you want alerts when those 
and other episodes come out,  
make sure to subscribe to the channel, and if 
you’d like to help support future episodes,  
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website, 
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode  
description below, along with all of our various 
social media forums where you can get updates and  
chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
