This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
The long voyage just to reach the stars seems
like the biggest challenge on our way to becoming
an interstellar species.
But we’ll need to establish regular trade
between the stars if we’re to stay united
as an interstellar civilization.
So today we’ll be talking about interstellar
travel and trade using vehicles known as Cyclers.
We briefly touched on cyclers for interplanetary
commerce in our recent episode on getting
to Mars, and I thought it was high time we
revisited the topic of interstellar commerce.
One of the major problems with interstellar
commerce is the sheer amount of time and energy
involved in moving anything over such distances.
If you want to cut down the time, you have
to expend far more energy, and vice versa.
Interstellar Cyclers offer us a way to mitigate
that problem, at least on regular established
trade routes.
We tend to assume the hard part of expanding
our civilization to other stars will be getting
there in the first place. But when it comes
to long-term economics, getting an outpost
planted somewhere is a one time effort that
opens up the resources of a whole new star
system, and there really is no cost too high
in terms of mass and energy to acquire that.
Even if getting to and colonizing a system
required building a fleet of ships and supplying
them with trillions of tons of reaction mass,
we could settle a thousand stellar systems
while barely scratching the resources available
in this one.
And we need trade and travel between stars
to be frequent and regular if we want to maintain
anything like a unified interstellar civilization.
The harder and longer it takes to make exchanges
between neighboring systems, the more quickly
and widely they will diverge until essentially
becoming alien worlds all their own and possibly
even threats. Galactic Colonization might
peter out quickly if we, or future colonies
on the edge of colonized space, feel sending
out another wave of colonists just amounts
to planting alien civilizations that might
become hostile down the road.
Such divergence will presumably happen anyway,
especially in a Universe that doesn’t seem
to permit travel of information, let alone
material, any faster than light speed. Absent
regular trade and contact, each system might
turn into a fortress watching its neighbors
like hawks for signs of aggression because
they increasingly share nothing in common
besides presumably a desire for survival.
Now this isn’t a big issue in early interstellar
days, because it would be a long time before
there were any colonies who could offer what
Earth has, and our solar system is likely
to remain the dominant source of new technologies
and data for thousands of years to come. If
our solar system develops as we tend to expect
on the show, building up space habitats inside
every asteroid and colonizing every planet
and moon, then we would have living space
for quadrillions in this solar system in great
comfort, a million times our current population.
So even if we packed a thousand fleets off
with several million people on board each,
that still means all those colonies combined
have way fewer people than we do back home.
Indeed probably fewer people than we’d have
scientists or entertainment producers. We
could easily run rather robust trade, at the
speed of light and with no spaceships, simply
on information.
Of course that begs the question of how those
colonies are paying for it. Which they might
not be, especially early on it might be sent
for free, or at least paid for by folks back
here. They probably wouldn’t have much information
to send home either but on the other hand,
one colony of a few million buying information,
needing to sell information back home to billions,
trillions, quadrillions, or even more, might
be able to fund all their data purchases off
a single locally produced best-seller, movie
or vital bit of exoplanet research.
However, they can send things back home physically
too. Now imagine for the moment you have a
vineyard in the Alpha Centauri system, and
someone wanted to ship home a bottle of locally
grown wine. Someone is willing to buy that
wine just for the novelty and probably at
a high price. So what is the cost[a]?[b]
Well, a liter bottle of wine massing a bit
over kilogram, trying to make it back to Earth
in a couple decades, at say 20% of light speed,
has a kinetic energy of about 2 quadrillion
joules. It would be very optimistic to say
you managed to speed it up and slow it down
for that journey for less than 10 times that,
so we’re talking 20 quadrillion joules.
In terms of modern electricity costs of about
5 cents a megajoule, that would be a ten billion
dollar bottle of wine. Someone might buy that,
bottles of wine have fetched half a million
dollars before, but that doesn’t seem like
much of a market.
Wine happens to be something that generally
is more valuable the older it is, the record
most expensive bottle was a 73 year old French
Burgundy, and if we didn’t mind the bottle
taking 73 years to come home, then that shipping
cost in terms of energy is going to drop a
ton. For that matter, if they’re shipping
home gold we might not care if it took ten
thousand years to arrive because it was going
very slow and cheap.
Gold meandering through space won’t be worth
what it is in when its stored in a vault,[c]
but as we discussed when we looked at asteroid
mining, a commodity doesn’t need to be in
hand to trade. Gold taking a decade to come
back from an asteroid mine will be traded
long before it arrives, just probably at a
lower value. If you can pick up a gold token
for that decade-out ingot of gold, for say
half its value if it were here right now,
then you’ve made a nice profit in a decade,
but more importantly you could sell it the
next year for a bit more than you bought it
for because now it’s only a 9-year promise,
not a 10-year one. Extrapolating that out
to thousands of years is iffy, even if we’re
assuming a civilization that’s got life-extension
technology and great confidence their civilization
will still be around then, but the basic premise
still functions. The bigger counter to that
is that a growing colony mining that gold
presumably values it too, and whatever the
markdown is to sell back to Earth might be
much more than simply sitting on the stuff
where you mined it and assuming in 10,000
years its value locally would be much higher,
which is very good bet since a colony started
by a million people, visited 10,000 years
later, might easily have grown to quadrillions
by then too.
So, going slow to save energy, probably isn’t
viable either. However energy isn’t money,
we might spend a dollar now to get 20 megajoules
of electricity, but the reason it takes so
much energy to move something near light speed
is that you have to pay an amount of energy
comparable to its mass energy. A kilogram
bottle of wine with a kinetic energy to move
at 20% of light speed still has more total
energy tied up in its mass, according to Einstein’s
E=mc², so looked at from another perspective,
shipping a bottle of wine home over several
decades might be running you less than a kilogram
of hydrogen – the most abundant material
in the Universe. Now it’s actually fairly
rare on Earth, about $14 a kilogram, hardly
expensive for a bottle of wine, but would
be even cheaper to a spacefaring culture and
for instance we could mine a billion kilograms
of hydrogen off Jupiter, for a billion such
bottles, for a billion years, and still have
only removed a billionth of Jupiter’s available
supply.
A civilization using artificial black holes
can pull off that rate of power efficiency,
but we still don’t even have fusion yet,
which would be more like a 1% conversion.
In fact our best mass-to-energy production
we can do right now is with fission, and that
might require more like a thousand-to-one
conversion for relativistic shipping, and
Uranium currently costs about $165 dollars
a kilogram. Key notion though being that if
you’ve got cheap fusion, be it regular old
hydrogen or deuterium, it’s so abundant
we would do it because the cost isn’t trillions
of dollars or quadrillions of joules, it's
just the cost to scoop up some material.
Nor does it have to be a material. The Sun
produces a lot of light and light makes a
great propellant at relativistic speeds. We’ve
often talked about using enormous lasersails
as spaceships and will dig into that more
later on, but a key notion is that our Sun
produces 4 x 10^26 joules of energy every
second, enough to ship 200 billion kilograms
per second using our earlier figure of 20%
light speed wine bottles. Let’s imagine
for the moment humanity in the 31st century,
a thousand years from now. It’s very hard
to estimate population growth even a generation
down the line, let alone over centuries and
if we’re throwing in life-extension technology,
but let’s just say it stayed at a hair over
1%, about what it is nowadays with our current
population of 7.8 billion. Such being the
case there might be 400 trillion of us by
3020 AD. One of our simplest forms of Dyson
Swarms is where you just put a cloud of thin
metal foils around the sun to capture and
bounce its light to collectors, it’s a pretty
cheap way to become a Kardashev-2 civilization.
If they had done that by then, and with that
population, 400 trillion, or 4x10^14, then
they’ve got a trillion watts of power generation
per person.
Folks often ask me why you would ever build
a dyson swarm, and the notion of course is
that you want all that power but a trillion
watts per person seems insane, and mind you
that’s assuming a 50,000-fold increase in
our population, right now that would be 40
gigawatts per person, something like 100 nuclear
reactors per person. However, if you want
to engage in interstellar commerce, and you’ve
got that kind of energy abundance, at a trillion
watts per person, then some package that cost
you 20 quadrillion joules to ship home like
our hypothetical wine bottle only amounts
to 20,000 seconds of your energy budget, five
and a half-hours. Putting that into more of
a dollars and wages analogy, that’s about
.06% of your annual energy budget, and if
we were saying an individual viewed that annual
energy budget as their equivalent of $100,000
dollars, then it would be 60 bucks.
Needless to say the price is a lot lower if
you’re not trying to move stuff at decent
fractions of light speed. That’s also in
the context of a solar economy that’s pretty
literally a solar economy. Jupiter has somewhere
around a billion, billion, billion kilograms
of hydrogen and if that’s your fuel, scooping
several tons of hydrogen or deuterium off
that planet, for a space-faring civilization,
is probably even cheaper.
Now in the long term there’s a problem here,
as while they might be able to scoop up trillions
of tons of hydrogen for fuel or trillions
of watts of sunlight, both for costs that
were essentially meaningless to them, there
is a certain amount of energy that it takes
to run a person. That might be a megawatt
for someone using artificial lighting to approximate
the Sun on some cylinder habitat, or several
kilowatts for someone using carefully efficient
artificial light in a hydroponics lab, or
it might be milliwatts for some post-human
living on a computer chip, and whatever that
is, that eventually becomes your currency
if your population is growing because that’s
how many folks you can support.
If you’re at that megawatt level, then 20
quadrillion joules represents your 1-person
energy budget of a megawatt for 634 years,
many hundreds of million of dollars in a modern
context, while those squeezing efficiency
out of their power using ten kilowatts or
so, it’s more like 60,000 years or tens
of billions of dollars, and for that entirely
digital civilization – which probably has
little interest in physical luxuries in favor
of data anyway, the cost or time-energy budget
gets into the geological or astronomical timelines
region. In any of those examples, assuming
you can even afford it, given the timeline
involved waiting longer to get the object
at a slower speed and orders of magnitude
lower cost might seem well worth it. On the
other hand to one enjoying that huge energy
abundance of early growth, they might view
20% of light speed as far too slow and be
willing to spend tens or hundreds times more
on shipping.
That is a key notion though, developing interstellar
colonies and developing your own system is
something that goes through phases. That Dyson-on-the-Cheap
of thin foil mirrors is likely something we’d
have the technology to build inside this century,
as it's about the easiest thing you can do
with even a simple self-replicating machine
system. You build a robot, or various species
of robots in a supply chain that is mostly
or entirely automated, who extract metal and
turn it into foil, and can build copies of
themselves. You don’t even necessarily need
self-replication either, that’s just the
tech that makes pumping out all that foil
so dirt cheap you don’t mind building a
million times what you need because all you
actually built was a handful of robots.
Of course dirt cheap production and more sophisticated
forms like 3D printing or automation able
to mill out virtually any item on demand also
interferes with interstellar trade. It’s
very unlikely any solar system is going to
contain any raw materials you can’t find
everywhere else, some might have twice as
much of something, or even hundreds conceivably,
but there wouldn’t be anything unique. And
if you can manufacture without massive supplies
chains, then even a small colony doesn’t
need to import manufactured goods from other
systems. Even unique conditions for biology,
like some alien plant or it turning out that
a world with a different set of lighting and
local conditions produced the best flavor
of some vintage, are things easily replicated
elsewhere. You can generate any gravity, atmosphere
& soil mix, and lighting spectra you want
inside a cylinder habitat after all.
This is already a bit of an issue in interplanetary
trade and is vastly exacerbated in interstellar
trade. This implies that in an economy dominated
by atomically-precise manufacturing, interplanetary
and interstellar trade would either revolve
around raw materials or unique goods of various
kinds, such as, for instance, the wine bottle
from Alpha Centauri, bought for its uniqueness
in a culture where you can have anything fabricated
in your home.
Alternatively early on, in a new system mass
is so cheap you can be outrageous with it,
like sending home a trillion tons of steel
propelled by a quadrillion tons of deuterium
just to buy you a shipment of million more
colonists or a megaton of various specialty
items that are hard to produce locally as
you’re new. More developed systems will
likely take that deal cheerfully, as they
can probably recover a lot of the energy by
controlled slowdown or a momentum exchange
of the shipment and would always be thirsty
for raw materials.
That’s a much longer timeframe and an extreme
example of trade, though. And for cases of
extreme abundance between two settled systems,
they have the option of the stellaser relay,
basically a big pair of mirrors sunk into
your star's corona that generate an enormous
and tight laser beam for shoving things around,
which we explored more in our episode interstellar
highways. However trade will always focus
on what’s cheapest for shipping, all things
being equal, and this is where we get to the
interstellar cycler.[d]
A few weeks back we discussed using the Aldrin
Cycler concept for moving stuff to Mars. The
basic premise is that you can put an object
– the cycler – on an elliptical orbit
that makes it come past both planets on a
cycle, it burns no fuel beyond starting it
up and doing minor course corrections. Everything
needs to spend fuel to get on board and to
exit and orbit the destination, but they can
save a lot on stuff like life support and
shielding. Thus you could have a big space
station habitat that meandered back and forth
between two planets and just took on cargo
and dropped it off, and did so on a minimum
energy transfer. Since we make them big compared
to most interplanetary spaceship designs,
and are more station than spaceship, they
are often called ‘castles’
That’s very handy for the slow movement
of cargo or people even between planets, as
there’s a lot of life support and shielding
needs. That’s even more true at the interstellar
scale where we can’t just chuck a bottle
of wine between Alpha Centauri and Earth at
high speed or it will be obliterated during
the trip. Interstellar spaceships are always
large affairs, they either need to be big
to contain all the spare parts, raw materials,
or life support needed for a journey of thousands
of years or they need many meters of thick
frontal shielding to be able to move at speeds
to make trips in years or decades. It’s
popular to hypothesize some tiny needle spacecraft
with a few nanobts and super-dense data storage
being sent to other stars but as we saw in
the generation ships Exodus Fleet episode,
this doesn’t really work or make sense.
So we always anticipate giant ships for interstellar
travel. Great big Interstellar versions of
our cycler castles fit that bill pretty well.
Now, you can actually create a long elliptical
orbit between two stars, but given that your
cycler’s speed needs to be in the general
vicinity of the orbital speeds of those bodies
to work, we’re talking trip durations on
an order of tens of thousands of years. That
might be fine for heavy raw material shipments
but not ideal. The cycler needs to be able
to significantly turn as it reaches a star
though – however it need not be a 180. One
option is to rely on electromagnetics. Stars
have very powerful magnetic fields and magnetics
fields can be used to turn objects for free.
There’s an awful lot of electromagnetics
going on in space, and a cycler running out
vast lengths of wires could use all that to
curve its path around a star. Done right such
a cycler might be able to make long circuits
around many stars and only pay the cost of
initially getting up to speed. And quite a
speed too, there’s nothing preventing them
doing this at a decent fraction of light speed.
Anything you want to put on them still has
to accelerate up to speed to get on board
and then decelerate when they exit to rendezvous
with their destination as the cycler moves
on. However, this lets us start playing with
recovering a lot of that energy we spent accelerating
things up. An Interstellar Cycler Castle could
be a huge affair, including one with the capability
to be unfurling huge solar sails for power
and for pushing course corrections as it gets
into a system, and could also be unwinding
a long electromagnetic mass driver to hurl
ships backwards along, to help match local
orbital speeds, while giving itself a push
too.
What’s more though, one of the big problems
with laser pushing systems is that it takes
a lot of energy to shove an object by bouncing
photons off it. It’s much more efficient
at higher speeds compared to other propellants,
not even including that you don’t have to
carry it around, but unless you can bounce
those photons back to something else to reuse
them, either for power for something else
or to bounce them off departing ships or the
cycler ship again, they’re a bit wasted.
That reuse policy is far easier close into
a solar system where the Cycler castle could
unfold a big parabolic dish to shove the energy
back to a facility that was capturing it for
local power generation. You’d have losses,
but in such a setup you could have a very
high percentage of recovery. Even a small
percent though would be enough to justify
it for trade purposes and thus make it the
dominant form of interstellar travel. If it’s
done efficiently enough there’s little to
no total energy use beyond the initial acceleration
and maintenance costs.
We tend to think of interstellar laser highways
being used to shove spaceships in between
two fixed points, a pair of solar systems,
and moving at velocities that wouldn’t permit
much recapture of energy just from the long
distances needed for acceleration, but this
might be the more plausible scenario. Instead
of giant fixed relay station along the way
giving shoves with beams, you might have lots
of interstellar cyclers castles running multi-century
paths around a circuit of stars who worked
in tandem with the local ports to keep an
acceleration and deceleration lane clear of
debris during the rendezvous period and sped
or slowed the cargo passing between via laser
beams bouncing back and forth many times.
Indeed it’s very likely such a system would
already be in place throughout any given solar
system for interplanetary transport, essentially
pulsing rivers of light for ships moving back
and forth with lots of carefully crafted mirrors
to keep that light efficiently reused.
In such a case the cycler doesn’t need to
be able to do much more than interface with
the local systems for transfers. And because
they are meant for presumably indefinite use
and you only have to speed them up once, you
can get away with truly massive affairs with
huge amounts of shielding, potentially well
in excess of even O’Neill Cylinders and
all of our larger generation ship design short
of planet ships. You might even start producing
ships in that size range – though likely
vastly lighter – for use as Cycler Castles
on very long routes. Such a system can be
modified to even serve as an intergalactic
cycler.
You do have an interesting effect from this
too. Since they are running a set and known
circuit, say one of 26 star systems A thru
Z, the folks at A enjoy an economic advantage
for shipping to B, who enjoys the same to
C and for importing from A, and that starts
setting up economic parallels to a lot of
historical trade routes that were dominated
by wind and sea currents and many of cultural
and diplomatic situations they had. You can
set up such a Cycler path on any path of stars
that’s reasonably elliptical so they can
make the turn at the speeds they’re going,
so a system might be a port of call on many
such cycler paths, and any given path might
have many cycler castles going on it clockwise
or counterclockwise, and at different speeds.
Given that there is quite a construction cost
and energy bill though to setting one up,
and doubtless maintenance cost too, there
will be much trade incentive to maximizing
their use and following existing paths.
One caveat though. While you can send these
castles out at extremely high speeds, they
must be able to turn and things must be able
to accelerate and decelerate from them. Your
maximum speed is going to depend a lot, especially
for the laser pushed and turned versions,
on how tight you can keep those beams to allow
accurate targeting and reflection back to
something reusing the beam, at least if energy
conservation is a major concern. Every extra
bit of distance either means more loss or
more relays adding some loss and scatter.
If I am moving at 20% of light speed, I can’t
do sharp turns. I have a 1-g turning radius
of 370 billion kilometers, 2500 AU, or .04
light years, or 2 light weeks. That’s a
lot of distance to be keeping tight beams
on, though since that is the turning radius
you could do a complete 180 rather than a
minor correction to the next star. 1-g, for
all that it’s Earth’s gravity, is quite
a lot of turn-stresses to be putting on large
objects too. Alternatively if it were going
slower, or was just nudging a couple degrees,
that could be done a lot easier and closer.
Additionally it can be using a lot of those
magnetic turning and slowing methods that
get discussed for interstellar ships, either
by itself or in tandem with laser pushing.
So this is manageable it’s just harder the
faster you want to go. Alternatively it's
easier if you’re going slower, at half the
speed turning radius is down to a quarter,
and some bulk freighter of durable goods shooting
for a tenth the speed, 2% of light speed,
only needs a hundredth of the turning radius,
just 25 AU, well into what we’d consider
the primary solar system, out in Uranus and
Neptune ranges.
However we do still need to contemplate that
kind of acceleration or more for those wanting
to catch up. A passenger ship trying to rendezvous
with something moving 20% of light speed needs
to accelerate at 1g for about 10 weeks. That’s
120 AU. Needless to say, many goods could
handle far faster acceleration, but people
– at least modern humans – probably could
not handle much more for weeks at a time.
This makes for an irritating paradigm because
it’s much easier to load durable materials
on a fast moving castle, whereas those are
the kind of goods where time is not of the
essence.
Such a castle probably is a community all
its own, maybe even a nation of millions,
and folks immigrating using one, even if it
is going a high fraction of light speed, are
basically not moving to another star system.
They are moving to the castle, then many years
or decades later, moving to another system.
Given that they are loading up at one destination
then another and so on, you might get the
equivalent of ethnic neighborhoods on board
them as a hundred thousand folks from Alpha
Centauri load up for the trip and twenty years
later the folks from Epsilon Indi load up
and another generation later the folks from
Delta Pavonis do. The crew is likely to change
a lot and amusingly by the time they turn
back around the folks loading up might go
visit the chunk of the castle inhabited the
last time their system loaded locals on board
and feel like they were going to a Renaissance
Fair in terms of the cultural difference.
As a reminder, those things coming and going
to the castle do have to match speeds, so
they do need shielding same as the castle
does, but not as much because they don’t
need the kind of redundancy and extra layers
a big colony ship plowing through space for
generations does. Also you can keep the rendezvous
space lane very tightly monitored to minimize
the need for extra shielding to handle objects
bigger than dust motes. You also have the
other big savings of all the equipment and
supplies a little ship would need compared
to some thick shelled giant space castle that
can be recycling everything and producing
its basic goods.
Now you would disembark as you approached
the next system, so their local laser array
could slow you down, and folks embarking would
race to catch up on the castle's way out.
So you could probably arrange to have shore
leave at the destination system. Especially
as the castle could give you a little extra
shove to higher speed on approach and slow
you a bit as you rendezvoused to leave the
system. That laser beam trick of bouncing
it several times works very well for minor
speed changes as the distance between the
two objects hasn’t changed much. The castle,
on top of all its own mirrors, sails, and
electromagnetic tethers for turning, can have
mirrors and lasers of its own just for shoving
around vastly lighter craft, not too mention
for blowing up space debris in-transit, so
you’d probably have the ability to get smaller
ships and cargo back and forth fairly easily
during each system’s window.
Those are big windows too, several weeks at
a minimum while it’s basically passing through,
and it would obviously be a big deal, depending
on how big the castle was and how often they
came by. They are likely to be constantly
expanding themselves, some might be entirely
automated, regardless of whether or not they
had living passengers, or others could effectively
be akin to nation-states or continental federations
on the go, and the castle analogy is fairly
accurate because they would be giants with
huge amounts of armor, and even ignoring their
own power generation and lasers, their sheer
kinetic energy makes them juggernauts. Likely
you’d see a big range, from automated ones
to minor civilizations in their own right,
from little drones to small crew freighters
to big behemoths.
Fundamentally though, simply because this
technique is always lower energy than the
alternatives we normally contemplate, and
because their fairly-fixed paths add some
stability to trade, I think this is likely
to be how the majority of interstellar trade
of physical goods and migration would occur,
on these interstellar cycler castles.
So that will wrap up our discussion of Interstellar
Trade for the day, but we did do an extended
look at interplanetary trade a couple years
back, and we also took a look at how trade
might develop between civilizations in our
Coexistence with Aliens Series episode on
Trade, and that 4-part series on Coexisting
with Aliens is exclusively available on Nebula,
our streaming service. We also show all our
new episodes there a couple days early and
without ads. If you’d like to catch SFIA
episodes early and without ads, and help support
the show while you’re doing it, you can
sign up for Nebula today, and see that Exclusive
Coexistence with Alien Series along with other
great content from our sibling shows.
However, we also have a deal running with
Curiositystream, where if you sign up for
them at the link in the episode description,
you not only get a 26% discount, but free
access to Nebula while you’re a Curiositystream
subscriber.
Curiosity Stream has excellent educational
content of their own and they are running
a 26% discount if you use the link in the
description. That’s a great deal since it
means you get a year of both Curiositystream
and Nebula for less than $15, and it helps
support this show and a lot of other educational
content which is what Curiositystream and
Nebula are all about, and again you can get
a year of both for less than $15 by using
the link in the episode’s description.
We mentioned asteroid mining today and we’ll
be take another look at that this upcoming
Thursday as we consider the role of Asteroid
Mining & Orbital Settlements in our future,
as we continue our Becoming and Interplanetary
Species series, and the week after that we’ll
be looking at space development from the more
human side of things as we contemplate Life
as a Space Colonist. Before that though we
have a bonus episode coming up this weekend,
looking at the Fermi Paradox and the Prime
Directive, the notion that we haven’t seen
any aliens because they feel morally obliged
to leave us alone and stay hidden.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
[a]Novelty goods that only rich collectors
can buy aren't a great basis for interstellar
trade. Better example cargoes might be isotopes,
elements, or complex organic molecules that
are rare at home, abundant at the colony,
and difficult or impractical to synthesize.
[b]Non-fungible good in a replicator-utilizing
setting, of note.
[c]How is the cycler different from a vaul?
[d]It took a while... Maybe move some of the
detailed discussions to *after* this?
