The Sun is a lonely star, it’s many planets 
millions or even billions of miles away,  
and with no kindred star within trillions, and yet 
many stars dance together eternally in binary or  
even trinary pairs, and we may come to live on 
planets with two or even three sunrises one day. 
So today we’ll be looking at the 
habitability of binary stars systems,  
and trinary or multi-star systems too, along 
with how and why we might colonize them. 
Now we used to say that most stars 
were in binary or multi-stars systems,  
so the issue of colonizing them if they might 
have habitable planets seemed pretty important,  
but we’ve since learned that’s not really the 
case. In astronomy we disproportionately see  
the great big stars, which have great big gravity 
wells, and they are far more likely to have formed  
with a binary partner and kept that partner.
Or indeed partners, as we can have triple and  
quadruple star systems or even more. And as we 
talked about last month in Primordial Planets  
and Multi-Planetary Empires, most stars form in 
clusters and slowly those get perturbed apart  
as they wander round the galaxy and have bigger 
members detonate as supernovae. Our episode today  
is more on binaries and trinary systems though.
Also, while we’re not fixated on using the  
classic definition of a habitable zone or 
goldilocks zone to mean the region around a  
star in which planet’s can have surface oceans 
of water, not ice or some Venutian Hellscape,  
it is the default meaning of the term habitable 
zone or goldilocks zone, not too cold,  
not too hot, just right for surface water. 
With binaries that can get a bit more tricky,  
since a planet might orbit both and move in and 
out of the habitable zone and remain habitable. 
So too, a system in which Earth-like life can 
emerge on its own, not only does not rule out  
life using other chemistries, but also does 
not well-represent what sorts of planets we  
can settle. As we discussed in Multi-Planetary 
Empires last month, even ignoring all the space  
habitats or asteroid colonies we might 
construct, we can make a lot of planets  
that are a bit cold or hot quite temperate by use 
of relatively simple orbital mirrors or shades,  
whose construction and maintenance would 
be orders of magnitude simpler and cheaper  
than terraforming that planet would be. We also 
have to move the habitable zone further out if  
discussing a large habitable moon, as those tend 
to be warmer from receiving not just sunlight,  
but tidal heating from their parent planet.
Incidentally, for channel regulars curious  
why I’m mentioning an episode last month in 
an episode I created last year on Nebula,  
the original version of this episode, colonizing 
binary stars, aired on Nebula back in April of  
2023 and as a companion video to our episode 
Life on Giant Moons, itself originally named  
colonizing giant moons, but as I was writing this 
week's other episode, Colonizing White dwarfs, and  
reviewing this one in preparation for a general 
release to youtube and our other platforms,  
I decided there was more to say on the topic.
And since this and next month’s Space Freighters  
episode were also the last Nebula Exclusives 
I recorded before I got the nose and tongue  
surgery to help correct my speech impediment last 
May, I felt like they deserved updated audio,  
and that gave me open license to tweak and add 
to the original script too. Even with that and  
a year of aggressive speech therapy there’s still 
some impediment left so if you’re new to the show  
and wondering what I just got done rambling 
about, feel free to turn on the captions. 
Now one of the critical things to understand about 
binaries and trinaries is that they are rarely the  
same mass as their partner, and this massively 
alters what their habitable zones look like.  
A second thing to understand is that their mass 
and brightness will often change over time, and  
the star which was originally brighter will die 
long before its twin, first brightening to be a  
subgiant, then becoming a massive red giant, then 
turning into much dimmer white dwarf, and then  
possibly going nova, sometimes repeatedly, and 
even supernova, a type 1a supernova specifically,  
by stealing mass of its binary partner, which 
typically leaves no remnant. Some stars used  
to be binary and now no longer have even a 
white dwarf companion left. They’re all alone,  
except maybe for a zombie star in some cases.
Ironically the vampiric mass theft off their  
longer-lived partner, in furthering lower 
their mass, actually extends their lifetime,  
so maybe vampiric isn’t the right way to think 
of it, but vampires and zombie are catchy  
terms. Also, their shift into a planetary 
nebula between red giant and white dwarf  
phases leaves a lot of matter hanging around 
their smaller partner might have gobbled up,  
so the vampire might be stealing some of it back.
Anyway that’s a key first point, whether we’re  
talking about binary stars or binary planets, 
there’s not a lot of cases where they are the  
same size. Alpha Centauri A & B, for instance, 
are fairly similar in size but A is still 20% more  
massive than B and also fully 3 times brighter. 
Mass is hugely important to star luminosity,  
as is age, so a star twice as massive 
is likely to be 10-12 times brighter,  
and that means its habitable radius is about 
three-and-a-half times wider too. Ironically  
the mass sensitivity is reversed for double 
planets, their surface gravity varies way less by  
mass than stellar luminosity does, see our double 
planets episode for discussion of that, but again  
stars vary heavily in brightness by their mass.
Specifically, our sun is exactly one solar mass,  
and has exactly one solar luminosity for its 
brightness - it's the basis for the system,  
and Earth is the basis for the astronomical 
unit, or AU, how far we are from the Sun. Our  
first modern estimate, from 60 years ago, had 
us roughly in the middle of the habitable zone,  
itself stretching from 0.74 AU to 1.24 AU, 
though most modern ones usually place us  
closer to the inner edge at about 0.9 AU and 
the outer edge sometimes even out past 2 AU. 
How does that vary for binaries? Well, 
let’s look at the individual stars first. 
Alpha Centauri B, also known as Toliman, has a 
mass 0.909 solar masses, 91% of our Sun’s mass,  
and a brightness of 49.8% of our sun’s, and 
both star’s are about the same age as our sun,  
so that brightness difference is all from the 
mass, just 9% less mass but half the brightness,  
and on its own it would have a habitable 
zone 71% as far from it a our own sun’s  
habitable zone is. Alpha Centauri A, also 
known as Rigil Kent, the larger of the pair,  
is only 1.079 Solar Masses, but 151% as bright as 
our sun and again 3 times brighter than Toliman. 
Coincidentally, their combined mass is 
almost twice our Sun’s and their combined  
brightness almost twice our Sun’s too. I say 
coincidentally because usually two stars with  
the same combined mass as our Sun would have 
nothing like its brightness. For instance,  
most stars are less than half as massive as our 
sun, and a star half our sun’s mass would either  
be dead and usually dim white dwarf or more likely 
an orange-ish red dwarf, and on the main sequence  
still since no star that started at that mass, 
even one as old as the universe, would be more  
than a fraction of the way through this life.
It would have a luminosity of just 0.4% of our  
sun’s, so it would take 250 of them to match our 
Sun’s brightness and its habitable zone would be  
only fifteenth as wide as ours, at about 7% of 
an AU. While a star with that remaining mass,  
1.5 solar masses, would be an F1 star on the main 
sequence, and 6.17 times brighter than our star,  
and more than 1500 times brighter than its red 
dwarf partner, even though it was only three times  
more massive. And it would be growing brighter 
as it aged too, and it probably would only live  
3 billion years, which might put it out of the 
habitable zone, at least for intelligent life,  
in a temporal rather than spatial sense.
We’ll return to age in a moment, but that massive  
imbalance in brightness tends to be more the norm 
than the exception, and for a close binary pair it  
often will mean that the second star is mostly 
irrelevant to the habitability so long as they  
are much closer than the habitable zone is wide. 
We’ll cover two interesting exceptions at the end. 
Alpha Centauri A and B are further from each other 
than their habitable zones are wide so any planet  
orbiting both are too cold for life, and any 
orbiting A are seeing something far brighter  
in the night sky than our moon is, but not 
one that helps much with life and temperature. 
We’ll dip into them more later in the episode 
but a planet in B or Toliman’s habitable zone  
would see a small rise or drop in temperature 
when A, Rigil Kent, was closest or furthest  
in its 79-year orbital period, but it is 
minimal. Alternatively, Alpha Centauri C,  
or Proxima Centauri, isn’t even a bright star 
in the night sky of A or B and effectively  
irrelevant to the habitability of either. We 
are not even sure if is a true trinary system,  
Proxima might just be near them and passing by, or 
newly joined, though a distant binary or trinary  
on orbits of tens of thousands of years might 
affect habitability if it was quite eccentric in  
its orbit and got in close during perihelion, 
or dragged a lot of comets along with it. 
Indeed the idea that our Sun might have a dim red 
dwarf or brown dwarf partner was a very popular  
one for a long time, and it was nicknamed Nemesis 
because it’s proposed distance would result in an  
orbital period of 26 million years, which we 
thought we saw a pattern of mass extinctions  
occurring at. Only relatively recently have we 
been able to rule out any Nemesis-like partner as  
big or bigger than Jupiter, and a better fossil 
record has pointed away from 26 million year  
cycles of extinction. Very popular idea in science 
and science fiction though, probably best known  
from my namesake Isaac Asimov’s excellent novel 
Nemesis, or the Red Star with its 200 year cycle  
of destruction from Anne McCaffrey’s Pern 
series, another of my favorites growing up,  
indeed the second sci fi author I read right 
after Douglas Adams, though I enjoy it just  
as much now as when I was a younger age.
And returning to age, it is a huge factor in  
binary habitability, more than in single-star 
systems in fact. Mostly because stars grow  
brighter as they age and more massive ones age 
faster. What’s more, we have white dwarf binaries  
like Sirius B, and that B indicates it is the 
second brighter of the two stars. But while Sirius  
A is the brightest Star in our own night Sky, and 
gives off 25 times as much light as our own Sun,  
both are less than a tenth our Sun’s own 
age and Sirius B, the white dwarf remnant,  
is actually more massive than our own Sun 
and while only half the mass of Sirius A now,  
would presumably have been 5-6 times more massive 
than our Sun before it went Red Giant and a few  
hundred times brighter, and indeed many thousands 
of times brighter when it was a red giant. 
We discussed this in greater detail earlier this 
week in Colonizing White Dwarfs, but you might  
easily find a binary system where such a star once 
lived and was now a white dwarf – or neutron star  
or black hole for that matter – and it’s once 
smaller and dimmer binary partner lived on,  
with planets. Even if that binary partner – now 
deemed A instead of B – were merely a red dwarf,  
it would still be brighter than any white dwarf 
or neutron star, especially after a long enough  
time that life had arisen. The Sirius system is 
only a quarter of a billion years old and Sirius  
B died around a hundred million years ago, 
not much time for life to arise and prosper. 
As we discussed earlier this week, while they’re 
bad spots to seek naturally occurring life,  
these remain good targets for colonization, as 
contrary to what scifi implies, a supernova does  
not automatically obliterate planets, and 
their charred remains might un-char after a  
long enough time. We’ll focus more for now though 
on contemplating binaries where habitable planets  
might naturally exist and be long-term stable.
This means that we’re either contemplating a  
system that is not a true binary for brightness 
sake – one where one of the stars has become a  
dim remnant – or we’re contemplating stars 
where the most massive is no more than 20  
or 30% brighter than our Sun, which would be 
enough to let Mars be earth-like temperature. 
Now of course many binaries are very stable and 
long-lived, but separated by dozens or hundreds  
of AU. We discussed the case of Alpha Centauri 
already and more in the episode Colonizing Alpha  
Centauri, and more in a bit, it's a popular 
star system to discuss after all as our nearest  
neighbor, and again those binaries have a period 
of 79 years and never get closer than 11 AU,  
or further than 36 AU. Think never as close 
as Saturn and never further than Pluto. 
For cases where they’re further, 
or dimmer, your main concern is  
gravitational perturbation of planets or mass 
cometary bombardment scenarios like Nemesis,  
or possibly alien mega-microbe invasion like with 
McCaffrey’s Pern. And while that case is unlikely,  
a panspermia event spreading life between 
binary systems is plausible enough. 
Needless to say though, that’s hardly a trivial 
group of concerns, but not a big one for habitable  
zones themselves. This would often be the case 
for trinary systems too, where two were close  
and either orbited something bigger - which 
is very likely to be short-lived, and end as a  
neutron star or black hole, or they got orbited by 
something smaller like Alpha and Proxima Centauri. 
So we’ll bypass this case too beyond noting 
it’s a situation where people are very used  
to seeing something far brighter than the moon in 
their night sky, and indeed often in the day sky,  
but which otherwise has minimal effect 
on them. We’re really only interested  
in binary cases where the both stars contribute a 
significant part of the light to warming a planet. 
Though we do want to be mindful that a habitable 
planet and a habitable star system are not the  
same thing, and so you could have cases where 
the planet intelligent life formed on really only  
relied on one star for sunlight but their best 
candidates for settlement relied on the other  
or both. And indeed you could easily imagine 
a case where both Toliman and Rigil Kent had a  
habitable planet or two in Alpha Centauri and was 
much more viable for colonization than imagining  
us going there, a journey modern ships could make 
without much more difficulty than a trip to Mars  
and where communication time lags are still on 
an order of an hour, not 4 and a half years.  
This makes trade, and for that matter war, 
a lot more plausible and practical too. 
In any event, this gives us 3 examples of 
how planets might exist around a binary or  
with some modification, a trinary system. The 
first two cases are fairly trivial. Case 1,  
the two stars are much closer together than the 
planet orbiting them. These are probably Close  
Binaries, which in astronomical terms means 
ones close enough to exchange mass from their  
outer atmosphere and which also means that once 
the bigger one goes red giant it will encompass  
that other star and later when it becomes a white 
dwarf, it is going to nova, if not supernova. 
Not a high priority colonization target and really 
only viable for habitable planets if both stars  
are actually fairly large, our Sun-sized to the 
nominal upper limit of 1.3 solar masses, as that  
would have a 5 billion year main sequence life. 
That star would have a habitable region 60% wider  
than our own sun, and if we threw in a smaller 
k-type star orbiting as far out as Mercury,  
at say 70% of our Sun’s mass, then it would have 
30% of our brightness and you would have a close  
but not too close binary pair around which an 
Earth-clone would orbit at 1.67 AU, just a hair  
farther out than Mars, but with as much sunlight.
This planet is orbiting once every 557 days,  
and half again our own year length, and during 
that time it will have occasions where the  
secondary star is more than half an AU further or 
closer to them than at other times of their year.  
Though those two inner stars are orbiting each 
other every 81 days, about a seventh of your year.  
The calendar here in terms of seasons might be a 
very screwy one, though it is likely your planet  
is going to end up in a resonant orbit that’s 
an exact multiple of that star’s orbital period. 
We’ll talk about other screwy season 
scenarios in next week’s episode on  
the Banks Orbital Megastructure, which 
I actually recorded before this since I  
keep coming back and tinkering with this script.
Returning to our example, since you are moving  
around those suns while they move around each 
other, this is probably something like a 90-100  
day period between when the secondary star repeats 
its closest approach to you and this is going to  
be producing sunlight changes as significant as 
summer and winter here on Earth, but over a much  
shorter interval more like our season than year 
in duration. Factor in your own axial tilt and you  
can get some extreme weather variation. Nor can we 
ignore tidal forces, which are likely to be very  
significant, and which for dimmer dwarfs replaces 
varying sunlight as the variable making this a  
rough place to live, as well as what permits it 
to live. They’re the fuel for the fire keeping  
you warm but often burning you, so to speak.
Note that a rough place to live isn’t the same  
as an impossible place to live, but we need 
to be mindful that this is a very perturbation  
prone system with changing lighting and twice as 
many chaotic effects like solar storms. Probably  
more too, tidal effects of stars on each other 
can cause more eruptions. As we noted earlier,  
most binaries are not very similar in brightness 
to each other, and there’s not going to be  
many stable configurations that allow that 
lesser binary to significantly contribute  
to lighting a habitable planet without also 
either capturing or ejecting it from orbit.  
Though by significant lighting we mostly 
mean heat and photosynthesis, even way out  
at Pluto where the sun is a thousandth bright, 
it’s still a hundred times brighter than the  
full moon. That’s going to impact biology and 
its cultural effect is going to be huge too. 
Now case 2 we can mostly skip, this is our 
case where the other binary is too far away to  
contribute any real sunlight or much gravitational 
effect. It’s still a lot of nighttime lighting  
though, and even for those a bit further apart 
than Alpha Centauri’s binaries, over its period  
of a century or more it will be visible during 
the night time during one half of the year and  
then not the other. It’s the extra bright moon 
lighting up your winter skies for a century and  
then it will brighten your spring nights for 
a century, then your summer, then fall. It is  
probably what your calendar uses for your next 
increment after days and years, and it might be  
many decades or even a few millennia, 
depending on how bright and close it is. 
Of course brightness is going to vary with 
how close it is and that can vary a lot too,  
as orbits are rarely circular, and as mentioned 
Alpha Centauri A and B orbit each other every 79  
years and very elliptically, from 11 AU to 36 AU 
in distance, meaning some planet orbiting Alpha  
Centauri B, again also called Toliman, is watching 
Alpha Centauri A – also called Rigil Kent – vary  
over 8 decades from something 400 times dimmer 
than our own Sun – a thousand times brighter  
than the full moon – to one 40 times dimmer 
than our Sun, brighter than a cloudy day,  
and at both distance visible during daytime. 
That probably isn’t a deal breaker, and we  
can imagine life managing that difference 
easily enough, but anything much more than  
that would probably make life non-viable, with 
either deadly hot summers for a couple decades  
or ultra-cold winters for the same. Obviously, 
this case relies a lot on a fairly elliptical  
orbit, which is neither rare nor normal.
Alpha Centauri C, or Proxima, again is barely  
visible, as at its distance of 13,000 AU from 
the others, a fifth of a light year, it is 100  
billion times dimmer in their sky than our own sun 
is in ours. It would be a fifth magnitude star,  
the kind only visible on very clear nights far 
from any light pollution. Incidentally, Proxima  
is not visible from Earth except by telescope, 
and even then, in the southern hemisphere. 
So case 1 is a planet orbiting both stars 
and case 2 is orbiting just one, but with  
a neighbor close enough to be a brightest moon 
or even a major climate changer over the course  
of its decades to centuries long orbit.
Let’s consider the third case, a planet  
orbiting the bigger star which is orbited by 
another star on a bit more of circular orbit,  
probably still elliptical but not sharply 
so, which helps minimize perturbation. 
The issue here is that this second sun plays a 
role a lot like Jupiter and indeed probably has  
its own solar system, but it needs to be further 
away than Jupiter for there to be any chance of  
stable orbits around either star. In a case like 
this you have more likelihood it’s a dim red  
dwarf on the smaller side orbiting something dim 
too, as that forces any habitable planets to be  
very close to their stars. This is quite common 
since most stars are much smaller than our Sun,  
and many binaries are red dwarf pairs, or a red 
and orange dwarf, or even involve a brown dwarf  
though it's debatable if they count as a star.
We don’t tend to think of it this way but the  
bigger a star is, the brighter it is, and the 
more easily disturbed and perturbed objects  
in its habitable zone are. Whatever your lighting 
is like, you can’t exist long as a planet if it’s  
either shifting radically all the time or if your 
planet is getting ejected into the interstellar  
void by perturbation. Or swallowed by its sun.
To wrap up with an interesting pair of examples:  
Let's imagine a tidally locked planet around 
a smaller red dwarf, that it orbits about once  
a month, and further out beyond that we have 
another star, a very slightly dimmer red dwarf,  
that orbits about once a year. That means 
during the normal course of events the day  
side of our planet is always under sunlight, a 
monstrously large but dim sun, and that we can  
often see that other star that’s about a tenth 
as bright in the sky. We see it for around two  
weeks at a time then it sets and rises again 2 
weeks later. During that time, the eternal night  
side is brighter, enough to feel like a cloudy 
day, followed by two weeks of utter darkness,  
but over the course of the longer year, we will 
be close or further from that secondary sun,  
so we basically have several month long cloudy 
days that are increasingly brighter followed  
by a zenith than waning to more dark days.
This place is also very tidally wracked,  
because that second sun is still very massive, 
just dim, so it might indeed be a very stormy  
place and still fairly warm from tidal heating 
and air currents. I could picture living in some  
mining city there built into a volcanically 
active island living on a diet of mostly fish  
and mushrooms, trading to the twilight realms 
and sunny side for other food. It would be an  
interesting place to be a ship captain during 
their age of sail too, gloomy seas for weeks at  
a time followed by eternal dark for two more, on a 
planetary hemisphere that was some mix of Iceland,  
fjords, and massive whirlpools.
We can also flip that case around,  
our planet around the smaller star and 
them orbiting the bigger binary. A red  
dwarf with a close habitable planet that orbits a 
star like our own but maybe at Martian distance,  
in which case that planet is probably tidally 
locked and one side always sees the red dwarf and  
the other not, but depending on the brightness and 
mass of that red dwarf, it may orbit it anywhere  
from once every few days to a few months, and get 
light one one side or another from that bigger and  
more distant sun on that same time frame.
So for a quick example, a two week orbit  
around a red dwarf not quite bright 
enough to warm that world on its own,  
has one side eternally lit by it and lit by 
that other sun for a week, then dark for a week,  
while the other side never see that close red 
sun, doesn’t know its binary, and is dark for  
a week and dimly lit by the bigger sun for a week, 
then once again dark. To the best of my knowledge  
that’s never been written up as a setting for 
any novel, either of them, so feel free to steal  
one and set a tale there, and there’s a lot of 
interesting trinary cases of a similar variety. 
But that’s where we’ll wrap 
our own tale up for the moment…
As we saw today, the habitability of binary 
star systems, and even regular star systems,  
can be a bit non-intuitive and require 
some calculation to understand. Math  
can sometimes be intimidating for those 
who want to learn more on these topics,  
and people can even trick themselves into 
thinking it can’t be done, even though they  
know it will open up whole new worlds to their 
imagination and help with professional growth  
too. But it can be done, especially with 
the help of a good partner, like Brilliant. 
The best way to learn is daily and establishing a 
daily learning habit is one of the most important  
things you can do, learning in fun and bite 
sized chunks, and that’s where Brilliant can  
help. Brilliant helps you build real 
knowledge in minutes a day—with fun  
lessons you can do whenever you have time.
Brilliant also focuses on fun and interactive  
learning, where you learn by doing, with 
thousands of interactive lessons in science,  
math, data analysis, programming, and AI. From 
simple to complex, whatever your skill level,  
Brilliant customizes content to fit your 
needs and lets you start where you should  
and improve at your own pace. Brilliant’s been 
a partner to this show for many years now,  
and you can trust them to be a partner on your 
learning journey, but you can try everything  
Brilliant has to offer first for free for a full 
30 days, just visit brilliant.org/isaacarthur  
or click on the link in the description. You’ll 
also get 20% off an annual premium subscription.
Thinking on long term friends and partners, 
whenever I’m doing a follow up or sequel to an  
episode from years back, it tends to spark my 
memory of when that episode was getting made,  
and today’s episode was no exception, and 
ironically while first written a year ago,  
before being expanded for today, it was first 
planned 4 years ago and put on the back burner  
because it was right after Covid came out and I 
switched some channel focus in favor of episodes  
like our Becoming an Interplanetary Species 
series. I’d originally been planning to give  
that as a talk while accepting my Pioneer Award 
at the International Space Development conference,  
which got canceled that year, and I decided 
to make it first an episode and then a series,  
and it was very popular with that organization, 
the National Space Society, and four years later  
I’m the president of that organization. Another 
thing that got put on the backburner from Covid,  
was my old army battalion’s long planned first 
reunion, and that was also just when my wife  
Sarah and I had gotten married, right after 
the shutdown. She was hoping to go to both  
events with me, but we couldn’t go and even our 
honeymoon had to be a bit shortened from Covid. 
That battalion reunion finally got rescheduled 
this year in Las Vegas, for this weekend,  
and I wanted to wish all my former battler 
brothers from 2-3 FA, the 2nd battalion of  
the 3rd Field Artillery regiment, proudly serving 
in virtually every conflict since the War of 1812,  
a great time there in Vegas. I could not have 
had any better luck than to serve in 2-3 FA  
alongside all of them. Unfortunately, my 4th 
anniversary is this weekend too, so Sarah and I  
will be off enjoying a long needed vacation when 
this episode airs. As I’m sure most of you know,  
I create these episodes well in advance, so 
no, if you were wondering, I’m not working  
on my vacation beyond probably spending about 10 
minutes releasing and checking on this episode,  
my wife might kill me otherwise.
Speaking of upcoming episodes though,  
we’ll begin May 2024 with a look at the 
Banks Orbital, also known as God’s Bracelet,  
a megastructure space habitat hundreds of times 
larger than Earth, that advanced civilizations  
might build as an alternative to terraforming 
planets. And speaking of advanced civilizations,  
the week after that on Thursday May 9th we’ll 
look at the Interdiction Hypothesis of the  
Fermi Paradox, which asks if civilizations out in 
the galaxy might leave large buffer zones between  
their empires, and ask if Earth might be inside 
one such empty buffer zone. Then we’ll continue  
the alien theme with a look at the reverse case of 
Interdiction, where civilizations sprawl near each  
other and set up alien embassies. After that, it's 
on to the idea of massive galactic empires and the  
enormous cosmic capitals that might oversee them.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can  
also help support the show on Patreon, and if 
you’d like to donate or help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting 
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can  
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early 
and ad free on our streaming service,  
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content like 
Galactic Beacons, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
