One of my favorite mottos in life is to live 
forever, or die trying, as it seems like a  
win-win philosophy to me, but as technology to 
truly extend life spans seems to draw closer,  
we may find out that longer lives opens the 
door to many new problems and dangers too. 
Welcome to another episode of Science & Futurism 
with Isaac Arthur, and I am your aforementioned  
host, Isaac Arthur. Today I’ll be going through 
a lot of the potential ethical conundrums people  
raise about life extension, and adding some lesser 
known ones too, as we consider if this is really  
a technological path we should be pursuing.
We’ll be trying to treat the subject neutrally,  
and we’re also picking sub-topics in part 
by the frequency I’ve heard them rather  
than their specific logical or scientific 
validity, but I feel they should still be  
treated respectfully nonetheless. Many of the 
arguments apply to other areas of technology,  
as well. I should also say from the outset that 
I’m a bit biased on the topic. After almost a  
decade of doing a show on science & futurism, one 
of the most common questions I get asked is what  
technology we discuss on this show that I would 
most like to see invented in my own lifetime,  
and the answer is life extension technology.
And that answer is a bit tongue in cheek but also  
sincere. Nonetheless, as much as I would love to 
live a much longer and healthier life than a mere  
70 or 80 years, I can definitely see some serious 
issues with this technology being developed. 
Some of the major ones we’ll cover 
today are that it isn’t natural,  
that immortality is wrong or impossible, that 
life would get boring, that any treatment that  
extends life would have unequal access, such 
that perhaps only the rich or powerful would  
get it. We worry that in a time of very long lives 
upward mobility would be far harder, and perhaps  
dampen or even halt technological progress or 
social changes, or that such long lifespans might  
erode traditional human social fabric, ending the 
need for children, or require changes to mind and  
body that rendered you inhuman. We’ll mention some 
others along the way but those are the big ones,  
and we’ll end by asking if the situation 
changes if we use a more gradual approach,  
versus sudden major life extension, and 
then some summary and closing thoughts. 
And this will take us a while, so 
grab a drink and a snack, sit back,  
and give those like and subscribe buttons a smack.
We might as well begin with the idea that longer  
lives aren’t natural, as it’s the biggest topic 
and a common concern we’ve addressed before with  
other technologies, and which also remains 
the most common concern about life extension. 
On the one hand, we would often just say that 
no, life extension isn’t natural, but neither  
are metal tools or cooked meat. However, while 
a prosthetic hand isn’t natural either, it also  
isn’t universal. Right now everyone dies of old 
age if something else doesn’t get them first,  
which until recently was usually the case, and 
everyone has lost family and friends to it.  
For me, that’s all the more reason to 
pursue life extension but I think many  
folks rationalize their grandparents death 
as okay because it's part of a natural cycle. 
Of course, that depends a lot on what we mean by 
nature, as for instance in Abrahamic tradition  
dying of old age isn’t natural, it’s the 
byproduct of original sin and living in  
a corrupted world. We see something similar in 
Hinduism and Buddhism too, in the past things  
were less corrupted and people lived longer. We 
probably need to distinguish between the two major  
ways people use the term natural, as both of these 
meanings get used in objections to life extension. 
First, nowadays a lot of people mean natural in 
the sense of a world and universe of no inherent  
morality or purpose, at least as given by a 
divine Creator. Life exists as it does because of  
Darwinian selection processes and our civilization 
is molded by those. In which case this concern is  
still a legitimate one but has a different meaning 
to the second and older notion of nature, which is  
in accordance with a divine plan or natural order.
In the first case, the concern is that our nature  
and civilization is a pretty delicate balance and 
that human civilization is pretty heavily based  
on our birth rate and lifespans for all sorts 
of key behaviors and processes. As an example,  
loving mothers caring for their young is 
rare enough in nature, fathers more so,  
but grandparents are super-rare. And a lot of that 
might be because few critters spend much time,  
proportional to their normal lifespan, as 
relatively helpless children needing care  
and teaching, and don’t really survive 
to a post-fertile old age much either. 
That’s probably a positive feedback relationship, 
a tribe with deep bonds doesn’t want to get rid  
of their older members and if they have a big 
development time for big brains, like humans,  
those older and wiser members are valuable 
commodities. If everyone suddenly grows  
up to be an adult in mind and body in a year, 
that relationship might have differed, so too,  
if the maturation period remained the same but 
people lived to a thousand or never suffered much  
loss of mental or physical vitality with age.
So common sense says that if that’s true,  
then messing with that risks a lot of potential 
unexpected consequences to society, some of which  
we’ll explore later, but normally this perspective 
of nature isn’t revering the natural for itself,  
just recognizing it as an impressive collection 
of trial and error that does work and easily tips  
over, so to be respected and not casually poked. 
But not inherently sacred or assumed to be best. 
We’ve thoroughly embraced the technological 
augmentation of human health these days,  
especially from this perspective, but 
that doesn’t mean every change is wise,  
especially when new and not tested, and 
not everyone thinks every change is a good  
one or that its side effects can outweigh 
those benefits or at least cut into them. 
The other half of nature is the natural order 
idea, and I should note that most people these  
days could be said to be of two minds on this or 
in this camp but also visit the other. But if you  
believe that nature is sacred or decreed by a 
higher power, then there’s always that concern  
that any action you take that’s not already listed 
as approved might be desecrating that order or  
offending that higher power. That’s a very common 
sense attitude if we’re taking this perspective  
too. And I can’t tell you that extending people’s 
lives is not violating that, since it’s very  
dependent on which higher power or natural order 
we’re talking about, and even then, very prone  
to interpretation. I can say that I’m not aware 
of any official consensus in any large modern  
religion saying life extension is inherently 
unethical, nor any consensus that it’s a great  
and wise idea that’s definitely approved from on 
high, and science is in the same boat, it doesn’t  
really do ethical questions well and lends us no 
special insight on if this is a good idea or not. 
As we were discussing in our episode, 
Human Devolution, a couple months back,  
a lot of traditions hold that humanity has been 
degenerating over the generations, either because  
of the world being inherently corrupt, or some 
other triggering event, like Adam and Eve taking  
culinary advice from the serpent, or the decrease 
of lifespans from Adam’s era to the post-Noah era.  
And there’s a lot of other examples from many 
cultures, but since that’s probably the most  
familiar to most viewers, let’s expound on that.
If humans once were longer lived, and now aren’t,  
one reason might be that it is a byproduct 
of some flaw in ourselves – physical or  
metaphysical – and a thing which can be fixed. 
If not, then the ethics of life extension don’t  
really matter because we’d just be tilting 
at windmills anyway and will never find out. 
Fundamentally though, the ‘not natural’ 
argument isn’t one we can just wave aside  
from either perspective. I’d make the argument 
that ‘in for a penny, in for a pound’ applies,  
as we already use huge amounts of technology to 
extend life in so many ways, and I think it’s  
a bit of a nitpick to say that curing cancer 
is fine and relieving, delaying, or repairing  
various ailments associated to aging is fine but 
trying to move the needle past 120 is wrong. Well,  
there have been folks saying 120 is the maximum 
age for years, but that’s media hype, there’s  
never been any sort of scientific consensus 
that humans have a hard biological limit. 
I think 120 is probably popular because first, 
we don’t have many folks documented beyond that,  
just the one at the moment with a few at 119, and 
second, because there’s a passage in the bible,  
Genesis 6:3, using the NIV, “My Spirit will not 
contend with humans forever, for they are mortal;  
their days will be a hundred and twenty 
years.” The verse right after that is the  
one discussing Nephilim and then we get to Noah 
3 verses later, whose grandfather was Methuselah  
and who was already 600 when the flood came. I’ve 
heard it interpreted as a warning that the Flood  
was coming in 120 years too. Skip ahead some more 
chapters and you’ve got Abraham and Sarah living  
to 175 and 127 respectively, and famously 
having kids when a century old, and their  
grandson Jacob is said to have died at age 147, 
so presumably it doesn’t mean a 120 year maximum  
lifespan for humans going forward in that period.
Obviously this isn’t a theological discussion  
today, but I’ve heard the 120 maximum idea a 
lot and it’s not a specific stance of science,  
but I think that comes from a mix of that verse 
plus only one solidly documented person making it  
past 120 thus far, plus the Hayflick limit 
and telomeres, but again that was never a  
confirmed or majority stance of science, and newer 
research says that if we have a maximum lifespan,  
which is strongly debated, then it’s at least 150.
So why doesn’t anyone live that long? Well,  
for a simple analogy think of it like flipping 
a coin, if it comes up tails you die. Based on  
the total combination of all factors, from medical 
technology to genetics and many points in between,  
people have an effective time at which half are 
going to die and half not, then another bit of  
time till half of the remainder die. If only 
a million people live to age 100 and current  
technology means half die each year thereafter, by 
110 only a thousand are left and by 120, only 1 in  
a million. So, if technology lets 10 million folks 
make it to 100, then 10 folks make it to 120.  
Alternatively, if technology lets that coin 
flip be biased to 60% survival each year,  
rather than 50%, then about 80 folks get to 120.
There will also never be a point at which you  
can completely eliminate all causes 
of possible death, including suicide,  
so over a long enough timeline people will die and 
with some statistical effect that would amount to  
a life span or half life. While we will use the 
term biological immortality frequently today or  
in other discussions of the topic, that means not 
aging specifically, that we can replace components  
or regrow them all, not true immortality.
There’s no real reason to think nature,  
viewed from either perspective, is 
insisting on a specific maximum age,  
and even if it were something like 150, well 
most of the ethics we need to discuss today  
would still apply if most people could live to 
that age, especially if their fertility could  
be extended that long and that probably is going 
to be an easier problem to solve, particularly  
since cryo-freezing some eggs and growing kids in 
a vat is basically already available technology. 
We could have more issues with considerably 
longer lifespans, beyond a thousand years,  
folks we often refer to as Methuselahs, and we 
also have folks of considerably longer duration  
in other traditions too. These might be a bit 
more of a concern, which we’ll discuss later,  
as they may need massive overhaul to 
their brains just to keep their memories. 
But there is the separate question of if 
Immortality is Wrong, and I’d argue that  
it is indeed a completely separate issue. 
Under known-physics we have a handful of  
hypothetical ways in which life can be extended 
infinitely, Dyson’s Eternal Intelligence,  
Tipler’s Omega Point Cosmology, Infinite Scale 
Duplication, and Quantum Resurrection being the  
big four we’ve discussed in other episodes. We 
have even more ways to potentially extend lives  
trillions of years or even more, but compared 
to infinity, all finite numbers are nothing. 
If you’ve got some eternal life hereafter, 
that’s going on for eternity and at the behest  
of an all-powerful deity, so no finite life 
extension is going to get you out of that,  
and no discussion of life extension, medical, 
transhuman, or digital, is contemplating  
immortality either, it’s just a figure of speech 
for a very, very long life. Incidentally if you  
want rundowns on Dyson’s Eternal Intelligence, 
see our Iron Stars episode, see the Omega Point  
Cosmology episode for discussion of that, 
and see our Infinite Improbability Issues  
and Technological Resurrection episode for 
the other two. Immortality may be unethical,  
I view it as impossible in this Universe anyway, 
and also not desirable, for reasons we discuss in  
those episodes. But I don’t see how they apply to 
finite life extension anymore than sterilizing an  
infected wound does. Wanting a longer life than 
we currently have is not automatically a slippery  
slope to desperately wanting an infinite lifespan 
at any cost, as common in fiction, and people  
routinely and knowingly skip on doing things we 
know extend life these days, like lots of good  
sleep, exercise, and diet, which truly will add 
years to your life. Of course some folks find that  
time jogging or on the exercise bike a bit boring.
There’s also that boredom issue, and an infinite  
time allows infinite boredom, but boredom with 
existence is a personal issue in my book, some  
people are bored of life by 20 – I think a lot of 
those same folks find it interesting again by 30,  
and I can’t imagine being bored of life by 
10,000, but for othera it might be a century,  
and my lifespan shouldn’t be determined by their 
issues. If living too long presents a problem,  
a very obvious solution would seem to present 
itself. This isn’t some fable story where you  
wished for immortality and now nobody can kill 
you, including yourself, even if you want to. 
While we sometimes call this biological 
immortality, to mean no inherent maximum  
age or loss of vitality from age, you are not 
immortal. Your lifespan has been extended, and  
that extension can be ended. You stop taking the 
pills, so to speak, shut the nanobots off, and if  
you’re impatient and opposed to suicide, you pick 
up ever more exciting hobbies till either you stop  
being bored or you stop breathing. Cliff jumping 
is an option, a channel favorite is stalking lions  
and attacking them with nerfbats. The galaxy is 
an enormous place, as is the human imagination, if  
all these things bore you, I’m sorry, but that’s 
on you. Your personal level of boredom and how  
long it takes to reach terminal levels shouldn’t 
be a deciding factor on if others should be able  
to extend their lives, unless by some coincidence 
it’s a package deal where we are all in for  
the process or not, and for the same period.
That’s partially applicable to the potential  
problem of overpopulation though, as we do have 
a finite amount of resources and there’s that  
concern we would rapidly over stuff the planet 
with people or have to ban any new children,  
or only a small handful of new births 
would be allowed, or we’d have some  
crazy lottery at age 100 for who got to 
keep living or have a kid or whatever. 
That’s not an ethical issue unique to life 
extension and I think it’s merely a correlated  
but separate one. But it’s also not an urgent 
new one. There was a spin off of Doctor Who  
called Torchwood where they had a season where 
by some technomagic process nobody could die,  
called Miracle Day. Folks are immediately 
worried about critical overpopulation  
occurring in mere months since people 
are still being born but nobody is dying. 
Thing is, as we hit 8 billion people on 
this planet, there’s just under 400,000  
babies being born every day, but there’s only 
about 150,000 deaths a day, that’s why we have  
a billion more people in 2023 than 2011, when 
that show came out. Had none of those deaths  
occurred since then, that number would be more 
like 8.5 billion. Not exactly a sudden crisis,  
the population rising by a billion and a half 
rather than a billion over a dozen years. So no,  
if someone invented agelessness or biological 
immortality, it represents no sudden life or  
death decision we need to make. You eventually do 
have a problem, one we already have incidentally,  
the dynamics change but they did that last century 
too, a couple of times, hence why we didn’t have  
any Malthusian Catastrophe as many expected.
You could have some surprising effects from that  
too. For instance, a lot of people juggle personal 
lives, careers, and families, and feel pushed into  
having a family sooner than later to avoid the 
built-in expiration date. If that expiration  
date gets removed or kicked back, the birth rate 
might drop too. People say great, I am going to  
look 30 for the next 300 years, I can wait a few 
decades to get my family started. Combine that  
with far better birth control technology and an 
aging populace that’s generally more experienced  
and thus probably has better judgment and more 
patience, and you probably do not have some  
massive population explosion waiting to happen.
In the long term, yes, if people aren’t dying much  
and people want kids, you do have a problem but 
it’s one with many possible answers, some better  
than others of course. For a lot of us, the answer 
is more technology for ever better management  
and use of resources and to expand to get more 
resources in space, and on strange new worlds. 
I think for a lot of folks, Overpopulation 
has been such a nightmare that seeing a growth  
rate decrease that maybe eventually leads to a 
stable population number is a dream come true,  
and so radical life extension can seem like it 
would just reopen that book, but the ethics remain  
the same in both cases. Do you or do you not have 
the right to tell others if they can or cannot  
have children, and if so, in what circumstances? 
But life extension adds the extra dimension that  
we now have to ask if we have the right to 
tell other people they have lived too long,  
and need to make room for others. Though that 
was already a discussion point in the past,  
and not just in a Logan’s Run context, but where 
people would ask if it was fair for retirees or  
seniors to continue living longer, especially as 
the older they got, the more resources had to be  
spent on them on average. It comes up in figuring 
out how to structure social security and pensions,  
if the retirement age needs to be raised, 
if you would still get a pension if you  
retired and life extension was invented.
And this is probably the origin of the rich vs  
poor concern of Unequal Access to life extension. 
It’s not the only dichotomy that unequal access  
can be built around, but probably the one we 
most here brought up for life extension. Medicine  
costs money, and there’s a limited number of 
practitioners too, so something has to determine  
when a given procedure for a given person is not 
a good use of resources. This isn’t necessarily  
a utilitarian decision either, where the goal 
is the most good as justified by the outcome.  
We just as often use the opposed deontological 
perspective; the ends don’t justify the means. And  
while the two positions are contradictory, we do 
generally try to heed both in our decision making. 
So, who should get treatment? Well, the default 
assumption is that life extension is a good or  
service someone can buy, so in a limited supply, 
it goes to the richest. This doesn’t necessarily  
assume it has to be an expensive treatment 
either, the pills that de-age you may be  
cheaper than a soda and taken just once a year, 
but your society might have decided that those  
using it have to pay a sin tax like most have 
for cigarettes and alcohol, or a Pigouvian tax,  
which are the kind where society tries to figure 
out how much something costs and spread it fairly  
around to those incurring that cost. Fuel 
taxes for roads are often based on this idea,  
those who use them most pay the most for 
maintaining them as they use more fuel. 
And this need not be wealth either. If 
your civilization is able and willing  
to give the treatment to anyone who asks, all is 
well, and I think that’s the most likely scenario  
for humanity in the coming centuries. But you 
might have places that say “Yes you can have it,  
but you must agree to be sterilized or take 
fertility blocking medications” as a way to  
avoid overpopulation, or that you can’t have kids 
till you get off the anti-aging drugs. Or that you  
could have both, but you had to do something 
to provide fundamental new resources, like  
go off to a colony planet where they need people.
A civilization with unlimited access to longevity  
might only allow new people by someone winning 
the lottery, or losing it and having to migrate  
to the unsettled regions of the galaxy, or 
being killed in Logan's Run style. In which  
case you might ask if someone has the right 
to give or sell that commodity, and if so,  
when? Could I volunteer to take the hit if a 
famous scientist or artist whose work had helped  
millions was selected to die or immigrate? If so, 
then could I volunteer to take that hit for some  
billionaire and migrate to Alpha Centauri so he 
could remain here. Could I win the birth lotto and  
sell my kid token to a wealthy family who wanted 
a child? If not, could I give it to a couple who  
lost their only child in a tragic accident? 
And who decides which exceptions are okay? 
We have far more dystopian options too, 
and the most popular one of late seems to  
be that greedy 1% having nigh-immortality 
while everyone else lives as their slaves,  
scrambling to get whatever jobs the robots aren’t 
doing so they can live another day in that grungy,  
cyberpunk-inspired world. Your mileage 
may vary on if you think that is likely,  
but there’s no motivation beyond scarcity to keep 
your masses miserable or short-lived, so it would  
imply you would have the same problem if you used 
a different method of determining have and have  
nots. A popular one is to let the scientists 
and philosophers have those extended lives,  
unsurprising given who usually discusses the 
topic, or that the political leaders would get it,  
or that we might determine it by some sort 
of social worth, possibly determined by how  
many likes your profile gets or how good a 
citizen the state has determined you are. 
All in all, I’d say unequal access, for 
whatever reason, tends to be one folks  
handwave away on this topic a bit too much, 
either assuming we will just fix this with ease,  
or that it’s a later generation’s problem, or 
that it’s insoluble and we shouldn’t pursue  
life extension because it will only make 
inequalities larger and harder to disrupt. 
That’s not limited to money or access 
to life extension either. For instance,  
Upward Mobility would seem to be an inevitable 
issue of longer-lived societies. If people can  
pursue careers for centuries, then it would not 
be surprising if people’s apprenticeship periods  
lasted decades, not months or years as now. 
It’s easy to imagine “Wait your turn” being  
the de facto model of such a civilization, 
and people growing impatient at it. Wealth,  
power, and influence will absolutely 
gravitate to the elderly if they are  
keeping the bloom of youth and vigor. They have 
the experience, the connections, the patience,  
and already have more resources. There will still 
be a churn rate of folks entering and exiting  
those peak positions but it’s likely to be slow.
In a post-scarcity civilization, it’s trickier  
too, because on the one hand, even if the top 
1% control 99% of the resources, control is not  
identical to usage, and there’s still so much 
going around and nobody is poor, they might all  
get porsches and their own robot-maintained 
mansion when they turn 18, but they just  
aren’t being allowed up the hierarchy – which is 
arguably worse on the human psyche. This isn’t  
solved strictly by looking at wealth and income 
either, because again control isn’t the same as  
usage. A billionaire controls billions of dollars 
of resources but most aren’t consuming most of  
that, just directing what is done with it, they 
don’t eat a billion dollars worth of food. And  
the same is true of elected leaders or non-profit 
groups, they control huge budgets, and we need to  
be realistic, the heads of most organizations, 
elected or not, will tend to be selected for the  
same traits that extreme longevity permits: 
experience, connections, reliability. 
All things being equal, someone who has been 
running the road department for 400 years and  
who is mediocre at it compared to his colleagues 
is still probably more knowledgeable of roads  
and infrastructure than any human currently alive. 
And we can’t point to a replacement and say “Well,  
they may not know as much but they’ve got the 
energy and vigor and new ideas” because that’s  
not necessarily true anymore, and anyone can come 
to the planning department meetings and offer a  
new idea during public hearings for the board 
to consider. Heck you can even join the board,  
we love new blood, Jessica over there joined 
us just thirty years ago, just wait your turn. 
And when you appeal to others, they’re likely to 
nod and smile and agree about it being unfair and  
even mean it, kind of, because they also tend 
to feel irritated at being stymied by their age  
but also prone to electing leaders with vast 
experience and a reliable and stable track  
record. We looked at the impact of this more 
in our episode the Effects of Longer Lifespans,  
but ethically it raises the issue of 
it is fair to force people to live on  
the lower rungs until their turn comes, or 
vice-versa, if we have any business saying  
some ancient and wise citizen needs 
to step aside and pass the reins on. 
It definitely makes the topic of term limits seem 
a bit more relevant, but I should note that a lot  
of us view the answer to this problem to 
be space and colonizing the galaxy. For  
at least a million years to come, there’s always 
going to be a new frontier for folks to go to if  
they want to be part of a growing pyramid 
at an earlier stage. And people are very  
programmed to either climb the local social 
hierarchy or wander off to a new one, so this  
is likely to offer a possible solution, and at 
home too as many folks higher on the existing  
pyramid are also likely to want to go abroad 
too, open middle and higher slots to be had. 
A post-scarcity civilization can offer 
a great life to that lowest rung,  
especially if you toss in virtual reality, 
but people tend to be most depressed and most  
disruptive to society when they feel like they 
have no option for ascending the local ladder  
and no option for picking up and migrating, 
and space colonization would seem to offer a  
rather long term solution to the problem. And if 
a better one for the even longer term hasn’t been  
figured out by then, well I still wouldn’t feel 
it was wrong to have tried rather than waited. 
But it isn’t one we can casually dismiss either, 
and the same is true of Slow Technological  
Progress. There’s a concern that an aging body 
of scientists – or scholars and artists in  
general – is less creative and open to new ideas. 
This, to me, is something of a debatable thing,  
as it’s rather over-simplifying what creativity 
or open-mindedness are. Nonetheless we often see  
the best and most creative new work from people in 
their 20s and early 30s, and there’s no guarantee  
that has any relation to youthful vigor. It might 
be a greater openness to risk taking for instance,  
always easier when you feel have less 
to lose. It might be the case though,  
so that a civilization of eternal youth might 
be one in which Einstein lives forever and keeps  
pumping out new material, or it might be that 
you do grow wiser and more effective with time  
but get worse at coming up with new ideas.
If so, that actually helps without previous  
problem, as there’s now a continuous need for 
bright young creatives in society and upward  
mobility from that, and since an automated 
society doesn’t really need folks for much  
beyond creative work and decision-making – and 
that’s debatable too – that might be the only  
type of non-hobby jobs left around. On the other 
hand, if people maintain that creative edge,  
and just grow in knowledge too, then it is 
unlikely technological progress would slow. 
We’ll have to wait and see on this one, but as 
a caveat, we need to remember that one of the  
fundamental points of technology is to improve our 
lives, mostly by letting us have our cake and eat  
it too. It is not just that it can extend life but 
improve training and help us understand boredom or  
hedonistic impulses so that a civilization of 
non-aging folks is one that is noble and wise,  
not a bunch of slugs spending all day waited-on 
hand-and-foot by robots, or living VR fantasies.  
The other side of that though is that if you have 
achieved these things and technological progress  
slows, that’s not necessarily an indictment 
of that civilization. See our post-science  
civilization episode for more discussion of that.
The same is true of Slow Cultural Change, in the  
sense that a truly just and ethical civilization 
has no need for fast changes. You hear the term  
stagnant, but a swamp is stagnant, a beautiful 
sculpture that doesn’t change with time is called  
enduring instead. If it’s a good civilization 
ruled by the old and wise then slow change would  
seem fine too. We can debate if it’s ethical 
to force folks who want change, wise or not,  
to either endure it in this slow-changing 
civilization or immigrate to a colony world,  
or just another different but established world, 
but that’s a two-way street, it’s not inherently  
fairer for folks to tell others that change is 
coming and they either need to adapt or leave. 
Both perspectives go over a lot better 
with a little basic human courtesy though,  
and I would not be surprised if life-extended 
civilizations were very heavy on etiquette,  
for good and ill. I also don’t see much reason 
to assume a longer-lived society is inherently  
way more resistant to change, so that they 
can’t be swayed by good arguments for it.  
For my part I’d rather win my case that way 
too, by swaying someone rather than waiting  
for the Reaper to do it for me. There’s also 
no guarantee that your older population is  
your source of resistance to change either, the 
longer-lived might initially push for a lot of it. 
This gets us to the concern though that longer 
lives might erode traditional human relationships,  
and that’s another hard one to examine, and one 
true for other technologies too. Does someone  
who has all their needs satisfied by robots and 
virtual reality need friends, spouses, real kids,  
and so on? And if so, is it ethical for us to say 
they’re wrong to do that, even if it erodes our  
civilization? Hard to say, and the same for how 
life extension might change these things. If I  
can live to a thousand, do I feel any real need to 
play grandparent? If I’m never planning to retire,  
do I feel a need to pay taxes to support 
programs and educations designed to replace me?  
Is this a society that is more prone to 
dumping huge resources into kids because  
they make up a small fraction of the 
population and are rare or treasured,  
or is it one where people say we are 
having way too many kids too fast and  
those having them need to be held accountable 
for that and not expect others to pay for it? 
As is often the case, the dilemma is not limited 
to this technology, but one that is specific to  
longevity is if it ends the need for children. And 
again since this isn’t immortality the answer is  
presumably no, not in its entirety, but it may 
reduce it to virtually none, and ever fewer as  
time goes on. Right now, in the US, about a fifth 
to a quarter of the population are children,  
and of course that depends on where we’re 
marking that line between child and adult.  
That’s lower than it used to be, and indeed even 
in the past when we said 13 made you an adult it  
was still a higher percentage of kids.
But if the median age is 800 not 80,  
and you never get enfeebled by time, that 
means something like 97% of your time is  
working as a taxpayer and only the first 
twenty or so years of life are principally  
education. Unless maybe we expect people to 
work a century at learning before producing,  
which might actually be the case if it takes 
them a century to get good enough at anything to  
be better than we could program a robot. Or the 
level we were willing to program a robot to be. 
On the flipside, this same highly automated 
culture wouldn’t need 97% of its population  
as net producers given that the robots can do so 
much. Outside of growth phases on new planets,  
it would seem like a long-lived civilization 
is one that probably is eventually in a slow  
to no growth period and only has as many kids 
as a percentage of their population as their  
lifespan divided by 18 is, if that is 900 years, 
then 2% of the population are kids. Assuming  
even a tenth the population still likes having 
little kids around, which would seem weirdly low,  
that still means every little kid would 
be spoiled for attention and resources. 
But I think as a civilization ages, its population 
will too, and keep seeing that median lifespan  
rising. Those who make it past the boredom or 
dangerous living phases might just keep going  
on not for centuries but millions of years, and 
they may not want a zero-growth civilization. It’s  
very likely by then that all local resources are 
tapped and all neighbor resources are long since  
colonized and claimed. So they have a fixed 
pool of resources from now to eternity and  
might prefer that instead of making new people 
to replace their losses, that they divvy up the  
remainder. Or that the person who dies has a will 
dictating how their resources are to be used,  
maybe divided, maybe given to make a new 
person, their inheritance and trust fund. 
We could probably do a whole episode discussing 
the strange cultures and ethical issues of  
ultra-long lived civilizations, but there 
is a question on if that’s even a human  
civilization anymore, or if someone living many 
centuries and beyond is really a human anymore. 
Living a very long time is likely to change 
your outlook a lot, but it’s also likely to  
physically change your mind and body. Your brain 
is not designed to hold an indefinite amount of  
memories and you may not want to lose them, so 
various mind augmentation might be needed. You  
may need psychological change too, not just for 
things like boredom, but also risk taking. Those  
who live longest are likely to be risk averse, 
part of what might help for upward mobility if  
new businesses or enterprises are mostly founded 
by younger and more risk-prone people. But you  
might modify your mind to be pro-risk on anything 
without survival implications, while needing to  
alter it more so that you are avoiding behaviors 
that have a higher risk on actuarial tables. 
Maybe parachuting is ultra-safe, 
even safer in a higher-tech future,  
but if that means only 1 in 1 million jumps 
is fatal, well that and few other hobbies or  
lifestyles with similar risks might take you down, 
unless you can suppress that urge for risk taking.  
You may also have yourself brainwashed against 
any self-destructive or suicidal impulse,  
to ensure a future you who had a rough or 
boring century doesn’t decide to end their  
existence or take up reckless hobbies.
Or just make yourself harder to kill,  
you cyborg up so that you’ve got three hearts and 
a titanium skull, and your home is very damage  
resistant and had medical drones waiting to help 
you or upload your brain to the cloning banks or  
repair your brain molecule by molecule from the 
most recent scan, and whatever was left over.  
Your whole body might merely be a human-appearing 
avatar and your home your real body,  
full of computer memory banks, and with 
copies uploaded regularly with updates to  
twenty different anonymous and ultra-secure 
memory storage vaults scattered throughout  
the solar system or even neighboring ones. You 
may occasionally add more brains to, and slowly  
but surely creep away from being human, so that 
at age one million you look out on the galaxy,  
now colonized, with eyes that see wavelengths 
they couldn’t as a kid and a mind that encompasses  
several thousand cubic meters of fortress, and 
somewhere along the line you stopped being human. 
That might be you or I too. It is 
entirely plausible that we may get  
major life extension technology in the next few 
generations or get close enough that many of us  
opt to be frozen in our old age for nanotech 
restoration when that point is reached. 
That’s the main list of life extension 
ethical issues themselves, but that gradual  
shift to something post-human does suggest one 
partial solution that we often contemplate for  
transhumanism in general, and that’s a gradual 
approach. We don’t know what life extension will  
look like, it might be a slow build-up of 
age and new techs that incrementally help,  
or it might be someone just flat out invents 
an easy, side-effects free fix to aging that  
costs a couple bucks and more than pays for 
itself in lower medical costs from aging.  
If it is the incremental version, then 
we can gradually solve the problem,  
especially if it is below takeoff speed, what 
we call it when life extension technology  
is adding at least one year of life 
to the average lifespan every year,  
versus the roughly 1 year of lifespan extension 
for every 6 that passed in more recent times. 
If it is an instant thing, it’s not necessarily 
ruinous. As noted earlier, we already have more  
than twice as many people being born every day as 
die, so even if everyone stopped dying tomorrow we  
would have no immediate crisis, especially as I 
think a lot of folks would slow down on starting  
families without the normal deadline. And we 
can assume that the deadline would move back  
eventually too, though fertility periods might not 
instantly expand to keep up with lifespans, we’ve  
discussed that more in other episodes though. 
So there shouldn’t be any need or justification  
for slow-walking or stalling life extension 
technology to give us more time to adapt to it. 
In an extreme case though, if we felt we needed a 
more gradual increase in lifespan, we could always  
insist that after a certain age you have to go 
on ice until we can figure out how to handle the  
problem, at maybe 120, and we just tell everyone 
that even if we don’t solve the issues we’ll still  
wake them up for another couple decades of life 
even if we decided 100 was a good maximum age. 
Note that throughout this we have assumed that 
we are not just extending life but vitality, and  
you’re not just getting more decrepit with time. 
Most technological pathways assume we’re restoring  
vitality or uploading you to a computer, rather 
than you just aging and aging somehow, but if  
that was the technology for life extension, then 
that doesn’t seem much of an ethical issue, and is  
akin to boredom, if that life is now unpleasant, 
you have an obvious solution, and for my part I’d  
rather that was left up to that person to pick if 
they wanted to end things as opposed to us making  
them or banning the technology so they didn’t 
have the choice. Your mileage may vary of course. 
In summary, we’ve seen today what most of the 
issues with life extension are. Many we can’t  
answer conclusively, they are subjective 
or need to wait and see what an extended  
civilization looks like to judge. I feel the 
case does strongly tilt toward yes though,  
that life extension is ethical and if it isn’t, 
trying to achieve it and finding out first hand  
still leaves the option of finding out it was 
a mistake and abandoning it. But the ethical  
problems and challenges of radical life extension 
seem either ones we have with other technologies  
or ones that we can manage, especially over the 
next several millennia when expansion into our  
solar system and the galaxy beyond seems to 
beckon so enticingly as a perfect solution. 
The galaxy is a huge place with more worlds than 
people, indeed more worlds than people who ever  
lived in total, and you might still be around 
and kicking in a thousand years or a million,  
on Earth or some world you helped found. All 
these ethical issues, even to the extreme cases,  
may be ones we need to take seriously 
because they might be our problems,  
and if not, probably our kids’ or grandkids' 
problems. And as the first ones passed the post,  
those issues of what to do later, and 
haves and have nots are our responsibility. 
The good news is you would be very likely to be 
on the top of that heap, after all, in a galaxy  
of quadrillions, even if you just set aside a few 
bucks a week to get compound interest or buy penny  
stocks in future colonies as they begin rolling 
out. The galaxy is enormous and ancient, and there  
is a real chance you or I might be around to see a 
galactic humanity become enormous and ancient too.
Today we discussed life extension and contemplated 
living untold periods of time, maybe even eons  
ahead to see the dark era after all the stars 
burn out. But there was another Dark age,  
not too long after the Big Bang, before normal 
stars began to form. An era in which there may  
have been strange stellar objects, Dark 
Stars, and other phenomena we believe  
may have existed back then. We’ll explore 
that topic in this month’s Nebula Original,  
Dark Stars at the Beginning of Time, which 
is out now on Nebula, our streaming service. 
On Nebula, you not only get to see every regular 
episode of SFIA a few days early and ad free,  
along with content by an ever-growing pool of 
awesome creators, but all of SFIA’s bonus content,  
including extended editions of many episodes, 
and more Nebula Original episodes like,  
Life As An Asteroid Miner, Nomadic Miners on 
the Moon, Space Freighters, Retrocausality,  
Orch Or & Free Will, Conformal Cyclic 
Cosmology, Colonizing Binary Stars, and more. 
Using my link and discount it’s available now for 
just over $2.50 a month, which helps support new  
content from myself and other creators.
When you sign up at my link,  
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use my code, 
isaacarthur, you not only get access to all of the  
great stuff Nebula offers, you’ll also be directly 
supporting this show. Again, to see SFIA early,  
ad free, and with all the exclusive bonus 
content, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
Before we jump into our upcoming episodes, I 
wanted to let everyone know about an upcoming  
space conference, Space Visions, this November 
9-11 in Washington DC, being put on by Students  
for the Exploration and Development of Space, or 
SEDS. SEDS is an excellent student-led nonprofit  
creating and connecting students nationwide 
with interdisciplinary opportunities to impact  
the future of the space industry. With over 85 
chapters, find the one nearest you- or create  
your own- and get involved as a student or 
as a project advisor by visiting seds.org. 
SEDS' marquee event, SpaceVision, is a 
student-oriented 3-day conference focused on  
introducing the breadth of the space industry to 
students, including many of the topics we discuss  
on this channel such as rockets, space stations, 
and various in-space services and applications.  
There are educational panels, a career fair, 
live competitions, and social networking events.  
Celebrate with them the 40th anniversary of SEDS 
conferences this year at DC in early November. For  
more information, check out spacevision.seds.org
And speaking of upcoming discussions of space,  
we’ll be returning to space to look at the idea 
of entire fortified planets in space empires  
with Fortress Worlds, on October 26th, then we’ll 
finish October with our monthly Livestream Q&A,  
on the 29th. Then on November 2nd we’ll ask if 
the Rebel Space Colonies we often contemplate  
in scifi and futurism might occur and what 
they’ll be like, before we release our big-3  
hour long updated and extended edition of the 
Fermi Paradox Compendium on November 9th. Then  
on November 12th it will be Scifi Sunday 
where we’ll discuss Human-Alien hybrids,  
like the famous Half-Vulcan, half-human science 
officer Spock from Star Trek, and we’ll ask if  
they could exist and even live long and prosper.
While you’re waiting for those to come out,  
you can check out last weekend’s Scifi Sunday 
episode, Forgeworlds and Industrial Planets,  
or this month’s Nebula Exclusive, 
Dark stars at the Beginning of Time.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
