This episode is sponsored by Audible.
When it comes to conflict inside families  
and nations, we say a House Divided against 
itself cannot stand, but what about a planet? 
So the last few episodes we were talking about 
what we should do if we encounter aliens or if it  
turns out we have the whole galaxy to ourselves, 
and a comment someone made was that if that turned  
out to be the case, no aliens, then at least we 
wouldn’t have to worry about war out in the stars. 
Unfortunately, humanity has a long history of 
war and none of it with aliens, just ourselves,  
and often our fights aren’t between 
nation and nation but internal conflicts,  
and it seems to be on a lot of people’s minds 
these days too. So I thought today we would  
explore what civil wars in the future 
might look like, at both the planetary  
and interplanetary scale. We will also touch on 
the notion of conflicts inside Space Habitats,  
or even Dyson Swarms, battles out in the void 
between stars, and even breakaway interstellar  
colonies. We want to discuss how those conflicts 
might evolve and how they would be fought,  
but first we need to ask who is fighting them, 
and what the Landscape and battlefield would be. 
Civil War and rebellion is certainly a regular 
conversation in science fiction, it’s the  
background plot of the entire Star Wars setting, 
both in terms of the galactic empire and republic,  
and the Jedi vs Sith and dark Jedi. Star Wars 
is the largest scifi franchise to discuss it  
but hardly the only one, and its common in the 
fantasy genre too, as with Game of Thrones. As  
well it should be, as internal wars have been 
as important for shaping history as external  
conflicts and that history and its interpretations 
offer endless realistic inspirations for fiction. 
But in terms of fictional looks at Earth itself 
and the near future, those conflicts don’t always  
seem as well based in historical realism. They 
typically involve Mars or the Moon seeking to  
breakaway from Earth, and we should probably 
start by asking why there’s always an assumption  
Earth is unified, and for that matter, so 
is Mars or the Moon or some other distant  
colony. That seems a stretch in many cases too, 
as the Asteroid Belt contains around a million  
rocks that range from floating mountains to 
continents, all spread out over a distance  
considerably bigger than that volume containing 
Earth, the Moon, Mars, Venus, and Mercury. 
The vast majority of Asteroids are closer to any 
of those planets than to each other, so the notion  
they’d have a lot in common would be like assuming 
every single one of Britain’s old colonies,  
from New Zealand to Jamaica, would somehow feel 
a deeper kinship to each other than the homeland.  
Mind you, if it's an oppressive empire it’s not 
hard to imagine everybody getting together to  
rebel and then go their own way after they win, 
but while that’s also common in science fiction,  
I’m not certain history provides many examples. 
As often as not, grabbing mercenaries from one  
corner of your empire to go pound another is 
a strategy that’s surprisingly effective and  
does not result in them deciding to team up 
down the road, quite to the contrary usually. 
So space is fundamentally huge and spread out 
and various colonies aren’t likely to feel any  
more connected to each other than Earth, all 
they really have in common is that they aren’t  
Earth. And it would seem more likely a Civil 
War wouldn’t erupt between Earth and a colony  
than on Earth itself, with various factions 
here and in the colonies all taking sides.  
Or trying for neutrality, as we’ll discuss in 
a bit, a true civil war on a high tech planet  
could be the sort of thing that makes World 
War 1 and 2 combined look like minor conflicts,  
and was exactly what was so scary about the 
possibility of the Cold War turning hot,  
as a conflict between NATO and the Warsaw pact was 
generally depicted as leaving a barren radioactive  
wasteland populated by mutants and scattered 
and disorganized tribes of techno-barbarians. 
There was a tendency to portray a nuclear 
exchange as fast and furious then done,  
but even a full scale exchange would leave much 
of the population alive, probably most of it,  
along with their armies and guns, and while the 
assumption is everyone would go into shock and  
ask how we could have been so foolish and 
focus on surviving rather than fighting,  
I think that might be a stretch. Likely as not 
most of those nations would still be around,  
still have the same leaders, and where 
they didn’t, they would like as not be  
replaced by folks howling for revenge and blood. 
Turning an entire planet into an endless line  
of trenches and bunkers really is doable, and 
indeed far more so in a space colony context. 
We tend to assume a high-energy and 
high-tech society is also a fragile one,  
especially relative to the weapons available, 
but that’s not automatically true. There’s a lot  
of ways to toughen places up even to the point 
of being resistant to atomic weapons, as well  
as to make your economy and society sturdier 
too. Complex supply chains can be shortened  
with options like 3D printers and superior 
automation while even hearts can be hardened  
against the brutality of warfare by everything 
from propaganda and drugs or genetic engineering  
to simply having a society where everyone has 
radical life extension and mind augmentation  
and is just emotionally tough and resilient 
to a degree that Job would be impressed by. 
That said, the immediate and lasting effect of 
a nuclear war tends to get wildly exaggerated  
in a lot of fictional treatments, you are 
definitely going into a cataclysm that  
makes economies collapse, but you could still 
feed a large population, nukes don’t despoil  
vast tracts of land the way it gets shown and 
that’s very repairable. However a higher tech  
civilization with cures for cancer and nuclear 
fusion is one that can sit around digging in  
huge bunkers with hydroponics for food and hidden 
nature preserves while maintaining populations of  
trillions on a single planet all while World 
War 1 style Pyrrhic victories like the Battle  
of Somme get fought every day and tactical 
nukes routinely get deployed on the ground. 
Nuclear War on Earth leaving the place an 
obliterated and empty husk is a common story in  
scifi, as is fear of Earth, our lone homeworld, 
being ruined that way and instead becoming the  
neutral ground and protected world in a greater 
galactic empire. However you really could have  
Earth operating as the capital of vaster empire 
while being built up like a megabunker and having  
periodic and lengthy wars where nukes were 
flying constantly and billions of ground  
troops were getting fed into a planet-sized meat 
grinder all while life mostly went on as normal,  
not just in the wider galaxy but on Earth itself..
There’s also the robot-factor, because just as  
a civilization with good genetic engineering 
and cancer treatments can ignore a radioactive  
landscape, one with very good automation can 
ignore lots of the normal economic and attrition  
limits of warfare. Robots may be doing most of 
your fighting, but maybe as importantly, they can  
be doing most of your farming, manufacturing, 
bunker building, and trench repairs. 
In between options are possible too, you might 
have brains in lead-lined vats installed in giant  
battle mecha. Or elite soldiers being mass 
produced Clone Wars Style, though probably  
faster and more realistically by uploading human 
minds into android war machines and copying those  
over and over. In a civilization where everyone 
has a copy of themselves backed up or controls  
their warframe by remote, a frenzy of courage 
is an option. Which might also be achievable by  
advanced indoctrination techniques or drugs too. 
You add in virtual reality as a training route and  
it means all your troops can be elite veterans 
because they train ultra-realistically and just  
don’t stay dead, even when you’ve nuked a place so 
hard and so many times that it glows in the dark. 
Also, welcome to Science and Futurism with 
Isaac Arthur, where we’re known for looking  
at the bright side of the future… and not many 
thing are brighter than an atomic bomb blast. 
All right, so we’ve established you could have a 
civil war on a planet and still have a planet when  
its done, but for a planetwide civil war to happen 
you need a unified planet. It isn’t likely you  
are having widespread use of WMDs unless there’s 
only two sides either, as third parties are likely  
to get involved and against the first-user if 
someone is releasing super-plagues or using nukes. 
This raises the issue of wondering what on 
Earth would actually unify Earth, and you can  
make a pretty case that nothing on Earth would, 
since it hasn’t happened yet and I’m not aware  
of any countries that include that as a piece 
of policy they’re even seriously contemplating,  
let alone pursuing. The usual assumption in 
scifi of course is that it wasn’t anything  
on Earth that unified it, but rather something 
off Earth, like encountering a hostile alien  
empire or just a big scary galaxy full of 
civilizations that dwarfed us and similarly  
made our differences with each other seem tiny.
Which seems plausible enough, though I suspect  
we could still find excuses to get in fights 
with each other even if our alien neighbors  
had fifty heads, tentacles for arms, and made 
Cthulhu look sane and friendly. All in all,  
it's not hard to imagine us getting into civil 
wars, just hard to imagine us ever being unified  
as a planet in the first place to have some colony 
planet of ours try to rebel and breakaway from. 
Truth be told I tend to expect that even in 
some future where there were multiple empires  
of hundreds of trillions of people claiming so 
many planets and space habs that they could fit  
a continent in their proverbial closet, that a 
bunch of them would still have their capitals  
back on Earth. It's much easier for me to imagine 
a future over the next several centuries where the  
solar system gets colonized by tons of groups 
and none able to individually claim bigger bits  
of real estate. Recent historical precedent 
is that you’ve got to be using and working a  
chunk of land to have a claim on it, and you 
can’t just grab a small farmstead worth of  
cultivated land covering a few dozen acres and 
say you now own an entire state-sized parcel,  
even ignoring that indigenous populations might 
live there, which for now at least would not  
be expected to be a problem we would face in 
colonizing this solar system, but might be an  
issue if we find little green men on Mars.
Just to give a bit of an idea here,  
the European Union is currently composed of 27 
member states controlling a land area of 1.6  
million square miles, Mars has a surface area 35 
times bigger than that. The Moon is 9 times bigger  
than that. Mercury is 18 times bigger. Venus is 
a whopping 111 times larger. So it is very hard  
to imagine people setting up colonies in the 
next few centuries that have some magic claim  
to territories larger than existing nations 
and that would stick for centuries to come.  
I can certainly see claiming whole asteroids 
or craters, but I just have difficulty seeing  
someone claiming all of Ceres or Vesta, 
or the entire Aitken Basin on the Moon,  
which is a good deal bigger than the entire EU, 
by just planting a couple domes and a few dozen  
astronauts there, and is still only about an 
eighth of the Moon. On Mars, Olympus Mons,  
the largest mountain in the solar system, 
is the size of Poland, and claiming it would  
mean you owned just one-five-hundredth of Mars.
That to me seems like far more plausible claims  
by countries as they send their colonies. It’s 
likely to be seen as needlessly belligerent to  
drop a colony within a few hundred kilometers of 
someone else from another country without them  
being okay with it as long as there’s vast 
untouched regions, and that allows hundreds  
of independent colony sites on each major 
planet and moon, while at the same time,  
folks back here on Earth aren’t likely to feel 
some country has a legitimate complaint for  
someone settling a thousand kilometers from them, 
given that it is a thousand kilometers from the  
border of Poland to Rome or London, with several 
countries in between, especially when the colonies  
have hundreds not millions of people in them.
All of which tends to indicate that such worlds  
will end up as collections of hundreds of 
different colonies, some cheerfully integrated  
into nations back here, some probably sovereign 
right from the outset. Outside of fiction I’ve  
never really understood why some colony of a few 
hundred on Mars founded by the US or UK or whoever  
would be thinking independence was a great idea 
and probably a lot less so if their immediate  
neighbors are some other country’s colonies or 
some sovereign entity founded by some corporation,  
ideology, or theology that for some reason 
found setting up on Earth less desirable  
than the ruinous cost of an offworld colony.
That tends to imply they aren’t great neighbors  
and it sure is nice to know you’ve got some nation 
of millions back on Earth willing to object if  
they do indeed turn out to be bad neighbors. Nor 
is some little colony of a few hundred, or even  
a few thousand, going to get treated like it was 
a new state in the Union. My little township of  
Plymouth, Ohio, named for the more famous colony 
a few states away, has a couple thousand people,  
and if the whole US population were divided 
up into similar bits, you’d have 165,000  
such townships, not the 50 states the US 
has or even 3200 counties it contains. So  
these colonies aren’t just magically getting 
statehood and senators or parliament members. 
To add to that mix, asteroid colonies 
could easily be claimed by a sole entity,  
especially the smaller ones that are tens of 
kilometers across, not hundreds, but they move  
relative to each other and the planets. We 
also tend to assume the future will be full  
of space habitats we build as often as domed 
colonies on rocks, and those are mobile too. 
That’s an interesting landscape at that point, 
because we might imagine that the US or China  
or EU circa 2300 AD was still around and 
had colonies. But the EU might have a dozen  
different regions of Mars that aren’t touching 
each other, and spoke different languages,  
and they might have a dozen O’Neill Cylinders 
orbiting Earth and six or seven moon colonies  
of various sizes and a hundred minor asteroid 
colonies and a base on each of the Galilean Moon  
of Jupiter but also a couple of the other minor 
moons, maybe one completely claimed by them.  
What are we looking at here? Is this another 
country that’s part of the EU with a total  
population of a few million? Or is this a 
whole bunch of minor territories like so  
many European nations have or had overseas 
and administered? Is there any particular  
reason they would all rebel? I’m no expert on 
that matter and am not even sure I could point  
to the right island given an unlabeled map of the 
pacific, but I don’t recall hearing New Caledonia  
or French Polynesia were anxious to break away 
from the EU anymore than Guam is from the US. 
Of course the whole point of today’s episode is 
that could easily change, but we probably need  
to be thinking of these sorts of breakaways in a 
similar context. Sometimes a Civil War is pretty  
even in resources. Sometimes it’s not but is 
to at least to an order of magnitude, where  
one side usually does have the bulk of forces 
but can’t send them all in. An empire dealing  
with a breakaway colony can’t send all its forces 
there to handle the situation, it not only has its  
own neighbors to deal with but also internal 
disputes. Great big empires tend to be glued  
together by exterior enemies and as often as not 
they have internal factions who hate each other  
more than their neighbors and cheerfully align 
with them in civil wars. So again we’re getting to  
the notion that it isn’t Earth vs Mars, but more 
likely something like the US versus its breakaway  
state of Armstrong or Muskland, and it isn’t about 
who has more guns and troops but how much effort  
can really be safely applied there, especially 
when dropping nukes or orbital bombardment isn’t  
likely to be magically okay with India or Brazil 
or whichever country has a colony near that one. 
Same goes the other way. In Robert Heinlein’s 
classic, “The Moon is a Harsh Mistress”,  
we have a moon colony feeling ill-used by Earth 
and rebelling, and dropping rocks on Earth down  
its gravity well. This isn’t nearly as good 
a strategy as the book implies, but they’re  
essentially repeatedly nuking Earth minus the 
radiation and that’s obviously not a viable  
strategy unless you’re at war with all of Earth.
If you are, well you’re in about the worst  
strategic position I can imagine, because while 
gravity well’s matter, especially if you’re  
limited to chemical rockets, if you can afford 
to move lots of people off Earth to other worlds,  
you can also afford to move lots of nukes. Nukes 
that can intercept and blow up those rocks,  
nukes that can toast fragile colonies, all mass 
produced by the largest planet that isn’t a gas  
giant and which already has a vast population 
and infrastructure. And a tactic like that is  
likely to be viewed as outright terrorism, 
which means all those other colonies,  
not just on the Moon but up in orbit and over on 
Mars and Venus and Titan and all those asteroids,  
are probably taking sides against you now, and not 
likely to be anxious to be seen as your ally even  
if they quietly approved of your activity.
There’s no Scorched Earth warfare going on  
in space. On the one hand it's vast and mostly 
empty and most of that non-emptiness is lethal  
radiation. That’s plenty of space for fleets 
to maneuver in and you would essentially have  
floating island fortresses moving around – the 
big space habs - which probably have meters of  
armor and megatons of ordinance. The moving and 
changing nature of space means besieging an enemy  
or striking at them isn’t something where 
your terrain and third parties are static and  
your attempt to launch a sneak raid or flanking 
maneuver might be interrupted by a new habitat  
orbiting into the area with politics or paranoia 
you didn’t factor into things well, and so they  
signal the target or just open up with a broadside 
composed of hundreds of kilometer long space guns,  
relativistic slug throwers, and anti-debris 
point defense lasers. Whereas they want some  
mobility for economics, station-keeping, and 
the option of migrating to a different orbit,  
your fleet by definition needs to be as low 
mass as possible to be fast and maneuverable,  
so they’re always going to beat you on armor the 
way a bunker beats a tank or even a fighter jet. 
Also, everything in space is going to be 
armored against micrometeors and radiation  
and electromagnetic pulses – like solar flares 
– and thus aren’t noticing even a large nuclear  
device unless it goes off within a few dozen 
kilometers, which is a speck of dust in the ocean.  
On the other hand everything we build in 
space is incredibly fragile compared to the  
power scale of all the ships and devices. Some 
ship the size and mass of a 747 cruising by at  
interplanetary speeds, say, 50 km/s, has roughly a 
quadrillion joules of energy in it, the equivalent  
of 250 kilotons of TNT, a powerful nuke.
So too, some orbital power grid designed  
to deliver vast amounts of energy to some future 
civilization probably would dwarf the 15 terawatts  
of electricity Earth currently uses, but our power 
grid generates the equivalent of that 250 kiloton  
nuke every minute, and turned into a massive laser 
would be cutting some serious holes through space  
habitats, spaceships, enemy missiles or asteroid 
strikes, and fortified positions buried in rocks.  
That same grid, composed of micro-thin 
but enormous reflective sails and panels,  
isn’t handling getting pummeled on very 
well. So all in all, if things go violent,  
and escalate, it could make a hypothetical 
World War 3 look like a barroom brawl. 
We can imagine that happening, even in something 
enormous like a Dyson Swarm, where in the course  
of a few hours things go nuclear and then 
beyond, and indeed inside such enormous  
civilizations a nuke blowing up a habitat of a 
million people every single second would barely  
scratch their normal birth and death numbers. 
In a civilization of 10 billion-billion people,  
a single death might still be a tragedy but 
a millions deaths isn’t even a statistic. 
As to actually invading down a gravity well or 
into a rotating space habitat with ground forces,  
or busting into some dome or arcology planetside, 
this is likely to make Normandy look like a field  
day even if it goes well. Again the paradigm of 
all the civilian architecture and infrastructure  
being ultra-fragile can’t be taken for granted.
A classic Martian dome that looks as fragile as  
a greenhouse and would shatter if shot with 
a handgun is not in the cards, and its worth  
noting that not only do we have ultra-tough 
transparent materials like the Transparent  
Aluminum of Star Trek, but our favorite super 
material for building space elevators and such,  
graphene, is transparent, as of course are most 
ultra-thin 2D materials, and so is diamond,  
something we can now mass-produce cheaply in labs 
and possibly soon cheaply enough you could have  
windows made of it. It’s very easy to imagine 
panes of diamond with graphene layers in them,  
and that such things might be no 
more expensive than polycarbonate  
or glass is now in even a few decades. 
Aluminum is a good example of that,  
it used to be considered an ultra-precious metal 
till we learned how to mass produce it, and again,  
we actually have transparent aluminum now.
More importantly though, domes aren’t necessarily  
for people to live under, they’re not even 
necessarily where you grow your food, you probably  
live under ground in the natural bunker of thick 
rock with skylight or window made of your dome  
material but with giant shutters ready to seal up 
in case of a breach or fear of attack. Key notion,  
an energy rich society that can afford to move 
spaceships fast and cheap enough for colonies  
to migrate populations or troops is one where 
a lot of normal building conventions disappear,  
and ultra-thick buildings aren’t devastatingly 
expensive, and that’s more than doubly true  
when you stack superior automation in there.
Superior food preservation techniques can help  
there too, because if you can store food a 
very long time then you can get away with  
bunkers and storage vaults that people can 
retreat to that can still be pretty plush.  
Trying to invade something like that, endless 
miles of tunnels and bunkered up storage rooms  
and hydroponics and factories, would be some kind 
of nightmare for any classic infantry situation. 
In these kind of scenarios it can seem like 
your brute force diplomatic options are limited  
to essentially embargoing a location, 
sending in infantry to seize it intact,  
which again would be a nightmare, or blowing 
the place up entirely, which is easier said than  
done and also a nightmare, just of a different 
kind. But I think there’d be a lot of in-between  
options depending on the available technologies 
and how much people want to seize the place  
intact or avoid damaging it too much during the 
fighting, where things might not escalate. And  
we must remember the state of play, all habitats 
in space are at least modest spaceships able to  
be moved under their own power or by a tug.
Folks needing new land can also build a new  
habitat or launch a colony spaceship to the 
interstellar depths and the trillion stars of this  
galaxy. If you just really like your breathing 
room, well even a full Dyson Swarm is less densely  
populated than Earth is, as it's more like a 
fog of habitats around a star, and the outer  
solar system is orders of magnitude larger, even 
before getting to the Oort Cloud, which Dwarfs  
our primary solar system the way the inner system 
dwarfs our planet. So it would seem like most wars  
would either be about claiming a place mostly 
intact as the only desired option or intended  
to force them to migrate away, at least for space 
habitats. Civil wars inside those habitats though  
would be an obvious exception, as would inside 
planet-fixed structures like domes & arcologies,  
or civil wars inside mega-metropolis city-states.
In our episode Extragalactic Sanctuaries we  
discussed a situation where the Solar System 
had become a roughly Kardashev 2 Civilization,  
in which the whole place is so festooned 
with power collectors and space habitats  
that most of the sun’s light is powering it 
and that’s 2 billion times the amount of light  
Earth gets so we tend to assume a population a 
billion times what it currently is or even more.  
In that situation we posited an example where 
a space tower arcology on Venus, a skyscraper  
tens of thousands of stories high and wider than 
a modern scraper, and probably home to hundreds  
of millions, has enough people to dispatch 
its own colony fleet to an unsettled star,  
and thousands of years later this transplanted 
civilization has grown to many billions or  
trillions itself and sends pilgrims back to their 
own Arcology, their motherland. By this time,  
which I believe we said was the 40th millennium, 
our own solar system is beyond colonized and  
that arcology on Venus is just a flyspeck on a 
large planet that itself is just a dot, albeit  
an important one, in a great solar civilization.
They feel unwelcomed and they feel their homeland,  
that Arcology, has been twisted away from the 
culture which once had it, so they invade that  
arcology. That’s an interstellar invasion where 
the cost to move troops and resources would  
be insane, especially in the context of sending 
thousands of massive battleships and cruisers and  
billions of troops. All those fleets and troops 
would be immense to that arcology and to modern  
Earth, yet still an unthreatening caravan 
in the eyes of that massive and disunified  
solar civilization. So they invade down that 
tower and its tens of thousands of floors,  
each probably the size of a modern metropolis, and 
they’re doing in city fighting where both sides  
are trying to avoid damaging the place, 
fighting level to level over centuries,  
where both sides are probably getting huge 
infusion of resources and manpower from outside. 
Their invasion would be akin to one of the many 
nations that claims to be a successor to the  
Greco-Roman civilization of antiquity deciding 
to invade the Vatican, and with the intent of  
not damaging any of the buildings there or in 
Rome itself, or maybe someone trying to seize  
the great pyramids claiming the current owners 
weren’t legitimate. And that sounds crazy to us  
but crazier reasons have been given as cassus 
belli to invade and in a civilization where  
radical life extension is possible it's entirely 
plausible the people who helped build and pay for  
it originally and lived there were still alive 
millennia later and found out that the place  
had been taken by outsiders while they were off 
colonizing the galaxy and now they’re coming to  
take it back. Mostly from people born centuries 
after the invasion, but some of the invaders might  
still be alive and respected founders and leaders 
too. In the eyes of the civilization around them,  
it might be viewed as justified if they’re 
willing to pay the weregild to win it back. 
Indeed it's likely in a Dyson swarm of a 
quadrillion O’Neill Cylinders, each home to around  
a million folks that people would seize them from 
the owners and often successfully. Even if their  
takeover wasn’t sympathetic to their neighbors 
many might say, including the wider government,  
that the cost to deal with it in money and 
lives is too much, and the Bundy Standoff in  
Nevada in 2014 or Autonomous Zone in Portland 
in 2020 are a couple of more modern examples  
of disputes where that may have been a factor in 
what actions were taken and when. Our own history  
is full of examples of that, situations where 
actions can be viewed as diplomatic or cowardly  
or pragmatic compromises, depending on the eye 
of the beholder, often clouded by a debated and  
cloudy history of events recent and distant, 
that make right and wrong harder to clearly  
see. Though in their case it would probably be 
a matter of digitally recorded and backed up  
history of the entire planning and construction 
and habitation of that space tower or habitats  
and quite possibly with many of the people who 
designed, built, or bought it still being alive  
centuries later, not just their descendants.
I would cite that as our last case for such  
internal conflicts though, because upward mobility 
or a feeling that you, as an individual or group,  
don’t have the option for upward mobility, is 
definitely a common cause for civil wars even  
if it's usually a background motivation, not the 
official or even conscious one. In a civilization  
where nobody is dying of old age or they’re 
living many centuries, I could see that being  
way worse. You and a few thousand other folks 
built a big space habitat suburb to orbit Earth  
and raise your families and it was the struggle 
of a lifetime to get that funding and permits  
and cooperation and by the time it was done many 
of you were already having great grandchildren. 
But you were also still having children yourselves 
because you’re biologically immortal. The place  
is filling up and that’s okay because there’s 
plenty more habitats you can build, even those  
adjacent to the one you have now which could be 
reached by a quick tether train. It isn’t hard to  
imagine that a few hundred years later when the 
population has grown from a few thousand to a  
few million that there might be a lot of tension 
between the majority of the founders and their  
loyalist relatives or sponsored immigrants, and 
the folks who are more youthful and more numerous  
who felt otherwise, and that might include some 
founder or wealthy immigrants who bought bits from  
other founders who did die or just moved away. 
Civil wars are often phrased as brother versus  
brother but often this is father versus son and 
here it is brother versus brother and grandfather,  
and nobody has a motive to blow the place up, so 
one can definitely imagine levels of escalation. 
Seems like in the grim darkness of the 
future there’s going to plenty of war,  
but everything is relative, and there’s a lot of 
room for non-violent options too, especially in  
civil wars where the land your wrecking and the 
buildings your trashing are your own, that win or  
lose you’re going to have to fix. And I do tend to 
think a civilization populated with semi-immortal  
people with centuries of life behind them would be 
slower to anger and quicker to step back and take  
a deep breath when things started getting heated, 
so I’m optimistic that while the future will see  
more and bloodier wars than anything we’ve ever 
witnessed, it will still be vastly more peaceful  
in a relative sense than any society that’s ever 
existed, simply because they are so much vaster. 
So it’s time for our Audible Audiobook of the 
Month and while there are lot of great novels  
and series covering military science fiction 
and civil wars, from classics like Robert  
Heinlein’s The Moon is a Harsh Mistress to the 
breathtaking novels and TV show the Expanse,  
when it comes to sheer epic scale of conflicts 
and civil wars, nobody beats the the Warhammer  
40,000 series the Horus Heresy, finally getting 
ready to wrap up after fifty novels of galactic  
civil war and the eight novel battle for the 
solar system and Earth, which illustrates the  
brutality and chaos of such an epic battle like 
nothing else. And everyone one of those novels,  
starting with Dan Abnett’s Horus Rising, is 
available on Audible, the Home of Storytelling.  
Audible has thousands of audiobooks and literally 
centuries worth of content for you to pick from,  
and more being added every day faster 
than you could listen to all of it. 
But they don’t just have audiobooks, 
they also have many excellent podcasts,  
such as Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur, 
where we have every single episode on Youtube,  
plus several audio-only exclusives I’ve made 
over the years. That’s just some of the great  
content in the Audible Plus Catalog, which 
also has sleep & meditation tracks available,  
as well as guided fitness programs, and Audible 
Original’s like Neil Gaiman’s Sandman Act III. 
The whole Audible Plus Catalog full of free 
books and other content, comes as a bonus  
when you join Audible, for you to stream or 
download to listen to anywhere and anywhen,  
in addition to the usual one free title a 
month and great member discounts. Audible’s  
incredible selection makes it truly the home of 
storytelling, and listening to audiobooks lets  
you get more books into your life. Let Audible 
help you discover new ways to laugh, be inspired,  
or be entertained. New members can try it free for 
30 days. Visit Audible dot com slash isaac or text  
isaac to 500-500. That’s Audible dot com slash 
isaac or text isaac to 500-500 to try Audible  
free for 30 days. Audible dot com slash isaac.
So we were talking about colonies on Mars or the  
Moon breaking away from Earth one day and a 
critical part to any successful or independent  
space colony will be successfully making their 
own food, so next week we’ll be looking at how we  
might do Farming on Mars. Those environments might 
need some real adapting for humans to live in,  
or vice-versa, for humans to adapt to them, and 
we’ll closing out the year by exploring the future  
of Transhumanism and Humanity. Before then though 
we’ll discuss whether or not our Universe might be  
a black hole, as some believe, and also if it 
might be possible to live inside black holes. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like to  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social media  
forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
