In a time when humanity faces an ever growing
need for energy and higher and unstable prices
for that energy, nuclear power would seem
ideal, but the plants are often enormous and
take forever to build.
Small, Modular reactors able to be assembled
quickly and fill smaller demands may be the
answer to the problem.
So today we’ll be looking at the Small Modular
Reactor or SMR concept of nuclear fission,
and how they potentially offer cheaper and
safer nuclear power, and how they might serve
as a better alternative to classic nuclear
power plants.
This means we’ll be digging a bit into both
the nuts and bolts of how the reactor designs
work – there are many – and how the logistics,
economics, and regulatory issues factor in.
We will also go through an in-depth explanation
of how nuclear power in general works before
getting to SMRs.
If you know the difference between alpha,
beta, gamma, and neutron radiation, what RTG
stands for, what a breeder reactor is, what
a moderator is, and can name a few and their
pros and cons, feel free to skip ahead.
If on the other hand you’ve heard those
terms a lot but never really got a good intuitive
explanation, because virtually every video
on nuclear power is either a three minute
video with few details or a long one that
assumes you already know all of that, then
grab a drink and a snack.
This episode continues our discussion of emerging
energy technologies, where we’ve covered
everything from Fusion Reactors to Power-Beaming
Satellites to more down to Earth options like
Solar and Solar Thermal.
I thought today we would take a look at a
particular type of fission reactor – the
Small Modular Reactor – as opposed to our
prior more general looks at fission technology
or alternative fission fuel like Thorium.
As usual see those episodes for more discussion
of Nuclear Power and reactions in general,
or other power sources.
And of course, if you enjoy this episode,
don’t forget to hit the like, subscribe,
and notification buttons.
The Small Modular Reactor is one we’ve been
asked to do a focused episode on for years
and has been much on my mind the last six
months or so, and by good fortune I got approached
by a company working on SMRs – Last Energy
– which asked me if I was considering doing
an episode on it and offered their graphics
for the discussion.
We will be looking particularly at their system
today near the end.
They are a commercial spinoff of the Energy
Impact Center, the research institute that
developed OPEN100, an open-source academic
platform for design, construction, and financing
of a 100 Megawatt pressurized water reactor
to prove that nuclear energy can be widely
accessible, standardized, and commercialized.
Additionally, Bret Kugelmass’s podcast,
Titans of Nuclear, conducts interviews and
deep dives with the folks in the nuclear industry.
Kugelmass is the founder of Last Energy incidentally
and the Energy Impact Center.
I would recommend both Titans of Nuclear and
also Rod Adam’s Atomic Show podcast for
those interested in really getting into the
regulatory and economic aspects.
Nuclear is definitely seeing a bit of revival,
especially outside of the West, and probably
at least in part from the current energy crisis,
and Last Energy for instance secured reactor
contracts in Poland and Romania.
Anyway, I’ve picked Last Energy both because
good visuals for explaining reactors are in
short supply and because they do seem to have
one of the better plans for production and
deployment of SMRs.
I’m not endorsing them nor are they sponsoring
the episode.
That and they actually have a small reactor,
20 Megawatts, a lot of SMR designs are hundreds
of megawatts and as big as a Walmart, parking
lot included, which is still smaller than
a traditional reactor facility.
They’re not alone in that, the Hyperion
Power Module is a 50-ton, 25 Megawatt Liquid
Metal cooled reactor, which is actually quite
light in power terms, giving you 2 megawatts
of electricity per ton of reactor, and there
are many other designs but between the drawing
board and development the size tends to tick
up, and at least partially because size often
helps a lot with price and safety.
We’ll start explaining what all those terms
mean in a moment.
Now, no discussion of nuclear energy can ever
be had without bringing up the dual issue
of safety and public fear and regulation.
Small Modular Reactors have both pros and
cons in regard to those matters and we’ll
come back to it later.
We should acknowledge that Nuclear Fission
isn’t unique in this.
Fusion is often the ideal technology of the
future, and maybe always will be, which is
maybe why it's so rarely pointed out that
they are just as radioactive as fission technologies,
they just don’t tend to involve or produce
long-lived radioisotopes, which is the nuclear
waste issue.
Power Beaming brings up all the problem of
space travel, plus the creation of a death
ray aimed at Earth as the pipeline for transmission.
Coal especially, but oil and natural gas and
other chemical fuels have the issue of limited
supplies and ecological damage acquiring them
and from using them.
Solar and biofuels both take up valuable real
estate and sunlight, windmills wreck the scenery
when not endangering air traffic and killing
birds, something most forms of active solar
thermal power do too.
Needless to say, some of our other favorite
high-tech power options like Black Holes,
Antimatter, or Vacuum Energy all have issues
of being hard to make and a propensity to
wreck things around them, like people, planets,
spacetime itself, or even an entire region
of the Universe.
There is also the reality that it’s a waste
of time to talk about any power source as
‘safe’ or incapable of being weaponized.
There is nothing easier to weaponize than
cheap energy, by both direct and indirect
means, and at the most fundamental level access
to cheap power very literally energizes a
nation’s industrial sector to the point
they can mass produce conventional weapons
and other goods and services to help pay for
maintaining and manning those weapons.
I like to get that out of the way from the
outset because often fear of nuclear involves
reasonable concerns and other times it gets
to a somewhat paranoid and maniacal state,
folks wanting ever more and more unreasonable
controls against any risk at all.
I’m not going to tell folks it is impossible
to produce nukes from the thorium cycle or
that a SMR is somehow incapable of causing
harm, merely that the technologies under discussion
meet reasonable safety standards in comparison
to both alternative energy sources and other
major technologies.
Chasing your tail around for moving goalposts
or 100% safety isn’t a pathway to success
or survival, and we’re prone to it in discussion
of certain technologies, aerospace and artificial
intelligence both being other examples.
Now our goal is not to do a deep technical
dive on either the basics of nuclear or any
specific reactor design, but it bears repeating
how you get energy from nuclear or atomic
sources.
Those two terms are fairly interchangeable
but you will generally hear me say atomic
while nuclear is more popular these days but
I’ve traditionally had a devil of a time
pronouncing nuclear.
I suspect that term shift is acknowledging
that the energy being released in nuclear
processes comes from changing the nuclei of
an atom, whereas altering the electron shells
of atoms in general is involved in more conventional
power and chemistry.
This difference is also apparent in the fields
of nuclear physics and atomic physics which
are quite distinct from each other.
There’s generally millions of times more
energy in nuclei that you can release by messing
with it than messing with that electron shell
around it though, which is the key source
of interest in it.
It’s not just that protons and neutrons
have thousands of times more mass than electrons,
and therefore mass energy, but the distances
involved.
The planetary model of the atom isn’t really
accurate but for the moment we’ll use that
and remember that positive charges attract
negative charges and repel other positives
charges, and that the force they do with that
rises sharply the closer they are, running
inverse-square with distance.
Two protons sitting right next to each other
shove very hard on each other, whereas if
we moved them a thousand times further away,
they would experience only a millionth of
that force.
Atoms are generally on that scale, with all
the protons wadded up close to each other
and all the electrons far, far away, and it
takes energy to bind them all together, so
moving those electrons shuffles a lot of energy
about, especially those inner electrons on
bigger atoms, but is nothing compared to what
is involved in pinning those giant protons
together at a fraction of the distance.
We discussed more on the inner workings of
those and quarks in our Antimatter Factories
episode, but all we need for today is to understand
that it takes enormous energy to cram more
protons into nuclei, and the process of adding
protons and neutrons is called fusion.
This occurs naturally in very dense and hot
places where nuclei can slam into each other
trillion of times a second and at ultra high
speeds, as otherwise it’s virtually impossible
to get two smaller atoms to combine, and most
of the matter in the Universe is made of those
smallest atoms, hydrogen, helium, and their
isotopes.
Fusion of this sort produces a lot of energy
and from a fuel source that is very abundant
and thus is very desired, but the trick is
that even in our Sun’s core this process
is so hard to do that your typical hydrogen
atom will spend billions of years before being
turned into something bigger, which most of
the time is a diproton, two protons all by
themselves, and these fall apart very fast.
Only in supernovae is this actually occurring
very fast, and thus a fusion reactor mimicking
the Sun’s core here on Earth would need
to have several tons of core material to produce
enough power to run a light bulb, thus artificial
fusion power needs to massively exceed the
already insane temperatures and pressure in
the heart of a star to be of any use to us,
part of the problem making it work.
Sometimes that proton-proton combo though
will undergo a switch into a proton, neutron,
and positron – the electron’s antimatter
twin, plus some neutrinos, and this is deuterium,
a proton and neutron together, and is an isotope
of hydrogen, as is tritium, which is a proton
and 2 neutrons, and this is unstable and after
about a dozen years around half of them will
have broken down, and that is true of many
atoms and their isotopes and the period half
breakdown into is the half-life.
The type of atom is determined by how many
protons it has, that’s it’s elemental
number and type, and the neutron count controls
what isotope it is.
Some are stable, lasting longer than the Universe
has thus far existed, others live lifetimes
so short they regard a second the same way
we frail mortals regard the Age of the Universe.
That’s the main nuclear reaction going on
in the Universe to date, small atoms combining
and mostly merging, but often they’ll spit
out a particle, typically an electron, proton,
positron, neutrino, neutron, gamma ray, or
an alpha particle – which is actually a
pair of protons and neutrons, the same as Helium.
[OOPS: That's tritium NOT HE-3 on the left]
If you’re curious Beta Radiation is when
an electron or positron is emitted and is
virtually harmless.
When these emission happens we call it nuclear
decay and we can derive a small but long lasting
power source by taking a material, or radioisotope,
with a decent half life, say a century, and
let it slowly decay and absorb all that decay
energy as heat energy to power a RTG or radioisotope
thermal generator.
These aren’t super-efficient or cheap but
they are ridiculously durable, small, and
simple and thus ideal for low-power draw applications
in places where repair and refueling are very
tricky, like pacemakers and space probes.
That’s two of the ways we generate power
from nuclei, and neither has anything to do
with fission reactors, except that we often
produce radioisotopes in the process and can
use them for this.
Indeed that is what radioactive waste is,
materials which have absorbed a radioisotope
or had a transmutation of some of its atoms
into a radioisotope with a long enough half
life to require long term storage or disposal
but still short enough to be dangerously radioactive.
The longer the half-life of an isotope, the
less dangerous it is, generally speaking,
as it takes far longer to emit its total radiation.
The type matters too, as Alpha and Beta Radiation are
incapable of penetrating human skin, 
whereas Alpha, Gamma, and Neutron Radiation are all
rather dangerous and indeed Alpha and Neutron
Radiation are what we often use to induce
fission in bigger atoms.
One reason we like being able to process radioactive
waste is that the stuff in it is of great
value, not just danger.
It involves a lot of spent fuel that still
has tons of other unspent fuel in it, or some
piece of equipment or shielding that now contains
a small but dangerous and valuable number
of radioisotopes we would like to extract.
Stuff getting hammered by radiation tends
to wear and breakdown easier too, the conditions
in your typical reactor are rather brutal
on materials even without the problems of
radiation, and this is why they have often
had to be very large, and is part of the problem
with making SMRs.
Now fission itself is when a big atom absorbs
a smaller piece, like a neutron, and breaks
into two larger pieces plus some tiny fragments.
The reaction we’re most familiar with involves
Uranium-235 – one of uranium’s more common
isotopes making up 0.72% of naturally occurring
Uranium on Earth and in this solar system.
It has a half-life of nearly a billions years
so there’s less of it around than Uranium-238,
which has a half-life of several billion years,
though both were probably created in about
the same quantities in whichever supernovae
or neutron star merger originally made them
probably about 6 billion years ago.
U-235 is prone to being able to absorb neutrons
assuming they’re not moving too fast, and
when it does it will shatter into a Krypton
Atom, a Barium Atom, and a new trio of neutrons
that are moving very fast, indeed too fast
for any neighboring U-235 atoms to absorb.
This is handy as it prevents new planets with
lots of U-235 from melting down or exploding.
If you crunch a supply of U-235 down very
small though, either by ramming into another
chunk of U-235 at very high speed or doing
a precise implosion by surrounding it with
explosives and setting them off simultaneously,
then you can get your uranium so dense that
any neutron emitted by a fission event slows
by colliding with other neighboring atoms
and is rapidly absorbed by another bit of
U-235.
That emits 3 more neutrons which are rapidly
absorbed by some more U-235 and this process
will result in all that matter undergoing
fission in just a fraction of a second, and
that’s a nuclear bomb, specifically a fission
bomb.
We use that process to set off fusion in a
Hydrogen Bomb too.
And you can power devices by explosions, even
fusion bombs, using very, very large reactors
or use them to push ships, like with the Orion
Drive.
And indeed there are some rare isotopes that,
if we had a big supply of them, might allow
us to do very small explosions, those that
would fit into something more like a very
large piston engine.
You need a pretty large amount to make a substance
thick enough and dense enough that a neutron
is unlikely to escape, and this amount is
called the critical mass.
A more traditional fission reactor works by
not compressing that uranium and instead putting
rods of it into a substance the neutrons can
bounce off of and slow down, warming that
substance – typically water – so the neutrons
emerge from the rod after a fission event,
as the rods are too small and the neutrons
too fast for absorption.
Make those rods too big and you can get a
runaway reaction too, not an explosion but
just a meltdown.
For the right-sized rods, we place a bunch
near each other with a moderator in between
– again water being common – that slows
those neutrons down to be captured in the
next rod.
We typically have two plates of those rods
that we can sink into each other, with maximum
reactions occurring when they’re closest
together, and we control the reaction by carefully
bringing them closer or further apart.
This can be quite a tricky process, especially
because water slows those neutrons at a rate
affected by its temperature and pressure,
and that water gets heated by those neutrons
and we use this to turn a turbine.
Not directly though, we typically cool the
entire shielded reactor vessel with different
water which then turns a turbine and makes
electricity.
Neutrons damage stuff, a lot, and uranium
rods are very dense and heavy, and a sealed
reactor vessel with superheated steam and
uranium and neutrons all over it is not conducive
to long and perfect performance of mechanical
and electronic components.
Meltdowns happen when the ability to move
those plates apart to slow a reaction breaks
and so the reactor can start feeding into
an ever-higher rate of reaction and that’s
a meltdown.
There’s a ton of ways to make that less
likely that have been developed over the decades,
most reactors predate them, and since we’ve
already spent more time on the basics of nuclear
energy than I’d like, see our episode on
the Future of Fission for discussion of those.
We also have one other way to make nuclear
power by fission, and that’s called a breeder
reactor, and is the reason why you’ll hear
some folks say we only have a few centuries
of nuclear fuel and others say we have millions
of years worth.
Most uranium is U-238, and we sperate natural
uranium to remove U-238 by centrifuge, enriching
the remaining uranium’s percentage of rarer
isotopes.
The chunk left over with fewer of those isotopes
is depleted Uranium composed almost entirely
of U-238.
How enriched a sample is controls how it could
be for rapid chain reactions when imploded,
for nukes, and thus weapon’s grade uranium
is very enriched.
But Uranium-238 can also absorb neutrons,
as can Thorium-232.
Uranium-238 can actually capture unmoderated
neutrons, those coming out of a fission event
at a couple percent of light speed, and the
result of this is getting plutonium, which
does not occur naturally, at least in the
sense that it presumably does get created
in dying stars but just has too short a half-life
to ever survive to planet’s forming let
alone evolving technological civilizations
that can mine it.
The Thorium breeder reaction does require
a moderator, to slow the neutrons down to
more very-hot thermal rather than relativistic
speeds to be captured, and is thus called
a thermal breeder reactor rather than a fast
breeder reactor.
Breeder reactors let us take a small sample
of something fissile and breed a much larger
supply of fissile materials from some other
material which is otherwise not fissile and
is plentiful, or less rare anyway.
Again see the future of fission for more on
that topic, but since this is SFIA, I’d
feel remiss if I didn’t point out that more
distant future options potentially open the
door to micro-nukes and very tiny nuclear
batteries if we can get better and more numerous
breeder reactors.
You’ll have folks ask how small you can
make a nuclear bomb or nuclear reactor and
the answers tend to assume uranium or plutonium
as the power source, but higher transuranics
can do better and as we discussed in the Antimatter
episode, if we do find an island of stability,
ones small enough to run cars would potentially
be on the table.
That said, when we’re talking about SMR
the small part usually means it fits in a
fairly large building, and the modular part
means individual components can ship on a
truck or train car for quick and safe assembly
at the site.
There are designs for reactors that would
fit into a truck or train car, that’s not
really that high tech, they just don’t offer
much for efficiency, cost, or safety.
Same idea, you might build an atomic train,
it's entirely doable, but it's much easier
to build an electric train and run power down
the rails to a much more efficient reactor
safely outside a city, as opposed to a train
or freight truck that might derail or crash
in the middle of a city.
Since I live within an hour of where the recent
chemical car train derailment in East Palestine,
Ohio occurred, I am not anxious for every
train to have a radioactive materials in the
engine and I suspect that incident would do
nothing to increase folks fondness for an
atomic train design.
But Atomic trains have been seriously contemplated,
the US Army considered them for off-road trains
for instance, one design being a 54-wheeler
that was 572 feet long.
Handy for circumventing damaged railroad tracks
during a war but really meant for moving cargo
in the arctic over ice.
Trying to do this in a car or truck is even
harder, as you need to reduce your mass – including
your shielding – and in the context of remembering
that a very large percentage of cars get involved
in crashes damaging enough to mess up the
frame or engine or reactor.
So again, a small modular reactor isn’t
about trying to get something that can run
in a vehicle, it's about one that you can
transport in a vehicle, and so there’s no
need for it to be complete.
Something needing five or six or ten cargo
containers to move and a few weeks of site
prep and bolting together is not a big hindrance
to anything other than emergency or military
uses, where regular generators can be used
instead.
You can make a big mobile reactor, even a
rail car sized one that’s totally enclosed
except for power outlets, but it’s not likely
to be economical or terribly high-powered,
as it only has that railcar surface for getting
rid of heat.
You’re not likely to ever have a reactor
that produces more electricity than heat,
and some 8 by 8 by 20 foot cargo container
generating power is limited by not setting
fire to its surroundings or melting into slag
– radioactive slag – in the process.
That is another feature we see in some SMR
designs though, for them to have closed loop
radiators, rather than the big cloud factories
we see on classic nuclear power plants and
that require them to be sited near large bodies
of water.
My wife took our youngest son up flying with
her for the first time a couple weeks before
I wrote this and his first reaction on seeing
our local power plant miles away over in Perry
was to ask if it was a volcano.
He’s 4 incidentally but the point’s a
valid one, we use superheated steam to turn
turbines, in nuclear or coal for that matter,
and that’s generally in the area of thousands
of gallons per second or a liter or two per
kilowatt hour produced.
Which is quite the issue if you don’t live
next to a nice freshwater lake – seawater
works too but salt is never very friendly
to equipment, though desalination is one of
the more popular uses of nuclear power.
Now of course if you live in a desert a reactor
that doesn’t need a water supply sounds
nice but why not use solar?
And the answer is that solar still doesn’t
work well at nighttime or in tundras.
As usual in our discussions we’re not really
interested in a one-size fits all power solution,
at least from those technologies currently
on the table.
But again we’re not interested in super
small because the point of that is basically
something so compact you can stick it into
the middle of a city where real estate costs
are high and so are power needs.
Because unless you can build it out of adamantium
and requiring no maintenance or operation,
you have to worry about cars crashing into
it, reckless hooligans or addicts whacking
it with a hammer and spraying the area with
superheated steam that was radiating around
the outer jacket, and property values crashing
within a mile of it.
So again we are basically always thinking
of placement in industrial zones or outside
the town, which is more reason why a closed
loop reactor is good.
Last Energy for instance has an air cooled
plant as part of their design specifically
to allow placement basically anywhere, not
just by large bodies of water.
There are the better part of a hundred major
SMR designs out there and they range from
classic reactors to fast or thermal breeders,
uranium to plutonium or thorium, water cooled
or molten salt.
Water is our classic favorite but has the
problem that its properties vary on temperature
and that it turns into steam which needs to
be very high pressure to run through pipes,
leading to lots of bursting issues and concerns
thereof.
Molten salt is popular as an alternative because
liquids don’t have that big bursting problem,
especially when not under significant pressure.
We also like to use water as both our moderator
and our working fluid, but you don’t have
to go that way.
Again the moderator’s job is to slow neutrons
down between uranium rods or fuel pellets,
and the working fluid is whatever is carrying
that heat off to turn our turbine and make
power, which is to say it turns heat into
the work of turning that turbine’s blades
to spin the dynamo that generates electricity.
Some reactor designs skip water as a moderator
in favor of something like graphite, and indeed
the original Atomic Piles ran this way, being
literally a pile of uranium blocks and graphite
ones.
We can’t explore these all today and each
has its own benefits and disadvantages, but
we need to look at one to illustrate some
of the pros and cons of development and deployment,
so let’s look at the one from Last Energy,
and their PWR-20 design, which is a 20 Megawatt
Reactor.
From the outset their aim is scalability and
rapid deployment, so they made a lot of design
decisions based on the idea of easy and available,
existing supply chains and the goal of being
able to get these installed and running in
under 24 months from Final Investment Decision
to Commercial Online Date.
The design is aimed fairly heavily at their
initial base of customers, which in this case
includes first sales to an industrial region
in Poland, and a lot of the motivation there
is making sure you have direct access to a
non-fluctuating energy supply that’s seated
right next to your factories.
This is not a theoretical model or design
either, they have secured commitments for
10 reactors in Poland, and 2 more in Romania
expected to come online by 2025, and they
do credit a lot of that to opting for off-the-shelf
components and going with the more traditional
light-water reactor we see in most nuclear
power plants.
They also contract customers under a PPA or
Power Purchase Agreement, so the customers
are buying energy not paying for the plant
itself.
They own and operate the plant, taking on
fabrication, delivery, etc with a cost of
under 100 Million dollars a plant.
I should also note that the other well known
SMR is the 470 Megawatt reactor Rolls-Royce
is developing, small again being a relative
concept, it’s aiming for 1.8 billion pound
cost which is around a tenth the cost of full
scale plants, but that’s a great deal more
than the 20 Megawatt Last Energy design or
the GE Hitachi 300 Megawatt design or the
Nuscale 77 Megawatt SMR design, and all of
those are light water reactors.
Lightwater just means water here and that
it is using it both as the coolant and moderator.
Heavy Water reactors are basically the same
but use heavy water, which is where the hydrogen
in water is deuterons not lone protons, meaning
each water molecule has 20 nucleons instead
of 18, though hydrogen-deuterium-oxide – one
deuteron and one normal proton – is often
considered heavy water too, or called semi-heavy
water.
Both are naturally occurring in the oceans
but we can separate and concentrate it and
its density is 11% higher than normal water,
it turns to ice at 4 Celsius or 39 Fahrenheit,
not 0 or 32, and boils at 101.4 Celsius or
215 Fahrenheit.
Off topic but for extreme high-tech megastructure
or terraforming projects, you might use 100%
heavy water on a planet you wanted to have
snow at slightly warmer temperatures, like
a ski resort hab.
More importantly though, it is a better neutron
moderator since it is less likely to absorb
neutrons that hit it, just slows them down,
whereas light or regular water often absorbs
the neutron.
Fission reactions are basically a neutron
preservation game, so having your moderator
suck some up isn’t really appreciated.
It’s not cheap, though, but the trade off
is that you can use natural uranium, unenriched,
in a heavy water reactor but need some enrichment
for a lightwater reactor.
For some, this is preferable, it’s the third
most common reactor type, well behind light
water reactors, and Canada uses mostly Heavy
Water reactors, for instance.
Natural uranium is plentiful and pretty cheap
and safe to dig up and handle and so there’s
no real proliferation concern about power
plants using it, whereas SMR designs, by having
so many reactors and those needing few people
to operate tend to raise security and proliferation
concerns.
This is why people will tend to scoff at countries
wanting enrichment facilities for power generation
though, it isn’t necessary for a nuclear
power plant but it is for light water reactors,
though only a little, way less than weapons
grade.
However, light water reactors are also smaller
and more compact.
Which probably explains why we’re seeing
it for SMRs.
There are heavy water designs though, Copenhagen
Atomics Waste Burner is a single-fluid, heavy
water moderated molten salt reactor designed
to fit in a leak-tight 40-foot stainless steel
shipping container.
One of the other things folks are looking
at for SMRs is being able to add more modules,
so there’s a lot to be said for smaller
module sizes, if you think you need 500 Megawatts
but maybe might need 600 in a few years, or
maybe 550, well it is easier if you have smaller
modules of 20 or 77 Megawatts like Last Energy
and Nuscale models, and fast deployment and
small footprint are big deals too.
Nuscale delivers their’s in groups of 4
or more, and their renamed reactors, the VOGYR,
are getting their debut in a couple years
providing power for Utah Associated Municipal
Power Systems.
You also have the big advantage of modularity
in construction with SMRs in that so much
of the precision work, or work needing radiation
shielding, can be done in a controlled factory
environment and also opens the door to greater
automation.
HTR-PM is a small modular reactor that came
online in China in 2021 and is not a light
water reactor, it’s a high-temperature gas-cooled
reactor and also a pebble bed reactor.
As I mentioned earlier, you don’t have to
use water, or any liquid, for either moderating
or cooling your reactor, and the first reactors,
the old Atomic Piles, just used blocks of
graphite.
Pebble Bed reactors take a pebble of fissile
material, uranium, thorium, or plutonium,
and wrap it in a moderator, pyrolytic graphite
typically, and ceramics being popular as an
outer layer, for something usually tennis
ball sized.
Which isn’t pebble-sized to be fair, but
you replace a bunch of fuel rods in water
– light or heavy – with a bunch of these
pebbles and no moderator.
Pebble beds cannot have a meltdown, there’s
nothing to raise or lower or get stuck like
with fuel rods.
These just naturally react when we dump a
bunch of them together as the moderator and
spacing is already baked in.
Then we pump a gas through to cool them, something
incapable of reacting chemically with the
materials inside, like helium, nitrogen, and
carbon dioxide, and very definitely NOT oxygen.
The setup in this case has a pair of reactors,
each with a thermal capacity of 250 Megawatts,
both turning a single 210 Megawatt Steam Turbine.
Most power generated by nuclear plants – or
coal or oil or natural gas or burning wood
– is thermal energy, and if you’re trying
to tell the difference, a Megawatt all by
itself and abbreviated as capital M Capital
W is referring to total power output, heat
and electricity combined.
If you see the MW followed by a lowercase
e, that’s the electrical power output only,
and if it's followed by a lowercase h, that’s
a megawatt-hour, a measure of energy not power,
a thousand times a kilowatt-hour, and how
much energy you have from a megawatt power
source running for an hour, or 3600 seconds
or 3600 Megajoules.
The typical US Household uses about 10 to
11 Megawatt-hours per year, and about 800
households can be supplied for each megawatt
of power generation you have.
That thermal energy isn’t useless either,
you can use it for heating locations or desalinating
water, we’ve discussed it before for tandem
use for running large scale greenhouse facilities
in tundra conditions too, see our episode
Colonizing the Arctic.
Another design sometimes suggested for SMRs
is Molten Salt, and this comes in two forms,
one where the Molten Salts are the coolant
and one where they are also the fuel, where
you would use your fissile material and the
moderator in the molten salt.
Their big advantage is that there’s no pressure
in the reactor even at monstrously high temperatures,
no super-hot high-pressure radioactive steam
tearing around all your equipment.
Their popularity with SMR designs though mostly
comes from the being good for closed nuclear
fuel cycles in breeder reactors.
Anything that makes it easier to truck something
in and flip it on as a big black box needing
no maintenance or oversight is nice with SMRs,
but of course they have their own problems,
again see the Future of Fission episode for
a deeper dive on that.
One problem all nuclear has is public relations,
which is why I try to do an episode on it
every year or two.
When it comes to fission, folks with opinions
on it generally come in two forms, those who
loathe it entirely and probably would under
any circumstance, and those who say it fixes
everything and has been horribly demonized.
So I try to give it a detailed, rational discussion
every so often, pros and cons.
There’s lots of middle ground, and I’m
hardly the only person occupying it, but it
can seem like it’s A or B a lot, especially
on the internet.
Indeed, I’m not really neutral either, I
am quite pro-nuclear overall but I don’t
view it as the magic cure for everything.
Generally I see it as part of 21st century
power pyramid built on it, solar, and hydrocarbons,
mixed with opportunistic use of hydro, wind,
and geo where its advantageous.
Long term I figure on fusion or orbital power
beaming.
Although strictly speaking I suppose ‘long
term’ I figure on Hawking Radiation, depends
on how long a term we mean and this is SFIA
after all, scale can get a bit extreme here.
I’ve lived near a nuclear power plant almost
my entire life, and they don’t hold much
boogeyman effect for me, but they do for a
lot of folks and not without cause, you’re
not crazy or paranoid if the thought of reactor
in your city makes you a bit nervous, hopefully
less so after today, as much of the point
of SMRs is to have more widespread use of
them.
Of course, as with all types of power generation,
the devil tends to be in the tiny little details,
and it doesn’t get much tinier than an atomic
nuclei.
When we look at the future of nuclear energy
or some other part of the energy sector, or
really any new emerging technology, folks
often get inspired to consider a career in
that area and start wondering if it's a good
career path and if so, what they should be
learning to forge a career in it.
I don’t think it will come as a surprise
that a good knowledge of math, science, and
computer science is invaluable if you want
to pursue a career in technology.
But learning it can be intimidating, and that’s
where our friends at Brilliant.org come in.
Brilliant has thousands of lessons, from the
basics to advanced topics.
Nuclear energy and reactors, artificial intelligence,
data science, neural networks, and so much
more.
Brilliant’s focus on hands-on, fun, interactive
learning makes it an amazing tool for learning
new skills or keeping your skills sharp while
diving deeper into advanced topics.
Brilliant can help you build your creative
problem solving skills and stay up-to-date
on the latest innovations.
Continual learning is critical to career success,
and Brilliant can help with effective, interactive,
fun, and bite-sized learning.
Brilliant makes it easy to build a daily learning
habit, and you can try everything Brilliant
has to offer, for free, for a full 30 days,
by visiting brilliant.org/IsaacArthur or clicking
on the link in the description, and the first
200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's annual
premium subscription.
So today we had a look at the current and
emerging state of Nuclear, and folks often
worry about it’s usage in doomsday weapons,
but this weekend we’ll be looking at some
truly mind-boggling weapons able to destroy
worlds, wreck galaxies, or even tear apart
reality itself, in our Scifi Sunday episode:
Super Weapons.
Then next week we’ll contemplate Life on
Giant Moons, ones nearly as big as Earth itself
or even larger, and how life might arise on
such worlds and how we might colonize them.
After that we’ll have our monthly livestream
Q&A, Sunday, April 23rd at 4pm Eastern time.
Then we’ll close out April by returning
to Earth and the near future to talk about
Smart Cities and the future of automation
in urban environments and how that will change
them.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
