This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
The Universe has been around for billions
of years, yet we’ve only been studying it
for a few centuries, who knows what secrets
it still keeps and what strange technologies
we might develop as we discover those?
So today’s topic is Clarketech, a term we
use on this channel for referring to technologies
that generally operate outside the bounds
of known physics.
We’ve a lot of material to cover so you
might want to grab a drink and snack, possibly
a slice of pie.
We get this concept of Clarketech from a trio
of adages by science fiction writer Arthur
C. Clarke, known as Clarke’s Three Laws,
particularly the third one.
They are:
1) When a distinguished but elderly scientist
states that something is possible, he is almost
certainly right.
When he states that something is impossible,
he is very probably wrong.
2) The only way of discovering the limits
of the possible is to venture a little way
past them into the impossible.
And...
3) Any sufficiently advanced technology is
indistinguishable from magic.
The third one is the most quoted but as a
group they highlight the reason we generally
won’t say anything is impossible.
But this shouldn’t be taken too far, and
folks tend to fall into a sort of intellectual
laziness by constantly asserting anything
is possible.
We do not constantly change our physical laws
and overthrow science, that’s a truism,
but we are constantly adding to our knowledge
and often find weird cases or exceptions,
usually minor tweaks or phenomena that become
the exceptions that cement the rules.
On this channel we usually try to look at
the future under known science, picturing
a future where those known rules more or less
hold up, to show that we can accomplish many
impressive deeds without relying on technologies
that would be practically magical to us nowadays.
Nonetheless, none of us really expect our
current understanding of science to be complete,
even ignoring that we have a lot of open questions
still to answer.
We take as a given that those questions, once
answered, will spawn more, and that some of
those answers will open some truly game-changing
science akin to what Special Relativity or
Quantum Physics did.
Since we don’t know what we don’t know,
this is often a bad approach for contemplating
the future.
A comment like “Anything is possible”
does us little good, since that would not
just include things like faster than light
travel or time travel, but the Moon actually
being composed of Blue Cheese, with a thin
crust of rock having accumulated on top of
it.
So Clarketech is not ‘anything is possible’
but what might be plausible if something specific
in our understanding of the Universe turned
out different, though we generally include
any technology common in science fiction too,
like force fields or teleportation.
Many of the examples of Clarketech already
have well-known names too, and we have covered
some of them and will skim them today, especially
since we don’t just want to mention examples
of Clarketech but talk about their implications
on civilization if we had them.
There’s no way we can possibly cover them
all with any depth in a single episode though,
so this is fundamentally an overview episode,
and we’ll add to it as time permits.
We will also run a poll over on the community
tab of the SFIA Youtube channel with them
all listed, to see which we’ll cover next.
Often a technology created in science fiction
has all sorts of secondary uses the author
didn’t think of, which can wreck a lot of
the plot when contemplated, and for a lot
of these technologies there are uses folks
wouldn’t normally think of that are often
far more valuable.
For instance, this month we’re celebrating
the Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy as
our series for the month, and in that we have
the Infinite Improbability Drive, a ship drive
that can basically take you anywhere very
quickly but does so by playing with probability
in often crazy ways, as the engine warms up
to the increasingly improbable.
Changing missiles into whales or petunias
was one example, as was burying a starving
planet in a rain of fried eggs.
Playing with luck is a common technology or
ability in science fiction and fantasy, I
think because the authors know the protagonists
constantly bumping into world changing events
and surviving being at the epicenter of them
strains plausibility so much.
Larry Niven plays with being lucky as an evolved
trait in Ringworld and his other Known Space
novels, and Robert Jordan’s Wheel of Time
series has characters who are Ta'veren, a
name given to people who destiny tends to
center on, thus explaining their typical heroic
properties of stumbling into crises and opportunities
and surviving them, but with weird local effects.
In a town they’re visiting many things will
happen that are possible but improbable, like
every coin landing on heads when flipped or
people finding buried coins when they dig
a new well, or bad things, like a windstorm
knocking free a single roof tile that flies
through the air to hit someone on the head
and kill them.
Now consider this ability to affect probabilities
in the context of Quantum Mechanics, and the
various quantum events that as best as we
can tell are truly random.
We know many particles have half-lives, a
period of time where there’s a 50/50 chance
they will decay.
They may not, and it would be atypical for
one to decay exactly at that time, one with
a half-life of 24 hours might decay a second
later, or a century later, but if you have
trillions of them in one spot, same as flipping
coins, a day later almost exactly half of
them will have decayed.
If you can manipulate those probabilities
you might be able to make it so that half-life
changed, or that every coin landed on heads
when you flipped a switch, in this case, every
particle decayed right at that moment.
When playing with luck we think of surviving
the odds, winning the lottery, or getting
struck by lightning, we don’t think of an
amazing and compact power generator where
some fairly benign and long-lived radioisotope
might, at the flip of a switch, suddenly start
decaying very quickly.
It can also potentially be used to play with
things like fusion too, allowing improbable
combinations of smaller elements.
Or to make stable isotopes, ultra-big atoms
that should decay almost instantly but do
not, one possible way to create materials
in the hypothetical island of stability, very
dense elements with far higher atomic numbers
than uranium that may actually be stable,
itself arguably a type of clarketech.
It also makes for a potentially terrifying
weapon, planets tend to have tons of fissile
materials at their center, and suns all work
by a constant coin-flipping of hydrogen atoms
combining to fuse, if you could screw with
the probability of that happening even just
a little bit, you could potentially blow up
either, or go backwards, suppress nuclear
reactions to shut off a star or keep a nuke
from detonating.
There are plenty of simpler examples from
physics as well.
The Second Law of Thermodynamics postulates
that every closed system proceeds toward a
state of higher entropy, but the entropy of
a physical state of the system is actually
just a measure of its probability.
In other words, the highest entropy state
of the system is just it’s most probable
one.
If you have closed canister of gas, nothing
in physics precludes all the gas molecules
from bouncing over to the left side and leaving
the right side in vacuum for a while--it’s
just an improbable coincidence, far less probable
than the state where that gas spreads out
evenly--and of course staying in that state
for long is far less probable than returning
quickly to what we call the normal state.
It’s important to understand that the Second
Law of Thermodynamics is a probabilistic statement--though
statistics pretty much turn into laws when
you’re looking at Avogadro’s number of
particles--but even this basic law of physics
will fail near an Infinite Improbability field.
These are the kind of implications such technologies
could have that we and authors tend to skip
over, focusing instead on just winning at
cards or dice a lot.
And we have another, that leads us into another
example of Clarketech too, the Perpetual Motion
Machine, since fundamentally entropy is a
probability-based process as well.
We also shouldn’t rule out that if you can
play with probability, you can also make things
which have a 0% chance or 100% chance so they
can occur or don’t occur.
Since we are speaking about violating the
Second Law of Thermodynamics, perpetual motion
machines are probably the most prominent technologies
that are forbidden by it.
Now a perpetual motion machine is a bit of
blanket term, most physicists and engineers
using the term generally mean anything which
violates the laws of thermodynamics, an easy
example being a bike wheel that if spun never
slows down from air drag and friction, or
which actually speeds up.
Note that it does not necessarily need to
violate conservation of energy to do this,
it might for instance have some weird property
that lets it leech momentum and energy off
air particles it hit, cooling them while it
speeds up.
No new matter or energy is created, just moved
in violation of entropy.
Such a thing, if invented, has huge implications
on many things we discuss here.
We often talk about the Fermi Paradox here
and something we call the Dyson Dilemma, the
issue that expanding civilizations ought to
want to take advantage of all the matter and
energy they can, by englobing or disassembling
their own sun and any others they encounter.
We had some caveats on that, and one of those
was perpetual motion machines or other thermodynamics
violating devices.
This both reduces the need to grab power sources
and partially negates the “No Stealth in
Space” rule, because it’s mostly the emitted
waste heat that makes it impossible to hide.
If you can constantly recycle your energy
supply without entropy in the way, then every
house just has a magic bike wheel in the basement
with a generator attached and is super insulated
to not lose heat.
This is essentially an eternal setup, immune
to the slow decay of the Universe.
If it conserves energy you still have to worry
about slow losses to leakage, and you still
need matter and energy to expand too.
If it doesn’t obey conservation of energy
this is a truly eternal setup, because you
need not worry about leakage and you can actually
create matter from energy, matter is just
one state of energy after all, and you can
convert energy into mass by ripping quark
pairs apart.
For instance, rip two quarks apart and the
energy needed to do that produces two new
pairs of quarks instead.
You can also dump it into black holes, which
mostly emit photons as Hawking Radiation but
also produce some particles too.
But this is where those implications can radically
shift our view of the Universe.
I’m rather notoriously of the opinion that
intelligent alien life is ultra-rare, so rare
most galaxies and maybe even most superclusters
won’t have birthed one yet, precisely because
of the reasoning of the Dyson Dilemma.
Show me a bike wheel that never slows down
without an external power input and I’d
instantly have to revise that opinion.
By a reverse of that, I tend to assume faster
than light travel and time travel – arguably
the same things - are impossible, because
the Universe is huge, likely far larger than
the Observable portion of it or even infinite,
and is still very young.
If you can travel from any place, or time,
in the Universe to another, it begins getting
truly absurd to assume no one has landed here
on Earth.
The moment a single species emerges with such
technology, it can not only colonize the whole
of the Universe, but go back and colonize
it the moment it became livable, or even further
back and just tap the superhot and dense era
for matter and energy.
“One-and-done” Fermi paradox examples,
where it only takes a single example of a
behavior to negate a solution, are the worst
kind.
The same applies for traveling between alternate
realities, like colonizing empty Earths where
humanity hasn’t evolved yet, or traveling
to parallel universes.
You can visit or colonize a lot of places,
so making the sum total of reality larger
never helps to explain the Great Silence,
nor does any technology that allows such travel
to be easier.
We’ve covered FTL methods more elsewhere,
including the old FTL series, so we’ll bypass
further discussion, except to note that when
we were looking at wormholes we commented
that if you could make the classic portal
or gate we see in science fiction, you’d
potentially get unexpected uses like dropping
one end of a wormhole into the Sun to provide
cheap power, or to regenerate stars by siphoning
off helium and adding hydrogen, or weaponizing
the thing by dumping one end in a star and
the other as a giant flamethrower on an enemy’s
planet.
Teleportation, which we discussed in detail
last year, offers many of these same options.
You can make some very fast and cheap ships
if you can teleport or gate in fuel or propellant
to a ship.
Though often one would wonder why you would
need spaceships at all, when you can just
gate or teleport from world to world.
More mundane uses would be people having them
in their houses, where doorways lead to other
rooms located on different planets or even
realities, kitchen on Earth, breakfast nook
on Mercury, and so on.
This would be handy for storage too, you could
have a closet opening to a warehouse somewhere
else, or even cabinets or backpacks like that.
This brings up the notion of Hammerspace,
named for old cartoons where the character
could yank a hammer out of thin air to hit
someone on the head.
Folks who play Dungeons and Dragons will know
it as a Bag of Holding, and of course the
TARDIS from Doctor Who, bigger on the inside
than the outside.
It could come in a lot of forms, like a box
that on the outside was a cube a foot across,
but on the inside was a foot wide and long
but a mile deep.
This is obviously handy in any civilization
with filing drawers, refrigerators, or magazines
for guns, since it allows huge and easy storage.
It raises the question of if that mass is
reduced too though.
Normally the assumption of Hammerspace is
the mass is being nullified or reduced too,
and that has some awesome secondary effects
as well.
Not just for classic storage, letting you
carry all your junk around in your pocket
or cram a mansion into a closet.
You could store huge amounts of mass in there,
which would be a handy way to get around gravitational
compaction for building megastructures or
fueling ships if your pocket dimension ignored
inertial mass.
That’s an important distinction too.
We tend to use mass as a single concept but
we’ve got 3 types of mass.
Inertial mass – what resists us when we
push on something to speed it up.
Active gravitational mass – what generates
gravity to pull on things.
And passive gravitational mass – what is
getting pulled on by gravity.
One of the mysteries of modern physics is
why inertial mass and gravitational mass are
the same, but perhaps they don’t have to
be.
The ability to manipulate one or all of these
is an entire category of Clarketech.
They’re also decently plausible options
too, gravity is the first of the 4 fundamental
physical forces we discovered, but also the
weakest, and arguably the least well understood
too.
It’s entirely possible we might figure out
how to generate gravitons or block them from
hitting something, an example of anti-gravity,
itself one of the best known Clarketechs.
This whole area is terribly underexplored
in science fiction though, especially considering
artificial gravity is ubiquitous in scifi.
A lot of the interest in playing with mass
is with negative mass and matter, it’s fairly
critical to most hypothetical FTL ship drives,
but even just being able to mess with one
of the three types of mass, reducing it rather
than making it zero or negative, or increasing
it, has huge implications.
We’ll skim those today, but a ship that
could drop its inertial mass while maintaining
its kinetic energy could flick that on and
suddenly leap up to a huge speed, shut it
off and drop back down again, totally altering
our normal view of ships not being able to
stop mid-flight or parking next to each other
to exchange fire rather than flying quick
passes.
It also allows way cheaper and safer spaceflight,
since a ship moving at relativistic speeds
might not have tons of kinetic energy anymore,
expensive energy that also made it a giant
weapon for ramming into planets.
A similar type of Clarketech is the reactionless
drive, and this would be one avenue for producing
such a thing or a close approximation.
It also rearranges our thinking on megastructures
a lot, you don’t build big rotating sections
because you have artificial gravity, but you
also don’t need to worry about size much,
since you can resist gravity.
No super-huge constructs collapsing under
their own weight.
You can also go the flip side and increase
gravity, potentially allowing micro-stars,
local areas low on mass but high on gravity
where fusion could ignite easily, or where
micro-black holes could be easily formed.
Of course we can potentially already do some
tricks like this by using Dark Matter, if
we could figure out how to use it, since it
interacts with nothing except by gravity,
so if you could manipulate it you could make
high gravity regions that were otherwise empty.
One possible way of making slow time fields,
for instance, since mass slows time but you
can’t really put valuable things in such
places as it would tend to be ultra-hostile
there, like a neutron star, wherever you piled
enough mass to seriously slow time down.
This raises interactions with matter where
we normally can’t, and dark matter is a
great example since its value is that it interacts
with virtually nothing, but this makes it
hard to use for the same reason.
We have materials that can absorb photons
and produce electricity, or vice-versa, photovoltaics.
One could imagine materials that interacted
to contain dark matter, or other weakly interacting
particles like neutrinos.
If you could make a solar panel that converted
neutrinos into electricity instead, you’d
gain access to a huge amount of power that
also wasn’t blocked by things like clouds
or our planet, the two big problems with normal
solar power.
Call this photoneutrionics, and that would
also be handy for communications, no disruptions
from walls or such.
Parallel technologies might be photogravitics,
panels that absorbed light and produced gravity,
or the reverse, absorbed gravity and produced
photons, which would be very handy for lighting
many of those bigger megaearths or shellworlds
we sometimes discuss building around small
or degenerate stars, which are a pain to light
normally.
If it absorbs light and produces gravity,
you might end up with Dyson Spheres or Swarms
where you lived on flat plates absorbing light
and producing gravity instead of the classic
cylinder habitat.
Even very limited improvements in such technologies,
like ones that merely reflect light normally
but can reflect frequencies we can’t really
build mirrors for, like gamma rays, would
be incredibly handy for things like fusion
or kugelblitz black holes.
Indeed Kugelblitz black holes, which we’ve
discussed extensively here, are mostly Clarketech
because of a lack of gamma ray mirrors.
Being able to play with the physical laws
or constants directly is yet another type
of Clarketech.
We don’t know why the various constants
like gravity or the speed of light are what
they are, unless you subscribe to the Simulation
Theory, where those are set by the computer
programmer.
There may be other universes where they are
different.
However, we can’t rule out that we might
be able to alter them locally one day, same
as we might be able to play with probability
one day as we discussed earlier, and with
some overlapping effects too, since a lot
of things like nuclear interactions are based
on the speed of light or other constants.
That’s another of the Fermi Paradox solutions
too, that civilizations might migrate to Universes
with physical constants that were more optimal
or tuck themselves into pockets of space where
they’ve messed with those.
Light lag is a huge problem for any advanced
civilization, FTL is often suggested as the
solution but being able to make a pocket of
space where the speed of light was just higher,
or gravity weaker or stronger, or so on, might
solve many of those issues.
This isn’t just physical constants either.
This episode is coming out Pi Day, 3.14, and
of course is followed by a lot more digits.
Historically a lot of folks have tried to
make it a rational number, though the more
extreme stories like Iowa trying to set it
to exactly 3 are fictitious or exaggerated.
Still, imagine if you could set Pi as being
exactly equal to 3, or make a circle that
had only 359 degrees, or 361, or a box where
anything going off the right side emerged
on the left, like in some old computer games.
You could presumably make a simulated universe
where that last one was quite true.
Needless to say building your own Universes
or being able to simulate them is Clarketech
too, especially types of reversible computing
that might let you get around how many simulations
you can make from available mass and energy.
We mentioned having a bike wheel in the basement
as a perpetual motion machine running your
house for eternity, but you could use that
exact same tech to run a huge simulated universe
too, benefitting from its entropy violating
ability to let you use the bonuses of cold
computation for hyper-efficient computing
we discuss in the Civilizations at the End
of Time series.
You could have your own simulated universes
in your basement then, your own virtual worlds,
something we discussed a couple months back.
Of course Clarketech that gets around things
like the Landauer Limit or other computing
limitations might be on the table too, and
we have a lot of Clarketech in that category,
though it’s worth noting that things like
nanotech and utility fog or smart matter – little
micromachines that can take any form or quickly
construct things for you, probably are not
Clarketech, as they operate inside known physics,
though more extreme forms that do it faster
or at smaller scales, picotech and femtotech,
arguably are.
See the Santa Claus Machine episode for some
of the limitations on speed and micro-sizing
that we’d have to overcome for these technologies
and which are imposed by known physics when
we dissect them and look at practical considerations
like heat loss, chaos, noise, and the sticky
fingers problem.
Speaking of computation and chaos, one of
the big problems with weather forecasting,
let alone any human prediction technology
like Isaac Asimov’s psychohistory, is chaos
and exponentially increasing needs for processing
when forecasting complex systems, so Psychohistory
for instance would be an example of Clarketech,
and one we discussed in its own episode.
We have so many more, we haven’t even discussed
things like building matter out of things
other than up or down quarks, like the strange,
charm, top, or bottom quarks, or creating
new types of matter entirely.
What about magnetic monopoles or magmatter
or neutronium or structures built of frozen
light or tachyons?
We haven’t discussed speeding up time, the
universe lets you slow time but not speed
it up, that would be another Clarketech.
We hinted at building pocket universes here
with different laws, but what about building
pockets universes like ours but in different
universes with different laws, like the Webway
from Warhammer 40k?
What’s the effect of such places on the
Universe, around the edges?
Would you get weird boundary or fringe effects
or their own type of event horizon?
Could uses of such things be a type of suicide
pact technology?
Invent time travel and instantly erase your
whole civilization when you use it?
Could you have places that violated causality?
We talk about being able to augment our minds
to be able to learn faster or store memories
better or even transfer memories to others
or delete them, but what about a technology
that did not delete a memory you found unpleasant
but deleted the event itself?
Needless to say, we’ve only scratched the
surface of possible Clarketechs and the uses
and implications of those we’ve briefly
touched on.
As mentioned we’ll do a poll over on the
SFIA Youtube community tab to see which ones
we’ll do next, either as their own standalone
episode, or possibly a few in a single episode
or shorter bonus episodes for them.
We’ll also open a poll on our Facebook Group,
Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur, where
you can suggest your own Clarketech options
and discuss the implications of these various
techs, and I’ll certainly welcome any thoughts
on them there or in our Youtube comments section
below.
One problem with keeping to a scientific approach
to futurism is it can sometimes restrict your
thinking on the possible a bit, so it is often
good to fish around for thoughts from folks
who might be able to think outside the box
on a topic a bit easier.
However, and I’d put this as a big warning
on this episode and topic in general, many
technologies people dream up or write up in
science fiction tend to fall apart on inspection
from known science and upon consideration
of the implications that they have to have
on the plot and narrative.
And again, it really is lazy to just say ‘anything
is possible’, and not too useful either.
We study and learn, we find out what is possible,
and we occasionally have to alter or even
massively overhaul our thinking on that.
Knowing how the real science and math works,
knowing what we do know, is invaluable, I
don’t think I need to try hard to convince
anyone of that here.
It’s also something our friends at Brilliant
excel at explaining, with practical courses,
quizzes, and daily problems on topics like
heat and thermodynamics that make the topics
far more intuitive to learn.
Learning more math and science is hard, but
incredibly beneficial in virtually every aspect
of life, including just the joy of understanding
the world around us better.
And places like Brilliant make that learning
far easier, by presenting topics in easy to
learn and interactive ways that let you learn
easier and at your own pace.
A lot of the technologies we discussed today
are restricted by Thermodynamics, for instance,
and we discuss it a lot on the channel as
a major limitation on what we can do, but
it can often be unclear to folks why it is
such a restraint and Brilliant's Science Essentials
course is a great way to learn about thermodynamics
and demystify that topic.
In addition to many great courses, they have
an online community to help you and discuss
the material with, and fun daily problems
that help to exercise your mind and encourage
you to challenge yourself everyday.
If you’d like to learn more science and
math, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur and
sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription...so you can view all the Daily
Problems in the archives and unlock every
course..
Before we get to the schedule, I just wanted
to announce that the upgrades on our website,
IsaacArthur.net, are complete, and we’ve
added some features like a catalog of all
the various books I’ve recommended over
the years and a new forum, as an additional
place you can discuss the concepts and ideas
we look at here, and while you’re there
you can take a look at some SFIA merchandise
we have available.
Next week we’ll be returning to the Civilizations
at the End of Time series to take a look at
how civilizations might survive around the
deaths of their own suns, and explore some
extreme options like living on white dwarfs
or converting neutron stars into giant computers,
as well as the Supernova Engine, one of those
extreme types of technology we so enjoy here
on SFIA.
The week after that we’ll return to the
Generation Ships series for an equally extreme
style of ship, moving entire planets around
as colonization vehicles, in Planet Ships.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to support future episodes,
you can visit our sponsors or donate to the
channel on Patreon.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
