This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. 
Get access to my streaming video service,  
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
You’ve probably heard a lot lately about 
the limitations of solar power as a green  
renewable energy source. But with some 
new supporting technologies on the way  
and others already in the field, the future of 
solar power looks as bright as the sun!
 
So, in the last couple of years we’ve looked 
at the Future of Fusion Power, of Fission,  
of Thorium, and of Power Satellites, and I 
thought it was time to take a look at the future  
of solar power. So we will be looking at solar 
photovoltaic, solar thermal, space-based solar,  
and some more variations and trying 
to see how the landscape will unfold.
 
Now, whenever I do an episode on the future 
of a given power supply, I feel obliged to  
say upfront that my own philosophy on which 
sort of energy we should research is “Yes”.  
Barring something like a micro-sized and instantly 
throttleable matter to energy converter or  
similar, none of the power concepts really on 
the table these days holds such an advantage  
over the others that we should ignore them or 
opt for a single energy option, which doesn’t  
really seem a good idea even if one of the energy 
sources is significantly cheaper than the others.  
Diversity has its value, and just because you can 
grow corn for half the price you could wheat or  
sugar or rice, doesn’t make it a good idea to get 
90% of your calories or fuel from that one crop. 
 
We probably want to err on the side of caution and 
assume the same is true for power generation, but  
if you were going to pick one current technology 
to go all in on, solar isn’t a bad one, since  
it’s fairly plentiful everywhere. SUNMetrix ran 
the numbers once for the worst place for Solar:  
a cloudy archipelago north of Russia, and it 
still has roughly a quarter of the sunlight as the  
best place for solar over the course of a year. 
And it’s not really subject to the same supply  
chain issues we have for other fuels, mostly, 
we’ll get to some of those problems in a bit.
 
This is a big part of why folks like solar, 
a sturdy and cheap panel offers long term  
energy independence if slapped on a roof or in a 
backyard, and combined with a good battery system,  
gets around the issues of weather and nighttime.
Now the materials to build those panels have  
supply chain issues, same for either batteries or 
another backup, but not for the fuel itself which  
is renewable as long as the Sun exists. We have 
to put that caveat in, because this is SFIA, where  
we do regularly contemplate how to handle stuff 
like refueling our Sun or civilizations lasting  
long after even the stars burn out. But certainly 
our Sun offers a more reliable and long term power  
supply than fossil fuels. The point is a bit 
more debatable for fission as nuclear has some  
definite pros, including a very long term supply 
of fuel as we looked at in the Future of Fisson.  
Of course so would chemical biofuels or renewable 
fuels, and another way you can use solar is  
to grow crops and biofuels with it. For that 
matter, it is a fairly chemically simple process  
to suck carbon dioxide and water out of the air 
and turn it into hydrocarbons like gasoline,  
making them a carbon neutral fuel, but it 
takes a lot more power to do this than you  
get from burning that fuel, so it’s 
value is in portability and storage.
 
As a result there are pathways forward, 
if solar panels get cheaper but batteries  
mostly don’t, where we might use the sun to 
power gasoline production to take advantage  
of the high energy density and portability 
of hydrocarbons or even hydrogen by itself,  
if we get better at hydrogen storage. Which we 
are, we could probably do a whole episode just  
on hydrogen storage improvements and 
their uses as a fuel, or propellant,  
or in tandem with solar or nuclear energy. 
Nonetheless, it's a topic for another time.
 
Key notion as we go into these concepts, we will 
explain how classic solar energy systems work,  
but we aren’t even vaguely interested in trying to 
break down the exact economics of a solar economy  
compared to wind or oil or uranium, because that 
is simply unpredictable 20 years from now. It's  
nothing ever so simple as finding out what the 
price point is for solar panels as roofing tiles  
is so that everyone installs them, because we 
could get to that price point tomorrow if someone  
invented a cheap megabattery, or never if someone 
invented a trusty Mr. Fusion for every home. In  
the same notion, tomorrow someone could come out 
with a clanking self-replicator that could mass  
produce things like solar panels, but governments 
might ban it being used Earthside so that we ended  
up with microwave beaming from orbital solar 
power satellites built by robots on the Moon. 
 
There’s simply too much variability to 
technology and economics in a generation to  
speak with confidence, and for that matter we 
can’t really do that with modern tech either.  
Though we should never let that uncertainty 
cripple us into inaction and not picking policies.  
But we need to be cautious in picking those and 
sourcing our data. Folks tend to compare the  
rosiest numbers for their preferred energy source 
to the worst numbers from other power plants and  
usually from the crumbling old models rather than 
the brand new ones, like comparing a brand new  
wind turbine to the mileage of some 1970s Cadillac 
getting 8 miles per gallon when it was brand new,  
and using its mileage on some worn down 
engine still kicking around. This is the  
same thing we see a lot with nuclear power too, 
or spaceships and airplane designs, folks often  
don’t just pick on all the technology they don’t 
like, but even do circular firing squads on the  
version of the preferred technology they don’t 
favor. We’ll skip examples as I’d imagine you  
all can think of plenty, and most of us are 
guilty of doing it ourselves at times too. 
 
But most importantly, the tech just tends 
to render all the neck-and-neck competition  
of today irrelevant tomorrow. As an example, 
one way around weather is to just float your  
solar panel up on a hydrogen or helium 
balloon to above the cloud layer, and the  
higher altitude also gives you longer daylight 
periods. However, this isn’t economical because  
hydrogen and helium are really tiny compared to 
other elements and tend to leak through them,  
meaning you’d have to reel your blimp panel down 
regularly to refuel it with expensive helium,  
but advances in various 2D materials like graphene 
show promise of ending that, in which case it  
suddenly gets very viable to basically permanently 
float objects, be it solar panels or wind turbines  
or delivery blimp-drones using solar to drive 
pumps and turbines to move around. Indeed you  
can potentially float houses and cities that way, 
see our Cloud Cities episode for more details.
 
Graphene is also an amazing conductor and 
superstrong, making it perfect for a discrete  
power cord and tether holding that floating 
panel to the ground and the houses or cities its  
powering. In this very same way though, those same 
2D materials, with amazing conductive properties,  
are the ones that seem to promise us 
the super-batteries we really want.  
New materials being used in cathodes and anodes, 
like graphene or ruthenium, appear to hold  
the promise of making our current lithium ion 
batteries old, obsolete, and clunky. Naturally,  
that would screw with the economics of floating 
panels connected by graphene wire tethers,  
if it was simply cheaper and easier to 
build and maintain twice as many panels  
down on the ground and connected to cheap 
and long-lasting super batteries that get  
us around not just the weather and night, 
but those unusual long-term outages too.  
Very approximately, since its new tech still in 
development, a battery incorporating graphene,  
and new cathode technology, can hold about 6 times 
the energy a current Lithium Ion one can, at about  
a watt hour per gram, which is 3600 joules 
per gram, or a kilowatthour per kilogram.   
 
That’s actually very low compared to gasoline, 
which comes in at a dozen times more dense,  
though the battery is storing electricity 
directly, rather than us combusting fuel  
which we can convert into electricity at an 
efficiency loss, and with additional heavy  
machinery. What’s awesome about it though, is 
that it would charge very quickly and store  
energy at a very low rate of loss compared to 
modern batteries, though it’s worth noting that  
while modern batteries can lose a percent of 
charge a day and be considered good, coal can  
keep its energy bound up for geological timespans. 
I think sometimes folks forget that it is not just  
cost and inertia that keep fossil fuels in use, 
they have a lot of edges over other options,  
as those other options narrow those edges, 
resistance to using them will probably decline.
 
Another thing with graphene and other 2D materials 
is that they appear to make for good solar panels,  
which would circumvent some of the other 
supply issues we have with modern solar panels.  
Most panels are made mainly of silicon, a 
substance basically as abundant as the carbon  
we make graphene from, but frequently incorporate 
lots of rare earths, which while not as rare as  
the name implies and folks tend to think, are 
hardly super abundant either. Current research  
suggests that graphene-based panels would take 
hardly any or no rare-earth materials at all,  
and might even defy the Schockley-Quessier limit, 
meaning you can get far higher efficiencies from  
them than silicon semiconductor-based panels. 
Amusingly you can actually generate power  
from raindrops with graphene panels, which is 
handy when it’s raining. Also a good reminder  
that an ultra-strong and light conductive 
material has some fairly broad applications  
with rival technologies like giant 
wind turbines or deep sea generators.
 
This is not an episode on graphene, see our 
episode the Impact of Graphene for that,  
but it’s a good reminder how one technology 
can massively disrupt tons of others,  
much as computers and internal combustion 
engines both did. And there are many other  
technologies being developed for grid-scale power 
storage, such as Iron-Air batteries, where power  
density and weight are secondary to cost and 
scalability. And computers and engines are  
good analogies for cheap energy and solar because 
they share that trait of being force multipliers.  
The effect of cheaper and more reliable energy is 
way bigger than simply a lower electric bill. 
 
In this same way, a civilization where 
most homes have solar panels on the roofs  
and banks of batteries in the basement 
is different economically - and probably  
even culturally - from one with 
that home solar for daytime use,  
but nuclear power on the wider community 
power grid for nights and weather.  
Both of those approaches have a lot going for 
them, as would other hybrids. You get a secondary  
economy if you fully and smartly develop cottage 
power production like that too, where folks  
either opt to spend more to build and maintain 
solar panels at their house in excess of their  
regular needs, or build to those regular needs 
and get more off the grid for peak consumption.
 
I use the term cottage industry because folks 
might supplement their income by overproduction  
or restraining their usage, in much the same 
way subsistence farmers do with their gardens,  
livestock, or craftsmanship. In the grand scheme, 
this wouldn’t be a huge economic impact I suspect,  
but might have big cultural impacts since 
it would tend to influence family life.  
Families tight on cash have even more reason 
to turn the lights off when not in a room,  
since they can sell that energy, and so on.
One problem with solar for this though, is that  
peaks and valleys in use and production will tend 
to flow together. I can’t really sell my excess  
power on a sunny day to my neighbors to run their 
Air Conditioning because it's sunny for them too,  
and because I presumably want to run my air 
conditioner too, of course I can probably leave  
the temperature a degree higher for less comfort 
and sell that excess energy for peak value. 
 
That’s hardly a unique conundrum in supply and 
demand, it tends to be common for anything that’s  
hard to store, like produce for instance, or 
bulky, like water. Nonetheless it’s always  
a fairly irritating one and one that better 
batteries or energy storage gets around, though  
also assisted by using other power types in tandem 
with solar, like nuclear, and by easier transport,  
like massive superconducting electric trunklines 
running around the planet – and of course those  
introduce supply concerns too since folks can cut 
those lines. When contemplating the future though,  
we need to be pondering this stuff at least as 
much as the basic science, because it’s how we  
notice that it’s a very different future for 
folks with big roofs and lawns versus those in  
a multi-story apartment in a city, or for folks in 
sunny deserts versus cloudy northern climates. 
 
That is another example too. Because solar has 
peak production in both time of day and time of  
year, it's handy to either be able to store it or 
use it for something you don’t need steadily. One  
example of that would be for folks living in sunny 
deserts to run a big pipeline out to the ocean and  
run pumps and desalinate during the day and summer 
– conveniently when your need for fresh water is  
highest anyway – but water is relatively easy 
to store en mass too, you just dig a hole and  
line it. These kinds of binge and purge, famine 
and feast sorts of production can often result  
in things being economically viable – like 
greening up the desert in those spots – simply  
because you have a big surplus in production 
at your peaks and need something to do with it.  
This is also potentially handy for 
doing things like producing aluminum,  
an energy-intense process, or even that trick I 
mentioned earlier for jamming carbon dioxide and  
water vapor back together to make hydrocarbons.
It’s probably worth noting though that bits of  
your economy that are surviving because of such 
a cheap surplus at peaks are often vulnerable to  
rapid obsolescence from a new bit of technology. 
In this case, better and cheaper energy storage.  
Though all energy storage is likely to have a 
significant cost in money, space, and maintenance  
attached that it is likely to leave a decent 
niche market for relatively cheap peak energy,  
noontime solar and such. Batteries fell under 
$100 a kilowatt-hour for the first time in 2021,  
but that still means a household needing 5 
kilowatts to run their home would need $5000  
in battery storage in their basement just for a 10 
hour night, before considering all the extra costs  
surrounding getting those batteries installed 
in the first place. Batteries need replacing  
after anywhere from 5 to 13 years, and need 
a fair amount of space and maintenance during  
that time too. If you are spending $100 per 
month maintaining your battery capacity,  
you are probably not getting anything like the 
savings on your bill you were hoping for. 
 
I’ve been saying batteries a lot this episode 
– and partially because I tend to be bad about  
using it as a catch-all for energy storage, so 
that I sometimes refer to even black holes as  
batteries – and improvements to batteries will 
help a lot, but I’m sure folks are expecting us  
to get around to molten salt and solar thermal, 
and now is a good time to segue into that.
 
There’s a lot of ways to store energy – 
indeed that desalination of water trick  
is a more metaphorical example, akin to selling 
energy and putting the money in the bank, to buy  
energy later when you need it – but in terms of 
easy manipulation of energy, modern rechargeable  
batteries have a lot going for them, and maybe 
the biggest part of that is portability.
 
Sunlight coming into Earth either reflects off of 
things or gets absorbed by them; this warms them  
up and we can use that heat for power, just like 
in any thermal power plant, which is most of them.  
Indeed for outer space or a vacuum, we can 
actually have reflective windmills pushed by  
sunlight itself, but neither of those approaches 
is considered a form of classical solar power.  
We won’t get too deep into the woods here, 
but when we say “solar power” we usually mean  
photovoltaic power, which is where photons of 
light hit a substance and spit out an electron  
resulting in voltage and current. Hence, 
photovoltaic. Volts are the measure of the  
electromotive force, named for Alessandro Volta, 
who invented the electrochemical battery cell,  
or voltaic pile, in 1799. 
This basic effect of electrons  
moving around as a result of absorbing photons, 
or emitting them, called the Photoelectric Effect,  
was proposed in 1905 and is what Albert 
Einstein actually got his Nobel Prize for,  
not relativity, and it’s the basic principle 
behind fluorescent and neon lighting.  
However it wasn’t until we discovered 
semiconductor materials about half a  
century later that photovoltaic power began being 
contemplated as a power source. This is not the  
birth of solar power in general of course, which 
predates humanity and drives every storm and fuels  
every plant, and we have been using it for things 
like solar ovens, heating houses, or sun-dried  
bricks for making houses for a long time. 
So the terminology can get a bit confusing.  
When people are referencing solar power, they 
do mean photovoltaic power, and less often but  
still frequently, solar thermal. Solar Thermal 
is taking advantage of sunlight to create heat  
and then to run that through a heat engine in 
the same way as we do for coal, gas, geothermal,  
or nuclear, typically by running hot water through 
a steam engine or turbine. Now there are several  
ways to turn heat into energy, maybe the most 
conceptually simple for solar thermal would be  
a steam engine whose boiler had clear sides and 
which many parabolic mirrors or magnifying glasses  
angled towards it, heating the water into steam 
and turning that engine or driving its pistons.  
Indeed, the very first attempts at solar thermal 
power did something along these lines, and never  
really caught on due to their efficiency.
The fluid that’s popular to discuss for use  
in a modern solar thermal power plant tends to be 
molten salt storage. This is where you have a big  
field with a ton of moveable mirrors encircling 
a big tower, and those mirrors tilt with time of  
day and season to reflect sunlight at the top of 
the tower in the center. Such mirrors are called  
heliostats, short for helios stationary or Sun 
stationary. That receiver superheats molten salt  
which we then pump through to run a steam powered 
generator. Molten Salt is handy because it is a  
hot liquid at temperatures water would be steam 
at, so it isn’t under any pressure and isn’t going  
to burst pipes - that’s why there’s so much talk 
about using it for other thermal power sources  
too. Even on the Moon or other airless worlds, 
relatively weak pipes can keep it a liquid and  
just as importantly, some giant storage tank 
can be built that’s well insulated but doesn’t  
need to be super strong to avoid blowing under 
the internal pressure like a hot gas would. 
 
Since heat storage by quantity is about 
volume, and heat loss from such objects  
is about surface area, using molten salt lets 
you make giant vats of solar-heated molten salt  
that you can store for very long times. Under the 
square cube law, scaling objects up squares their  
surface area while cubing their volume, hence 
a storage tank 10 times bigger has 100 times  
the surface area leaking heat but 1000 times 
the total heat storage, or energy storage,  
so that it’s effectively cooling at a tenth the 
speed the smaller tank would, in terms of energy  
loss. So the molten salt heated in the day can 
keep powering you at night, and if you build tanks  
big enough, you can keep the salt temperature 
fairly stable over many weeks or even longer.
 
Indeed, since pressure isn’t as much of an issue, 
you could do large vacuum flasks for even better  
insulation, though this might be cost prohibitive 
over simply building conventionally insulated but  
bigger tanks. Insulation would not be costly 
on a place like the moon though, where vacuum  
comes with the location, and is a great way to 
manage the problem with solar power on the Moon,  
where the sun rises for two weeks and then 
sets for two weeks. It’s an excellent approach,  
and we often show an animation of such a 
system on the moon in our moon-based episodes.  
Also another example of good tandem use is with 
nuclear, which often contemplates using molten  
salts in this capacity (called a stable salt 
reactor), though most people tend to take more  
interest in using the salt as part of the fuel 
and coolant rather than as a giant reservoir.
 
Solar thermal works very well on any airless 
world, and also in the vacuum of space. We often  
contemplate using it for power satellites 
in orbit of Earth instead of photovoltaics  
for this reason. It’s a bit easier there 
too because you don’t need heliostats,  
you can just use a big parabolic dish 
that stays stationary to the sun,  
which removes a lot of the complex 
components and therefore reduces the cost.  
Also the lack of air prevents birds flying 
through the solar flux and being incinerated.  
Concentrating light on active support power towers 
still results in some problems like that though,  
which are hard to avoid with the intent of 
efficient commercial power generation. 
 
These issues are one reason passive solar or more 
tuned down options are popular too. Passive solar  
of course is where you make your roofs or 
curtains reflective to bounce light away,  
cooling your house, or very absorptive to 
heat it. This of course is nothing new,  
but if your rooftop was covered in mirrors 
or heliostats pointing at your own personal  
power tower and you had your own molten salt 
reservoir and generator, that probably keeps  
things low intensity enough to avoid obliterating 
local birds without losing all your efficiency. 
 
One nice thing about molten salt and steam 
generators is they are definitely easy tech,  
so it’s plausible that they could be something 
installed at the neighborhood or even personal  
home level. Outside of cases like that, 
we tend to assume home based solar is  
strictly either photovoltaic or passive. Don’t 
assume it's limited to solar heating though;  
solar cooling, or cooling things with 
heat sources of any kind, such as with  
the Einstein Fridge, is no more complicated 
than the typical electric air conditioner. 
 
In our contemplations of the Fermi 
Paradox or cyclical civilizations,  
folks often wonder how a civilization could get 
technological if their world didn’t have fossil  
fuels, either having never developed or getting 
used up, and these alternative solar options  
are good examples of parallel approaches without 
electricity specifically or without fossil fuels,  
and there’s some fairly fascinating options 
for civilizations who develop fiber optic  
cables for light transmission too. 
That’s another topic for some other time,  
but a key notion is that we always want to be 
careful of comparing old techs to newer ones,  
as the old tech has often had millions of folks 
working for decades to improve its functionality  
in myriad ways. We’re pretty amazing with what we 
can do with internal combustion engines compared  
to back in the 19th century for instance. Solar is 
a great example of that and amusingly the science  
that would have made it viable sprung up just 
after we got very into using oil and coal. If the  
order on that had been different, semiconductors 
being discovered in the late 1800s for instance,  
we might have gone solar sooner, and 
be way better at it than we are now.
 
Solar has a bad reputation in a lot of circles, 
and I think a lot of it is a holdover of prior  
times, much as with fears of nuclear energy. 
Back in 2008, when companies like Solyndra  
failed, the technology wasn’t as efficient and 
cost-effective as it is today. For a lot of folks,  
getting solar power and ethanol jammed down 
their throats at increased costs while being  
scolded for complaining about how inferior 
they were as power sources did not sit well,  
and tends to be one of my favorite examples of 
horrible ways to roll out technology and policy.  
You catch more flies with honey than vinegar, 
but humans can handle vinegar just fine,  
they just tend to get surly if you tell 
them they should feel lucky about it.
 
It can be hard to grasp just how quickly Solar 
and Wind have developed thanks to the massive,  
seemingly “wasted,” investment 
in it at the turn of the 2010s.  
Humans aren’t great with rapid change sometimes, 
and the idea of solar going from unaffordable  
to competitive in just 5 years, and competitive 
to the cheapest source in another 5,  
is foreign to many of us. Continued improvement 
will help to speed that up, and of course  
more widespread use will help with cost and 
innovation too, much as with computers, cars,  
and all sorts of household tools and appliances. 
Economies of scale are a beautiful thing.
 
It's easier to be confident about solar gaining 
ground nowadays, but there is a reason it had a  
lot of enthusiasm going for it even back when 
solar panels were barely able to run a cheap  
little calculator. Realistically the big appeal to 
solar is that there’s hundreds of watts of power  
hitting every square meter of this planet, 
which amounts to about a liter of gasoline per  
square meter per day, in terms of incident energy, 
depending on your location and time of year. That  
means even at 10% efficiency a hectare of solar 
panels would be producing as much energy per day  
as you’d get from burning 10,000 liters of fuel, 
or 1000 gallons per acre per day. Forever, or for  
billions of years anyway. And our newest solar 
panels are running at over 25% efficiency now.
 
Now that’s not free, you’ve got to make those 
panels, maintain them, replace them, clean them,  
and build and maintain the wires running to 
them, and so on. However, I want you to imagine  
you had some solar panels on your garage, say 
just 5 square meters of them, 54 square feet,  
or 9 by 6 foot, and some tanks on the side that 
hummed and gurgled away and managed that 25%  
conversion of sunlight into gasoline, getting 
you 12.5 liters of fuel a day or 23 gallons  
of gas a week. How much do you think most folks 
would pay for that? Even at half the efficiency,  
you’d need twice as many panels, but they would 
still fit on most garages with room to spare.  
Now batteries might do better, or hydrogen fuel 
cells, or even molten salt, emphasis on the  
word ‘might’ but it is a reminder that none of 
these power techniques needs to be exclusive. 
 
As we noted in our power satellites episode, even 
with working fusion plants you’d probably still  
either beam energy down to Earth as microwaves, 
be it from fusion in those plants or fusion  
from the sun collected as solar, simply because 
generating power groundside produces more heat  
on Earth per watt of electricity than beaming 
it down as microwaves would. Even in space,  
fusion might simply be more effort than equal 
amounts of power collection by solar would,  
at least until you hit the asteroid belt. Folks 
tend to forget, it takes tons of actual solar  
matter at temperatures of millions of Kelvin to 
produce a single watt of power, that’s how rare  
fusion events are in stars like our sun. It seems 
like the containment system for something like  
that would be big and maintenance heavy compared 
to, say, a thin sheet of reflective material  
for bouncing light and thin sheets of solar 
panels or solar thermal power tower apparatus. 
 
It’s very hard to say just how the 
future of solar will go; we’ll use  
and abuse all sorts of panels and batteries 
and technologies in the next few decades,  
and see what improvements and innovations 
rise up from that. Fundamentally though,  
as far as I can tell, solar power’s future 
is as bright as the sun that fuels it.
 
There’s an awful lot more to solar 
power than we didn’t get to cover today,  
and I’d recommend checking out Catalyst’s episodes 
on Super Solar Cells and Battery Powered homes,  
over on Curiositystream, for some more insights 
on how solar might be arriving in our homes  
in the next decade or so. One thing 
I didn’t cover today and wished I  
had in hindsight is the various types 
of solar panels, like monocrystalline,  
polycrystalline, thin-films, and PERC or 
Passivated Emitter and Rear Cell panels.  
These each have their current pros and 
cons and how those pros and cons might  
shift with some potential advances, may alter 
the field and market in years to come. So I’ve  
decided to make it the subject of another 
of our extended editions over on Nebula.
 
If you didn't know, Nebula is our streaming 
service full of awesome content from creators  
focused on informative but fun content. 
It’s designed to give creators more freedom  
than other platforms, and all our episodes of 
this show appear early and ad free on Nebula,  
and many have extended editions too like 
today’s, as well as some Nebula Exclusives  
like our Coexistence with Aliens Series. And 
thanks to all of our NEbula subscribers since  
it lets me do extended editions, which are 
nice ways to do addendums on videos I usually  
write a few months before they air and often have 
additional thoughts on during final production.
 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself but 
we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational 
videos like Catalyst, to offer Nebula for free  
as a bonus if you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in our episode description.  
That lets you see the amazing content on Curiositystream
and Nebula for less than $15 a year, just use the link in the episode’s description.
 
Incidentally we had a livestream Q&A this 
weekend, and afterwards we posted a poll of  
topics the audience came up with during that, and 
there is still time to vote for your favorite of  
those topics and as usual the winner will get 
made into an episode, just head over to the  
Channel’s Community tab and vote. Also all those 
livestreams are available afterwards, indeed  
most folks catch them after, but I gather many 
folks aren’t aware that they basically just turn  
into an episode after the stream ends.
All right, next week we will take a couple  
episodes to contemplate Kessler Syndrome, the 
risk of a cascade of orbital debris around Earth,  
and the implications it might have on the 
Fermi Paradox as well as other scenarios,  
natural or artificial, which might imprison a 
civilization on their homeworld. One other case  
folks often mention for that are worlds where the 
gravity is too high to let them send rockets into  
space, Super Earths, and so the week after that 
we will examine those and how life might evolve  
on them and how we might colonize them. Then 
we’ll finish out February with a look at building  
Water Worlds and Marine Space Habitats, and our 
next Livestream Q&A on Sunday, February 27th.
 
Now if you want alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe to the  
Channel and hit the notifications bell, and if you 
enjoyed this episode, please hit the like button,  
share it with others, and leave a comment below. 
You can also join in the conversation on any  
of our social media forums, find our audio-only 
versions of the show, or donate to support future  
episodes, and all those options and more are 
listed in the links in the episode description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
