This Episode is brought to you by World Anvil.
It takes a lot of energy, precision, and effort
to hang a satellite in orbit above our atmosphere,
but it takes even more to hang one inside
our atmosphere.
So today we will be looking at placing satellites
and even non-moving objects into ultra-low
orbits, or even beneath the Karman line, the
edge of outer space and the main atmosphere,
and to do that, we need to start by explaining
why we don’t now, and why we want to.
Many folks mistakenly believe there’s no
gravity on the Space Station because it’s
way out in space, an enormous distance from
Earth.
In reality, the ISS and most of our satellites
are as close to Earth as we can possibly put
them before atmospheric drag slows them down
too much for them to remain in orbit.
Gravity is an inverse square force, meaning
it’s proportional to the square of the distance
from the center of the planet, and the ISS
is only 254 miles or so up, just 6% farther
from Earth’s center than you are, so the
gravity there is only 13% weaker than what’s
holding you down right now.
So if the ISS is at .87g, why doesn’t it
fall?
Well, it *is* falling, but as Isaac Newton
famously illustrated, if you travel fast enough
over the surface of a planet, you’ll fall
toward it at the same rate it curves away
from you, so you’ll keep falling around
it indefinitely—a situation we call being
in orbit.
If you were to move at about Mach 23, just
3% faster than the ISS does, you could, in
theory, orbit the Earth and experience weightlessness;
inches above the surface.
But in practice you’d run into three critical
problems.
The first is that the Earth isn’t smooth
or perfectly spherical, it bulges out at the
equator and has all kinds of features sticking
up for you to slam into, like mountains.
The second is that things like oceans and
crust have very different densities, so the
earth’s gravitational field isn’t perfectly
spherical, so your orbit won’t be perfectly
circular and will intersect with the surface
at some point.
And the third barrier to ultra-low Earth orbit
is that you’re slamming into all that air,
which slows you down fast.
Loosely speaking, air particles colliding
with an object, sap energy out of that moving
object with the square of the velocity, ten
times faster, one hundred times the energy
loss from each collision with an air particle.
You also are moving ten times as fast though,
so you’ll run into those particles ten times
as often, meaning your power loss actually
runs at more like the cube of your velocity.
Orbital speed is on an order of 8 kilometers
or 5 miles per second in low orbit or Earth
atmosphere, about 100 times what your car
is doing on a highway.
One hundred times as fast, 100-cubed or one
million times the power-loss, draining away
your speed and requiring you to either burn
fuel or let your orbit decay.
This is why those satellites are up there,
above it all.
At sea level, the density of air is about
1.23 kilograms per cubic meter.
At the Karman Line, what we usually call the
edge of our atmosphere and space, 100 kilometers
up, air density has dropped to 567 micrograms
per cubic meter, 2 million times thinner than
at sea level.
Even that altitude is too low for most satellites,
allowing orbital times far shorter than the
useful lifetime of a satellite, so we go higher.
Low Earth Orbit is usually at least twice
the height of the Karman Line, and the lowest
satellite I’m familiar with is Jaxa’s
Tsubame Super-Low-Altitude Test Satellite
that was up for about 2 years from 2017 to
2019 and was at 167 kilometers of altitude.
I put that qualifier on there because we try
to keep spy satellites as close to Earth as
possible for best viewing and thus a country
might have broken that record, though likely
not by much, and wouldn’t want to publicly
claim they had.
Even just dipping down to that height at the
perigee of a very elliptical orbit is going
to take a lot of operation time out of your
satellite.
Perigee incidentally is when an orbiting object
is closest to Earth, apogee when its furthest,
when that orbit isn’t circular.
The stratosphere, which ends about 50 to 60
kilometers up, is even denser, no less than
a thousand times thicker than what it is up
at the Karman Line.
So stratospheric satellites hanging up there
by simple orbital mechanics isn’t really
doable, even for a single rotation.
They need power, and a lot of it, very much
more than it would take to simply get into
orbit.
Now it’s not that tricky to stay at the
Karman Line briefly, but we’re usually talking
minutes, not years, and at much lower speeds.
The current altitude record for a rocket plane,
of 112 kilometers, has been held by Brian
Binnie since 2004 but Joseph Walker first
crossed the Karman Line at 106 kilometers
way back in 1963 in the X-15, but neither
was getting up to orbital speed, the X-15
for instance barely got up to a quarter that
velocity on its 11 minute flight, covering
543 kilometers, just over a percent of Earth’s
circumference.
Spaceship One, in 2004, actually went slower,
it just got higher and claimed the record.
Simply shoving against air at hypersonic speeds
is not an optimal way to keep something up,
you might do better by simply hovering it
on a rocket engine at 1 gee at the chosen
altitude, because then it’s just fighting
gravity, not air drag, and then with modern
rocket fuels you might keep something up for
a handful of minutes.
Indeed, how many seconds you can keep something
hovering under normal earth gravity is what
we measure Specific Impulse in for rockets,
and the favored ones nowadays run 250 to 500
seconds.
Something to keep in mind is that we obviously
can hang things lower and slower for longer,
like a helicopter or a plane or balloon, and
we will return to that.
However we also shouldn’t casually rule
out much-higher specific impulses altering
the landscape.
Nuclear rockets, or fusion rockets, might
do much better, and a satellite crammed full
of antimatter, or a micro-black hole, might
have no problem remaining static above the
landscape or in low orbits for months or years
before needing to come down for repairs and
refueling.
We also can’t dismiss that some form of
anti-gravity might get developed at some point
too.
Nonetheless, let’s keep to the assumption
that if our object is orbiting, it is doing
so above the Karman Line, and if we want to
go lower, we are not having the objects moving
at 8 kilometers per second; at least not on
the outside.
One example of ultra-low orbital infrastructure
we could potentially build, is an Orbital
Ring, which is essentially a hoop around Earth
that remains stationary with the ground, and
inside it, there’s a flow of matter moving
faster.
This matter moving faster than normal orbital
speed has an excess of angular momentum, which
when combined with the stationary or slow-spinning
sheath around it, gives the pair of them just
the right angular momentum to remain in orbit
together.
This mass stream is usually assumed to be
magnetically contained and accelerated with
a power supply hooked up from ground or attached.
This is called active support and is a good
option when it comes to low-sky options, including
ones connected to the ground.
Now, when it comes to helicopters, those might
technically count as another low-sky option,
as those remain stationary by shoving air
down constantly, but helicopters run out of
fuel and would thus need to land a lot, but
they could be ran on electricity, and that
could be via ultra-lightweight helicopters
running on attached solar panels, or even
a tethered power cord to a groundside nuclear
plant, or energy beamed up by microwaves from
the ground or down from orbital power satellites.
Solar by itself is non-optimal in most cases,
because of night and clouds.
Electric quadcopters, common in modern aerial
drones, probably would only be an option for
continuous running if they were either inside
a wireless power grid or if we invented batteries
that have orders of magnitude better power
density than modern ones.
Some more power-dense nuclear battery or radioisotope
thermal generators might permit this.
Such solar helicopters would work better on
low-gravity thick-aired places, like Saturn’s
Moon, Titan.
Or even a place like Venus, where the world
turns so slowly that you can keep up with
the Sun setting, and never lose your solar,
so long as you stay above the clouds.
Now, you can use motion to produce lift on
a wing, like any airplane’s airfoils, but
if you wish to remain stationary, you need
to keep in a tight circle above the spot you
want.
This works well enough, and we do have unmanned
planes, able to fly constantly on solar these
days, but they’d need a lot more improvements
before they could fill the role of communications
or surveillance.
Now, weather satellites tend to be high orbiters,
and are example that not every satellite benefits
from being lower, but options like circling
planes or balloons, are very tempting alternatives
to satellites or tall towers for objectives
like communications.
One key thing about altitude that does benefit
you, is that it’s a wider range of view.
Folks tend to assume, incorrectly, that up
on the space station, you can see the whole
planet, or at least the whole hemisphere you’re
facing.
In reality it’s a circle containing about
3% of Earth’s Surface at any given moment,
not 50%, at its altitude of about 400 kilometers.
For lower altitudes you can calculate how
far you can see based on your height, ignoring
terrain, with the rule of thumb that if you
take the square root of your height in feet
and multiply it by 1.22, that’s how many
miles you can see, or the square root of meters
of height multiplied by 3.57 for kilometers.
That is a rule of thumb that works for determining
how far away the horizon is, when your altitude
is much less than the radius of the planet
you’re on, and even the space station is
only about 6% of the Earth’s radius above
the planet.
Now, a communication satellite up in geostationary
orbit, 36,000 kilometers up, is high enough
to see most of a hemisphere, 42% of the planet,
and it can usually get everything from 81
degrees north and south, and since it is geostationary
it sees the same 42% of Earth all the time.
However that does mean it takes a quarter
of a second for a signal to reach that satellite
from the ground and return to another spot
in its zone, and longer if it had to bounce
it around to another geostationary satellite,
that might be a quarter of a second away too.
That means if you were talking to someone
on a satellite phone on the other side of
the planet you could get half a second from
when you spoke to when they heard you, and
at least a quarter of a second for anyone,
even just down the road, and that would be
very irritating, whereas something using a
fiber optic cable, or bouncing between low
orbit satellites, can bring that down to a
fraction of that time, and a very tiny one
if they are just down the road, signal lags
too small for a human to notice.
Cell phone towers can only see as far as their
height permits - though that distance would
obviously be further than their height - and
that tends to be especially limiting in places
with hills and valleys.
Now, in the future, we could probably build
them more economically by building them higher
than we currently do, but there’s an understandable
desire to contemplate things hanging many
kilometers up.
Now, kites are an option, as are any sort
of engine powered by a tether, running electricity
from the ground, but such tethers are dangerous
to airplanes, and would need lights like a
tower does, and are also probably prone to
snapping and falling on the landscape.
That really shouldn’t be fatal to anyone
it hits directly.
Getting hit by a whip isn’t usually lethal
and whip-tips cracking in the air, only do
so because they are moving supersonically,
and a falling cable will be moving slower,
but definitely a hazard.
A hot air balloon would seem the next option,
or just one full of helium or hydrogen, and
needing no fuel, which would allow rather
great heights.
We’ve gotten manned balloons over 40 kilometers
before and unmanned ones up to 53 kilometers.
From 40 kilometers up you can see 714 kilometers
or 444 miles to the horizon around, bigger
than Texas, and at 53 kilometers you can see
822 kilometers or 511 miles around.
This also means you’re getting signals even
down in the shadows of cliffs.
Now a cell phone tower can be up to 500 watts
per channel, though usually they’re under
100 watts, and the taller ones can give service
over 40 miles away, and we obviously need
a stronger signal for higher reaches, and
more sensitivity on the receiving end.
Aircraft rarely go above 8 miles or 11 kilometers
up, so if we put a lot of helium or hydrogen
balloons at 10 miles or 16 kilometers up,
they’d have a range of 280 miles or 450
kilometers, essentially one could service
an entire state or medium sized nation.
This doesn’t really interest us for its
width of service area though, more that it
cuts down on relays and signal-dead zones
in valleys.
In theory, a thousand such stationary balloon
comm stations could cover a whole planet,
in practice you’d probably want several
times that.
Picture something like this as a big floating
flower, covered in solar panels or a big antenna
hanging from a balloon but tethered to the
ground.
Either power is running up or it's getting
it by solar, or both, or wind power if the
tether is strong.
Why don’t we already do this?
Well, a number of reasons, but maybe the big
one is that helium leaks and is very expensive,
and hydrogen leaks even faster.
Also, if you want the stations to stay stationary,
they either need that tether or a powerful
engine, or they need an airfoil and the ability
to circle.
Hydrogen is a better buoyant lifting gas than
helium and vastly easier and cheaper to supply
– and no, we’re not worried about it igniting
Hindenberg-style – but the problem is that
hydrogen and helium are the two tiniest atoms
out there, and they tend to slip between the
molecules of whatever the skin of your ship
is as a result, being smaller than those atoms.
Worse, while helium is a Noble gas and doesn’t
interact with any other atoms, hydrogen interacts
with tons of stuff and in this context ‘interact’
tends to mean ‘corrodes’.
2D materials, like graphene, have tight spacing
that can hold-in helium or hydrogen and thus
are getting looked at as a coating for hydrogen
tanks and permits potentially ultra-thin balloons
that would need far less frequent replacement
or reeling-in for recharging.
Indeed, you might be able to replace hydrogen
while up there, given that it’s a lot more
prevalent in ionized atomic form at higher
altitudes and might be collected electromagnetically,
or with sufficient power, electrolyzed from
water vapor.
With a strong power supply you can also heat
a gas up, to make it a better lifting-gas,
and electrolizing it would have that dual
effect.
Amusingly, the material that we love for ultra-long
tethers is also graphene, and of course is
the reason why we don’t see these kinds
of balloons yet.
We’re not good at mass manufacturing large
sheets of graphene - though way better than
in previous years.
It’s also a very good conductor and very
promising for integration into solar cells.
However, we do have other modern materials
that do very good jobs compared to when satellites
and cell phones were fairly new, and that
will take us to the Dark Sky Station in a
moment.
First though, two other interesting options.
It may be that we figure out how to do fusion
sooner than later, in which case, we might
opt for a deuterium-filled balloon that had
a fusion reactor running on that deuterium
and that probably could just sit there in
the sky, even in the middle of hurricanes
or the Great Red Spot on Jupiter.
Indeed, it would strike me as a likely option
for a gas-harvesting station on gas giants,
since that implies you have fusion if you
want the stuff in such quantities.
Non-rotating Skyhooks are another option,
as, with good tether technology, you can hang
a satellite rather low, while having most
of its weight and power generation higher
up, and as we discussed in our Skyhooks episode,
it is possible to regenerate momentum lost
to atmospheric drag by electrodynamic tethering
off Earth’s Magnetic Field, with a power
supply.
This is slow and low-power, but skyhooks can
also qualify as Ultra-Low Orbital Infrastructure,
since their lower end, or bottom of their
rotation for spinning ones, is usually assumed
to dip below the Karman Line.
They also work even better on thin-aired or
no-atmosphere worlds, and Earth isn’t the
only place we’re interested in.
See that episode for more details.
But this is one option for stratospheric satellites,
the long skyhook hanging some instruments
into the stratosphere, or for that matter,
a high-altitude balloon hanging a guidance
package tens of kilometers lower, this latter
is the StratoSat, which imagines a wide balloon
gondola 35 kilometers up, with a tether hanging
down to 14-20 kilometers up, with guidance
systems and devices hanging from it.
How this is handy is that, at the end of that
tether, you can hang a wing, and the huge
difference in velocity between wind at that
altitude and up at the gondola, lets you guide
the thing and circle the Earth in about 10-20
days and it would rarely exceed speeds of
40 meters per second or 90 miles per hour.
More tech and better materials help, but these
Stratosats are not terribly sophisticated
and we can make them now.
They are principally of interest for meteorology
and if you want more details on them, there
was an article on them in the American Meteorological
Society’s August 2009 edition, “Stratospheric
Satellites for Earth Observations”.
We could make them a lot bigger though, and
they’d be a relatively easy thing for any
plane to perform a mid-air docking maneuver
on, potentially even down where unassisted
breathing was still possible.
The 14-20 kilometer altitude for the bottom
is to avoid air traffic, and bigger and more
sophisticated ones could have a winch on their
tether to lower it more.
Now, if you are hanging from such a balloon,
not only can you climb up it, but you can
also use it as a track for accelerating up,
pulling the balloon down, but a donut shaped
and large, wide balloon might let you speed
up its tether to reach higher velocities while
pulling it down a ways, then it just floats
back up later after you release and fly up.
Think of it like a vertical mass driver.
Now flying straight up doesn’t get you into
orbit, but you can push into a high-eccentricity
orbit this way, or just shove to the side
a bit and glide back down elsewhere on the
planet for a relatively fast and low fuel
flight.
I haven’t encountered this particular approach
in this specific form before, so we’ll go
ahead and name it a “StratoTram”, unless
someone knows of someone detailing or naming
it before, as it is fairly similar to a cablecar,
and also a bit parallel to the StarTram mass
driver.
It benefits over simply lifting a spaceplane
on a balloon, because you’re coming out
the top at high velocity, not just floating
up there.
As I often note about orbital rings, the cool
thing about them is that they are also useful
for rapid travel around your own planet, and
so is a StratoTram, and anything that is highly
beneficial to folks living on Earth, is excellent
for space development and travel in general.
Now the Dark Sky Station, or DSS, from JP
Aerospace tries to take this notion of buoyancy
beyond classic balloons.
The concept is fairly straightforward.
We take some long cylinder-shaped balloons,
five of them, and arrange them like a starfish
around a hub, and cover the tops of the balloons
in solar panels for energy.
It hangs up at just under 43 kilometers of
altitude and is the midway point for their
approach to space travel, which involves two
giant ascenders.
The first is a large V-shaped vessel, designed
to be both buoyant and aerodynamically lifting,
so it floats, but has propellers too, and
the thing is huge, solar-powered and designed
to lift to that Dark Sky Station.
At the DSS, folks disembark and shift over
to the Orbital Ascender, which is too fragile
to exist in the lower atmosphere, being hyper-thin
and large, and again, solar powered.
It begins a 9 day journey to orbital heights
while accelerating slowly to orbital speeds,
as the air thins.
I think it's awesome, but I suspect folks
would view it as more of an eyesore over options
like an orbital ring or space tower, which
are a lot more compact and rapid, in terms
of cargo carrying.
Orbital rings can be that low, in the Stratosphere
or even Troposphere, and Space Towers can
be built that high, and indeed the Lofstrom
Loop design essentially lets you make a long
runway that you can lift or lower to basically
any altitude you want.
That same technology lets you lift a highway
or parking lot or even a city.
You might build a big long tube or track across
a continent, hanging in the stratosphere for
trains or even pressurized personal car-planes
to whip across from coast to coast at high
speeds and low fuel usage.
Refineries in high orbit can potentially be
grabbing up air to be used on space stations
or as a propellant or fuel too, not optimal
in the extreme long run, but Earth has supplies
of these that are many orders of magnitude
greater than we would need for even a very
large orbital infrastructure and habitats.
Plus aerobraking cargo pods makes replenishing
Earth’s air supply from distant mining colonies
easier and cheaper than shipping air from
those to orbital colonies.
Now, will there ever be an ultra-low orbit
or stratospheric infrastructure?
Yes, though I’d imagine the bigger objects
will rely on active support rather than buoyancy.
This might be the kind we envision with orbital
rings or space towers, or it might be that
the entire planet is saturated in a wireless
energy field, provided by millions of power
satellites beaming microwaves down from medium
orbit, so that personal spaceplanes could
travel without needing to carry fuel, or giant,
hanging turbines could suspend themselves
in the sky for years at a time.
So too, microwave-powered scram jets might
allow genuine orbits by sheer brute force,
all the way down to the Karman Line, though
simply hanging in the air like a geostationary
satellite, but far closer, will often be preferable.
And no, you don’t really need to worry about
these things crashing, you just include a
battery, good for several minutes, or a parachute,
or both.
Amusingly, Graphene, our wonder substance,
also allows for superior batteries and super-large
and strong parachutes, that make silk look
heavy and fragile.
It also represents a fall-back option against
Kessler Syndrome, as a civilization that found
its orbital infrastructure had caused debris
cascade, could opt to move things a bit lower,
ensuring a far more rapid clearance of debris
and protection from it.
Such being the case, why not build in the
stratosphere?
We often talk about filling Earth’s orbits
all the way out past the Moon, with millions
of orbital habitats and power collectors,
and in a distant future, why leave a gap?
In the future we might have buildings stretching
all the way up to space, and we may find that,
not only might a lot of folks have addresses
on the ground and in orbit, but also in ultra-low
orbits, and the mesosphere and stratosphere
too.
As I like to say, the sky is not the limit.
So one of the awful things about COVID is
that it made it impossible to do a lot of
the gathering and conferences that not only
allowed people with shared interests to learn
more about those in person, but also to meet
each other, and I’m rather glad that’s
drawing to a close.
As you probably know, I’ve been doing some
public speaking again now that I can and this
episode came out a bit early today in order
to allow me and Sarah to head down Arlington,
Virginia for the biggest space-based conference
out there, the annual International Space
Development Conference hosted by the National
Space Society, of whom I and many of you are
proud members, Ad Astra, and I’ll be talking
there this Sunday but we’re arriving Thursday
Evening and I hope to get to meet some of
you in person then, and if you can’t make
it, I hope you’ll join us virtually.
That is one of the silver linings of COVID,
a lot of advances in teleconferencing, Zoom
and its cousins, and maybe more importantly
a lot more people growing comfortable using
those technologies.
For most of us on the geeker side of things,
chatting with friends on Discord or gaming
on Roll20 is hardly new, but its gotten easier
and more streamlined and also had a lot more
folks willing to use it for business and recreation.
Which is nice for a lot of us who prefer the
versatility of pencil and paper role-playing
games over MMORPGs, because everyone’s gotten
a lot more comfortable joining online, meaning
we can keep up our gaming groups even when
nobody lives in the same state anymore.
I’ve been rolling 20-sided dice for over
a quarter of a century now and while computer
games have improved a lot since then, I still
prefer pencil and paper, but I definitely
like being able to use all those computer
resources for worldbuilding and campaign crafting.
That is where World Anvil, the award-winning
Worldbuilding Toolset comes in, because they
have created the hands-down best suite of
software for gaming and worldbuilding out
there, so that you can use all those awesome
computerized options while still enjoying
the versatility of pencil and paper gaming,
or fantasy and scifi novel writing for that
matter.
It’s great for DMs and folks wanting to
let their audience peek into the novel’s
setting more collaboratively as it does have
a free version and also has ways to monetize
your content on platforms like Patreon, Kofi,
or your own storefront, and you can share
that content selectively to keep secret content
hidden.
Whether you’re managing a campaign or writing
a novel, whether you’re making city or dungeon
maps or family genealogies and world history,
whether its scifi or fantasy genres, World
Anvil lets you forge your setting better,
easier, and more interactively than anything
I’ve ever worked with before.
They also have an amazing collection of great
tutorial videos so not only can you learn
how to use World Anvil but so can anyone you’re
trying to introduce to it, though it is very
intuitive.
World Anvil offers wikipedia-like articles
for your world setting, interactive maps,
timelines, an RPG Campaign Manager and a full
Novel-Writing Software, all the tools you’ll
need to run your RPG Campaign or write your
novel, and never lose your notes again!
If you would like to give World Anvil a try
and let it help you forge new worlds, just
click the link in this episode’s description!
So as I mentioned I’ll be at the International
Space Development Conference this weekend
and I’ll be giving a live talk on Megastructures
there instead of our normal End of the Month
Livestream Q&A, and I hope you’ll join us
for that.
Preparing that talk on Megastructures had
me thinking on all the ones I couldn’t cover
or haven’t covered in episodes down the
years and I decided it was time to reboot
our original episode of SFIA, where we discussed
a lot of Megastructures in a quick summary,
and on June 9th we will have an expanded 2-hour
episode, the Megastructure Compendium, covering
roughly a hundred enormous space structures
and artificial worlds we may one day build.
Before that we will be starting June off by
asking what Ancestor Simulations are and if
we might be living inside one and if we could
possibly know, and then the weekend after
is Scifi Sunday, June 12th, where we’ll
look at the Silurian Hypothesis, the concept
that some ancient civilization like intelligent
dinosaurs might have once dwelt on Earth long
ago.
We will also ask what would remain of humanity’s
accomplishments millions of years from now
if we suddenly died off.
Now if you want alerts when events and episodes
are coming out, make sure to subscribe to
the Channel and hit the notification bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below.
You can also join in the conversation on any
of our social media forums, find our audio-only
versions of the show, or donate to help support
future episodes, and all those options and
more are listed in the links in the episode
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
