This episode is sponsored by Audible
One of the greatest constraints on human  
civilizations has been the need 
to travel outward to new horizons  
to find fertile land to gather and farm from. What 
if the solution is to go upward not outward?
 
So today we’re taking a look at vertical farming 
asking what it is and what the opportunities and  
challenges are in developing it, and if it 
can ever become practical. Now discussion of  
vertical farming almost always involves 
discussion of other farming techniques,  
typically greenhouses, soilless farming, 
hydroponics, aquaponics, aeroponics,  
and other controlled-environment agriculture 
and so we will discuss those today briefly too,  
but vertical farming itself is the concept 
of growing farms in vertical stacks,  
multiple levels, or of just taking far 
more advantage of height in farm layout. 
 
As an example, in a future of low gravity space 
farming, up and down aren’t much harder to work  
with than left and right or forward and 
back, whereas you usually want optimize  
maximum internal volume per external surface 
area on space habitats, keeping them compact,  
so you would be a lot more likely to see farmed 
volumes rather than farmed areas, so to speak. 
 
Now the biggest hurdle of vertical 
farming is cost, it's outrageously  
expensive to build up or even to build at 
all, compared to raw cleared land. Mostly,  
we’ll get into current exceptions today 
and expected future ones. This is also why  
vertical farming is almost always discussed in 
tandem with controlled-environment agriculture,  
because while something like a greenhouse is 
usually hugely more agriculturally productive than  
an equal area of open land, the cost to build and 
maintain one is often considerably higher than an  
equal amount of land is. However if you’re already 
building up for stacked vertical farm layers,  
putting a roof and sides on to control 
the environment doesn’t cost much extra,  
but gives huge rewards, so tend 
to almost always be included.. 
 
A lot of the costs for vertical and 
controlled-environment agriculture are  
likely to go down as we improve technology, and 
also proportionally down as we seek to get more  
food out of less land and land values rise. So 
too, the cost of food traditionally – especially  
for citizens in an urban area - is mostly not 
the cost to produce it and more the cost of  
transportation and storage. And especially 
in the case of items prized for freshness,  
like herbs and some fruits and vegetables, urban 
agriculture that cuts out the transportation  
and storage issues can get away with premium 
prices more viable for vertical agriculture.
 
Now a lot of our examples of 
controlled-environment agriculture, especially  
vertical farming, tend to rest their economics 
on taking advantage of discounts and freebies,  
something like building out of discarded 
shipping pallets or abandoned urban warehouses.  
I applaud any hobbyist or entrepreneur taking 
advantage of deals or recycling that way  
but it does represent a false cost for upscaling 
– you run out of free discards – and it makes it  
very tricky to really look at the future 
economics of vertical farming because so  
many of the known examples are of that sort.
Similarly, it's not uncommon for advocates to  
credit big production with vertical farming in 
cases where that is more from the controlled  
environment aspects. It's not false but it can be 
a touch misleading from a future expansion point  
of view because any scenario in which vertical 
farming has come to produce a large fraction  
of our food is one in which we either have 
hyper-energy-abundance and/or amazing automation,  
or it's one in which we have already replaced 
open-air farming with domes and greenhouses  
over it all, in which case we’re comparing 
the economics and productivity of vertical  
farming to that, not open-air farming.
And we should probably start there,  
because it does show how the costs contrast. Good 
agricultural land isn’t cheap, it can run several  
thousands dollars per acre, but that pales 
in comparison to the price of land in cities.  
We estimate that the total of urban land in the 
United States values at well over 25 trillion  
dollars and amounts to some roughly 50 million 
acres at over half a million dollars an acre.  
And that’s all urban land, not metropolises 
let alone downtown Hong Kong, New York,  
or London, where a single square meter of 
land costs more than a hectare of farm land. 
 
Incidentally since I’ll be switching back 
and forth between hectares and acres, meters  
and feet, a lot in the episode, for quick mental 
approximation, a square meter is about 10.7 square  
feet and a hectare is about two-and-a-half acres, 
or 4 hectares, 10 acres. A hectare is 10,000  
square meters, or 100x100 meters, and an acre is 
about 4000 square meters or 43,560 square feet,  
and there’s 640 acres to a square mile 
and 100 hectares to a square kilometer.  
You don’t need to memorize those, there’s 
no quiz at the end, but I felt we should  
bring those numbers up to emphasize just how 
wild the cost differences are. Monaco, the  
world’s most expensive land market, at over 5000 
dollars a square foot, costs more than an entire  
acre of farmland does in my neck of the woods, 
indeed it’s about 60,000 times more expensive.
 
Out in the country land is so cheap that 
virtually all the cost of a structure is  
building it and maintaining it, in a metropolis 
that flips around, the cost of the land and  
paying its mortgage and property taxes can 
dwarf the cost of even multi-story buildings,  
let alone some ultra-cheap area structures like 
barns and warehouses. We normally put the price  
of a commercial greenhouse at around 25 dollars 
a square foot, so greenhousing in an entire acre  
would run around a million dollars, a hectare 
about 2.5 million, both about double the cost  
of average urban real estate, again not downtown 
metropolises where it can be several million. 
 
Obviously the land cost is trivial there for 
rural examples, and indeed there places you  
can still buy land for under a thousand an acre 
from a combination of remoteness and bareness  
and greenhousing those places, like a region cold 
enough to be permafrosted, can suddenly change  
that land into prime agricultural producers. 
And yet the savings for building there,  
rather than on existing prime land, is trivial 
too and possibly non-existent considering you’re  
trying to build far from existing infrastructure 
too. On the flipside, sure we can find an  
abandoned warehouse in many a city and convert 
it into vertical farming or a big greenhouse,  
but even for the purpose of freshness, we might 
be better off buying 100 acres of farmland  
and making that warehouse a top-notch 
supply and distribution center instead.
 
This is a futurism channel though, so we’re not 
interested in the economic viability of vertical  
farming or greenhousing today, we’re interested in 
it down the road. Right now there’s only 8 billion  
of us, and many do think the population will 
stabilize at around 9 or 10 billion. Personally  
I doubt that because the background thought on all 
of it is that having more folks than that, or even  
that many, uses up our resources. But as long 
as the cost of food is only a fraction of what  
a human produces overall, you can keep expanding 
– or in this case, doing more with less land – and  
greenhouses, hydroponics, and vertical farming 
are all huge boosters of food per unit area.  
Indeed enough that greenhouses are already 
marginally profitable in many cases.  
And they get relatively cheaper every year 
as we get better at engineering, producing,  
and assembling cheap but durable glass-like 
materials while simultaneously land costs rise. 
 
There’s around a billion acres of farmland in 
the US, about two-fifths of the total land area,  
and even with existing technology we could 
easily feed the entire human population with  
just that space – though a lot of people couldn’t 
afford to eat at that cost. Indeed that same tech  
would easily allow new areas to be converted to 
farmland too including flat out desert, because  
even a few centimeters of rain a year is enough 
for a greenhouse since water is mostly contained,  
and seawater can economically be converted to 
freshwater at that point too. It might seem  
insane to spend 10 million bucks building 
some ultra-durable acrylic greenhouse  
with multi-layered vertical farms and aquaponics 
and hydroponics inside designed to feed a thousand  
people, but if the improvements in technology lead 
to a planetary average GDP per capita of 100,000  
dollars a year and you are trying to feed 50 
billion of us without knocking over every forest,  
suddenly that becomes economically viable. 
And in truth, or my opinion anyway,  
most of those aforementioned factors seem 
pretty plausible in the next few centuries.
 
Now if the population does end up stabilizing 
for a time at around 9-10 billion, how much more  
controlled-environment farming we see will depend 
mostly on overall improvements in material science  
and automation. We can produce food to feed 
hundreds of billions on this planet, but it's  
way easier and cheaper to feed our current levels 
on open-air farming of larger amounts of land. 
 
As an example, the typically 6 to 10 mill 
plastic used on most greenhouses is usually  
only pennies per square foot and those can be 
made from biofuels so you can hypothetically  
greenhouse in land for about its normal rural 
cost, carbon neutral and sustainable, and it  
will be way more than twice as productive if you 
do, and there’s a lot that could bring that down.  
Similarly, the cost for tall buildings is 
usually predicated on them being sturdy and safe  
as residences and office space, not as mostly 
for plants, robots, and a few human inspectors.  
If agriculture shifts to a more 
robotic and controlled environment,  
because we’ve got our robots good enough to run 
most basic agriculture with human oversight,  
then vertical farming might be much more viable.
Now there is a fundamental limit of sunlight,  
only so much comes down on a given area, and while 
you can intercept light destined for different  
chunks of ground by building tall and putting 
other bits of land in your shadow, taking their  
light, it isn’t terribly likely that in most 
cases that would serve any practical purpose.  
So super-tall vertical farming is 
really more the realm of arcologies  
running on fusion power or power satellites, 
see those episodes for discussion of that.
 
Today we’re still focused on the relatively near 
term - the 21st century and maybe the 22nd - and  
we’re not really contemplating off-Earth 
Agricultural here either, space based or  
on other planets. Here we are talking about 10-20 
levels of plants stacked up, possibly a bit more  
in an urban environment where you might borrow 
the sunlight falling on some other building nearby  
like a warehouse or storage garage where they 
aren’t really interested in windows anyway,  
and you can install mirrors, or just leave 
the building in your vertical farm’s shadow..
 
Now getting that light there 
offers a lot of options,  
you can build to just let the light come in but 
you also have options for mirrors or even for  
growing plants up bundles of fiber optic cables 
connecting back to wherever the light source was,  
which could be kilometers away given how 
good fiber optics are at carrying light.  
So too, while we’re not focused on space options 
today, we often discuss power satellites,  
and shades and mirrors as a beneficial and maybe 
even a necessary part of future civilization,  
even perhaps this century, and have some of 
that orbital infrastructure – handy for power  
generation and climate and weather control 
- devoted to beaming down light to some  
rooftop lenses for distribution to a vertical 
farming site, and this is definitely doable. 
 
However, let's take a look at a current production 
to see the situations and challenges as they are  
now. As of currently, vertical farms of several 
stacked layers run about twice the start up costs  
of greenhouses, and are often running supplemental 
lighting for the plants – which isn’t necessarily  
costing extra as you can use that minimal 
tailored-spectrum light for heat as a byproduct  
and plants like heat. I mention that specifically 
because people like to eat all year round  
but precious little grows in the winter, and 
even heated greenhouses are limited in this role  
whereas multi-layered vertical farms do a lot 
better at staying warm for less expenditure.
 
One thing going for the vertical farming market 
is the total collapse in LED lighting costs. LEDs  
are not only stupidly more efficient at producing 
light than old incandescent or even fluorescents,  
they can also be tailored to photosynthetic 
spectrums. Indeed they can be tailored not  
just to the frequencies plants tend to like, but 
the specific frequencies a specific crop likes,  
and like at that time, as how much and 
what kind of light a plant wants can vary.  
Seedlings need little light compared 
to their future plant, for instance.  
How much light of what wavelengths, and heat and 
humidity, for how long each day, and for a current  
time of day and current time of year or maturation 
period, can all be controlled and the production  
booms when you do, particularly if contrasted to 
the normal sunlight hitting a chunk of ground. 
 
Long term it won’t just be LED lights either, we 
might see stuff like semi-transparent greenhouse  
glass that transmitted the photosynthetic 
frequencies through for the plants but reflected  
non-photosynthetic light down on to solar power 
collectors or thermal heat mass in the greenhouse  
meant to keep it warm at night. This is 
a lot of what I mean when I say we have  
problems discussing vertical farming separate from 
controlled environment agriculture, because the  
two tend to be innately intertwined. If you’re 
building a structure to be climate-controlled,  
you might as well take advantage of the 
multi-level tray of plants you can do in it.  
Even without supplemental lighting, just by 
being able to cut out the natural seasons,  
and thus have some plants growing in 
seedling phase, using little light,  
near ones that are using more form being 
more mature, adds to productivity.
 
Economically, fresh food that I can grow in the 
winter and put in a supermarket in a city on the  
same day can sell for a good premium, and the 
competition is better storage or cheaper rapid  
transport from further away. I want to emphasize 
that though, because we are getting much better at  
storing stuff in ways that prolong its freshness 
and obviously we ship way faster than we used to.
 
And we could see some weird hybrid innovations in 
that too. We’ve a long history of truck farms, but  
contrary to the implication, it has nothing to do 
with growing food on a truck or transporting it to  
market on trucks, it's just a perversion of the 
old north French word ‘troquer’ meaning barter and  
exchange, in reference to small market gardens of 
a handful of acres; folks would bring produce into  
cities from. However we could see that term become 
properly literal in a future of automated freight,  
fleets of trucks holding vertically-farmed produce 
could be operational, with one parking right  
outside someone’s house to deliver produce that 
a robot just harvested from that truck 30 minutes  
after someone ordered it. It might even be carbon 
neutral from using its own exhaust for travel  
and supplemental lighting for the CO2, 
water vapor, and heat the plants relish. 
 
You get some weird scenarios with low-level 
AI in any economy, especially a post-scarcity  
or borderline post-scarcity economy as 
is basically inevitable with such AI.  
Contemplate a civilization where most people’s 
homes were semi-off grid in terms of having  
in-house water and sewage recycling and some 
small automated garden that grew its regular crop,  
and where animal-intelligent robo-trucks 
swung by to deliver orders for less-used foods  
or a sudden need for extra quantity, tanked up 
off your sewage for partial payment, and meandered  
off to their next delivery. Recycled shipping 
containers are currently a popular option for  
housing vertical farms, and I could well imagine 
skipping the recycled part so that the farming was  
in shipping containers and vehicles just picked 
them up when ready to deliver. Possibly in a  
weird parallel to crabs changing shells.
Bit of a tangent into more of the scifi realm  
than science for the moment, but I could imagine 
civilizations having an almost human-pet relation  
with such food trucks or have roaming 
fleets of entire wild stray trucks,  
animal intelligent and parking wherever they 
could steal some sunlight and begging at doors  
for food scraps and waste and repairs in exchange 
for fresh herbs and greens. Like I said, you get  
some very weird scenarios in a civilization 
with low-level AI, especially if it's smart  
enough to play at being cute and appealing to 
why we like kittens, puppies, and little kids. 
 
Anyway Vertical farming has to potentially compete 
with weird new innovations like that, and is a  
reminder that improvements in technology in a 
different area can sink another area we expected  
to do well in the future. Though that example also 
raises some market for it, being able to convert  
rooftops, basements, or garages into home gardens. 
Automation makes that a lot more viable, from both  
the overall increase to human wealth and the ease 
of maintaining a garden if you’ve got robots doing  
most of the grunt work. It might seem like we’re 
pessimistic on vertical farming in this episode,  
we’re not, and indeed that sort of home vertical 
farming is something I can practically guarantee  
will explode in the next couple decades. 
That’s hardly a niche market either.
 
And neither is that rapid ability to get 
fresh food from farm to fork in mere hours  
and any crop at any time of the year. If you 
want that, you either need climate-controlled  
agriculture or amazingly good global transport 
and distribution, and if you’re doing climate  
controlled, then the conversion to vertical 
farming isn’t much extra, indeed it's usually  
necessary to make it profitable. But we 
shouldn’t ignore that the aforementioned  
amazingly good global transport and distribution 
option is probably also going to become a reality.  
Which one wins out, or if the two can 
simultaneously exist, is likely to be dependent on  
unpredictable factors, tiny differences in cost of 
thus far undeveloped technologies could make the  
difference, so could international strife making 
food security a bigger concern. Heck, a lot of  
human history is an ongoing conflict not between 
neighboring realms but the cities in those realms  
with the countryside that feeds them, and same 
as things like online shopping and 3D printing  
can lessen rural dependence on big factories and 
retail centers, vertical farming could lessen the  
feeling of food security for folks in cities from 
rural areas, a historical exposed jugular artery.
 
If I were a cynic I suppose I’d be worried 
those options might make conflicts between them  
and shifts to city-states more common in 
the absence of that shared interdependence…  
thankfully I am not. I should note though that 
while vertical farming offers the ability to  
cut down on travel time and distance for goods 
to urban areas, it still isn’t likely to see  
truck farms – the traditional kind – adapt to 
vertical versions in the middle of downtown,  
just on the outskirts where land and 
building costs aren’t too prohibitive. 
 
I mentioned earlier how the cost of urban 
agriculture can often be misleading because  
of how much is being done with discarded 
materials or abandoned buildings and land,  
but it is worth noting that there is likely 
to be a lot of that in any given city  
and the economic viability of 
any project is pretty holistic.  
If I can take over an abandoned old warehouse 
covered in graffiti and weeds and turn it into  
a small vertical truck farm, I can probably 
also get a small market and deli in there,  
maybe get a grant from the city or a foundation 
aimed at helping restore that neighborhood,  
and then sell the whole thing down the road 
when land and building prices rise nearby,  
due to my improvements. Again that’s a niche 
market approach but hey, there’s a lot of niche  
markets in a civilization of nearly 8 billion 
and rising, over half of whom live in cities. 
 
I would tend to bet that a vertical farm, 
especially one with transparent sides of a nicely  
insulated acrylic or polycarbonate, would tend 
to work as well as garden parks and greenspaces  
at all the things those are touted for, which 
is everything from actual medical health to  
psychological wellbeing, lower crime, higher 
property values, and more. So again any costs for  
making them need to take factors like that into 
account but at the same time would probably be  
of diminishing value as the number of them grew.
Also, we should note that major use of vertical  
farming is likely to also be tied into not 
just hydroponics and aeroponics, since heavy  
trays of dirt come with their own problems, 
but also aquaponics since it's such a good  
way to handle storage of water and heat, and for 
that matter creation and recycling of nutrients.  
Cities need vast grids to handle their water 
and sewage use, if you can narrow that down  
so that the water and sewer recycling for any 
given neighborhood was in the basements of a  
couple local vertical farms, all within walking 
distance and open to strolling through, you’d be  
cutting down on the huge cost of water and sewer 
infrastructure in metropolitan regions and in a  
way that’s like to be positive and appealing 
to many folks, and possibly profitable. 
 
It’s also one possible way to reclaim abandoned 
underground tunnels and mineshafts, and ironically  
one approach to carbon sequestration 
back into some of those mineshafts. 
 
Vertical Farming and controlled environment 
agriculture in general tends to be vastly superior  
in water use, fertilizer use, and problems 
with disease, contamination, and pesticides,  
so that’s another aspect to put on the 
balance scale against the sheer price  
difference compared to open air farming. 
They are much easier to quarantine and thus  
also safer for using GMO crops which might be 
invasive to an area, but highly productive.
 
All right, so what’s the takeaway? Will 
we see vertical farming in the future?  
Certainly, it already is in use, just principally 
in niche and premium markets. But it's growing,  
and as we grow ourselves, hoping to keep more 
people while hopefully not needing to make new  
farmland to feed them, I think we will see a 
big rise in vertical farming, so to speak.
 
Somewhat surprisingly given how important 
agriculture is to humanity, it tends to get  
undermentioned in science fiction and only gets 
surface dips rather than deep dives as a topic.  
Probably one of the biggest exceptions 
to this is Farmer in the Sky by Scifi  
grandmaster Robert Heinlein, which looks at 
a farming colony on Ganymede built to help  
feed an overcrowded Earth and the journey 
of a young man out to join that colony.  
Farmer in the Sky is one of the roughly 
dozen books Heinlein wrote for Scribner as  
young adult scifi and is also counted as part 
of his Future history series, so is a very good  
gateway into one of Science Fiction’s most 
fundamental and influential authors, and it  
got a Retro Hugo Award in 2001, as the novel came 
out a couple years before the Hugo Awards began.  
70 years later Heinlein’s works still 
resonate with audiences, young and old,  
and I’m very happy to add him to our very 
short list of authors who have won our SFIA  
Audible Audiobook of the Month more than once.
We gave him it some years back for Starship  
Troopers, which was ironically rejected from the 
Scribner series. We’ve been doing the Audiobook  
of the Month for six years now and other 
repeat winners are Isaac Asmiov, Larry Niven,  
Alastair Reynolds, and Arthur C. Clarke, so he’s 
in good company, and each of those authors has a  
huge binge-worthy catalog of novels available 
from audible. I would like to go ahead and thank  
Audible too, they are our very first sponsor for 
the show, going on six years, and I’ve been a  
customer of theirs for almost thrice that now. 
Hopefully you’re getting to do some traveling to  
see friends and family this holiday season and if 
so, audiobooks are a great companion on long car,  
plane, and train rides, as well as for exercise 
bike rides for working off the holiday calories,  
and Audible is is now offering 60% off their first 
three months of membership so it is a great time  
to join or if you are already a member, to give it 
to someone as a gift. Audible also has a lot more  
than just audiobooks now too, like their Plus 
Catalog, which gives you free access to a huge  
collection of podcasts, Audible Originals, guided 
fitness, meditation, sleep tracks, and more. As  
always Audible member’s get 1 free premium credit 
a month to use for all those new bestsellers or  
classics like Farmer in the Sky, and you get 
the member discount on additional purchases,  
but it's awesome having free access to all those 
podcasts and shows for streaming and download and  
it’s definitely my favorite new feature they’ve 
added. To give them a try, and get 60% off the  
first three months, just visit Audible dot 
com slash isaac or text isaac to 500-500.
 
All right, next week we’ll be examining the 
notion of intergalactic colonization with a twist,  
as we try to see how a lone ship or nomadic fleet 
might escape a hostile galaxy and survive as a  
civilization. Then next Sunday, the day after 
Christmas, I hope you’ll join Sarah and I for  
our last monthly livestream Q&A of the year, 
at 4pm Eastern. We’ll then finish out the  
month and year with a look at the Challenges 
we will be facing in the next 100 years. 
 
Then we will explode into 2022 with a look 
at using Nuclear Bombs to propel Spaceships.  
After that we will revisit our most popular 
series, Alien Civilizations & Civilizations  
at the End of Time, first for a look 
at hibernating alien civilizations  
that might be waiting till nearly the end 
of time, then for a look at the Big Rip,  
the cosmological model that ends the 
universe early and by being shredded,  
and we will ask how civilizations might 
manage that, or manage to survive that.
 
Now if you want to make sure you get 
notified when those episodes come out,  
make sure subscribe to the channel, and if you 
enjoyed the episode, don’t forget to hit the like  
button and share it with others. If you’d like to 
help support future episodes, you can donate to  
us on Patreon, or our website, IsaacArthur.net, 
and patreon and our website are linked in the  
episode description below, along with all of our 
various social media forums where you can get  
updates and chat with others about the concepts 
in the episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
