Our galaxy is beyond immense, containing more 
stars than every human who has ever lived,  
and even more planets than that. And yet, it 
is but a tiny dot compared to the Universe,  
and to reach that vastly larger realm,  
we will need to contemplate voyages 
between the galaxies themselves.
Prior to about a century ago we didn’t really 
know what the difference between the galaxy and  
the Universe was, that our Observable Universe 
is something like a million times wider and a  
billion-billion times greater in volume. It’s 
the difference between a room in a building and  
our entire planet. However, in terms of space and 
civilizations, we often still tend to use the two  
interchangeably, talking about getting out into 
the galaxy and colonizing it. I think that in  
the past it was just assumed the galaxy all on its 
own was so huge we would never colonize it all and  
that it probably had at least a handful of other 
civilizations we would need to share it with. So,  
even greater journeys to other galaxies 
that probably already were populated by  
aliens didn’t seem worthwhile to contemplate.
Nonetheless there’s a very good chance this  
galaxy contains no other intelligent life 
and neither do any of the galaxies near us,  
our Local Galactic Group or the Council of Giants 
which surrounds us. Indeed, even if the known  
Universe contained 10,000 other civilizations like 
our own or older, it would still mean something  
like 200 million galaxies per civilization, each 
of which contains billions and billions of stars. 
As we’ll see today, the process of claiming those 
galaxies, many of which would be billions of years  
of travel away, is an enormous feat, and yet 
one that could potentially be accomplished. 
Now, as usual we will be assuming that Faster 
Than Light Travel and Communication is not  
available but we should put a caveat there. If 
FTL Is possible, it is very hard to imagine it  
won’t have been discovered by the time we reach 
the edge of the galaxy, hundreds of thousands  
of years from now, and that tech definitely 
does change the equation if you’ve got it. 
Or it keeps it the same, but with a 
different boundary. Many hypothetical  
FTL methods occur at a fixed maximum speed, 
like Warp at 100 times the speed of light,  
or a wormhole gate that has to be built initially 
at sublight speed. Or they go through a parallel  
Universe or Hyperspace that’s congruent to our 
own, and which is a thousandth the size or in  
which light moves a thousand times faster. One 
of our big problems with interstellar empires  
is how you can hold a civilization together when 
it’s separated by thousands of years of travel  
and communication lag, and even if you could keep 
it together for decades of such lag, a FTL device  
that operates thousands of times faster than 
light does suddenly makes a galaxy-spanning  
empire somewhat more plausible. It also means 
intergalactic lag times, while still immense,  
are more in the zone of what we normally 
anticipate for interstellar civilizations. 
Whether it is next year or next century or 
ten minutes before the last star dies off,  
I don’t think we will ever have FTL. 
Nonetheless I thought we would discuss  
a few of those options today along with how they 
would impact things as we go, even if our main  
focus will be on sublight speed travel.
No object with mass can move at the speed  
of light, just get ever closer to it, as you add 
more energy to it. You’ve probably heard reasons  
why on many occasions so let me offer two lesser 
known explanations for those who have heard why  
before but didn’t find it intuitive.
First, mass, or inertial mass,  
is the specific quantity that resists being shoved 
to higher speeds, or acted against to slow down,  
what resists us as we push or pull. It is all 
about resisting changes to its velocity and  
it requires energy to make that happen. That’s 
what it is doing here. The thing is, while we  
prefer these days to refer only to something’s 
rest mass, the mass it has when not moving,  
under classic special relativity, as something 
speeds up it gets more massive, and conceptually,  
all that kinetic energy you’ve added in 
order to speed things up is now additional  
mass resisting being shoved even faster.
So you could think of an object as a wheelbarrow  
with some initial mass when it’s just sitting 
there for the wheelbarrow’s frame and tires. As  
you add speed, you add mass to that wheelbarrow, 
making it harder to push. Eventually you end up  
with a mountain there on that wheelbarrow and 
you can always push it faster with a bit more  
effort but it starts getting rather pointless. The 
more full your wheelbarrow gets, the more likely  
it is to be hard to push, as it might be more 
likely to flip over, crack the axle, or flatten  
the wheel too, and at very fast sublight speeds 
we get similar issues. Ramming into a grain of  
dust can be like hitting a big bomb, and one 
you have no time to detect or dodge as you’re  
moving tens of thousands of miles per second.
The other thing is that things which have mass,  
or rest mass, experience time. Things which do 
not have it, do not experience time. A photon of  
light can travel at light speed but its internal 
clock doesn’t tick, it gets emitted and one day  
may also get absorbed, in a nanosecond or several 
quintillion years, but to it, there was no passage  
of time between those moments. Only things 
with mass experience time and the larger the  
percentage of their total energy is their mass, 
or rest mass, the faster time moves for them.  
Something that is not moving and has no 
significant heat or spin energy is something  
that is experiencing essentially 100% of normal 
time flow. If it’s moving relativistically and  
has half its energy as kinetic energy and half as 
rest mass, then it experiences 50% of normal time  
flow. Ultra-relativistically, maybe 100 times the 
kinetic energy as rest mass, and it experiences  
just 1% of normal time flow. One minute passing 
for every 100 that those outside experience.  
And yes we have tested this 
in the lab many, many times. 
The object being accelerated to ever higher 
speeds never stops having that rest mass,  
no matter how much more energy you throw 
in, anymore than the wheelbarrow ceases  
to exist no matter how much other mass you 
threw in it. So it never stops experiencing  
time and never quite reaches the speed of light.
Now, that’s a theoretical maximum and in theory  
nothing stops you from reaching a billion 
to one ratio of kinetic energy to mass,  
where a billion light year trip would 
feel like only a year to those on board,  
something explored excellently in the classic 
scifi novel, Tau Zero. However there are all  
sorts of practical barriers to getting to that 
speed and this ranges from how you supply that  
energy to how you avoid the damage that would be 
done by essentially running into a nuke every time  
you hit a grain of dust in space at that speed.
But we have one more fundamental maximum that is  
very important to intergalactic travel. 
The intergalactic medium is not empty,  
space is not a vacuum and even intergalactic space 
still has stuff in it, which is very important for  
our discussion today. But it is pretty empty and 
we can get away with far higher speeds than we  
travel at today, or would inside a solar system or 
even interstellar space. Given that intergalactic  
travel is a massive undertaking that might 
draw on galaxy-scale resources to be launched,  
an intergalactic voyage might be able to get away 
with tens of thousands of light years worth of  
pushing relays serving as its launch ramp and 
getting it to 99.9% of light speed. Or higher. 
But there’s one thing which is present 
everywhere in the Universe and that’s the  
Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation. These 
are ancient photons that are the last relics  
of a period when the whole Universe was dense 
and hot enough that it was basically a star,  
and as the Universe expanded we reached a critical 
tipping point where photons no longer got emitted  
and were nearly instantly reabsorbed, but instead 
tended to be able to travel uninterrupted. And  
in many cases they never got reabsorbed, even 
almost 14 billion years later to the present day. 
Those were much brighter photons in the past 
too, they have redshifted from visible photons  
all the way through the infrared spectrum 
and now to microwave. Far, far in the future,  
they will be redshifted down into the radio range 
too. However, if you’re moving through space at,  
say, half the normal rate of time flow – which 
isn’t until you’re at fully 86.6% of light speed,  
then those CMB photons are going to blue shift 
back up by a factor of 2, and from just under 2  
millimeter wavelength to about 1 millimeter, and a 
frequency jump from 160 GHz, much higher than your  
wifi signals, of 2.4 or 5 GHz to about 320 GHz.
Which also means they just doubled in energy,  
and you are running into them now, and every one 
that hits you is slowing you down a bit. Speed up  
yet more and the photons will keep blueshifting, 
eventually becoming visible light again and  
carrying vastly more energy than they used to. So, 
essentially, at a certain time-factor or speed,  
which we calculate to be a bit over 100, even in 
empty intergalactic space, the red-shifted and  
now blue-shifted photons leftover from 
the Big Bang era are slowing you down. 
So the fastest you can plow through even 
intergalactic space, probably being shoved  
from behind by a massive pushing laser, is still 
going to require you to take 2 million years to  
get to the Andromeda Galaxy 2 million light years 
away, and is still going to feel like 20,000 years  
to those on board. Still that is definitely in 
the doable range of what we have contemplated.  
You could probably also burn off most of your 
kinetic energy as you approached your target by  
expanding massive mirror arrays to bounce more 
photons off your front. As always with space  
travel, slowing down is as hard as speeding up.
Indeed more so, because you do your speeding up  
near home, with all the knowledge and resources 
of your civilization sitting right there. 
Now this is SFIA so we are willing to consider 
options that might seem insanely over the top,  
and such being the case we might imagine building 
a massive shielded tunnel between two galaxies to  
keep the CMB Radiation out. This might be some 
big wide pipe with millimeter thick walls that  
ships just moved down. You might already have 
such freeways built throughout your galaxy in  
order to allow faster safe travel, as there’s even 
more ambient radiation to run into and space dust.  
Such a project is beyond huge, literally bigger 
than a galaxy in span, but an aluminum tunnel  
10 kilometers in circumference and a millimeter 
wide contains about 27,000 tons of aluminum per  
linear kilometer of tunnel, or more like 2.5x10^20 
kilograms per light year. 250 billion megatons. 
And that means a tunnel 2 million light 
years long would mass around 5x10^26  
kilograms. That’s a lot of aluminum, not 
that we couldn’t use other materials too,  
but keeping scale in mind, that’s only about 
the mass of Saturn. In a galaxy that masses  
trillions of times what Saturn does, such 
an intergalactic pipeline freeway system  
would really be no more ambitious than 
a continent-spanning highway route. So  
if you’ve ever wondered what projects a 
Kardashev 3 civilization might get up to,  
that’s a real possibility. And as usual, 
welcome to SFIA, where scrapping hundreds  
of planets just to turn them into aluminum 
foil for one big freeway is not considered  
a particularly impressive task. Indeed it will 
be fairly minor even just for today’s material. 
Trickier than it sounds though, since galaxies 
are even less static in position than stars are,  
and only our nearest few neighboring galaxies 
like Andromeda are actually staying still or  
getting closer. Most galaxies are moving away from 
us very fast. Indeed the majority of galaxies are  
moving away from us faster than light speed, and 
we can only see their ancient red-shifted ghost  
remnants from billions of years ago because 
they weren’t moving away that fast back then.  
As to why I just got done saying most of the 
Universe moves aways from us faster than the speed  
of light and just a few minutes before that said 
nothing can move faster than the speed of light,  
see our episode The Edge of the Universe for 
explanation of why that is NOT a contradiction. 
This is our other big issue for intergalactic 
travel, because for every billion light years  
away a galaxy currently is from us, we need to 
be going an extra 7% of light speed faster just  
to counter the extra speed they have away from 
us from Hubble shift as the Universe expands. 
Also, while individual stars, even in dense star 
clusters, are like tiny dots in a big black sea,  
galaxies are more like island archipelagos. One 
might be a million light years from a neighbor  
but a hundred thousand wide itself, not like a 
star, which might be a million kilometers wide  
but trillions of kilometers from a neighbor, 
and planets are similarly hugely spaced out. 
So, unlike staging up from global 
travel to interplanetary travel,  
or from interplanetary to interstellar, the 
jump to intergalactic isn’t that much bigger,  
and with two interesting notes. First, while 
you are probably used to hearing Andromeda as  
the closest galaxy to us, if you actually 
pull up a list of neighboring galaxies,  
you will find Andromeda isn’t #1, but way down 
on the list, #86 on the one currently up on  
Wikipedia, though exact position is changing and 
debatable. You’ll also see a ton of other places  
called Andromeda in about the same place on that 
list list, and that’s because our galaxy and most  
others around these days are monstrous cannibal 
agglomerations of dozens of other dwarf galaxies,  
and we’ve gotten much better at spotting 
them amidst the wider galaxy these days. 
Second, we’ve gotten much better at spotting 
galaxies in general these days and thus we  
don’t talk about our galaxy and its two 
satellite dwarf galaxies, the Large and  
Small Magellanic Clouds anymore, because neither 
is really all that noteworthy as our knowledge  
has expanded. There are currently a few dozen 
satellite galaxies of the Milky Way known to us  
that are further from the core than the Magellanic 
clouds, and another dozen listed at half a million  
to just over a million light years from us.
And we will probably discover many more. They  
are often the dim, stripped-out remains 
of some smaller early galaxy that passed  
through the main Milky Way and got most 
of its stars and gas nebulae pulled off.  
Some tiny dwarf galaxy is still huge though, and 
some remnant core like that in deep intergalactic  
space may easily contain many millions of stars, 
even if it is considered tiny by astronomical  
standards. Both the Milky Way and Andromeda have a 
bunch of these dwarf galaxy satellites, and indeed  
the two and their satellites are really more 
of dumbbell-shape making up our Local Group of  
galaxies, with the Triangulum Galaxy as a distant 
third place of a major galaxy, and like Andromeda,  
it will eventually merge with our galaxy.
Emphasis on dumbbell though because there is  
an approximate corridor of stars and gas between 
us and Andromeda that make a journey between them  
having a lot more landmarks along the way than 
intergalactic space generally has. You could  
have a fairly impressive collection of colonized 
star systems between the two serving as waypoints. 
Galaxies are not really spread evenly 
in space in general, and the next step  
up above our local group of 3 major and 80 or 
so minor galaxies is called the Local Sheet,  
one wall of the Local Void, a giant empty volume 
we’re near, and we call it the Local Sheet as it’s  
more of flat plane than a big bubble of space, 
about 35 million light years across, and dominated  
by a rough ring around us of what is called 
the Council of Giants, twelve large galaxies,  
10 spiral and 2 elliptical, the nearest of which 
is the Sculptor Galaxy, 11 Million Light Years  
away, with its own satellite galaxies called 
the Sculptor Group and a central black hole  
estimated at 5 million solar masses, just a bit 
bigger than our own core black Hole, Sagittarius  
A. The furthest is the Black Eye or Evil Eye 
Galaxy, M64, about 17 Million Light years away. 
While they are not gravitationally bound to us 
like Andromeda and Triangulum, all of the Council  
of Giants are moving away from us very slowly, 
generally around 300 kilometers per second,  
a thousandth of light speed, and even the Evil 
Eye Galaxy is only moving away a bit faster. 
That is not much of a drift and as we discussed 
in Fleet of Stars, that is actually reversible,  
with sufficient brute force. Ships 
arriving at the Council of Giants,  
20 million years from now – which is probably the 
right zone for when this will happen – could have  
each colonized fully inside a million years and 
make the necessary modifications to get those  
entire galaxies moving back toward us. Indeed we 
could probably pull this off anywhere inside our  
wider supercluster of Virgo or Lanikea. Maybe even 
the Entire KBC Void, which, if you didn’t know,  
is an immense and relatively empty region of space 
in which our own galaxy and most of the Laniakea  
Supercluster sit, and it is a rough sphere about 
2 billion light years across, which the Milky Way  
is a few hundred million light years out from the 
center of. Not to be confused with the smaller,  
if enormous, Local Void, which is only 150 million 
light years across, and is essentially a void  
inside the larger Supercluster and KBC Void. For 
comparison think seas or bays compared to oceans,  
and the rather arbitrary boundary between them.
Folks often get the impression that cosmic voids  
are empty of galaxies, they are not, we’re one 
such example as are the roughly 100,000 other  
galaxies in it. That’s also why people hypothesize 
they might be massive civilizations that have gone  
dark inside Dyson Swarms. That could easily be the 
case, except they wouldn’t go dark, just infrared,  
and we still see tons of stars inside these 
places, like our own, that we can see. 
We usually mean even more remote galaxies when 
we refer to Void Galaxies, though. Pisces A is an  
example of a Void Dwarf Galaxy, and is about 18.4 
million light years away, and emphasis on ‘Dwarf’  
because it is only around 10 million Solar Masses, 
compared to roughly a trillion solar masses,  
which is how much our galaxy or Andromeda mass, so 
we’re 100,000 times as massive as that dwarf, and  
that’s not particularly small for a dwarf either. 
As a reminder, our Sun is exactly one solar mass,  
and it is bigger than most stars, but most of the 
galaxies tend to be nebula gas and dark matter. 
In between galaxies are tons of loose stars 
too, I’ve heard numbers as high as 50% of all  
stars being intergalactic rogues that are not 
gravitationally bound to any galaxy, though  
I’m skeptical it's anywhere near that high. And we 
need to keep in mind that while Andromeda would be  
our first real galactic target – even though many 
dwarfs will doubtless be sooner and easier – that  
bridge of stars makes it easier too.
It is important to understand the real  
layout of the cosmos in order to discuss 
traveling to various landmarks in it. We’re  
not really talking about getting to our nearest 
neighbor today. If we wait a few billion years,  
Andromeda will simply arrive, and there are 
several dwarf galaxies closer, not even including  
many inside our own galactic main body.
Rather it is about trying to reach out to  
those further galaxies, the Council of Giants and 
beyond. And it asks the questions of whether we’re  
hopping from one place to place, ever further, as 
we often imagine with interstellar colonization,  
or if every intergalactic colonization 
mission is launched from this galaxy,  
and indeed from the relatively small inner 
sphere of a few hundred light years around us. 
The question is how fast we need to launch and 
my thinking is there is really no advantage to  
seeking to exceed 99% of light speed. At that 
speed every clock is running 7 times slower  
and your trip to the Circinus Galaxy, one of 
the Council of Giants on the opposite side of  
Andromeda about 14 million light years away, takes 
2 million years from your perspective on the ship. 
And if we’re going to be honest, that’s about 
the only perspective that matters for long. I  
don’t care how much you extend the human lifespan, 
if you’re on a multi-million year journey through  
a genuine void in space, you are a divorced 
splinter of humanity. This is far beyond what  
it looks like at the galactic stage where even in 
remote regions of the galaxy you would still have  
many hundreds of neighbors within a light century 
of you feeding you information and entertainment,  
that was no more out of date than most 
of our literary classics these days. 
Even in the galaxy bridge case, where you 
might have an immense relay of power-beaming  
systems pushing on ships between a galaxy, we 
might expect a gap of a thousand light years. 
But this is all assuming we’re using stars as 
relays, and we have to be mindful of the sheer  
amount of time and resources involved 
here, not just in the sense of what an  
extraordinary draw on both is involved in 
such an intergalactic voyage or highway,  
but in terms of all the options on the table once 
you open that door to truly deep space and time. 
In our original Intergalactic Colonization 
episode some years back, we had the finale  
for our recurring fictional crew of the Starship 
Unity as they took a multi-century pause in the  
Terminus System at the edge of the galaxy and 
prepared to launch across the intergalactic  
void. There we suggested they would be 
building an immense Nicoll-Dyson Beam  
System to push their ship up to 99% of light 
speed and that ship was likely to be huge,  
a thing dwarfing any prior spaceship and probably 
attended by an enormous fleet coming with it. 
I think the reality of an intergalactic 
expedition might dwarf even that, but I’m  
going to propose it’s the launch of thousands 
of them, and to Galaxy Groups more than galaxies  
individually. You don’t launch to an individual 
galaxy but rather to the collection of a handful  
of major galaxies and dozens of minor ones all 
bound together by gravity. And in many cases,  
as we expand beyond our local group and the 
Council of Giants, many of those targets  
might actually have merged by the time your fleet 
arrives. You also might need to be ready to divert  
entire armadas en route to colonize some tiny 
dwarf void galaxy, because while a few million  
stars might not seem like much compared to the 
trillion your typical gravitationally-bound galaxy  
group might have, it is still a million stars.
That’s also a journey where you’d seriously need  
to contemplate beforehand what you’re going to 
do if you arrive and find that No Trespassing  
signs are now staked out in front, because 
during your hundred million year journey,  
that galaxy went from empty except for one planet 
with basic animal life, to a galaxy-spanning  
civilization. It is also quite likely your fleet 
will be passing in the eternal night past other  
fleets from other alien empires. Whether or not 
alien life, intelligent alien life, is so common  
our galaxy has several examples, or so rare that 
even the Grabby Aliens scenario of thousands of  
empires Universe wide is a bit generous, 
you have every motive to spread as far as  
you reasonably can, and so do they, so if you can 
build spaceships able to move 99% of light speed,  
there are billions of galaxies still in our reach 
if we launch them in the next few million years,  
and older empires would have had even more.
Those massive intercluster armadas are not really  
passing each other, they likely wouldn’t come 
within ten thousand light years of each other,  
even if moving between the same two galaxies; 
and that doesn’t imply any ability to carry on  
a conversation, or even necessarily know they 
existed. There’s nothing subtle about plowing  
through space with an enormous fleet at 99% of 
light speed but it is still a huge volume and  
also it’s hard to do much astronomy at that 
speed because there would be lots of noise. 
We are definitely not expecting any attempt to 
stop and throw punches at each other either,  
more likely you would be requesting a letter 
of introduction for when you arrive so that the  
enormous galaxy-spanning mega civilization there 
might find you an empty star to call your own.  
Galactic empires probably aren’t stable things 
over millions of years and they probably consider  
you no more alien than most of their distant 
neighbors who share ancestry from their homeworld,  
except you have databases full of cool 
and unique data from your home galaxy.  
And you’re also not a threat and you’re probably 
an isolated incident. However commonly alien  
intelligence evolves, it probably does keep 
spreading till it bumps into others, and should  
do so in every direction eventually, but probably 
along fronts a billion light years wide. There’s  
no war along that stretch because there’s no unity 
of culture either, or there’s millions of wars but  
contained to isolated and unrelated conflicts.
The lone exception to that would be if we had  
instant FTL travel or at a speed so fast as to 
essentially be permitting intergalactic travel in  
days or maybe years, not geological epochs. And 
that is entirely possible if FTL exists at all,  
nothing says that you can only break the speed 
limit by a couple orders of magnitude or that  
if you can break it at all, breaking it a ton is 
any harder. Especially if it were something like  
a wormhole network where you had to reach 
it at sublight speed but once there could  
create an instant portal back home, in cases 
like that, empires definitely do go back on  
the table, and that version at least doesn’t 
actually exacerbate the Fermi Paradox much,  
since it still requires a slow spread. In that 
case though, you could have galactic empires  
and even supercluster-sized ones and wars 
between them when they ran into each other. 
In the absence of that, your best bet is going to 
be to run your ship up to speed on a long chain of  
laser highway pushing devices. And I think you’re 
going to make that as long as you can convince  
neighboring systems to go in for it. Longer is 
better but you do get diminishing returns. So  
realistically I think maybe a few hundred light 
years is your practical limit to organize and  
incentivize participation, and thus something 
Earth itself might opt to be the center of.  
It is entirely possible that Earth, and the Sol 
system in general, will remain the big titan of  
the galaxy for several more millenia and be in a 
position to arm twist its daughter colonies for  
hundreds of light years around, especially for the 
purpose of coordinating big, mutually beneficial  
or prestigious projects. So a massive laser 
pushing system between each nearby star, possibly  
complete with swept-out tunnels allowing safer 
near-light-speed travel, might get itself built  
in the next few millennia and it would probably 
not be that hard to arrange for that to allow  
intergalactic launches. Especially as that might 
help subsidize early expansions of that highway  
to places that might not merit that capacity 
yet, but would inherit it after the launches. 
A hundred light years is a very big ramp and it 
is entirely plausible you might be shoving with  
energy beams able to push planet-sized ships up to 
speed. Indeed it is very likely the sail array the  
ship would be using would be planet-sized, 
even if the ship itself was far smaller. 
So how big does such a ship need to be?
This is tricky because what we really mean  
is how small can we get away with and there are 
a lot of variables there. Including crew-size,  
which might be a lot of uploaded minds running 
in ultra-slow time. Indeed, your entire armada  
of colony fleets being sent to millions of 
different galaxies might have the same crew,  
just copies of the same million volunteers or 
various permutations of a large fraction of that. 
Is this ship the size of a car or the size of 
a planet? Or is it an actual liberated star  
system hurled into deep space by one of the star 
drive systems we discussed in our episode Fleet  
of Stars, able to use a star’s own power to 
turn an entire solar system into a spaceship. 
On the one hand, that is the minimum size we know 
of for a spaceship able to survive for hundreds  
of millions of years. Not just our planet 
Earth, floating through the void of space,  
but its larger power system, our 
Sun. This is really feasible too,  
though I think a binary star system with 
a black hole and a donor star might work  
better. You could feed liberated matter, via 
starlifting, from the one into the other and  
achieve possibly as high a speed as 20 or 30% 
of light speed. Such a method could move a whole  
star system through intergalactic space and to 
places as far away as, perhaps, 4 billion light  
years. You could settle a whole super cluster 
using that technique, and far faster than a  
simple Shkadov Thruster or Helios Drive might 
allow, but it's still probably a slow option. 
Also clunky, In a case like that I’d rather 
have a black hole directly turned into a ship  
in a Matrioshka Shellworld built around it 
that we were firing beams of matter or pods  
of matter at from behind as it left the original 
launch region, to fuel up and get it up to speed. 
This particular approach still works if we’re 
shining megalasers onto it to speed it up too,  
and all the more so because even if it is a 
planet, you still need a protective shell around  
it as you get to very high speeds, because 
of all that radiation and relativistic dust. 
Such a massive sphere could be the size of a 
natural black hole, indeed you might repurpose  
an existing one, a few solar masses or a million 
Earth masses. Or it might be a micro-black hole  
the mass of a modest asteroid. It might actually 
be several micro black holes that are sized so as  
to hit their peak Hawking Radiation when 
you arrived at the destination galaxy,  
giving you a power supply to slow down with. In 
all cases you are probably using a mothership  
for the intergalactic crossing and then 
probably dispatching a smaller vanguard  
to slow down and gather energy and raw 
materials to help build the infrastructure  
to slow the mothership down when it arrives.
As we discussed in our episode, The Million Year  
Machine, there are some methods for potentially 
keeping machinery intact and asleep for such a  
voyage, in which case even relatively small ships 
running on fusion might make intergalactic voyages  
and awake at the other end to thaw out crew or 
recreate them from digital backups. How much  
you trust your AI is obviously very important, as 
well as your engineering, because if you can make  
stuff that just plain doesn’t break from sitting 
in the void for a hundred million years, then you  
can use even a fairly simple radioisotope switch 
to turn everything back on at the right time.  
Trusting intelligence, man or machine, is 
definitely tricky. After all, your ship left  
millions of years ago, longer than recorded human 
history, longer than any reasonable definition  
for humanity in terms of age of the species.
If you sent a planet cocooned in protective  
layers and with a fake sun shining down on it, 
powered by a black hole in the basement, how many  
empires rose and fell inside that thing during a 
journey just to the Council of Giants? How many  
buried layers of earlier human civilization are on 
that planet-ship and how often did they flat out  
forget what their mission was? How many religions 
have arisen when they partially rediscovered that  
mission and thought it was a 40 Million year 
exodus in the desert of the extragalactic void? 
How many times have great councils been called or 
wars been fought trying to figure out how to speed  
up, change course, stop, or turn around? How many 
collective centuries of worrying have people had  
that they might arrive at a once empty galaxy only 
to find it full and possibly very hostile? And a  
quarter of a million years out, when you pick up 
signals of an emerging interstellar empire that is  
claiming the place, what do you do? Send a message 
asking for a small corner to call your own,  
and tens of thousands of years for a reply, likely 
as you’re already reaching the galaxy’s edge,  
as you’re traveling so close to light 
speed, that you chase on the heels of  
your own message. What if that reply is a wall 
of space mines tearing your ship to pieces? 
If the timing is right you might be in a 
position to fight them for it, arriving  
part way through their own colonization of their 
native galaxy, or maybe they’re the vanguard of  
an intergalactic colony fleet too. Even if you 
got there when it was colonized, you might still  
negotiate or fight for a small chunk of it, again 
they’re not likely to be unified galaxy wide. 
Intergalactic Colonization will be like 
no journey humanity has ever made before,  
but the one thing it will have in common 
with other great Explorations is a lot  
of doubt and uncertainty, and a need for 
people of bravery, risk-takers, and vision.
We have a couple show announcements coming 
up in a moment, one very major, but first:  
An awful lot of how we colonize the Universe is 
going to depend on which if any of the various  
theories on the origin and fate of the Universe 
turn out correct, Heat Death, Big Crunch, Big Rip,  
or maybe something entirely different. One of 
the newer and more fascinating ones is Conformal  
Cyclic Cosmology, a scenario for potentially 
surviving the death of this Universe or a prior  
one, and we recently did an episode on that topic 
exclusively over on Nebula, my streaming service. 
We have a lot of bonus content on Nebula, 
from extended editions of episodes to early  
releases and exclusives like Planets vs 
Megastructures or our Coexistence with  
Alien series. All of SFIA’s content comes out 
on Nebula a few days early and ad free too,  
so you can enjoy the episodes as intended. It’s a 
streaming service started by creators for creators  
and their audiences, and has grown to be the 
largest creator owned streaming service. No  
Youtube algorithms penalizing content or 
dumping badly matched commercials on you,  
and using my link and discount it’s available 
now for just over $2.50 a month, less than  
the price of the drink or snack you might have 
been enjoying during the episode, and it goes  
to supporting new content from myself and other 
creators, like our new feature, Nebula Classes,  
so its 2 for the price of 1.
When you sign up at my link,  
https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use my 
code, isaacarthur, you not only get access  
to all of the great stuff Nebula offers 
plus now Classes, you’ll also be directly  
supporting this show. So if you’d like to join 
Nebula today, and see SFIA episode early and  
ad-free, just click the link in the episode 
description, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
So we have a couple announcements for today, one 
very big one. Long time viewers might recall that  
just before Covid hit, I had the honor to receive 
the National Space Society’s Pioneer Award,  
and that I gave a talk at their International 
Space Development Conference last year. I was  
looking forward to continuing involvement with the 
NSS as it’s been the largest civilian pro-space  
group for a couple generations now and critical 
to keeping the flames lit on enthusiasm for  
space exploration and development. The NSS 
is home to a lot of folks who have been my  
inspirations and role models for the show, and 
has been helping forge and shape space policy  
since even before its official formation.
I was not expecting to get called up a few  
weeks back to be asked if I’d consider 
serving as the organization's president,  
and I was unanimously elected to the position, 
effective immediately, March 1st. Since it’s  
both a recent and unexpected surprise, I will 
probably discuss it more after I’ve settled in  
a bit and gotten my footing. Needless to say it is 
a huge honor and one I’m looking forward to, and  
I know there are a lot of NSS members here in our 
audience, so thank you for entrusting me with it. 
For non-members, if you have ever thought 
about joining the National Space Society or  
finding one of its local chapters to attend, 
I’ll put the link in today’s description. 
Also, for anyone living in the Pittsburgh 
area, I will be back at the Carnegie Science  
Center on Friday, March 10th, for their 21+ 
Night, focused on Mars. It’s aimed as more of  
a casual cocktails and chat night, but I’ll be 
giving a few brief talks throughout the evening,  
as will Bruce Banerdt, the Principal Research 
Scientist on NASA’s InSight Mission to Mars,  
and geologist Michael Ramsey, the head of 
the University of Pittsburgh’s IVIS Lab  
focused on using satellites to study Martian 
volcanoes and Lava Flows. I’ll link that event  
in the description too if you’d like to attend.
Speaking of upcoming events, we have our Scifi  
Sunday episode coming up this weekend, MArch 12th, 
to explore how we mitigate major catastrophes or  
rebuild civilization afterward. And while normally 
we focus our eyes on the future and up above on  
the galaxy, next Thursday we’ll be turning our 
eyes downward and to the past, as we look at  
the Future of Archeology and some of the amazing 
technologies that will help us learn more about  
humanity’s history. Then the week after that we’ll 
take a look at the concept of simulated universes,  
and how we might hack or escape them if we’re 
inside one. And three weeks from now, on Sunday,  
March 26th, we’ll have our Monthly Livestream 
Q&A, before closing out the month of March on  
March 30th with our 2-hour special, The Advanced 
Spaceship Drive Compendium, where we will take a  
look at nearly a hundred different star drives, 
from existing tech to the entirely hypothetical. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other 
ways, you can see those options by visiting  
our website, IsaacArthur.net. You can 
also catch all of SFIA’s episodes early  
and ad free on our streaming service, 
Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
