This Episode is sponsored by Brilliant
We often worry about humanity running out
of room to grow outward, and many suggest
we might spread out to new worlds, but perhaps
we’ll spread vertically first.
So we return to the Earth 2.0 series to conclude
our main arc by discussing Matrioshka Worlds,
planets built of many concentric spherical
shells, like layers of an onion, each its
own planet or layer.
We’ll be drawing on many of the concepts
we’ve already discussed, such as artificial
islands, colonizing the depths of the oceans
or underground, bringing life to barren deserts
and tundra, and even building cities floating
in the sky.
We’ll also be drawing on technologies we’ve
discussed in other series like the active
support technologies of the upward bound series.
But I thought we’d begin by reiterating
a point we made back in the Arcologies and
Ecumenopolises episodes, which is that you
are unlikely to ever run out of space for
people themselves on a planet, because our
real problem is coming up with the energy
to support them and a way to get rid of the
heat generated in the process.
Incidentally, this is going to be one of our
long episodes, or longer anyway, and one of
the ones where I necessarily have to reference
previous topics we’ve covered.
Appropriately, for a topic involving the supersizing
of a planet and uprooting continents to hang
in the sky, we’ve got a lot of groundwork
to cover first, then we can get to why we’d
likely want to dump a black hole into the
center of our planet and have worlds inside
worlds where the time runs slower.
There’s lots to cover so we’ll be here
a while, and this would be a good time to
grab a drink and a snack…
Science fiction has examples of entire planets
given over to immense cities, what we call
a Ecumenopolis, a Planet-city.
A few of the best known of these are Trantor,
the capital of the First Galactic Empire of
Isaac Asimov’s Foundation series, Coruscant,
the capital of the Old Republic, Galactic
Empire, and New Republic in Star Wars, and
Holy Terra, the capital of the Imperium of
Warhammer 40k.
These boast massive populations compared to
modern Earth, but nowhere near what they should,
almost like the authors flinched back from
the true scale of such places, putting it
in the billions or maybe a trillion or so
people.
As we saw in Ecumenopolises, even a trillion
is very low, especially if you’re cramming
people into the dreary cramped lives such
places are usually described as, and points
to Chris Wraight in his novel Carrion Throne
for finally giving a figure of ‘quadrillions’
which would fit the scale of the world given
when you do the math.
That’s a great book incidentally, though
showing a much more grim and dark future for
Earth than we’ll paint today.
The key concept is you do not need more space
in and of itself, even for such an immense
figure, nearly a million times our current
population.
If we covered the entire planet, only one
story deep, in fairly modest individual apartments
of 50 square meters per person or about 500
square feet, then Earth, with a total surface
area of 500 trillion square meters, would
house 10 trillion people.
Needless to say, if you’re building the
kind of immense skyscrapers we often see in
such stories, a few kilometers tall, or a
thousand stories, that would give you 10 quadrillion
people.
In these stories, where the population is
often given as a trillion or so, but the world
is nothing but mega-skyscrapers, your typical
person would feel like they’re wandering
around a deserted warehouse, not a packed
residential area.
The obvious point, though, is that it’s
not people taking up all that space, it’s
all the agriculture they need to be fed, and
in fact it’s not the plants taking up all
that surface area, rather it’s the area
that sunlight falls on.
The plants spread out to soak that in.
For most of our history sunlight could be
treated, like air, as something so abundant
that other scarcities like decent soil, rainfall,
and manpower to tend crops were what dominated
the equation.
For a high-tech culture, those begin to diminish
in importance, machinery begins to make it
easier to irrigate soil, sow and harvest crops,
and science lets us improve the fertility
of soil and even modify crops to be more productive,
a process that our ancestors had to do in
a fairly slow and hit-or-miss fashion.
There’s a lot of pathways to allowing more
people to survive on less land, or even removing
land from the equation.
Greenhouses, hydroponics, and vertical farming
really let you crank out calories per acre
or hectare at levels that are vastly superior,
such that it really can support trillions
of people on Earth in comfort and with full
bellies without needing to knock over any
more forests or destroy any existing ecosystems.
They are however, incredibly expensive, but
better energy production and automation could
make them equal to or even cheaper than traditional
farming a ways down the road.
That’s only one pathway of course.
We could grow food up in space, as we discussed
in space farming, or go more artificial, either
synthesizing our food, or cutting that out
in favor of cybernetic or digital existences.
Or even live in life support tanks connected
to a computer and experiencing virtual reality,
matrix style.
And we’ve discussed all these topics in
more detail previously.
Whether we’re talking about space habitats
like an O’Neill Cylinder or terraforming
other planets, all the living space you’re
making really has nothing to do with feeding
people or giving them enough room for their
furniture once you solve two basic technological
hurdles.
One is abundant, reasonably clean, cheap,
and renewable power, and the other is considerably
improved automation, not necessarily human-level
artificial intelligence but something smart
enough to automate most factories, transport
and production chains, and construction so
that they needed minimal human oversight.
Truth be told, you only need one of those
technologies to basically be a post-scarcity
civilization.
As an example, if robots are doing most of
your mining, refining, and production, you
can churn out solar panels so cheaply that
it doesn’t matter how durable or efficient
they are.
The total of all our energy demands, from
fuel for cars and freight trucks to electricity
for houses and factories is about a percent
of a percent of the sunlight hitting Earth,
so even relatively inefficient panels placed
only on barren wastelands or roofs is going
to cover your needs with room to spare.
That’s hardly a breakthrough in energy technology
but it hardly matters if you’ve got the
power you need and can rely on the supply
lasting half of forever without being a burden
on your ecology or economy.
Of course those robots can do their work just
as well on the Moon and in orbit, meaning
you can beam your power down and circumvent
losing any land, not needing to worry about
darkness from nighttime or clouds, and not
having to mess around with giant arrays of
batteries or superconductors to store and
move your energy to where and when you need
it.
The flipside is that if you haven’t got
the smart automation but do have a revolutionary
new power production method, like fusion,
then you are automatically post-scarcity because
the only reason we aren’t now is because
of that non-sustainable and expensive energy
issue.
Just the savings on electric and gas at the
personal level would result in a lot of prosperity
but folks tend to forget it’s built into
everything.
Even food production, since the three majors
difficulties growing everything inside climate
controlled facilities is the cost to climate
control it, the cost to provide lighting or
supplemental lighting, and the material cost
of building and maintaining the things.
Since most of us tend to assume we’ll lick
one or both of these issues, energy or automation,
in the next couple of generations, we try
to factor it into our thinking for the future
here at SFIA.
It’s why we often present the concept that
in the future we probably wouldn’t terraform
dead planets for new living space so much
as disassemble them for tons of artificially
constructed habitats in orbit around those
worlds or wherever.
We always note that a spinning habitat probably
only has several meters of dirt and superstructure
beneath your feet, whereas a planet has a
several million, making it wasteful to basically
build planets like Earth, since all that valuable
rock is merely generating gravity, which can
be created much more efficiently.
We have discussed building spherical shell
worlds or others shaped like discworld flat
earths before, and using materials like hydrogen
or helium or even dark matter or black holes
to generate most of that gravity, with a rocky
shell around it, but it’s still a lot of
mass you’re using.
This is where we truly lead into our topic
for today, because that is the big limitation
here.
By default most of us would rather live on
a sphere than inside a can, but in an economy
of truly abundant energy and automation, your
economic limitation is basically on raw mass
and building material, and most folks probably
would not be willing to pay a million times
as much for an acre of land to have it on
a sphere instead of inside a can or ring.
It takes a lot of mass to make Earth, 6x10^24
kilograms, almost a trillion tons per person
living here, and enough to create the equivalent
of hundreds of thousands of square kilometers
of living area per person as rotating habitats,
a modestly small nation for every living person
to call their own.
And so long as you’re doing a sphere with
Earth gravity on its surface, it will cost
you the same mass per surface area whether
you’re making tiny planets with black holes
in the middle of them for your gravity or
converting gas giants into habitable planets.
Gravity falls off as the inverse square of
radius, surface area rises with the square
of radius, so the two handily cancel out.
However, we keep saying surface, and of course
today’s topic is about many surfaces, spheres
nested in spheres inside spheres, like a Matryoshka
Doll which is where we get the name for this
approach.
If your planet has many layers, they each
can get most of their gravity from the same
place, so you’re not spending as much mass
per living area anymore.
Build thousands of layers, each as thick as
a typical rotating habitat’s floor, and
suddenly the mass cost is very different.
There’s a general feeling that even if we
disassemble other worlds to make huge numbers
of rotating habitats that we wouldn’t do
it to Earth itself, and the same would likely
be true of a planet that had been the early
focus of colonization in another solar system.
And with such places likely being capitals
and hubs of interplanetary or even interstellar
empires, the real estate is likely to be precious
on them.
So this is one way to go for places like Earth.
Of course, this raises a ton of other problems.
How do you build such a thing?
Second, how do you light the lower levels,
since natural sunlight is blocked.
Third, what do you do with all the waste heat
being produced by it.
Fourth, how do you build such things incrementally,
as need requires?
Fifth, what exactly is the point of doing
whole new layers when you could just go the
skyscraper, vertical farming, and arcology
route?
And sixth, just how big can you go?
How many layers can you do?
Conceptually such an object is simple enough.
I build a shell over the current surface of
Earth and support it somehow, we discuss the
various ways in a moment.
We could also go the opposite direction, hollowing
a layer out below us, and indeed it would
make sense to hollow a layer out to make one
or more layers above you.
You are probably thinking, correctly, that
if we build a layer above us we would have
lower gravity there, being further up, and
if we dig stuff out below us and lift it up
there, we will have less gravity here at the
ground level too.
Now if you’re keeping your layers close
and not making very many, this can be ignored,
but it will be an issue if you want to make
lots and lots of layers and keep the same
gravity on each one of them.
For additional layers you just need to ensure
that the extra mass of that new layer corresponds
appropriately to its distance from the center.
If we go up, say, 64 kilometers, to build
our next layer, that layer is 1% further out
than we are and has about 2% lower gravity,
so that layer would need to mass about 2%
of what Earth does to compensate for that.
One built twice as high up as that would be
2% further out than original ground level,
and need 4% the mass of Earth, though if we’d
built that previous layer, we can subtract
its mass.
It just depends on how much you care about
gravity diminishing as you go up and how much
sky you want to have.
You can obviously do much thinner layers and
space them a lot closer too, nor do layers
all have to be at the same height as full
spherical shells.
Though if you don’t mind things hanging
right over head, you might as well just go
the skyscraper route or live in a rotating
habitat.
An important thing to remember is that a spherical
shell of mass generates no net gravity inside,
not just in the dead center either but everywhere,
even right inside near the shell.
So you can always ignore the levels above
for calculating gravity, though emphasis on
‘net’ gravity, as it’s not really gone
and will start making clocks and time itself
run slower on lower levels if you go big enough,
more on that later.
Of course they can’t just hang there, something
has to hold all this stuff up, right?
Well yes and no, channel regulars already
know of a concept we have called active support,
and it’s how we cheat when we need to keep
something heavy up and normal materials won’t
let us do it.
The first of these is the Atlas Pillar, basically
a particularly massive space tower whose purpose
is implied by the name, it holds the sky up.
Albeit in this case the sky is the underside
of another planetary layer.
This type of active support works the same
as what keeps a piece of paper floating over
a heat vent, nothing rigid underneath, it
just gets pushed on by hot air.
See the Space Towers episode for details of
the science on that but a problem with active
support is that it is active, you have to
pump power into the thing to keep it going,
and it will lose that power as waste heat,
which is problematic even if you have near
infinite cheap power generation.
If we ever manage to make cheap superconductors,
and especially if we develop a material, probably
a metamaterial, that makes for good magnetic
shielding, then hypothetically, you could
make a big rod that was closed off, no new
power added or heat lost, and had ridiculously
high compressive strength.
Inside it’s got plenty of stuff moving around,
but since it isn’t drawing power or losing
it to heat, it would be an ideal building
material for stupidly big and heavy projects,
like trying to hold a continent in the air.
One of our other methods is the orbital ring,
which relies on standard orbital mechanics.
Stuff doesn’t fall down for the same reason
satellites and space stations don’t, or
rather they always fall down as orbiting objects
are constantly yanked on by gravity and dropping,
they just are flying off to the side at just
enough speed that they wrap around a planet,
constantly falling but never hitting.
If a giant hand reached out and stopped the
space station, everyone floating around inside
would fall to the floor as they’re not that
high up so gravity is only a little weaker.
Of course when the giant hand let go, the
station would plummet down to Earth too.
However, if instead of stopping the station
our giant pushed it faster instead, then it
would have to go up into a higher orbit or
even escape entirely, it’s moving faster
than it falls now.
You’d have to push down on it to keep it
from flying off.
What an orbital ring does is merge these.
We make one ring, potentially just a long
and simple metal wire, that spins around Earth,
and a tube around it doing the same.
We use metal so we can generate a magnetic
field to keep the two from touching but still
able to push on each other, and so that we
can use magnetics to push on them to speed
or slow either one.
We spin the inner ring up while slowing the
other one down, keeping their net momentum
the same as a ring of equal mass to both of
them would need to stay in orbit.
So long as their net momentum stays at that
value, either can be moving at very different
speeds, and by default an orbital ring is
one where the outside doesn’t spin at all,
or no faster than the planet below it spins,
while the inner move far faster.
See the Orbital Rings episode for details,
but basically you end up with a small fast
ring sheathed inside a big stationary ring
you can walk around on, as gravity feels normal,
or just a little lower since you’re up higher.
These can handle changes of weight on that
outer sheath by just speeding up or slowing
down that inner ring a bit.
Incidentally, there are many ways to do this,
like using a particle accelerator instead
of a metal hoop, and they do not need to be
circular either, they could be elliptical
so one end actually touched the ground.
One of the ways to make a space tower or Atlas
Pillar is just to take that hoop and squeeze
it very narrow, so that’s it’s basically
two straight lines spinning up from the ground
to the top and falling back down on the other
side.
These things can handle staggering amounts
of weight if you’re willing to invest the
mass and energy into spinning it up, and you
could cocoon an entire planet in a bunch of
them, made wide and tilted at angles, and
just layer over it with rock and water and
air and presto, planetary shell.
Same as the Atlas Pillar, if you’ve got
cheap superconductors and magnetic shielding,
you basically only have to pay your energy
bill once, but in both cases they’re not
nearly as power draining as you’d expect
if you have to run them with modern tech,
all the interior motion is just something
flying around in a vacuum so very little energy
is being lost to friction and so on.
Such things always require maintenance but
that applies to every structure.
Such huge projects can only be contemplated
with energy abundance and very good automation,
but if you have them, they’re not really
high tech beyond that.
They’re quite sturdy and safe too, especially
with those rings cocooned together in case
one fails.
It might seem otherwise as it’s unfamiliar
but honestly it’s safer and sturdier than,
say, living on a thin crust of rock floating
on top a huge ball of unpredictable molten,
radioactive iron as we currently do.
Also, one whose mantle tends to explode through
from time to time, which is handy for making
new land but we can do better, and frankly
it’s just not tidy.
Our core and mantle are like keeping radioactive
waste and explosives in your basement, not
something a responsible civilization should
do, and we’ll replace it with something
safer like a black hole eventually.
Yes, I did say a black hole.
Safety, though, does encourage us to use multiple
methods and so you’d expect to see the layer
built out of an orbital ring but also supported
with Atlas Pillars and many of them for redundancy.
This does raise the notion of building incrementally
though, and you can do that with an Atlas
Pillar, just make several of them in some
area and lay land across, like a big table.
You could also have a thin orbital ring running
through that, or hang that shelf down from
something, relying on tensile strength, like
a space elevator, only with much less length
on the tether.
You could indeed do all of the above, building
a land mass of a desired size, say a large
island, that hung in the air between spherical
shell layers, which we’ll call “Babylon
Shelves” as a nod to the Hanging Gardens
of Babylon.
Needless to say you could use any of the other
tricks for hanging stuff in the sky that we
discussed in Cloud Cities, but this approach
lets you get away with making very heavy stuff
and mobile ones too if it’s just hanging
from rings like a Chandelier City or sitting
on them, though skinny Atlas Pillars could
let you walk the thing around like Baba Yaga’s
Hut.
I suspect you’d go both ways, above and
below, for redundancy and for ease of transport,
particularly as Matrioshka Planets need a
lot more transport than just people and our
personal goods and supplies.
A Babylon Shelf would of course shadow whatever
it was above, but you could put lights on
the bottom and of course on lower layers you
need to fake your sunlight anyway.
It’s a handy approach as you can incrementally
build many of these and expand them or lift
or lower them into place on a layer you’re
building.
Since orbital rings would be a central part
of your off-world economy, anytime you build
a new layer you’ll need to create a new
orbital ring layer to keep access to and from
the planet cheap and easy.
While lower layers would presumably look the
same as Earth, probably with fake sun and
stars, the upper layer is likely to look like
the most massive scaffolding project in history
with skeletal rings wrapping the planet and
space towers rising from it for millions of
giant space freighters and passenger liners
to dock at probably domed cities hanging around,
literally.
What you do with all that space is hard to
say, because you’re probably not growing
food on it much.
You could just farm on the various levels
naturally, or have vast hydroponics complex
built inside them too, but you could get away
with just importing your food from huge space
farm orbiting the world further out, it will
generally cost less energy to land food than
to grow it, also meaning it will produce less
heat, and you really have no need to export
back your waste since you are probably constantly
adding new layers of dirt, and some of the
best dirt you can get is dirt that used to
be food until someone ate it, so you might
just import food.
Amusingly, I often complain that Ecumenopolises
are falsely portrayed in fiction as inevitably
being what tropes call a ‘crapsack world’,
and in this case that would technically be
true.
One nice thing about such worlds is that unlike
a rotating habitat, you don’t have your
sky composed of your neighbors’ back lawn,
but actually we can double up on our layers
by living upside down if we wanted.
One of the incremental build methods would
be just to make a wide orbital ring like a
big band around a planet, and there’s nothing
stopping you from using the underside to produce
spin, except that a spinning ring wider than
a planet would be beyond what even carbon
nanotubes and graphene could handle for tensile
strength.
One could spin it slower and fake lower gravity,
which might be fun, but you can’t build
giant ringworlds with any material existing
in known science.
That is except if you cheat and use active
support.
As we discussed in the Ringworlds episode,
if you have a very massive ring that doesn’t
spin or does so slowly, you can have another,
lighter ring just inside it spinning around
very fast, by having the massive ring push
back against it; it’s the same basic concept
as a normal orbital ring.
Such things essentially hang there and are
too heavy, this is like holding them up from
beneath, only in this case from above, and
presumably with a magnetic field so you’re
not touching it.
Normally this is impractical since you need
a really massive outer ring to allow this
around a Sun, like a Niven-style Ringworld,
but it’s far easier when it’s just around
a planet and you do have a ton of mass just
sitting there being supported, and a spinning
inner ring would actually help brace it better
and give a small continent of extra living
area, though you could have several.
So folks could live upside down on the underside
of layers too, like some of the Hollow Earth
notions, though since we need to name the
thing to avoid confusion and I’d rather
not dignify some of the crazier Hollow Earth
theories by borrowing their names, we shall
name these upside down ring-shaped small continents
“Antipodean Bands”.
What other fun options do we have?
Quite a few, the sky’s the limit, at least
if you live in lower levels.
Needless to say you could devote entire planetary
surfaces to being nature preserves and parks,
you could have an actual “Disney World”,
and there is no limitation whatsoever on how
many layers you can build, except cooling
the place which is a big problem.
As I mentioned, your top layer is likely to
be devoted more and more to spaceports and
ongoing construction as you build ever bigger,
so you might not even bother keeping an atmosphere
up there, particularly if you decide to build
one from scratch and don’t want it rotating
or it wasn’t rotating originally because
it was a tidally locked world.
So it would have no magnetosphere helping
keep the Sun from stripping your atmosphere
off.
Matrioshka Worlds are rather ideal for tidally
locked planets which will likely be fairly
common, since those might often be around
red dwarfs, the most numerous of stars, and
would often have one side baked by the Sun
and the other in eternal darkness.
Since heat can only be transferred by radiation
in a vacuum, like space, you can just put
a reflective coating on a planet and keep
all that sunlight off if you want to, and
artificially light your lower levels.
Earth, being warm and geologically active,
isn’t actually the best place for making
a Matrioshka World, but it’s also the best
place in the Universe for one because it’s
likely to always be fairly central to a future
humanity.
You can get away with adding more levels to
our world because it is Earth, even where
doing it on other worlds might be easier.
The problem is you can’t really have very
many levels if you want to light them all.
Our planet’s temperature is based on how
much light it gets from the Sun and can radiate
away, and that’s based on its radiating
surface area.
If you’re doubling the light with a second
layer, but that layer is only a little bigger
than Earth, you’ve got a problem, your planet
is going to get rather hot, and each new layer,
while slightly increasing the surface area
to radiate from, is adding far more to this
heat burden.
Now that’s actually okay for a classic Ecumenpolis,
as it’s assumed you’re importing your
food or growing it in optimal conditions and
light spectra, and any natural habitats are
basically parks, a small minority of area.
It’s also okay to dim things in most places
as most plants don’t really need full sunlight
to prosper, and a big chunk of the light we
get they don’t even use, or use little of,
like green light, or infrared, which we can’t
even see.
But this only lets you do a handful of layers,
which is still quite a lot, but after that
point if you want more it needs to be in darkness.
That’s okay if you want vast subterranean
civilization or cold dark areas or just a
lot of storage space, most kept in the dark,
but building a Matrioshka World with those
in mind would seem like overkill.
If you just want tons of storage space or
caverns, you’ve no need to do huge layers,
and can take the approach of just building
story after story of whatever height you want
it in a particular place, like we discussed
in Dying Earth.
What can we do about heat?
We could build them deep in space far from
a star where they’d already be cold, these
are ideal for rogue planets, but as we mentioned
we could also just shine up the surface to
reflect light away so they could work very
close to stars too, and it still doesn’t
let you do many more layers.
Of course we might get some new technology
that violated Thermodynamics, in which case
these become ideal places to live.
Or we might be able to make wormholes, dumping
heat from these worlds to some other place.
It may even be possible to dump waste heat
into black holes, and I did mention we’d
probably want one at the center of Matrioshka
Worlds in some cases, though not principally
for that reason and we’ll discuss that more
in Colonizing Black Holes this summer.
Barring such advances, or going the dark route,
if you want many layers you need a giant surface
to radiate with, or at least a giant surface
area.
Heat sinks to help cool devices are generally
all about maximizing surface area in a compact
way, and we can, for instance, stick lots
of conical spikes or obelisks on the outermost
layer to increase surface area, and cover
them in something reflective to infrared light,
which many metals already are.
That will let you squeeze out more heat and
thus more layers, but we can go further too.
Such planets are likely to always be surrounded
by an immense swarm of space stations, docks
and orbital habitats, what we call a Planet
Swarm, like a Dyson swarm only smaller and
around a planet.
There’s likely to be constant traffic back
and forth to those and huge skinny space towers
potentially rising thousands of kilometers
over the outermost shell, indeed they might
just be extensions of the Atlas Pillars holding
it up, and possibly we’d have tons of space
elevators rising from that surface too, attaching
to massive counterweight habitats or space
docks or farms at their far end.
All along these you could have fins, like
leafs on a tree, into which heat could be
moved by conduction or convection into them
and then radiated away, all arranged and coated
in infrared reflective materials to spew out
heat to fly away or bounce off neighbors until
it did.
Same as we have electrical superconductors
that conduct electricity too, we have thermal
conductive materials that move heat well and
may get a thermal superconductor one day too,
in which case moving heat from a lower layer
to these radiating towers becomes easier.
You want to maximize this surface area so
you’d probably make these towers or tethers
or obelisks fractal in shape, at least for
their radiating leaves, and since we’re
using a tree analogy, and your world would
be covered in these things potentially stretching
tens or even hundreds of thousands of kilometers
off into space, we shall call them Fractal
Obelisk Radiation Emitting Super Towers, or
FOREST, though the ST in these FORESTs could
also be Space Tower or Space Tether I suppose.
It’s actually rather amusing since the purpose
of these FORESTs is to let us generate a lot
of heat by lighting lots of forests and other
ecosystems on lower layers, and considering
the sheer scale of these things, thin and
light but immense, even the massive kilometer
long spaceships constantly flying around and
docking at them would just be like birds or
bees flying around a normal forest.
NOW we can start doing a lot more layers,
and it behooves us to space them out and up
and down, as we probably don’t want atmosphere
running between them, same as we mentioned
in Subterranean Civilizations, dig down real
deep and the air pressure will rise from all
those extra kilometers of air piled up.
Though if you don’t mind airlocks along
the way or barrier mountains, you could have
big holes between layers people could walk
or drive directly through.
You could potentially even do the equivalent
of spirals instead of concentric circles,
a spherical spiral or helix with one unbroken
land surface, though I suspect you’d still
need to be pumping a lot of air and water
back up to avoid it building up even if you
were including a lot of chokepoints.
Of course you might enjoy having a big waterfall
between layers too or massive columns of air
rising back up as an eternal storm you could
hang glide between layers on.
Adding to those layers, as you go up, and
as I mentioned earlier, you can maintain the
same gravity on each new layer by just adding
enough mass to compensate for the decrease
in gravity from being further away.
However, as you do this, the density of your
entire planet is going to start dropping off
inverse to its radius.
Want a planet twice as wide, with four times
the surface area on the top layer, and the
density of that sphere needs to be half in
order to maintain the same surface gravity.
Earth’s average density is thousands of
times denser than air, so you can do a lot
of layers if most of those layers are relatively
thin on dirt and water and mostly air by height.
However, at a certain point, if your planet
is now dozens of times wider than Earth is,
you will actually want those layers spaced
out enough that the atmosphere over each layer
thins out to vacuum before the next layers.
At least on the mainland, you might keep your
Atlas Pillars pressurized and make them wide
with their own habitats, or include step tiers
of Babylon Shelves and Chandelier Cities.
As you go down, hollowing things out though,
you will slowly slice away at your gravity,
Earth’s pretty dense after all.
Drop that density by hollowing things out
and gravity will drop.
You could pack your center with something
ultra-dense like Osmium, but that’s hardly
super abundant so you’d either have to stop
or find something stable and far denser, cue
sticking a black hole in the middle of your
planet.
This is also a potentially awesome way to
power such a place too, as various possible
means of power generation from black holes
are way more efficient than even the fusion
that runs our Sun.
We’ll save discussion of this more for another
day, but a quick mention for now of another
unintentional side effect of putting layer
after layer on is that eventually, if you
do enough of them, you will end up with time
dilation at the lower levels, as we discussed
in Mega Earths.
Clocks run slowest down at the bottom layers
and fastest up at the top and among the FORESTs
and spacedocks.
Considering new layers are likely to be inhabited
by new people, especially in a future with
life extension technology, you might have
some very ancient folks and civilization hanging
out in the depths of such worlds, especially
if you built them big enough that you were
ransacking thousands of star systems to add
to your building material and made the planet
so big that it qualified as a Mega Earth or
Birch Planet, where the Sun and any Dyson
Swarm around it would end up instead orbiting
around that Matrioshka World.
Such places would likely only ever be constructed
because they were the natural political and
economic centers of their civilizations, but
if they got big enough, they might become
the physical centers of such places, and indeed
regardless that the gravity on each layer
might be Earth-like, the escape velocity from
such things would grow too, making it very
easy to approach to bring in more material
and goods, but harder to leave, another reason
for those huge forests of spacetowers rising
far away.
It’s a breathtaking project in scope, but
one that could be done over eons as need demanded,
and one I could see us doing since for humanity
at least, Earth is a unique place and will
stay unique even if we colonize a million
other worlds and forge a trillion space habitats.
It’s an effort that might be fueled simply
by Earth maintaining its prominence as the
center of future civilizations.
It’s something that might be pushed so far
that a growing Matrioshka Earth might become
a truly geocentric one, with everything literally
orbiting around us.
So I could see this future happening, a many-layered
Earth able to house almost endless civilization
and ecosystems, a new and greater Earth, an
Earth 2.0
We were discussing how you can achieve the
same strength of gravity on each layer of
a Matrioshka World today, by carefully calculating
how much mass each layer needs based on it’s
extra distance, and if you’d like learn
how to do that on your own, I’d recommend
the Forces chapter in Brilliant's Science
Essentials course.
As is often the case on this channel, we introduce
the concept and folks want to create and play
with it afterward, but it helps to have a
good background in science and math.
Brilliant offers a lot of in-depth, fun, and
interactive courses and quizzes that let you
master these topics at your own pace.
With that course and others you’ll gain
a greater understanding of how we can create
such worlds, from their gravity to the active
support holding them up.
In addition to many great courses like that,
they have fun daily problems in math, science,
and engineering to encourage you to challenge
yourself everyday, and an extensive online
community to help you if you get stuck.
If you’d like to learn more science and
math, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur and
sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can view all the daily
problems in the archives and unlock every
course.
So I mentioned we’d be looking at Colonizing
Black Holes soon, as part of a new crossover
trilogy with some of our other series, and
we’ll start that next week by looking at
Black Hole Ships, and many different approaches
to using black holes to move things between
stars, as part of our Generation Ships and
Interstellar Colonization series.
We’ll follow that up with a return to the
Outward Bound Series to look at Colonizing
Black Holes, and to our Space Warfare series
with Weaponizing Black Holes.
But before that, two weeks from now, we’ll
be returning to the Upward Bound series to
look at a different approach to launching
ships into space, to discuss Sky Platforms
and other launch methods that don’t start
by having a rocket launch from the ground.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
