Meteor showers are one of the 
most majestic sights in space,  
which is good since regular showers are nowhere to 
be seen… and that’s as good as the jokes will get,  
because as we’ll see today, keeping 
clean in space is no laughing matter.
Space is beautiful, vast, majestic, and starkly 
clean… but the inside of spaceships and space  
stations are none of these things. A crewmember on 
board a freighter from the volatile refineries and  
depots around Jupiter and Saturn can be forgiven 
for getting a bit jaded about living conditions.  
It’s true that it’s better than the old early 
days where everything was in microgravity, their  
freighter has a habitation ring for sleeping and 
some of their work. Unfortunately a lot of that  
ship is not under spin and not getting cleaned 
regularly and needs a good scrubbing, and frankly  
so does the air, even in the habitation ring.
Everything feels dirty all of the time,  
and for a ship carrying 5 million tons of 
water, ammonia, and methane, you’d think  
they could spare some more of that for showers 
and cleaning. The water anyway, methane seems  
disturbingly abundant throughout the ship even 
though all the systems claim there’s no leak. 
And your crewmates smell, all of the time, 
especially that new guy, Johnson. It’s amazing  
he doesn’t gag every time he puts his spacesuit on 
to go EVA. Though honestly, no matter what you do,  
your spacesuit always smells too. Cleaning the 
inside of a suit is virtually impossible, and no  
amount of scrubbing seems to get everything. You 
can't escape the smelly ship even when going EVA. 
Ports of call aren’t any better, just different. 
It’s one of those things you get used to as a  
spacer, when the airlock opens you get hit by all 
the new sights, sounds, and smells, and every ship  
and station has its own unique aroma. For many 
of them it’s that hospital smell of disinfectant  
everywhere, and they hose you down before you 
board, for others it's the crackly smell of  
ozone from ultraviolet disinfection lights 
sweeping down the hallways. Often literally,  
most ships have remote drone vacuums and mops that 
are wirelessly powered by the ship while they roam  
the hall with UV lamps and spotlights flickering 
around to scan and disinfect. There’s a report  
out that a lot of UV resistant forms of fungi 
are popping up on ships and stations and rumors  
of those that can survive near-vacuum and cling 
to the cracks and leaks on the outside of ships. 
Amusingly most ships have petri dishes full of 
healthy soil and gut bacteria growing that can  
be added to any plants growing or stomachs 
churning on the ship. Jackson, the ship’s  
cook and dietician, is always going on about the 
importance of that and seems to be able to spend  
hours working down in smelling hydroponics, yeast, 
and waste management compartments with a blissful  
indifference to the myriad foul odors there.
You know that’s where the rats must hang out, they  
got on board a few years back and nothing seems to 
kill them off. As a bright note, the ship’s social  
media page went viral last year when the ship’s 
cat got caught on film taking a floating rat out  
in the zero-gravity section of the ship. These 
days the captain just periodically vents whole  
sections of the ship to space to try to wipe out 
the increasingly diverse collections of rats and  
bugs. Your last ship had a hamster problem, and 
you could hear them scuttle through the vents. 
For Christmas, the captain got everyone nail 
clippers with a vacuum attachment. You felt this  
was a pointed reminder, particular for the ship’s 
engineer, who clipped their fingernails right in  
the ship’s mess one evening and the nasty things 
were still floating around in the air when dinner  
got served. Every panel is greasy and covered in 
dead skin cells and dirt, and you got upgrades to  
your cybernetics just so you could control more 
of the systems without having to touch them. 
At least there’s spin gravity though, in the 
habitation section, sometimes you have to spend  
days in the ship’s shuttle or pods and then it’s 
back to hoses and vacuums in the bathroom and  
trying to brush your teeth without running water. 
You’d think a couple days of mostly sitting around  
with a fellow crewmate on one of those missions 
would be a great chance to talk and strike up  
a friendship, but frankly you always want to 
murder them 12 hours into the trip. Then there  
was that time they had to stop the habitation 
ring spinning for a couple days of maintenance,  
that turned into an entire week, with 
no showers or laundry or sane plumbing. 
Space is awesome, space is majestic, space 
is clean and sterile, but spaceships and  
their crews are most certainly not, and 
you love your job but you are thinking  
about getting a cybernetic nose with filters.
I should probably note that while I suspect  
space won’t be as bad as that, for reasons we’ll 
discuss, it’s actually worse than that right now.  
One of my favorite astronauts is Chris Hadfield, 
who in his time as the ISS Commander on that Space  
Station devoted a lot of time, patience, and 
personal privacy to showing us all of the nitty  
gritty of space, from eating to brushing your 
teeth afterward. He maintained an entirely upbeat  
attitude while showing us some of the serious 
downsides of floating high up above our planet,  
and I will say from personal experience that he 
is exactly like he seems in those recordings,  
a down to earth gentleman and optimist… 
also a very good writer and teller of tales. 
I’ve gotten to meet and talk with quite a 
few astronauts, even more since becoming  
the President of the National Space Society, 
and a common remembrance is just how smelly,  
cramped, and dirty space tends to feel. It is one 
of the reasons I tend to assume that space hotels,  
after the initial glamor of zero-g wears off, will 
feature rotating sections under partial gravity. 
Without gravity things will tend to float around 
and you can only partially counter that by having  
a fan or vacuum causing a breeze that takes dust 
and detritus into a filter as opposed to falling  
to the floor. That is one of your options though, 
in the absence of gravity, suction can perform  
some of those functions. Otherwise every surface 
gets covered in stuff. You may have noticed I  
didn’t open the episode with a suggestion to 
get a drink and a snack like normal, as some  
of what we’ll discuss today is a bit nauseating to 
consider, and that includes the horrifying thought  
of someone vomiting inside a microgravity 
environment or inside their space suit. 
One of those more unpleasant aspects is that the 
human body sheds somewhere between a pound to a  
kilogram of dead skin cells every year and that 
everytime you scratch an itch or rub your nose,  
or even just put some clothes on, you knock 
some skin cells off. On an average of 600,000  
every single day, or about 7 per second. Even with 
the help of gravity, fresh air, and ample space,  
you are regularly touching or even inhaling other 
people’s dead skin. Amusingly we’ve found they  
contribute significantly to ozone removal 
in confined rooms and cabins, as does hair  
we lose. Your head typically sheds 1-200 hairs a 
day, and more from your body. An electric shaver  
can easily scatter small hairs everywhere, 
so they need to include a vacuum on them. 
We are also constantly emitting various 
vapors and gases. Houses and cars leak  
quite a lot of air - as do space stations 
and spacesuits - in the case of the latter,  
we would prefer they not do so and aim for as 
little as possible. There’s no window to open  
in space if someone burns something on the stove 
or forgets to take the garbage or compost out. 
Everything from brushing your teeth to 
doing laundry is more complicated in space,  
as you have to carry all your water with you 
and have no natural cycles to expedite water  
or air recycling and filtration. If you’re 
using a lot of soap, that ends up in your  
water needing purifying. If you’re using a lot 
of fragrances, those get trapped in your air  
filters and shorten their lifetime too. In their 
absence, folks can get sick in body and mind. 
It is the grungier aspect of life in space 
and it is all manageable and fixable,  
with enough time, technology, and resources, 
but it can not be ignored in the meantime. 
If you launch into space with someone who caught a 
cold, odds are good everyone else on that mission  
is getting exposed to it. Even ignoring obvious 
concerns about health, there’s the mental aspects  
too. When I was in the US Army I spent a lot 
of time in the field or deployed to war zones,  
and thankfully showers on a daily or almost 
daily basis were still possible most of the  
time. Indeed the second place I was stationed 
in Iraq, down in Anbar, actually had a laundry  
service that would return your uniforms clean 
and folded and smelling and feeling fresh too. 
A lot of us who’d been deployed elsewhere thought 
it was the best thing ever, and even almost 20  
years later I’m grateful the taxpayers coughed up 
the extra cash for that luxury for us. If you’ve  
ever spent a day just getting filthy, out in the 
hot dry desert or a wet cold muddy field, you know  
that being able to get clean and put on something 
clean and dry just makes you feel so much better,  
while dwelling in cramped and muddy or dusty 
quarters with people who haven’t showered in a  
week is just demoralizing. It can make you want 
to smother someone you love like your brother. 
Unsurprisingly laundry in space is not a simple 
matter, every spare piece of clothing is extra  
mass to bring along, and a washing machine is 
not a light thing and has to be built for low  
gravity. Antimicrobial fibers are critical to 
decent space clothing, particularly for inside  
a spacesuit as those are not easy to clean 
and are going to quickly fill with sweat and  
dead skin cells. And harsh cleaning methods and 
agents are likely to cause leaks in that suit. 
People often talk whimsically of the pioneering 
days of the American frontier and we often draw  
analogies to it for developing and settling 
space, but nobody likes to focus on the absence  
of running water back then or how it was often 
well into the late 20th century before a lot  
of those places got plumbing. A spaceship or 
colony dome might be just as cramped and when  
you’re doing a couple hours of exercise every day 
to maintain your muscle and bones, getting clean  
after your workout is fairly important.
Even a little gravity like the Moon has  
would allow for options like baths and 
showers. There is no shower on the ISS,  
in favor of using washcloths for sponge baths, 
but we have done showers in space. Skylab had  
one but it took up a lot of space and didn’t work 
well. Basically about 3 liters of water would get  
heated and pressurized with nitrogen and sprayed 
inside the shower enclosure, while suction removed  
it. A normal shower uses 20 or 30 times as much 
water as that, but I would not be surprised if we  
say this approach to water minimization remain 
normal in space, whether the shower is using  
suction or gravity to make the water move.
It’s not just the lack of gravity preventing  
things from falling either. Water doesn’t act like 
we think it would in space, even ignoring that it  
doesn't fall down. Liquids tend to form floating 
globules due to surface tension. This means that  
water does not run over hands or body surfaces for 
effective washing. Instead, astronauts often use  
specially designed no-rinse soap and rinseless 
shampoos, along with wet wipes, to clean their  
bodies. The absence of a sink's functionality 
requires them to squirt water from a bag and then  
carefully use towels to remove both the moisture 
and the cleanser. You can’t wring a washcloth out  
either… well you can, but the water just pools 
around the washcloth, you’d have to blow it off. 
The management of waste liquids is another 
intricate aspect of hygiene in space. Without  
gravity, toilets can't function in the same way 
they do on Earth. Instead, space toilets use air  
flow to direct waste away from the body and into 
appropriate containers. Solid waste is typically  
dried and stored for eventual return to Earth or 
incineration upon re-entry, whereas liquid waste  
can be treated and recycled into water—a 
vital process for long-duration missions. 
Also keep in mind that jettisoning anything 
in orbit or at interplanetary travel speeds,  
including garbage and solid waste, risks 
an explosive collision with some other ship  
or facility on par with being shot by a tank 
gun. You need to be able to recycle everything  
you can. The challenges lie in ensuring the 
efficiency of these systems, avoiding blockages,  
and preventing any contamination of the 
spacecraft's environment, which can pose  
severe health risks in a closed-loop system.
But contamination can also occur through the  
spread of droplets in microgravity, a situation 
that requires careful containment strategies  
and regular cleaning protocols to ensure 
the safety and well-being of the crew.  
There’s no gravity pulling things down like 
normal when you sneeze, so even someone down  
the hallways and around the corner could 
get blasted, and the same for coughing.
In the long term it is entirely possible 
the inside of spaceships, and spacesuits,  
will be full of tiny machines that go around 
cleaning things up. Indeed we might re-engineer  
microbes or even bigger organisms to clean up 
for us. We already have entire ecological niches  
for organisms that eat waste and detritus 
so we don’t need to reinvent the wheel,  
just tweak or mimic them. You might program 
rats to go collect junk and take it to bins  
for waste management for instance, something we 
see onboard the ship the Nostalgia for Infinity in  
Alastair Reynolds’ epic novel, Revelation Space.
And in spite of what I said in our narrative at  
the beginning, it isn’t very likely ships would 
be unable to purge rats. Though size matters,  
some ships in fiction are enormous, 
and colony vessels might be too,  
stretching miles long with thousands of decks, 
and in ships like that we might have entire  
tribes of stowaways lurking around the more 
remote sections of the ship for generations. 
I’ve seen that in fiction a fair few times 
too, it's a popular theme in Warhammer 40,000,  
huge ships with their own unintended ecosystems 
and civilizations on board. There it is usually  
mutants and that raises another issue, toxic 
waste and radiation on board ships. We did  
talk about those scenarios more in our 
episode the Million Year Ark, but in the  
broader sense of waste issues, radioactive 
materials do at least have the advantage of  
typically being sterile… or sterilizing anyway.
There are likely to be a lot of things on a ship  
that are hazardous in some fashion and keeping 
a ship clean is one way to help manage that,  
at least in part because a crew that is sick 
all the time might be a lot less resistant to  
any chemical, biological or radioactive hazards 
released in thate ship. In that same vein though,  
while ships might have a lot of nanotechnology 
helping keep the ship clean and fresh and  
protecting the crew from disease, that 
same ship might essentially need its  
own biological and nanotech equivalents 
of an immune system to protest against  
ship-to-ship transmitted viruses or station 
transmitted diseases and technorganic plagues. 
It is difficult to avoid making a Star Trek 
Captain Kirk joke about alien STDs at this  
point but we do need to acknowledge that if 
we do find life out there in the cosmos that  
spaceships can become the plague ships sailing 
into harbor with potentially apocalyptically  
diseases on board. Invasive species, technorganic 
plagues, alien viruses, biological or digital,  
and more, might be lurking out in space. Indeed, 
given the issues of divergence and light lag,  
you could have colonies separated from each other 
by a century of travel time that routinely passed  
viruses and diseases through interstellar trade 
ships. So too, even at the interplanetary scale,  
a dozen planets, a hundred moons, and a million 
asteroid mining settlements scattered across  
the solar System from Mercury out to the 
Oort cloud gives a lot of new territory  
for ailments to grow and mutate to infect others.
In that regard, even though classic space hygiene  
should only grow easier as our technology 
improves and our presence in space grows,  
that same growth might introduce all sorts of 
new problems for future space travelers and  
the space ports they visit. So in the future, 
as our colony vessels sweep out into the solar  
system and the galaxy beyond, we probably want 
to encourage them to sweep up after themselves.
As channel regulars know, sometimes I find a 
good story is better way to discuss a concept  
than just the facts and thoughts about a 
topic that might be a bit dry otherwise,  
and today’s topic about the grungier side 
of living in space seemed ideal for that,  
but I also just enjoy storytelling and love a good 
audio drama about life on board a spaceship, and  
with that in mind I wanted to welcome The Sojourn 
onboard over at Nebula, our streaming service. 
Join the full-cast crew of the Sojourn for 
some top-notch audio dramas set in the Tantalus  
Cluster, where after centuries of reckless 
colonization and a violent interstellar war,  
humanity is gripped by poverty and famine. 
Desperate and facing extinction, humanity’s  
only hope is a strange nebula that has suddenly 
appeared beyond the edge of the cluster. Its  
shifting clouds may hide a source of salvation for 
the people of Tantalus, but time is running out. 
Nebula has tons of great content from an 
ever-growing community of creators like the  
Sojourn, and as always, every episode 
of this show comes out their first,  
a few days early and ad free, along with 
our monthly Nebula-Exclusive Bonus episode,  
like this month’s Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships. 
Using my link and discount it’s available now for  
just over $2.50 a month.
When you sign up at my  
link, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur and use 
my code, isaacarthur, you not only get access to  
all of the great stuff Nebula offers, like 
The Sojourn or SFIA’s Nebula Exclusives,  
you’ll also be directly supporting this show. 
Again, to see SFIA early, ad free, and with  
all the exclusive bonus content from us and other 
creators, go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur 
So some of you may have noticed that we’re having 
a bonus episode on a Sunday and not our mid-month  
Scifi Sunday either, and that’s because Sarah 
and I had to cancel the usual end of the month  
livestream as it wasn’t fitting in well with our 
Thanksgiving holiday plans, but we will be having  
it next month on New Year’s Eve. Needless to say 
we have a lot of episodes before then including  
one more for November, on the 30th, where we’ll 
look at Agriworlds, and have a discussion of  
how you could farm an entire planet.
We talked a lot about being a crew  
on a spaceship today and we’ll be continuing 
that in December with a discussion of how to  
select spaceship crews, before returning to our 
Alien Civilization series two weeks from now,  
with Nihilistic Aliens. Then we’ll talk about ways 
to warp and manipulate reality, on December 14th,  
before discussing Silicon based lifeforms on 
the 21st, and wrapping up our episodes for  
the month and year with a different type 
of space hygiene, clearing space debris. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
