In the future we may deploy armies of cybernetic
superhumans to fight our battles, people so
augmented they could tear through walls or
dodge bullets.
But would these invincible warriors be willing
to fight for mundane humans, or merely fight
each other to rule us?
Hamzah was born on the planet of New Damascus.
He doesn’t remember the city of his birth
because it was vaporized in an atomic bombblast
when he was 2.
He grew up in a refugee camp with half a dozen
different cultures mish-mashed together, but
his grandmother told him his name meant powerful.
He certainly never felt powerful, not with
half a dozen defects and illnesses that left
him both a cripple as a boy, and a social
reject, one picked on by everyone else and
valued by no one.
The doctor who visits their camp every week
told him he would have been easily cured if
he lived back in civilized space, but to Hamzah
that’s little consolation.
When Hamzah turned 18 years standard, he joined
the Martian Foreign Legion.
They didn’t have to talk him into cybernetic
augmentation, indeed he spent most of his
salary on extra components, upgrades, and
bootlegs.
That clubfoot he had is gone; so are those
worthless lungs he had that always coughed
up blood and phlegm, from the harsh radioactive
dust storms of New Damascus, where the regolith
is like ground-up glass.
Hamzah can see a hummingbird’s wings flap
a thousand meters away, see in frequencies
his old eyes couldn’t, and hear a pin drop
in a crowded room.
He’s as tough as steel now, tougher…
He can bend steel rods in his hands.
He’s powerful, at last.
He doesn’t know fear anymore either, not
with his endocrine system properly regulated,
plus he carries a gun that’s bigger than
most people are into battle, what in the Galaxy
would he have to be afraid of?
It isn’t hard to see the attraction of cybernetics
to healthy people, let alone to those suffering
with ailments or living with disabilities.
And that can include feeling weak and afraid,
like our example of Hamzah, born in a refugee
camp and feeling like a discard of a vastly
more powerful civilization.
Talking about the role of cyborgs in the future,
especially in a military capacity, it’s
worth remembering that the line between necessary
prosthetics and personal augmentation or enhancement
can be blurry.
It isn’t hard at all to imagine why generals
would like cybernetically enhanced troops
or why those troops might gladly embrace them.
Nor is it hard to imagine why many might embrace
cybernetic enhancement on alien worlds.
Indeed, the original usage of the term cyborg,
short for cybernetic organism, was in the
context of chemical or mechanical alteration
of people to better let them adapt to extraterrestrial
conditions like lower gravity or pressure,
or even just sleep aides for irregular day-night
cycles.
The original meaning rapidly gave way to the
more sci-fi and comic book flavor of a guy
with a big steel arm or leg, as opposed to
more subtle or biochemical approaches to cybernetics.
Our introductory character for today, Hamzah,
is basically a prime target for all of those
enticements to go cyborg.
He’s physically impaired, he lives in an
environment humans aren’t adapted to, he
benefits in his job, which is inherently dangerous
and thus makes every augmentation decision
life or death, and he is not happy with his
current body.
He feels weak, frail, outcast, and a victim,
he’s joining an organization and getting
augmentations to end that.
We could comment on how psychologically healthy,
or ethical his chosen path is but that’s
not our topic today.
This is sci-fi Sunday here on SFIA, where
we examine the realism of concepts in science
fiction and ask how plausible they are or
how we could make something like them plausible,
and the idea of a cyborg soldier is about
as well-known a sci-fi concept as you can
get.
One thing missing from a lot of those stories
though is the large numbers of cyborgs in
them; full-on cyborg armies, not one lone
super-trooper or commando squad.
We want to contemplate whole armies, and that
means not just looking at shock troops but
what the cyborg crewmen of a spaceship might
look like, or a fighter pilot, or even just
the supply sergeant, mechanic, or quartermaster.
Nor do we just intend to discuss unsubtle
physical enhancement, like being able to punch
through a wall or be bulletproof, or simple
computerization options like adding a heads-up
display to someone’s vision, many things
like that might be accomplished with a pair
of goggles or some powered-armor exoskeleton.
And it is worth remembering that many of these
options might not require lopping limbs off,
when adding some exoskeleton might not necessarily
be a very bulky or cumbersome option.
So too, whenever we talk about implants and
prosthetics, especially ones meant for gross
physical enhancement, there’s that question
of what is powering everything.
Even our most sophisticated batteries not
yet available for commercial use are no match
for a gas engine in terms of energy density,
even if they avoid power loss from idling,
and indeed are even less power dense than
biological fat cells, our own best energy-storage
option.
There is no guarantee we are ever going to
get any sort of power storage option much
better than what we already have either.
Even nuclear options are way short of what
we want for most comic book-esque cyborg applications,
as a radioisotope thermal generator may be
way more energy dense than any battery or
chemical fuel but produces a constant power
supply at all times.
That said, Plutonium 238 generates about 260
watts per pound or 570 watts per kilogram,
and that’s almost 20 times denser than water,
or the human body, so you can pack a lot of
power generation in that way.
Unfortunately that’s mostly heat, especially
given the low efficiency of RTGs in producing
electricity, but with a half-life of 88 years,
a single kilogram of it represents a pretty
good power supply, as even 88 years later
it would still be producing half the power
it originally did, and a quarter of that 176
years later.
Needless to say, even if 10% conversion to
electricity was the best you could do, it
would be no problem to pack a kilowatt of
generator into someone, it wouldn’t even
take up a liter worth of space.
It would kill them dead real quick to be fair,
and not from radiation.
Plutonium’s an alpha emitter when it comes
to decay, you can block that with a thin layer
of tin foil, and even direct exposure to a
human isn’t really penetrating skin.
Putting it inside someone is a different story,
but that’s what shielding is for and not
much is needed.
Instead your problem is that your cyborg is
going to catch on fire, as that 20 kilograms
of Plutonium is giving off over 10,000 watts
of heat.
That’s around 100 times what your body normally
radiates.
You can go a lot higher than that, you can
potentially burn 1000 calories an hour for
instance, which releases almost 1200 watts
of heat.
You aren’t going much higher than that without
serious alteration with radiators, like a
car engine has.
We might imagine a cybernetic arm or leg as
being a tough metal coating, with lots of
blood vessels like radiators in it, which
has a bone made of plutonium – it’s a
pretty hard metal – and the rest of the
arm is your hydraulic or artificial muscle
and a lot of batteries.
Your RTG mostly powers them up for brief moments
of high exertion and then otherwise just being
a bit higher power from moment to moment than
a typical human.
If you don’t feel obliged to keep to average
human height and weight – you go for the
big bulky look – then you can absolutely
run a power plant in that person, allowing
them to keep a modestly superhuman pace of
exertion going all day while having plenty
of battery for moments like when they need
to flip a car over.
One thing to note here is that this isn’t
really much better than a power armor suit
would offer, since we could easily pack that
plutonium into a nice thick exoskeleton and
have the same sort of radiating room.
It’s not hard to imagine the armor plating
being batteries, especially given that super-strong
materials like the carbon allotrope, graphene,
are the materials we tend to contemplate for
ultra-high performance batteries.
We can economically grow diamond these days
too, including diamond made from Carbon-14,
what we call a diamond battery.
Carbon-14 Diamond batteries decay as beta
radiation – which is comprised of electrons
and positrons - and thus can produce electric
current directly.
Betavoltaics aren’t new, the Moseley generator
is 110 years old, and I’d imagine many of
them are still running as it’s a durable
and long-lived approach to power.
Carbon-14 has a much lower power and energy
density than Plutonium, but as we just saw,
we don’t need Plutonium power levels here.
Someone with a Carbon-14 diamond skeleton
or diamond exoskeleton or armor, say 100 kilograms
of it, would have a theoretical maximum of
130 Watts of Power Production, and be hard
as diamond.
That’s no hard limit either, Carbon-14 has
a half life of several thousand years, compared
to tritium, another beta decay isotope, at
around a dozen.
Loosely-speaking, your half-life is inversely
related to your power production for an isotope,
the longer it lives, the slower it releases
that power.
Beta decay is usually going to be weaker,
pound for pound, than alpha decay.
Key notion though is that we can go atomic
for our cybernetics.
Otherwise you need an active power connection.
That might be a mobile armored generator following
you around or, given the durability of something
like diamond or plutonium, I could imagine
folks having a big old shield, medieval knight
style, one that was also a power supply.
We can go the other way and have people eat
food and convert that into electricity, or
adapt our normal internal power process to
run cybernetics off of sugars.
We could also charge batteries off something
like a cap or cloak made out of flexible solar
panels.
The big issue though is that none of these
options offer the mobile energy density that
atomic sources do, but those cannot be throttled,
they always run at full speed.
A classic fission reactor can’t be made
that small, though we could conceive something
running on vastly superior materials and transuranic
elements being possible.
That would then offer a power supply that
could be throttled, though probably not ultra-quickly,
but batteries used in tandem with that could
allow rapid surges in power while the reactor
throttled up, something akin to an adrenaline
rush.
This avoids the continuous stable power supply
issue RTGs or anything else running on decay
represent.
Hypothetically, someone might also find a
way to play with decay rates using thus far
unknown physics.
It seems unlikely you would ever get something
like fusion working at such a tiny scale,
especially at high power and without cooking
the individual.
We have the option of antimatter, but I think
folks would flinch back from having a power
source that, if damaged, would detonate and
release its full power.
A human’s daily food supply if converted
into an explosive of the same energy would
be the equivalent of around 2 kilograms of
TNT or about 10 hand grenades, so it might
be viable if you were willing to limit your
fuel supply in your cyborg to something like
1 day or even less, while giving them other
less-dense power options for maintaining basic
functions.
People need to eat regularly, a resupply run
for Cyborg Armies remains an option, as at
a minimum it’s no harder to resupply them
then regular human troops and probably a lot
easier.
Something like a micro-black hole is off the
table too, as Hawking radiation for any Black
Hole that massed 100 kilograms is almost identical
to the entire power output of our Sun, and
lasts for 47 nanoseconds.
So, it’s basically a 2000 Megaton nuclear
bomb detonation, not a power source.
We could imagine some almost perfectly reflective
substance shielding it and bouncing the emissions
back inside to keep it from blowing up, which
you could adaptively change the reflectivity
on to dial up how much energy escaped, but
we would be talking about wanting kilowatts
of power, or maybe nanosecond long pulses
of gigawatts for a weapon of some sort, and
so we would be talking about a substance that
ranged from 99.99999999999% reflective to
99.9999999999999999999% reflectivity.
We might hypothesize someone’s power supply
consisting of a few hundred different nanoscopic
micro blackholes, massing mere nanograms,
needing even higher reflectivity and precision
control, for that be viable, and lowers the
explosive yield down to something saner.
A microgram of mass converted to energy is
200 kilograms of TNT, in the very large artillery
shell or car bomb territory.
I should note that both in this and the antimatter
case, you are probably using these as your
weapon munitions too.
That power supply and how big it goes boom,
and how likely it is to do so in combat conditions,
also controls how big your combat units are
and how close they can be.
You might be limited to one-man-armies or
small squads with some technologies, as opposed
to deploying entire battalions into relatively
small areas.
Even outside of combat situations, since someone
might intentionally detonate one and blow
up their neighbors in some horrible domino
effect.
So too, you might see weapons which were designed
specifically to set off an enemy’s cybernetic
power supplies, like a magnetic disruption
round to wreck magnetic confinement of antimatter
and set it off.
How viable a given power supply is for usage
is going to depend on its reliability and
resistance in these sorts of situations, not
just its raw output.
I should also note that rupturing high density
batteries isn’t entirely safe either though
certainly less pyrotechnic or radioactive
than other options.
We also could imagine the cyborg squad is
coming in on a troop transport, tracked, wheeled,
copter, whatever, and all have a plug-in cable
to that thing’s engine and even maybe a
coolant tube to its radiators, and enough
battery capacity to allow plenty of time to
reconnect.
Which can include a reconnect by the vehicle
shooting a magnetic grapple onto their power
port or coolant port in under a second and
having hundreds of backup wires, allowing
them to maintain a ridiculously high battle
tempo practically indefinitely, even if the
enemy is trying to take those wires and hoses
out.
That’s a pretty terrifying notion, some
rapid assault dropship deploying a dozen cyborg
super-soldiers.
And as we discussed in our dropships episode
a couple weeks back, cyborgs might potentially
have liquid breathing options and be able
to handle insane g-forces.
In the end the battery option is your best
one, as it’s going to be present in any
design I think, but always in tandem with
one or more other power supplies.
You give options for multiple paths for charging,
some internal atomic sources perhaps, some
solar panels built into clothing, a port for
plugging into a wall or generator, and a way
to convert regular food into power, maybe
even normally indigestible stuff like cellulose,
so you can gain calories off grass or tree
bark or just the parts of food that you as
a human often eat but can’t process for
calories.
Indeed, it’s a good way to stay trim, if
you by-default convert any excess calories
into power storage.
And might be necessary psychologically too,
after all, you do not actually need as many
calories if you chop off a limb, nor if your
body is staying warm from your excess atomic
energy, but you might still want to eat big
meals, even if just recreationally or to maintain
some feeling or semblance of what it is like
to be a human.
Our person could also, outside of combat circumstances,
just run mostly on batteries and maybe plug
in occasionally, or at night-time while sleeping,
or even charge wirelessly.
We also shouldn’t rule out the reverse process
of using organic materials for power, but
instead having artificial means of providing
power to organic cells.
After all, you can make sugar and amino acids
in the lab just fine, and arguably more power
efficiently than sunlight and plants can.
Having nanotech or other high-tech internal
medical options for repairing the cyborg’s
remaining organic components is also on the
table, and might be necessary if you’ve
got them walking around with atomic power
supplies.
An internal fission reactor is a lot more
viable if you don’t need as much shielding
on the soldier and their squadmates because
they’ve all got cancer-repair mechanisms.
Which raises the brief tangent on if a cyborg
might also be genetically enhanced or pumped
up on ultra-steroids.
I tend to assume nobody who is fine with lopping
of limbs or jamming microchips in their brain
is going to be too touchy about genetic alteration.
Drugs might be different, but it isn’t hard
to imagine some 9-foot tall mass of machines
and genetically engineered tissues jacked
up on some cocktail of drugs that made steroids
and cocaine seem safe and mild in comparison.
They might be safe of course, we shouldn’t
assume performance-enhancing drugs are inherently
dangerous no matter what improvements we make,
but it’s also easy to imagine some drug-fueled
berserker running around with a 50 caliber
machine gun and armor, shield, and giant sword
all made of depleted uranium, graphene, or
nuclear diamonds, or even high density fissiles
or radioisotopes.
That person still needs some serious coolant
for their organic components though.
Incidentally, for today’s purpose we will
assume a cyborg must contain a significant
amount of both machines and human flesh.
I’m not sure a person with a digitally-uploaded
mind uploaded into an android body isn’t
a cyborg too, but even they wouldn’t get
a blank check for heat.
That heat radiation issue really is the check
and balance that allows a human in an exoskeleton
to be a relative match for a cyborg or android
or killbot, and not out outperformed by whole
orders of magnitude.
Alternatively the cyborg might have their
organics limited to a brain in a jar and that
could have well-insulated walls with their
own coolant to allow the remainder of the
body, all mechanical, to run around at temperatures
that would fry organic materials.
And that could be extended to other bits,
eyes, spine, etc.
Though probably just your nervous cord.
I don’t think you can plausibly keep your
natural spine, or much of your natural skeleton,
if you want to be running around flipping
cars over and punching through walls.
So our myrmidon cyborg giant might have bones
made of diamond and graphene and plutonium
all pumping out and storing power while his
battle armor is covered in heat sinks and
made of more batteries, and he’s got a cloak
that’s also a high-efficiency solar panel
that’s also bullet proof and carries around
a railgun that can chew through vehicles and
buildings, as well as people.
He can turtle up under a shield and that armor
and survive a tactical nuclear blast within
100 meters.
You can drop him right out of an airlock and
he’ll survive, and can even parachute down
from high altitudes with that cloak and survive
landing at normal terminal velocity too; thus
allowing the classic one-fist-down superhero
landing.
What else is on the table?
I think we’ll skip mind augmentation in
terms of intelligence today.
If you can massively enhance intelligence
in your whole army then you are probably doing
that with your entire civilization.
But faster reaction speeds are on the table,
and you can replace the longer nerves with
something that transmits way faster.
Being able to shut off pain receptors is handy,
even at a day-to-day level, being able to
handle aches and pains by dampening them down
is obviously valuable for maintaining alertness
and energy levels; we all know how distracting
a thorn in our toe, or an itch in our side
can be.
Or a cable or metal port sticking into your
brain through your skin.
Even more than being able to survive nasty
injuries and keep on fighting, those little
aches and pains wear us down more.
My unit used to run on coffee, cigarettes,
and ibuprofen when we were deployed or even
just on field exercises, and for that matter
they were pretty popular even in garrison,
and that’s generally been the norm in a
lot of high-stress, weird-hours jobs like
police or other first responders, hospitals,
guard shifts, etc.
I daresay you could almost as accurately represent
the 20th century with an ashtray, coffee cup
and bottle of Tylenol as the Moon Landings,
or a computer chip or atomic bomb.
So at a day-to-day level, anything that helps
with stress, alertness, anxiety, or pain management,
chemical or mechanical or electronic, is likely
to be viewed as a more important augmentation
than super-tough armor.
And honestly, if you want a tank, build an
actual tank.
Of course a cyborg isn’t necessarily human-shaped
either, we might dump a brain in a jar into
a tank or fighter jet.
So long as you had successfully come up with
a liquid substance that circumvents the water
density issue we discussed in dropships, you
can now have a brain in a jar that’s able
to handle insane g-forces, not just hundreds
but maybe even low thousands.
That’s probably all you need too, because
while we talk about robots being able to handle
far higher g-forces and having better reaction
times, you don’t need to be able to handle
any more gees than your jet or spaceship is
able to handle and has the fuel for.
No battleship is pulling off a thousand-g
acceleration or turn, and no tiny drone is
carrying fuel and engines to allow several
minutes of high-g maneuvers.
And you could achieve a lot of that same effect
without much cybernetics just by having a
liquid air tank on someone’s more conventional
spacesuit or battle armor.
Your typical cyborg army probably is not bothering
with a lot of internal features that gear
they could carry could do as well.
Does your cyborg need an internal air tank
rather than carrying one?
Maybe; people don’t really need much actual
oxygen, around a kilogram a day, and you only
pull about 5% of the oxygen out of the air
you are inhaling, which is only 20% oxygen
itself, so you only get 1% of the molecules
you breathe in.
And a lot of the need to exhale is about purging
carbon dioxide.
So we might replace one lung with a smaller
mechanical one that was better at pulling
oxygen and had an oxygen tank below that was
good for a few hours, or days, and a CO2 scrubber.
Or shrink both lungs and stick that system
in both, or replace them entirely, or leave
them be and simply expand our person a bit.
Your mass and volume rises with the cube of
your height if we keep you proportional to
a normal human, and you can always go for
the classic comic book Rob Liefeld-style super
wide chest and shoulders and then you’ve
got so much extra space that you don’t even
need to remove any of the original organs.
You might have problems fitting through doorways,
but that’s someone else’s problem.
Which is handy because while you might find
lots of people who are fine with getting rid
of their organics, or even enthusiastic about
it, others might be doing it out of a sense
of duty and want things simply added not removed.
The process can be reversible then, you get
decommissioned back into your original body
with something along the lines of full body
tummy-tuck.
Or maybe we get a high-tech equivalent of
canopic jars, cyborgs keep their original
bits and pieces in storage vaults, freezers,
or the equivalent of a brain-in-a-jar’s
life support system, just for everything but
their brain.
On a grimmer note, it makes me wonder what
you would end up burying in a funeral, given
that you have all those valuable cybernetics
to recycle and might even be pulling out various
cloned and enhanced organs, like that super-heart
they grew and replaced yours with, which is
still in good shape for a new user.
Needless to say, back up hearts are another
cyborg part we might see in regular use, in
and out of militaries.
How open folks are to various replacement
organs might depend a lot on that culture
and how much they use cybernetics in normal
civilian life.
Of course, they need not be volunteers, your
cyborgs soldiers might be prisoners or random
citizens grabbed up and involuntarily turned
into one and given lots of brainwashing, mind-control
chips, old fashioned indoctrination, or drug
addictions.
I would assume anyone planning to use that
option would want to be very confident it
was effective and not easily removed.
That’s the first rule of warfare after all,
never hand someone a gun unless you’re sure
which way they will point it, or in this case,
don’t turn someone into a living weapon
unless you’re confident they won’t stab
you.
If they’re worrying about the loyalty of
their cyborgs, then they might opt to use
robots instead, but my assumption is you would
see a lot of robots with cyborg commanders.
Those might be semi-autonomous or they might
just be an extension of that soldier.
He’s not always carrying a shield, it’s
running around on its own two legs getting
ready to provide cover, it and its three buddies,
plus the big generator running around and
the point defense drones orbiting a bit overhead.
Or maybe the big squad of robot troops who
look almost identical to our cyborg.
But those bots might be controlled remotely
and your cyborg troop in this case might just
have some mental augmentation to allow fast
and intuitive control of those bots and awareness
of their circumstances.
Same for plugging them in as pilot of a vehicle,
or as the mechanic fixing a system, with augmented
reality and implants letting them rapidly
diagnose and repair problems at a speed a
NASCAR pit crew might envy.
They know exactly where all their tools are,
every repair component needed, they can see
and sense in greater range than a normal human,
they can probably pull an augmented reality
instruction video right over the object to
see how to quickly fix something they’ve
never worked on before.
They may be able to speak to machines more
intuitively too.
So too, your quartermaster might be augmented
just to be able to keep track of where all
the unit’s gear is and what supplies are
en route or getting used up at what rate.
Or you might go the other way and have this
as a minimal AI accessible to everyone in
the unit in real time.
They know, down to the bullet, how much ammo
they have left and with whom.
They could, for instance, send a rapid mental
query to that AI that could plot them the
fastest, safest course to a fallen ally who
had ammo leftover, or a signal to an ally
who had lots still to toss it to them.
Or the same for figuring out how to extract
a wounded comrade.
Which in some cases might be extracting their
armored brain jar and physically hurling it
out of the combat area or to a rescue drone
who will grab it and high-tail it out of the
area.
I imagine folks watching this who enjoy a
good daydream or enjoy writing probably have
some interesting stories in mind by now, and
I hope you’ll write or draw them.
However, it’s pretty clear how much of this
would be genuinely attractive to modern militaries,
for good or ill, and as we saw today, many
of the less flashy options aren’t too far
over the horizon.
So Cyborg Armies might see their premiere
in the near future and become the mainstay
in another couple generations.
The war machines of the future might not just
be piloted by our grandkids, they might be
our grandkids.
So next month is our show’s 9th anniversary
and I was looking up benchmarks for the occasion
and I realized we’ve been doing Scifi Sunday’s
on this show for around five years now, and
also that we’ve just past the 6 year mark
of our partnership with Brilliant.org, today’s
sponsor, and our longest running sponsor for
this show and so many other wonderful science
and education channels too.
They truly understand how important interactive
visualization is to learning and I love the
way they work that into so many of their math
and science lessons, from basics of geometry
like understanding how to calculate surface
area up to advanced topics like neural networks.
On a strictly personal note, they’ve been
a great partner to this show over the years
and their dedication to top-notch interactive
online learning is as impressive as it is
effective, and I’ve quite a few testimonials
from folks over the years about how Brilliant
helped them or a loved one to better learn
math, science, or computer science.
Brilliant understands what works: Interactive
learning, fun, bit-sized bits, with thousands
of lessons from basic to advanced concepts
that you can learn at your own pace, at home
or on the go, and to fit your needs, and that
as always you can try for free for the first
month.
Education is a lifelong journey, one that’s
best worked on a little everyday, and Brilliant
is a great partner on that journey same as
they’ve been a great partner to this show.
Let them be your partner on your journey too,
try them out for free, for a full 30 days,
by visiting brilliant.org/IsaacArthur or clicking
on the link in the description, and the first
200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's annual
premium subscription.
One of the cool things about doing this show
is I’ve gotten to meet, virtually or otherwise,
an awful lot of the amazing scifi writers
whose work the show’s referenced or drawn
on and even strike up friendships with some
of them, David Brin and Dennis E Taylor particularly
come to mind, but I finally got to meet Alastair
Reynolds, who Revelation Space series and
other works like House of Suns were such an
influence on this show, and he was giving
an awesome talk on the Fermi Paradox to the
Interstellar Foundation at the time, and they
have a great collection of interviews with
a lot of other awesome scifi writers too,
as well as with myself with Nick Searra of
the Golden Record Project, over on their on
youtube channel, so check them out and check
out Alastair Reynolds too, he is one of the
greatest scifi authors of our time and his
discussion of cyborgs and transhumanism definitely
influenced this episode.
And speaking of episodes, next month’s scifi
Sunday will be coming out on this show’s
9th anniversary, where we first looked at
megastructures and in the next episode how
they factored into the Fermi Paradox, and
we will be commemorating the occasion with
a look at fallen galactic empires, where we’ll
take some new and fresh looks at the question
of how we would detect the ruins of ancient
catastrophes and conflicts, ruined Dyson swarms,
and how widespread galactic conflict smight
limit what sort of megastructures get made,
and maybe alter our view of the Fermi PAradox.
But before then we have a lot of episodes
coming up, starting this Thursday with a look
at how we might come up with all the air,
water and other volatiles those megastructures
might need, as we look at Comet Mining.
After that we’ll look at the concept of
Devolution, and ask if fictional mutant degenerates
like Morlocks and C.H.U.D.s might be possible
in our future.
Then we’ll close out the month with our
Livestream Q&A, Sunday August 27th at 4pm
Eastern Time, and then Thursday, August 31st,
with a look at near term space colonization.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
