Comets have awed, amazed, and even 
terrified humanity for thousands of  
years, with many believing they 
heralded the end of the world,  
but could they be the key to 
reaching and creating new worlds? 
Comets have a long and mixed history 
with humanity, often frightening,  
often seen as omens of change, but always seen 
as astonishing. Even into the 20th century there  
were fears even among scientists that passing 
through a comet tail might kill us, and many a  
scientific theory, then and now, contemplate them 
as bringers of death or even life to this world. 
They are our most popular candidate for how we 
might have gotten oceans back on Earth after  
the apocalyptic encounter of early Earth with 
a smaller planet that we believe tore off the  
surface of the proto-Earth, and from which we 
think the Moon later formed. That would have  
taken a lot of comets, around ten million the size 
of Halley’s Comet, the best-known one, and there’s  
major doubts if this was or could have been the 
method that got us our oceans. But the impact of  
such bodies would not have been trivial affairs, 
we estimate the asteroid that possibly killed  
dinosaurs as only five times more massive, and 
Haley’s Comet is not the largest one out there. 
Today we will be looking at comets from 3 
perspectives, first, tapping existing comets  
that periodically and potentially conveniently 
come in close to Earth and the inner solar system,  
second, in terms of the icy bodies 
in deep space these are made from,  
which number in the countless billions, 
and third, to making comets artificially  
as a means of bringing those icy bodies 
into our inner solar system to be of use. 
As to the fundamentals of why we would 
want to mine comets and not asteroids,  
their characteristic tail is the key reason. Those 
comet tails are made of materials which sunlight  
can heat to boil off that comet’s surface, and 
thus are principally materials that are both  
very common in deep space and rare in the inner 
system. They are a mix of rock, dust, water ice,  
frozen carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, methane, 
and ammonia. The rock and dust is common enough  
in the inner system, indeed comet’s actually 
have a separate dust tail that’s less vibrant  
than their main ice tail, but those other 
materials are much less common. Indeed  
virtually the entire accessible supply of some 
of them in the inner system is here on Earth. 
So we’ve got plenty down here, but to use it 
in space we have to pay that insane fuel cost  
of dragging it up through our gravity well and 
atmosphere. So when we’re out in space we would  
rather have a locally available source, for In 
Situ Resource Utilization or ISRU. Critically,  
though, the source we’re thinking of is 
those volatiles so essential to life,  
and because we can also use compounds like water, 
methane, and ammonia as rocket fuels too. Comets,  
the visitors to the inner system from 
deep space, are potentially one of the  
best paths for us to settle and colonize the 
inner system, and to get into deep space. 
They have potential as actual vehicles too, as 
we could load equipment onto a comet while it  
was in-system and let it ride out. That’s 
one of those ultra-low energy approaches  
we can utilize if we never get substantially 
better at doing spaceflight than we are now.  
There’s a future in which we don’t get better and 
we move out to deep space and even other solar  
systems by fission reactors and riding comets 
and jumping between them over generations. 
But there’s also a future where we direct 
countless comets toward Mars to bring it  
air and water, or dissect comets and 
haul their pieces to asteroid colonies  
and orbital habitats to allow life to thrive 
inside those without paying the shipping bill  
from Earth and exporting our own sea and sky.
It can be easy to forget the sheer immensity  
of fuel we use moving a rocket 
even just for the mass of air,  
let alone the water that spaceships and big space 
habitats would need, but comets represent a great  
source for those. Especially actual comets, 
those ice bodies whose eccentric orbits bring  
them close into our system, rather than the 
many Kuiper Belt, Scattered Disc, and Oort  
Cloud objects we’ll discuss reaching in a bit.
Let’s talk about Halley’s Comet for a moment.  
It is doubtless the most famous comet, being 
observed long before Edmund Halley documented  
it as a recurring object in 1705. It comes 
through about once in a human lifetime,  
last appearing in 1986, where I got to see it 
as a smeary telescope blur as a little kid,  
and will next make its appearance in 2061, so 
statistically most folks listening to this now  
will get to see that comet even without any major 
improvements in medical science and lifespans. 
Now, was it worth seeing? I’ll be honest, I 
didn’t find it much of a sight as a little kid,  
but I was 5, and while I had a love of astronomy 
as a kid, that didn’t really blossom till I was  
7 or 8. Maybe that’s why I don’t really mind the 
idea of ripping it apart to fuel solar expansion.  
Halley’s Comet represents about 220,000 megatons 
of potentially usable rocket fuel, air, and water.  
That’s enough for a million Kaplana-class space 
habitats housing hundreds in comfort or even  
a hundred or so full-scale O’Neill Cylinders, each 
home to hundreds of thousands if not millions.  
So you could build an entire major spacefaring 
nation out of that comet alone, and far more if  
we’re being miserly and hyper-efficient instead 
of building pseudo-Earth living conditions full  
of garden space, forests, and farms.
I figure by 2061, when Halley returns,  
we ought to have a real presence on the 
Moon, have put people on Mars, presumably  
also semi-permanently, and have at least a couple 
of space stations that actually have spin-gravity  
and some real garden or botanical section at 
least. To expand beyond that we will want some  
more easily available resources like comets.
The good news for folks who might feel queasy  
about dismembering Halley’s comet is 
two-fold, first, it very unlikely we  
would be in a position to extract all but 
a minuscule fraction of its resources off  
in 2061 – and keep in mind it blows tons of them 
off every 75 year pass through the inner system,  
potentially a thousandth of its mass, which would 
be huge to us in value to capture, and second,  
there are plenty of other icy bodies that pass 
through which are less historically interesting. 
Initially, of course, what we really want them for 
is making fuel out of. Something like our current  
space station needs about a ton of nitrogen and 
a quarter of that in oxygen, and thus you could  
refill it around a hundred billion times off 
Halley’s Comet. Alternatively, as we noted at  
the beginning, you would need millions of them 
to give oceans to a planet like Mars or Venus. 
You can also blow through a thousand tons of fuel 
just lifting a fairly modest rocket payload into  
orbit. And ten or more times that if you want 
to take that same payload and bring up enough  
fuel from Earth with it to get it to the Moon, or 
Mars, or a Near Earth Asteroid. So, short term,  
that’s what we really want comets for, fuel.
Now, Halley’s Comet only goes out to about  
Neptune and Pluto distance, being at aphelion 
– or furthest from the Sun – at 35 AU,  
Astronomical Units, or 35 times the distance 
Earth is from the Sun. Alternatively it gets  
as close a .6 AU to the Sun at Perihelion, 
a bit closer than even Venus gets. 
And this is a pretty key notion here because 
objects travel at highest speed when nearest  
whatever they’re orbiting and slowest when 
furthest. Halley’s Comet only spends about  
1% of its orbital path at Earth’s distance or 
closer, but spends a shorter percentage of time  
there as it is falling toward the sun and picking 
up speed, which it then loses on the way out,  
thus moves through the hottest part of its 
journey the fastest. Only when it’s closest  
to the Sun is that tail very visible, and in 
its 75-year journey, that large visibility to  
us is only a handful of weeks, even if it 
is visible dimly for a bit longer and to  
telescopes yet longer. Comets develop their coma 
– a thin atmosphere of evaporating or sublimating  
and escaping gas - as far out as 5 AU – Jupiter 
distances, but the brilliant tail is definitely  
for things as close as Mars and closer.
There is a distance from our sun,  
based on its brightness, where ice can be exposed 
to sunlight and stop sublimating off – ice in a  
vacuum doesn’t melt into liquid then evaporate, 
it turns directly into gas, sublimation, and we  
call this distance the frostline, and the further 
in you are from it the faster this sublimation  
occurs. This is what causes the growing brightness 
of comets as they get closer and the reason why  
the asteroids in the Belt and the three moons 
of the inner system don’t have vast amounts of  
ice on their surfaces. Once you’re out past that 
frostline there’s not much that isn’t covered in  
ice that isn’t instead covered with an atmosphere.
The frost line for our solar system can be debated  
to be anywhere between 3-5 AU from the Sun, 
and was probably closer when the solar system  
was younger and our Sun dimmer, which probably 
helped us get our oceans back since comets would  
live longer and have more of a chance of hitting 
us and giving us their water and other volatiles. 
So we tend to refer to comets as coming from out 
in the deeper solar system, which is full of such  
bodies, but an icy body that turns into a comet 
is structurally different after a while. They’re  
evaporating material off and getting a crust. I’ve 
heard it compared to ice cream being deep fried  
or dipped in chocolate. Whereas the interior is 
more porous and an amorphous ice mix of ultra-cold  
ices not normally formed on Earth, and other ice 
substances like methane and ammonia. You start  
with an icy body that has gotten perturbed onto 
a more elliptical course that brings it inside  
that frost line, the more time it spends in that 
zone and the closer to the Sun it gets, the more  
quickly it loses material. This outgassing, 
both the ion and dust trails, act as minor  
rockets on the comet, changing its trajectory, 
something we’ll discuss taking advantage of later. 
That comet is also more likely to run into 
the Sun or a planet, the more times it passes  
through and the more closely it does so, and the 
more likely it is to get its orbit perturbed by  
its own rocket-like tail or a gravitational tug 
by a nearby planet, so that it either does not  
return or follows a different path and orbital 
period next time. Assuming it doesn’t crash into  
something – which again is how we think we got our 
oceans, or get ejected from the inner system, it  
will eventually stop outgassing. Halley’s Comet, 
for instance, is expected to keep outgassing for  
perhaps as much as 10 million years, but more 
weakly every time. We believe a sizable fraction  
of Near Asteroids are former extinct comets. 
And comet is very much a temporary state,  
in astronomical timelines, not something eternal. 
The comets we see aren’t the ones the dinosaurs  
saw before that last asteroid that ended them.
Size, period, and perihelion are the big  
controlling factors on how long it takes for a 
comet to go extinct. Halley’s Comet is what is  
known as a short period comet, those with a period 
of less than 200 year that generally don’t go much  
out past Neptune or the Kuiper Belt. There are 
shorter period comets though, such as Encke’s  
comet, that don’t even go out past Jupiter. Long 
period comets are anything over 200 years and  
can potentially be millions of years per orbit 
if coming from the Oort Cloud. With sufficient  
observations and astronomy, a mobile colony with a 
nice supply of nuclear fission fuel could leapfrog  
between comets and likely migrate to other solar 
systems this way. Most of these icy bodies have  
plenty of rock in them too, and metals, including 
fissile fuels that colonists could extract and  
use. See our episode, Using Asteroid and 
Comets as Spaceships, for more details. 
Now, I mentioned making rocket fuel out of 
comets, or icy bodies out past our frostline,  
and this is pretty straightforward, though we 
have multiple fuels we can make. As we discussed  
earlier this summer, so long as you have a power 
supply – solar or nuclear probably – you can take  
ice or water and by electrolysis turn it into 
hydrogen and oxygen, the pair of which is one  
of our best rocket fuels. But we can also get that 
oxygen from many other molecules, including rocks,  
and hydrogen can be gotten from both methane and 
ammonia, both plentiful in comets. Or you can  
simply melt and centrifuge out that methane and 
you now have a portable fuel supply to return to  
places like the moon or various space bases. As 
we discussed earlier this summer in our episode  
on Lunar Mining and Refining, there’s essentially 
an unlimited supply of oxygen on the Moon or any  
other asteroid, as it’s the most common molecule 
in most rocks and minerals, but inside the frost  
belt virtually none have hydrogen, in any form.
However, hydrogen is quite a pain to store  
and move by itself, even diatomic hydrogen 
molecules are, by being so small and reactive,  
just prone to leaking and corroding tanks, while 
a methane molecule, one carbon and four hydrogen,  
25% hydrogen by mass, is much easier to 
store and move. As is an ammonia molecule,  
one nitrogen and three oxygen, 18% hydrogen by 
mass, while H2O water is merely 11% hydrogen by  
mass. But you can use both ammonia and methane as 
direct rocket fuels, ammonium nitrate is a good  
solid rocket fuel, and ammonia perchlorate is one 
of our favorite solid rocket fuels, and chlorine  
is also readily available on various moons and 
asteroids, and not exactly rare in comets either.  
So we have a lot of options for in 
situ fuel production with comets. 
Overall, Methane is just a very easy fuel to 
store and work with, and tends to leave less  
residue on rockets when burning. So it’s a nice 
fuel for spaceships looking for an easy bulk fuel  
rather than simply the highest performing one. I 
could easily imagine pods of methane being shipped  
back from comets or icy asteroids to the Moon or 
one of the Martian moons of Phobos and Deimos,  
where oxygen can be created as a 
byproduct of refining metals, and you  
could be electromagnetically flinging methane or 
methane-oxygen fuel pods back and forth between  
those two for filling up and transferring 
to other spaceships and space stations. 
There are around 4000 comets we currently track 
and likely many more that we don’t yet track,  
and each is likely to have an ideal harvesting 
pattern, with some rocket that could be  
sent to ahead of time to get setup and then 
start chucking empty fuel pods to it for filling,  
and that would be a very mobile industry with lots 
of elaborate calculation and paperwork going into  
making them more efficient and productive, and 
constantly moving to the next target. Done right,  
it could be an incredibly cheap and abundant way 
to fuel all space travel beside getting off Earth  
itself, and thus allowing large and heavily 
shielded spaceships for crewed missions and  
bulk production of metals and plastics in space, 
for things like power satellites, solar shades  
and mirrors, space stations, and space habitats.
Speaking of those space habitats, one of the keys  
to doing that is not only having air to breathe 
but also air that plants can breathe. We often use  
a lower pressure oxygen-only mix in space ships 
and suits to minimize leakage, as lower pressure  
pure oxygen is sufficient for humans and leakage 
through holes and joints is faster at higher  
pressures. Not to mention that a full pressure 
pure oxygen environment is stupidly flammable  
and dangerous. However, our normal air is about 
four parts nitrogen to one part oxygen and that’s  
critical to any sort of farming or ecology being 
set up in space. Ammonia, easily found in comets,  
is a great source for that nitrogen, and every 
2 molecules of ammonia we import into a space  
habitat can be combined with oxygen to make 1 
nitrogen molecule of air and 3 molecules of water. 
Again, it’s easy to source oxygen pretty much 
anywhere, and it will be a waste byproduct of  
a lot of asteroid and moon mining. So by 
shipping in pods of ammonia we can turn  
an asteroid mining colony, initially dependent 
entirely on outside supplies, into one that is  
using its waste oxygen and imported nitrogen to 
produce local gardens, farms, or other ecologies.  
An isolated mining facility might grow its own 
food or export food or even get donations or tax  
write offs by creating local nature preserves.
This is how we would see many asteroid mines  
slowly turning into a profitable community with 
many luxuries like spin gravity, fresh food, and  
air and water that’s more naturally recycled. This 
might start with a few simple hydroponics bays  
growing some fresh veggies and herbs, and those 
facilities would likely grow in scope to include  
elaborate gardens and even nature preserves. And 
those asteroid mines are potentially the primary  
customer for pushing ice in from comets or icy 
bodies. So too, all those orbital facilities,  
power-beaming stations, space hotels, dockyards, 
and refineries. All need those volatiles and  
have a way to pay for them, making trade viable.
This isn’t an episode on mining asteroids however,  
it’s on mining comets, and it turns out some 
different techniques are available. First off,  
the very nature of the comet suggests a pathway 
for harvesting it. You can just melt it inside  
a big bag or box. But in a lot of cases what you 
might instead do is use a hot knife to slice out  
a big block, then cover that in a thin reflective 
tin foil, to help it from losing material as it  
makes its way inward. Or maybe even just mount 
a shiny reflective parabolic dish on the front  
side facing the Sun, bouncing that light away so 
it doesn’t melt your snowball and instead dumping  
it into a power collector forward of that dish. 
Maybe you coat the comet, or comet fragment in  
a thin layer of plastic to keep it outgassing as 
you bring it in-system. Strategic vents placed on  
it could be opened to provide maneuvering thrust.
You’re making a decision early on whether or not  
you plan to bring the comet into some facility, 
or to leave it on its natural orbit. Though you  
might also push it to a better orbit or bring 
a big refinery to it. You also have to decide  
if you want to do your refining at the asteroid or 
comet or send big chunks back for work elsewhere.  
For any on-site refining, a basic centrifuge 
is viewed as a good option, and you could be  
powering that centrifuge and other production 
with the parabolic dish I mentioned a moment ago,  
powering your operations while protecting 
your investment from the Sun’s heat. 
Incidentally, while some folks do suggest using 
an actual transport pod or rocket made out of ice,  
and filled with ice and other cargo, usually 
spray painted with a thin insulative paint,  
I’m not a big fan of this approach. It works but 
strikes me as wasteful compared to a reusable  
pod that can also include more elaborate 
components for monitoring, maneuvering,  
and other applications. In either version, we 
have the options of using either a small nuclear  
reactor, or RTG - Radioisotope Thermal Generator, 
or simple mirrors and dishes reflecting sunlight,  
to evaporate material or even generate a rocket 
flame, for acceleration or for maneuvering the  
cargo. We also have the solar moth option, 
which is where long wing-like reflectors  
bounce concentrated sunlight into superheat gas or 
even to ionize it and run it through an ion drive.  
Slow but very efficient, especially in terms 
of mass you have to send there to begin with.  
I should also note that you can do some fairly 
elaborate parts made out of ice or other frozen  
substances that could be 3D printed on the site.
Those can potentially include nice igloo domes  
which crew can inhabit and equipment can be 
put into. There’s also a lot to be said about  
drilling into the comet and mining the interior, 
thus hollowing the comet out, an approach we also  
often contemplate for asteroid mining, as the 
near absence of gravity means no concerns of  
collapse and this allows you to take advantage of 
the outside of the object for radiation shielding.  
Some heat shielding would also allow crews to 
live comfortably inside the comet or the use of  
temperature and pressure sensitive equipment. 
You might even mount a big airlock door on the  
outside and flat-out bring ships inside 
the comet to pick up and drop off cargo. 
Now, in the short term we are really 
only interested in comets in the Jupiter  
region – it sweeps up many of those that come in 
from deeper out – but it actually takes a lot of  
water and other volatiles to keep making fuel 
and habitats and plastics out of. We usually  
estimate dozens of megatons of volatiles being 
needed for something like an O’Neill Cylinder,  
and we want to build a lot of those. So eventually 
you move into the Kuiper Belt and Scattered Discs,  
or even the Oort Cloud, for your icy bodies.
Now, you might send a bit of these icy bodies in  
piecemeal, after all, many will be quite large, 
but you might opt to turn the entire thing into  
a comet. A carefully timed and positioned 
nuclear detonation has good odds of shoving  
the remaining comet into an eccentric orbit, 
taking it closer to the Sun in a few centuries.  
Usually we would envision that detonation 
being at a slight distance from the comet,  
incidentally, not inside it or even on its 
surface, as you’re mostly seeking to ablate  
material off it, and want that energy pulse 
to distribute rather evenly over the surface. 
But moving something this way sacrifices a lot of 
its material into propellant or takes a very long  
time, or both. So an alternative option would be 
to plant a nuclear reactor – fission or fusion  
if you got it – on that asteroid and use the 
electricity to vaporize, ionize, and accelerate  
material off the comet at the ultra high-speeds 
we associate to an ion drive, or even a particle  
accelerator. So too, we might send enormous beams 
or microwaves to an icy body or comet from solar  
farms nearer the Sun and use that energy to 
ablate or evaporate material off the icy body,  
to produce thrust in a desired direction, or to 
ionize it and run it out an ion drive. Or to power  
a large mass driver that could hurl pods full of 
cargo to their destination. This still isn’t fast,  
but it allows much higher velocities and with 
less comet wasted than many other alternatives. 
In the end, there are far more icy bodies 
out in the deep than there are asteroids in  
the asteroid belt, and so we should never have a 
shortage of icy bodies for filling habitats with,  
making plastics, or generating rocket fuel from.
It is worth keeping in mind though that the value  
of these bodies, as opposed to mining nitrogen 
off Venus, Titan or some other outer Moon,  
is negated if you rush the job, so slow and 
steady wins the race with comet mining. This  
would seem to strongly favor automation, like 
robot probes carrying comet mining rigs and  
dropping them off at likely comets. But it could 
be that a lot of folks looking for peace, quiet,  
and elbow room might decide that living 
inside a comet or icy body and shipping  
volatiles back home for trade was a nice option.
They might even use a power beaming or nuclear  
powered mass driver to fire home those 
pods while using them as a propellant to  
push themselves further away, toward another icy 
body they might also want to claim or even as an  
interstellar ship, bringing life to a new system.
That seems appropriate, since not only do we think  
comets brought oceans to our own world for life 
to evolve in, but the panspermia theory of those  
basic life elements being created in comets 
and coming down to Earth is still on the top  
5 list of ways life might have merged on Earth.
Either way, it may be that comets will turn out  
to be how we bring life to the rest of 
the solar system and the galaxy beyond.
We’re just about back to the school season, 
which for me means slightly fewer kids running  
around distractingly and distractedly around 
my studio, but for a lot of us that means we  
or a loved one is heading off to college, 
where access to the internet is vital,  
but where that internet is almost bound to be on 
someone else’s network. I don’t think most folks  
check what the privacy policy of their college 
or the local coffee shop with free wifi is,  
or how scrupulously they follow it, or what random 
stranger is spying on your internet traffic,  
throttling your internet bandwidth based on 
your activity, or looking at your country of  
origin for deciding what videos you can watch or 
price you pay for merchandise. This is exactly  
what VPN’s help protect you from and nobody 
beats NordVPN when it comes to speed, quality,  
ease of use, and additional features - like 
their top-notch password manager, NordPass,  
which I use constantly, and NordLocker, their 
easy to use encrypted cloud storage. With NordVPN,  
not only can no one else spy on your webtraffic, 
but neither does NordVPN, they don’t track  
or share what you do online, your traffic is 
encrypted and has a kill switch to instantly  
shut off the connection if there’s a problem.
And best yet, one account can protect up to  
six devices, with dedicated apps for any major 
platform. They have a 30 day money back guarantee  
if you don’t like them, and 24/7 customer 
support to help you whenever you need it.  
You get a discount of 4 bonus months if you sign 
up for any of their 2 year plans through our link,  
nordvpn.com/isaacarthur, and Nord keeps 
sponsoring our show if they see that link  
used a lot. Sometimes people hear about NordVPN, 
open up a new tab, and start searching, but  
they didn’t use our link. I’m glad they got the 
service, but you get a discount and you support  
the channel through that link. So if you're 
trying to support SFIA by signing up for Nord,  
please use my link, nordvpn.com/isaacarthur, to 
get that discount, and to protect your privacy.
So a few announcements before we get to our 
upcoming schedule of episodes. Today’s episode  
spent a lot of time in the Kuiper Belt and is 
an unofficial sequel to our episode Colonizing  
the Kuiper Belt earlier this year, and I suspect 
a lot of you are familiar with the New Horizons  
spacecraft which has been so critical to learning 
more about the Kuiper Belt, and myself, the  
National space society, and many others are asking 
folks to help encourage NASA to keep New Horizons  
going at its purpose-built mission of Kuiper Belt 
exploration. I could tell you all the reasons  
why we should, but there’s someone vastly more 
qualified who’d ask for a moment of your time. 
Hello everyone at Science & Futurism 
with Isaac Arthur, this is Alan Stern,  
NASA's Principal Investigator and 
mission leader of New Horizons mission. 
New Horizons is the only spacecraft 
ever sent to explore the Kuiper Belt,  
and the only one currently planned to go there. 
We have valuable new Kuiper Belt observations,  
and also a search for a new flyby target, still 
to complete every year until we leave the Belt in  
2027. Quitting this exploration prematurely, while 
New Horizons is still in the Kuiper Belt, after  
NASA spent nearly $1B to get us to the Kuiper Belt 
seems to many of us to be tragically mistaken, a  
poor use of taxpayer money, and a lost scientific 
opportunity that can never be recovered from. 
Thank you Alan. As I was writing this episode I 
was painfully aware of how much we still have to  
learn about the Kuiper Belt and for my part I’d 
hate to lose this opportunity. Folks, if you’d  
like to help keep New Horizons functioning at 
its best, to help us keep exploring new horizons  
in deep space, the National Space Society has 
a petition up on Change.org that we’re asking  
folks to sign, which is linked in this episode’s 
description, if you can take a minute to sign it,  
and if you want to take more minutes, a polite 
letter to your congressman can often work wonders  
too. Either way, thank you for your time, for 
listening to this episode and this request. 
When I was getting ready to write this episode 
the first thing I did was pick up my old copy  
of Mining the Sky, by John Lewis, which is the 
quintessential comet and asteroid mining book  
whose first edition in the late 90’s helped me 
and so many others start thinking about new ways  
to settle space. So the second thing I did was to 
email John to ask if he had any new thoughts he’d  
like to tell us all about, and unfortunately for 
health reasons he couldn’t be actively involved  
in this episode but he is nevertheless the 
inspiration for so much of, and if you want to  
learn more about this topic, I strongly recommend 
picking up a copy of Mining the Sky, and this  
episode is dedicated to him, for everything he 
has done to improve our knowledge and passion  
for space, and for all the work he’s done for 
the National Space Society over the years.. 
Speaking of the National Space Society, we have 
another Space Forum tonight, Thursday August 17th,  
at 9 pm Eastern, where Melodie Yashar will be 
discussing Automated Additive Construction,  
Building Habitats on the Moon and 
Mars. I’ll leave a link in the episode  
description for the registration page, and 
as always those are free to attend online. 
Speaking of upcoming discussions, next week 
we’ll look at the concept of Devolution,  
and ask if fictional mutant degenerates like 
Morlocks and C.H.U.D.s might be possible in  
our future. Then we’ll close out the month with 
our Livestream Q&A, Sunday August 27th at 4pm  
Eastern Time, and then Thursday, August 31st, 
with a look at near term space colonization.  
Then it’s into September for Living in Space, 
on September 7th. On the 14th we’ll ask about  
the infrastructure we need to build in our solar 
system to colonize it, and then we’ll jump into  
Scifi Sunday on September 17th to celebrate the 
SFIA’s 9th birthday with the Fermi Paradox: Fallen  
Empires. And if you missed this weekend’s sci fi 
Sunday, Cyborg Armies, you can check it out now. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
