Many great minds have speculated about the
possibility of life in higher or extra dimensions,
but only the late, great Douglas Adams recognized
the difficulty of going to war with them,
unless of course someone can work out a way
to fire missiles at right angles to reality.
So, welcome to another Scifi Sunday here on
SFIA, where we try to examine concepts in
science fiction and look at what science has
to say about them.
Today we’re going to be discussing the concept
of life in higher dimensions.
I would imagine that for a lot of folks, that
conjures either the idea of an extra physical
dimension or two (or perhaps many), or alternatively,
some higher or lower planes of existence.
Our focus is on extra physical dimensions
but we will be discussing both today, and
the reason why, as we’ll explain, is that
the two are almost inextricably linked.
Because what we really mean is a place where
physics operates differently, and gravity
for instance works very differently if your
universe has 4 physical dimensions and not
3, while concepts like entropy or energy conservation
really shouldn’t exist in your typical,
heaven-like higher reality as portrayed in
many a religion or in various scifi with spiritually-ascended
entities who have risen to a higher plane
of existence.
That higher plane is assumed to have different
rules, ones better than here that you might
wish to migrate to.
So, one of the questions we’ll ask today
is if it is possible to move to a higher dimension,
and if it’s worth the trip, what those benefits
might be.
At the same time, this video is not focused
on discussing ascended alien life much, we
already did that in our Aloof Aliens episode,
though there’s more worth discussing than
fit in there.
So too, we’re not really trying to look
at afterlife scenarios either, except in a
resource-availability standpoint, as I felt
that more properly belonged in its own episode,
Artificial Afterlives, that will come out
later this week, June 15, 2023.
And if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to hit those
like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
In order to ask what life in a 4D or 5D universe
would be like, we should take a moment to
ask about 2D life.
The excellent classic book Flatland helps
us to see just some of the problems life might
have in that realm, and it’s been a topic
given lots of speculative discussion for years
since then, but a few years back James Scargill
of UC Davis gave it more detailed physical
and mathematical analysis and makes a compelling
case that it might be possible.
But there are all sorts of problems with physical
forces and effects that tend not to be intuitive,
beginning with how easy it is to essentially
log jam almost anything, since a single line
across a sheet is a wall of effectively infinite
height and depth, you have to go around it.
Things collide far more easily too, moving
in 2D, whereas in 4D or 5D various particles
bouncing around are far less likely to run
into each other.
Given that most chemistry and physics involves
stuff bumping into each other, something that
makes that far less common tends not to make
more complex emergent properties like biology
all that probable in higher dimensions.
We also need to ask what exactly a dimension
really is.
So, what is a dimension?
Well, most folks know we’ve got the three
physical ones and the one for time, and they
know there’s some connection between those
making spacetime all one.
Also, that there’s talk about us really
living in 10 dimensions or 11 or 26, but somehow
those ones are practically undetectable to
us or super tiny, and maybe made of strings
or something.
That can seem really confusing but it must
be true because theoretical physics says that
the math checks out, though just as an FYI,
physics does not, it’s just that a lot of
physicists and mathematicians feel having
some extra dimensions that were ultra-tiny
would explain the universe better, but there
is no actual proof or even evidence of these
other dimensions.
It’s critical to String theory, most versions
of which call for 9 physical and one temporal
dimension, Bosonic String Theory calls for
26, and their cousin, M-theory, calls for
11 dimensions.
And they are very compelling mathematical
cases.
But what is a dimension?
Well, in math it can be a lot of things, for
instance if I’m a park ranger tracking my
deer population I might make a graph showing
how many deer there were by apparent weight,
giving me two dimensions, quantity and weight.
Those can presumably go all the way out to
infinity, there’s no specific boundary,
but we might add a third dimension to the
chart; which had antlers and which did not.
That’s a specific state, yes or no, there’s
no in-between, it’s a very compact dimension.
We could leave it open to infinity, by making
a dimension for antler length instead, or
widen it but keep it discrete by going by
how many points the deer’s antlers had.
And we can keep adding more dimensions till
we have hundreds.
We might also have a dimension that is circular,
much like latitude and longitude are, or a
color wheel, and you could have a dimension
for color, in a graph that’s an inventory
of how many objects were what shade.
Now, modern physics does not recognize the
10 or 11 or 26 dimensions of String Theory
and its cousins, even if theories are popular
among theorists and well-thought-out, but
it does recognize the three physical ones
and time, the 4 dimensions of Minkowski Spacetime.
Hermann Minkowski incidentally was one of
Einstein’s teachers and his work in the
early 20th century is critical to Relativity.
It was at about this time that we had our
first discussion of adding another dimension
to unify physical forces, and we’ll come
back to it in a moment.
Physics also recognizes 7 basic units, which
are length, time, mass, electric current,
temperature, luminous intensity, and amount
of substance.
From these 7 units you can create any other
units in physics, for instance speed is length
divided by time, and the unit of weight is
mass times length divided by time squared.
Anything in our universe should be entirely
measurable in one of those units or a combination
thereof.
In a physical sense anyway, we can give a
color in terms of its photon wavelength or
frequency or energy and brightness, loosely
speaking.
Colors are fundamentally a human concept based
on our optics, biology, and brains, and not
all colors have an equivalent wavelength,
like magenta, but it works well enough for
an example.
However, something like how pleasing it is
to the senses can be measured, but not in
any direct or obvious combination of those
basic units.
And you could think of them as dimensions
in a general sense as well, since you could
chart them for any given object.
And the word ‘Dimension’ derives from
Latin for measuring or to measure out, and
came to mean bulk, size, extent, or capacity
sometime in the 16th century.
In the early 20th century dimension also came
to mean any component of a situation, but
this is not really what is being discussed
when physicists and mathematicians talk about
dimensions.
We usually mean physical space and time, but
I feel it’s worth keeping in mind that you
could have other dimensionalities besides
those in a different universe or plane, or
even analogues for space and time in which
neither existed.
But the extra dimensions of String Theory
are not quite the physical extra dimensions
folks tend to expect.
As I mentioned a moment ago, we could have
a dimension that only had two components,
up and down, or left and right, something
very compacted with only two states – or
only a thousand maybe, but we usually mean
2 or 3.
Imagine a piece of paper, this is actually
a 3 dimensional object with thickness, but
for the purpose of demonstration, we can consider
it to be 2-dimensional, except that it has
a front and back.
If you’re a letter or image on the paper,
you either are on the front or the back, not
+2 front or -1.5 back.
A or B, positive or negative, right or left,
up or down, only two states but those states
still exist, so the 2D paper is actually 3D,
2 normal physical dimensions but one compacted
physical dimension as well.
In the same way, by folding the paper into
a circle we can make an object that is 3D,
and is regular in one dimension, compacted
in another, a loop in another.
Now, even before relativity, there was a lot
of speculation about additional dimensions.
Indeed it was a fairly common reason given
in some magic shows for impossible deeds in
the late 19th century and had a lot of credence
with many scientists at the time.
Some fourth dimension we couldn’t see but
which things could move through, though not
be confused with something like an Astral
Plane, Sub-Space, Fey Realm, Underworld, or
Shadow Realm that we typically would treat
as a higher or lower plane or Universe, rather
than just an extra dimension.
While the topic got a lot more rigorous heading
into the 20th century, it definitely had roots
in the mystic and has remained popular in
that and scifi, though often things get a
bit ambiguous about details.
Which is understandable, the math on higher
dimensions works fine but visualizing it is
hard.
If I’m looking at a circle on a piece of
paper, that is an image of an object, I can’t
really say if that object is a sphere or cylinder
or cone or quite a few less simple shapes.
Same for if a 4-dimensional object was protruding
into our reality.
You’ve heard of tesseracts, they were popularized
by the Marvel Comics’ movies, and made an
appearance as an alien probe in Threshold,
a short-lived scifi show from 2005, produced
by Brannon Braga and with Peter Dinklage and
Brent Spiner in it.
Good little gem of a show that had lots of
room for improvement but which I would have
liked to have seen get a second season.
Nothing mystical about a tesseract, it’s
a simple object that is the same length on
every side, like a square or a cube, but it’s
just got one more side.
You’ll see animations of them that are very
kaleidoscopic and don’t really make you
think ‘hyper-dimensional cube, but if you
look at a cube sometime from different 2D
angles, it doesn’t really resemble a square
unless you’re up close, and look at it straight-on
from one side, or you close your eyes to remove
your depth perception.
A tesseract turned at the right angle just
looks like a cube.
Similarly, a 4D object protruding into our
space looking like a sphere might have other
dimensions drawing out something more cylindrical,
or it might be a very compacted 4th dimension,
so that it is to a sphere what a piece of
paper is to a square or rectangle.
Or it might be an object with an equal radius
in all directions, a hypersphere.
I could see looking at one being rather disorienting
but there’s no special reason it should
drive you insane.
If you were walking around on a cube-shaped
planet or construct, it would have six faces,
2 for each dimension, just like with dice,
but a tesseract or 4-Cube actually has eight
cubes for its surface, much as a square has
4 lines for its surface.
On each corner of a 2D square, you have two
lines, each going in one of two directions.
On a 3D cube, each corner has 3 lines, each
a line going in one of three directions, and
is where three perpendicular squares meet
up.
For a 4-cube, that becomes 4 perpendicular
cubes meeting at corners with 4 lines extending
in one of each 4 directions.
What would be disorienting is moving around
one or watching someone do it, and this is
the basis for a lot of talk about moving through
higher dimensions in scifi, and again mysticism,
because if you live on one square surface
of a cube, watching someone walk off the edge,
and disappear, then appear from another side
shortly afterward seems like teleportation,
but they just strolled around those other
hidden faces.
Notice that doing this doesn’t magically
shorten your trip, it actually got longer,
which is why proper analogies about using
higher dimensions as shortcuts, like wormholes
and hyperspace, generally involve drilling
through a piece of paper or folding the paper
up for two points on a map to touch, or to
jump into some congruent space that’s smaller.
But it does allow you to teleport and to avoid
passing through a space, you jump over a wall
or line, which you can do in 3D but not 2D,
which would let you do handy tricks like walk
through an impenetrable castle wall or shield
by just walking around it.
A great way to deliver weapon systems like
missiles through defenses.
The problem is that a lot of things break
down in higher dimensions.
You can certainly have a 4 sphere equivalent
of a planet for instance, but gravity falls
off far faster.
For instance, in an Earth-moon parallel, gravity
out where the Moon was would be considerably
weaker, and it would have been harder for
planets to form in that weaker gravity, but
just as importantly, it’s hard to make a
stable orbit in higher dimensions, the higher
you go the more that a minor perturbation
would destabilize your orbit.
Move 10% closer in 3D, and gravity is 121%
stronger, but in 4D it’s 131% stronger,
and in 10D, 260% stronger, so again a minor
change in distance is for more perturbative
in higher dimensions.
In a 2D universe, we expect gravity to weaken
inverse to distance, so something twice as
far away experiences half the gravity, while
in our normal 3D Universe, it’s half squared
or a quarter, and in a 4-D Universe, it’s
half cubed or an eighth, etc, such that a
10D Universe at double the distance would
have gravity weakened to less than a thousandth
of what it was.
Again, that means the higher you go dimensionally,
the harder it is for a radiating force like
gravity to allow objects to have stable orbits.
This also translates to other forces, like
electromagnetism, which is also an inverse
square force in 3D.
This isn’t helped by situations like sunlight
falling off in that same fashion, so that
a planet further away has drastically less
light.
These don’t help your odds for finding a
4D planet equivalent that’s habitable over
long periods.
But it gets worse.
Our Sun radiates its sunlight in the frequency
it does because the density in the core causes
fusion at a rate that is balanced by our Sun’s
size and temperature.
Very tiny changes in the core’s density
will seriously alter the brightness and lifetime
of the star, so much so that a difference
in mass by a factor of around a hundred can
cause a lifetime difference of a million and
a brightness difference of a billion.
And that’s in our own 3D Universe.
But something like heat transfer, by particles
whacking each other or radiating into the
vacuum, ought to be far higher, making for
a faster rate of surface cooling.
Alternatively because such a Universe is 4D,
its density for things smacking into each
other ought to be less too.
Imagine a big bang in 2D, but with the same
number of particles.
Once a space has grown to be a billion light
years wide, or a billion-billion square light
years, it’s now a millionth as dense as
it was back when it was a region a million
light years wide.
That same region in 3D is a billion times
less dense, and in 4D, a trillion, 5D, a Quadrillion,
and so on.
So the time available for matter to clump
and planets and life to form before the place
gets too spread-out is small, and those unstable
orbits don’t give those planets much time
to cook-up life and allow it to become spacefaring.
And yet there’s nothing about that situation
that really implies chemistry is going any
faster, especially as ultimately, the power
pumps for life in this Universe are the residual
heat of forming under gravitational collapse
(which would appear to be less common and
weaker, and cool off faster), the tidal heating
of planets or moons near you, which are inherently
unstable, and the light from your sun, which
has a much shorter range and thinner habitable
bands where the goldilocks zone stays almost
just right.
And the chemistry would get way different
too.
We can’t really assume the normal forces
exist in higher dimensions, indeed they might
be emergent properties of 3-space specifically.
But an electromagnetic bond is weaker with
distance, just like gravity, which is bound
to impact which molecules are stable and have
what properties, and it won’t be any of
the ones we’re used to.
This probably hits just as bad at the atomic
and subatomic scales, but what it means is
that if you were stepping into a 4D Universe,
you’d probably instantly die.
In Stephen Baxter’s novel Raft, we see a
group of humans that accidentally entered
an alternate Universe that is 3D but where
the gravitational force is a billion times
stronger – not that implausible considering
even the weakest of the other 3 fundamental
forces is a trillion-trillion times stronger
than gravity.
There are no planets because they’d instantly
collapse into black holes, and stars are very
short-lived and only a mile across, cooling
to semi-livable bodies a few hundred meters
across with 5 times normal earth gravity.
In this sort of universe, gravity has a real
impact on actual chemistry, rather than its
normal role of essentially contributing to
temperature and pressure.
And that’s still the same 3 dimensions,
just one force changed be stronger.
We can always handwave some sort of field
that somehow lets you stay 3D in a 4D Universe,
like something that lets a 2D person from
a paper universe exists in ours, but is really
handwavey.
The alternative is that we already live as
a paper equivalent in a 4D universe.
If you imagine a statue of a person made of
paper sheets, any given sheet of that paper
is not terribly lifelike, a cross-section
of a foot, your stomach, or whichever, and
if those weren’t paper but actual 2D universes
intersecting with one of us, folks living
in that 2D space wouldn’t really get that
they were just a tiny cross-section of us,
less than a tiny bit of gut bacteria.
This is usually the analogy for 4D life, that
if we encountered an example of such an organism
it is probably because we’re living in a
3D slice of the entity.
And I want to emphasize, we don’t really
know from a science perspective what the odds
are of life evolving under different physical
constants or dimensions is, because it’s
too big a problem and with only math modeling
to guess from, not observational data, and
you really need the latter for it to be science.
There’s some strong arguments that 3D is
uniquely suited to life because a cell is
possible with a certain surface area to volume
ratio and it gets way off in 4D or 5D.
And things like the square cube law, for how
objects scale up in 3D, is very important
to all sorts of biological and engineering
considerations and might not convert to higher
dimensions or have a parallel equivalent there.
It’s popular to suggest we’re in a fine-tuned
universe where if any of the physical constants
were just a little bit off then life would
be impossible.
But what it really means is that our type
of life would be impossible, and indeed you
might not be able to evolve in such a place
but an artificial construct designed here
for use there is an option, as it’s the
statistical fluke alternative to Darwin, where
something simply happened to randomly assemble
at a very high level of complexity.
We usually call that a Boltzmann Brain, but
we’re assuming a human or higher level of
intellect would be needed for it to be long-term
stable or self-replicating in a non-natural
environment, but that’s pretty speculative
too.
Honestly it's more about the idea you or I
might be a boltzmann brain randomly sprung
into existence; that is busy going slowly
mad and hallucinating this life, or that we’re
both in a very deep dream of something bigger
than us, dreaming us both up, which itself
is either very bored or crazy or both.
Realistically, some simple lifeform popping
into existence with the ability to self-replicate
and survive in its environment is still more
likely than a large brain, so Boltzmann life
popping in at a modest complexity and then
evolving is also an option.
In any event, there really are not very many
universes I’ve heard proposed where I couldn’t
think of a way to make a switch of some sort,
and if you can do that you can presumably
do a computer of some sort, and if you can
do that, you should be able to have an intelligent
mind or alien of some sort.
And the odds of it occurring might be insanely
low but we have to be careful to assume the
probabilities translate to other Universes
very well, which is much harder when we throw
in extra dimensions.
You can make a switch out of so many things,
or a basic analogy to an atom or a molecule,
even out of something like a black hole, or
a pair of them, if you’re dealing with some
old or high-gravity universe where there would
be basically nothing else remaining there
but those.
Consider, a universe with a billion times
the gravity we have, like in the novel Raft,
which is one where black holes should form
out of virtually any conglomeration of mass,
and where we would expect a Universe the same
as ours in other respects to be very nearly
all black holes by now, with plenty of other
objects but all around the fringe and tiny,
but probably still very numerous.
The Schwarzschild radius, or Event Horizon,
in 3D, of a black hole goes with the Gravitational
constant and mass, so a billion times the
gravitational constant, and some stellar mass
black hole is now as wide as our solar system,
not the size of a small asteroid, but something
only the mass of a modest asteroid should
be able to turn into a smaller black hole.
We believe black holes evaporate from Hawking
radiation, and that their lifetime goes with
the cube of mass and square of the gravitational
constant, in a 3D Universe.
So they live a billion times longer at the
same mass.
In the right sort of Universe, you might have
the equivalent of basic hydrogen atoms be
a pair of black holes, or they might be your
basic unit of power that everything at the
bigger scale lives off of.
Heck, we have decent theories around the idea
that our Universe is inside a 4-Dimensional
Black hole, or that tiny little electrons
are actually naked singularities themselves.
But in an example like us being a 3D slice
of a 4D Universe, presumably with many other
slices, or pages, like a book, that place
probably has its own existing objects, maybe
stars, maybe just an analogy to them, and
we could potentially have our Universe, or
our spot in the Universe, intersect with that
and we’d never even know till it got us.
A cataclysm, akin to living on a 2D map and
not realizing that there’s a campfire nearby
and some wind blowing.
The good news is that, unlike in a simulated
reality, your higher levels here do not necessarily
enjoy infinite power over you, and if they
can interact with you, vice-versa should be
true.
You ought to be able to affect that universe
in some way, and from that, study it and assemble
4D or 5D or whatever objects and implant a
mind into them, an adapted copy of a human
or an AI.
We also want to ask if we might want to colonize
such places and I think that has to be attached
to the reminder that we’re not always necessarily
talking one higher physical dimension otherwise
like our 3.
It might be a circular or compacted one, or
it might be a second time dimension, something
analogous to 2 and 3 dimensional space but
for time, or a close parallel, like the address
listing for alternate timelines.
And a lot of those options imply pretty casual
time travel, in the same teleportation context
of the person living on one face of a cube
while another can walk around the other faces.
Or maybe not, after all, we can talk about
time being just one more dimension but much
as gravity is just one more force, it is very
unlike the other three, it only seems to flow
one way and you have very limited control
of the rate at which you move in it.
That might hold even if you had three time
dimensions, and it might not hold at all in
a higher-dimensional case.
Fundamentally, if you can interact with them,
you want to, because if I’m a piece of paper
in the 3D world, I can tap a vastly larger
supply of everything that way.
Whether I’m adapting to go live in a higher
dimension or just importing the upside.
You might have a place you can open tiny portals
up to and have raw energy pour out, or matter,
or even elements that form rarely here but
easily there, or not at all here but might
stay put once formed.
You might have a place time moved easily in
each direction and you could dump entropy
in, flip the switch, and yank that matter
back in a lower entropy state.
The Good news is that while we have plenty
of reasons to invade or colonize higher dimensions,
aliens living there really have little reason
to do the same to us, though they also have
little reason not to take an interest in us
or fear us.
So they’re not a great Fermi Paradox solution,
since we would probably talk to a 2D world
if we found one, and might expect a 4D civilization
to talk to us.
Ultimately, the really neat thing about higher
dimensions is that there’s literally entirely
new directions to explore and make use of.
So we recently finished up the International
space development conference in Dallas and
I talk more about that in a moment but it
was a really great chance to not just see
huge developments in the field but discuss
them with others who share our knowledge and
passion for Space and technology.
And that’s also the goal for our episode’s
sponsor, Keysight World: Innovate, Keysight’s
virtual vision conference that takes place
over three days in June.
Starting June 20th to 22nd, the industry’s
best minds will take you behind the scenes
of today’s most exciting technologies to
discover the future of what’s possible – all
in under two hours a day!
On Day 1 you’ll get a true picture of how
5G and 6G will map the information superhighways
of the metaverse to take us beyond gaming
and transform daily life.
On Day 2, go full speed into the cutting-edge
advancements in AI-controlled or Software
Defined Vehicles, and discover how lessons
learned from auto racing can make autonomous
driving safer.
On Day 3 we cover non-terrestrial networks
and digital healthcare.
On June 22, find out why extraterrestrial
6G is the final communications frontier and
how AI driven devices are transforming healthcare
beyond telehealth.
Register now to explore a world of infinite
possibilities.
So I recently had the honor to co-host the
National Space Society’s International Space
Development Conference in Texas and I got
a lot of great ideas for possible episodes
from various presentations and conversations.
We'll poll those over on our Community Tab
on Youtube over the next couple months so
you can let me know what episodes you would
like to see.
One of the events we do there is display entries
in our Gerard K. O’Neill Space Settlement
design contest and I’m glad to say we had
over 350 international students at the ISDC
giving presentations on their designs and
over 26,000 entries from around the world.
We also awarded the Wernher Von Braun prize
to Dr. Eric Smith, who headed up the James
Webb Telescope project and shared some great
insights into both Webb and what future telescopes
might need to incorporate to take us beyond
Webb.
As a sidenote, the NSS was created by the
merger of two groups founded by O’Neill
and von Braun respectively, it’s pretty
awesome being president of the organization
they founded, and those prizes in their honor,
along with the Heinlein Prize, are our three
highest awards.
Also, a special thanks to Ken Ruffin and the
rest of our North Texas chapter for helping
host this year’s ISDC.
Next year we’ll be in Los Angeles and I’ll
talk more about that event down the road,
but the NSS has tons of events throughout
the year, most virtual, in progress, getting
added, or under upgrade, and I’ll also mention
those more in future episodes.
I will likely be heavily involved in production
of those, given my experience at that, and
if you’re interested in being involved too,
shoot me a message or email.
Also for those keeping track, today’s outro
is the first episode segment I’ve recorded
since my nose and tongue surgery, for my part
I think I sound the same as before but others
have said I’m much clearer.
Given that the main segment of the episode
was recorded back in April I’d be curious
if anyone notices a difference.
All right, that will wrap us up for today
but join us again on Thursday to continue
the conversation by looking at the possibility
of using science and technology to create
artificial afterlives.
And next week we will have our 400th regular
episode of SFIA, as we contemplate what life
might be like in the year 2323 AD, then we’ll
wrap up June with our Monthly Livestream Q&A
on Sunday, June 25th, and then on Thursday,
June 29th, we’ll ask what Earth might be
like if humanity disappeared.
Then we’ll head into July to discuss how
and why we should mine or refine materials
on the Moon.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
