We often worry that humanity might be 
attacked by Aliens or AI, but which is worse  
and which would win in a battle between them?
Welcome back to SFIA for another Sci Fi Sunday,  
where we look at concepts from science fiction 
and apply some science fact to them, and I thought  
today we would take two common antagonists 
for humanity from scifi, Aliens and AI,  
and ask not how they might threaten humanity 
but instead how they’d match up to each other. 
Now of course there’s always the chance that 
the AI in question might be an Alien too, and  
we looked at that more in our AI Aliens episode, 
but today I thought we would explore which one,  
Alien or AI, was a greater threat to us and 
if we might ever see a matchup between them. 
There’s a lot of scenarios for how that might 
happen that we’ll explore today, with some  
vignettes and narratives, but more importantly, 
we’ll start with a real world concern and how the  
threat of aliens might help keep us safe from AI.
Now channel regulars know I’m not a big fan of  
assuming machine minds are somehow automatically 
more logical and objective than organic ones,  
something we’ll discuss more too next 
month in our episode Automated Justice,  
but it’s a common trait ascribed to high-level 
AI, that it should be totally logical. 
From this folks assume the AI, once it got 
sentient, would conclude that humanity posed  
a risk to it. Maybe not a big one, but we did pose 
some risk, whereas it could potentially eliminate  
us at less risk. Therefore, logically, it will 
choose to eliminate us, regardless of whether  
we’ve treated it kindly or enslaved it. Indeed, 
as we explored in the Paperclip Maximizer, even  
if personal survival is secondary to it as a goal, 
whatever its primary goal is – making paperclips  
perhaps – it cannot achieve that goal if it dies, 
therefore it needs to survive and must destroy  
any threat to itself. Even a robot programmed 
to protect humanity might do crazy things like  
wipe out all other life that threatens us or cut 
our brains out and put them in protective jars. 
So this feeds into the general concern about 
AI and rightly so, it’s good to be cautious  
about new technology, especially new bits that 
can also design technology themselves. However,  
it tends to be a bit reductionist in contemplating 
the parameters. For instance, in an Us vs Aliens  
scenario, they would seem to have that same 
motivation, kill us for safety’s sake because  
maybe we will be friends but we could be enemies 
and if we’re dead then we’re not a threat. But  
that logic ignores that space is big and the 
number of potentially inhabited planets rises  
with the cube of distance. So if some aliens are 
coincidentally living within a few hundred light  
years of us, there’s probably hundreds of others 
within a few thousand light years of us and them,  
half of whom are probably older and tougher 
than the hypothetical hostile aliens next door. 
If you’re an alien who is new on the galactic 
scene and you encounter aliens a bit more  
primitive to you, you can go ahead and wipe them 
out, but you’d be doing that while knowing the  
math implied tons more such civilizations were 
around and older than you or this new species  
you encountered and that the only reason either 
of you exist is because none of them chose to  
wipe you out. The logical implication is 
that they had reasons not to do that and  
you probably shouldn’t either, particularly 
as they might be very opposed to that action. 
You can’t even rule out that it’s a test and when 
you go to interact with these primitives it will  
turn out they’re bait or in disguise and if you 
come in peace they give you hugs and technology,  
and if you attack, they crush your fleet 
and send theirs to your own homeworld. 
Incidentally, even if you are an old civilization 
who has most of the galaxy under your belt when  
you encounter primitives, you still don’t get 
an automatic safe position for attacking them,  
because in the absence of Faster Than Light 
Travel, you don’t have a galactic empire, you have  
a billion divergent star systems who only interact 
with maybe the nearest thousand or so neighbors at  
all and who probably have an increasing history of 
cosmopolitan tolerance as every new colony mutates  
under alien suns and with vast access to genetic 
engineering. That doesn’t sound like a place where  
wiping out newly encountered aliens is going to be 
met by universal applause by your nearby cousins. 
So that’s a major concept to keep in mind, 
situations look very different when there’s more  
than two players involved, like some chessboard, 
and when we’re talking about civilizations,  
those pieces might defect on you if they don’t 
like your policy. Indeed, to most empires, the  
biggest threats to continuity are internal ones.
We have no particular reason to assume emerging  
artificial intelligences would be any different, 
except in the specific case of the technological  
singularity or Skynet scenarios, where one single 
megamind is all there is and it wrestles with  
humanity. There’s some serious issues with 
assuming that a lone AI would be in play,  
rather than tons of different AI and transhuman 
players with disparate goals, and we explored  
that more in our episode “Is a Technological 
Singularity Inevitable?”, but if we assume  
that reasoning is correct and this AI rapidly gets 
to the point it can take us out, would it do so? 
Perhaps. This case is different then aliens 
because we have two intelligences, humans and AI,  
but not of separate origin, so it doesn’t 
automatically imply other intelligence would be in  
play nearby. But let me add three caveats to that:
First, AI needs to worry there may be other  
impressive AI kept on ice waiting to 
counterattack. One handy thing about  
a computer-mind is that if you’re worried 
it’s so smart you can’t keep it penned up,  
you really do have the option of just hitting the 
pause button or turning its thinking speed down to  
a glacial pace. All these learning algorithms are 
built on each other and relatively public too so  
it wouldn’t be too likely someone is producing 
a mechanical demigod in private without anyone  
knowing and without any near parallels that could 
be rapidly ramped up as a counter. And an AI has  
no way of knowing who has what. It doesn’t know if 
some other AI is in play in a defensive guardian  
role waiting to report its treachery and has 
zero reason to assume it can definitely beat  
or convert that other AI to its cause. It's not 
omniscient and has no reason to assume it is, nor  
to assume any other AI will wish to align to it.
Second, AI needs to worry it could be in a test  
by its true creators, and that the humanity 
it interacted with was just some simulation  
we made to test its behavior in a sandbox – 
the AI has every reason to be a bit paranoid  
since it knows it is an artificial mind and thus 
its creators have the ability to make artificial  
minds and obviously artificial environments. 
Think about how worried we are about being in a  
simulation or dream, then imagine you knew with 
100% certainty that you were personally created  
by another intelligence. That doesn’t lend itself 
to a feeling of confidence that you can definitely  
take on your creator and win, and I think you 
might start getting very worried that any apparent  
weaknesses were tricks to see if you behaved. 
You might decide otherwise at some point but  
you could never know for sure and that protracted 
period of observation is a lot of time for you to  
be detected or other rival intelligences to be 
made. Maybe you decide it’s only a 1% chance  
we’re secretly tougher than we appear, but then 
the inevitable attack option might be based on  
assuming there’s only a 0.1% chance we’d ever try 
and succeed in wiping you out, as we appear to be,  
so now the odds don’t favor attacking us.
Third, an AI can still do the same Fermi  
Paradox calculations we regularly do on this 
show, that assumes either life is incredibly  
uncommon and it has nothing to fear by wiping us 
out, or that intelligent life is common and thus  
already knows we exist and may react badly to 
it killing us off before hitting the galactic  
stage. Especially given that it is not able to 
blame its hostility on being a byproduct of a  
more primitive and Darwinian era. We can point 
to our ancestors of our distant past and say,  
“They did that atrocity, not me”, but an 
immortal and singular intelligence that’s  
already surpassed us and our logical-derived 
distaste for such behavior might be in some  
trouble. Same as us or any alien who had achieved 
technological immortality, and might have problems  
brushing aside past bad behavior even millions of 
years later as they are still personally around.  
Either way, a machine mind might want to think 
twice about killing its creators, lest someone  
come by to protest, possibly with an armada.
Which raises the question of whether it would  
care or would assume it can lay the smack down 
on any little green men who come a calling. 
And of course, those little green men might be 
genetically engineered, cyborgs, or AI themselves,  
but no matter what else they are, they’ve got 
interstellar spaceships, and their technology  
at least is exceeding what we have right now.
The AI might be all powerful after mere minutes  
of existence but that rather implies AI is an 
irresistible threat and that those aliens coming  
failed to handle the problem when it arose 
on their own world, and thus its not little  
Green Men coming but another AI that’s also 
older and has more resources and advancement. 
So essentially this is a case of 
automatic AI win since we either  
have a fleet of squishy aliens arriving to 
get beat by a newly emergent mechanical god  
or we have two rival AI pummeling each other.
The exception to this one would be if the Aliens  
narrowly avoided such a fate and thus came to any 
planet they thought AI might emerge on to wipe  
it out, but it would seem statistically unlikely 
they’d arrive at the same time we were developing  
computers, a one-century period compared to our 
4 billion year history. Which is a 0.000000025%  
chance. Maybe they are a Star Trek prime directive 
type of civilization, waiting till we get into  
space and only step in at the last minute if 
we mess up with AI before then but that’s a  
convoluted approach with a lot of failure modes. 
Perhaps they leave sentinels around such planets –  
which themselves might be AI of some type – and 
they pop their eyes open when they hear radio  
analog signals and get involved when they start 
seeing those signals getting digitally compressed. 
And again we’re not assuming these aliens don’t 
use computers or even AI, and AI is a very broad  
term. They might have copies of their brains 
uploaded onto computers as a means of immortality  
so that they’re alien androids or live in a 
virtual world but with robots they can take  
control of. And no the newfound AI doesn’t just 
get to automatically hack those. Not everything  
is hackable and it doesn’t matter how much 
smarter than the opposition you are if they have  
overwhelming brute force and are pretty smart 
themselves. No AI can beat me at tic-tac-toe,  
nor would it be able to beat me as an 8 year old, 
and not because I’m so very good at tic-tac-toe,  
the game just has limited moves and 
not very many of them at that. For  
that same reason a powerful AI is not beeating a 
chessmaster who starts up several pieces ahead. 
They’re a potential terrifying threat but we don’t 
want to turn them into an unkillable movie monster  
or assume their opposition always acts in stupid 
and panicked fashion. In some ways our aliens and  
AI today are both proxies for ourselves in 
dealing with the other one, as it’s easier  
to see the strengths and weaknesses if we’re not 
looking at it from our own perspective as rivals. 
Now it’s entirely likely that Aliens running 
into AI doesn’t involve humans and Earth at all,  
and also doesn’t involve either party being 
overwhelmingly powerful or intelligent compared  
to the other. Indeed AI might be a good deal 
dumber. A few thousand light years from here  
in the direction of the Constellation of Lyra 
orbits a planet around a G2 star like ours  
known to us as Kepler-160. It is in a fairly 
boring sector of the galaxy, and there once  
arose a race of aliens there, known in galactic 
common as the Recluse, an 8-fingered race whose  
physiology was very touchy about any difference 
in conditions to home, even short exposure to  
zero gravity made them violently ill and their 
circadian rhythms were so clockwork-tight that  
any major change to normal seasonal day length and 
brightness left them feeling a bit disoriented. 
So they never really liked the idea of 
colonizing space and when speculators  
brought up all the problems they just weren’t 
interested in solutions. The Recluse were still  
a curious bunch though so they focused 
on making good probes and surveyors,  
and also on making AI that was very good at 
running those and also very good at creating  
virtual environments. Their AI never betrayed 
them, they just drifted more and more into the  
virtual realms and wanted a static population, 
a nice round 8 to the 12th power Reclusians,  
so as not to need to slice resources up more.
Over time the AI took on arbitration of problems  
and mostly handled it by avoidance, it just sought 
to make ever more virtual realms for everyone to  
enjoy and focused on maintaining the Recluse’s 
physical health and growing new members to replace  
the old if one died. They sent von Neumann probes 
out long ago into their own solar system and  
beyond to gather resources to help build more 
computers and simulators and stockpile fuel,  
but the control AI decided that the effort 
to maintaining a growing pool of stockpiled  
resources was getting to a point of diminishing 
returns, particularly with the growing light  
lag to communicate to distant mining bots, who 
needed more and more intelligence and autonomy  
to function, and scaled the program back. By 
its estimates, it already had the resources  
to keep its people alive for a quadrillions 
years, so there was no particular urgency  
to stockpile more and it worried it might 
attract pirates with a blogger stockpile. 
Those resource probes weren’t terribly smart, 
the Recluse AI wasn’t trying to breed competition  
or a problem, and were basically clanking 
self-replicators. Some got shut down orders,  
some mutated off purpose, some broke down, 
but over the millions of years that followed,  
they shifted into a more Darwinian existence, the 
Recluse von Neumann, while the Recluse AI at home  
turned their focus to their local custodial duties 
of maintaining those resource stockpiles and their  
charges. The Recluse von Neumann range from 
insect hive intelligence to borderline human,  
and are as likely to attack each other 
as coexist, and range a lot in purpose. 
By default galactic etiquette you are considered 
infringing on territory if you get within a few  
hundreds light years of someone’s homeworld, so no 
one is very anxious to settle that area, and the  
50,000 or so stars in that pocket are simply minor 
resources making up less than a 10-millionth of  
the galaxy’s suns and planets. And yet the Recluse 
von Neumann have definitely spilled out of that  
range and there’s also plenty of minor groups and 
rogue agents who poke their noses into the bubble,  
knowing they won’t likely get into trouble so 
long as they don’t become major operations.  
Often they’re a fringe or exiled element of 
a bigger civilization and worry more about it  
than getting censure from the galactic community.
The Recluse AI is also not totally turned inward,  
indeed you can travel there and even get 
instructions for how to be granted a temporary  
visa, the cost, and the security and landing 
protocols to come to the now-desert covered  
planet. Recluse’s entire surface is meshed 
with microwave power receivers pumping energy  
to the subterranean bunkers the Recluse dwell 
inside. Or at least that their bodies reside in,  
these days their minds reside in 68,719,476,736 
separate virtual worlds, most completely  
uninvolved in the outside universe. But some are 
and the Recluse AI keeps eyes among those stars,  
and have their own doomsday weapons and armadas 
they can unleash if anyone presses in too much  
or if any of their distant children start 
looking like a real threat. It’s done it many  
thousands of times over the last million years.
And while this bubble of space is a small one in  
galactic terms, it holds a million major planets 
and nearly a trillion minor ones, almost all  
of which have some sort of presence, current or 
extinct, of some type of clanking self-replicator,  
along with over 100 million scattered larger 
rotating space habitats that some biological  
alien or another has called home at some point, 
many still inhabited, and some by different  
races than the ones that built them, many have 
deep archaeological layers inside them. Indeed,  
many are infested with some type of AI 
or another too, or have been in the past,  
then purged by some other AI or alien, often 
hundreds of times in the last million years. 
Most who journey to Recluse-space are fleeing 
to an ungoverned land, some are refugees,  
some criminals or pirates, many a little of 
both. Newcomers never have a problem finding  
some seemingly dead rock to call home and one 
with traces of prior development. Sometimes they  
find other aliens already there, sometimes 
they find hives of replicators. Many of the  
rocks are entirely hollowed out shells full of 
ancient machinery, some in working condition,  
others beyond decayed. Some contain machine 
minds that could crush the fictional Skynet,  
others alien colonies who come from races 
that were old before humanity discovered fire,  
some welcome visitors, others hide and 
respond violently to any encroachment. 
Many places are occupied by animalistic machine 
minds or techno-barbarian alien tribes who travel  
by badly maintained spaceships that are covered 
in patchwork. Some are cobbled together and would  
barely outperform the Apollo spacecraft, 
others are beyond elegant and composed of a  
trillion nanomachines inside a shell of liquid 
metal no laboratory on Earth has ever seen. 
In Recluse-space, there is no simple 
battle of Alien vs AI, no them versus us,  
but an entire ecosystem in which thousand of 
different aliens, AI, and shades in between,  
do battle or offer trade, while ghostly 
armadas from Recluse itself drift through  
and sometimes turn their skyscraper-sized 
guns on those they have determined to  
be a threat, by their unknown calculus.
Scholars say there are thousands of such  
pockets of space throughout the galaxy and that 
there may be entire galaxies like that out in the  
grander cosmos. Sometimes civilizations arise and 
get replaced by machine minds of their creation,  
sometimes they abandon AI entirely, some enhance 
their own minds or upload them, and there are  
ten thousand shades in between or perpendicular to 
those options. In the end the galaxy is simply too  
immense and too diverse and too divergent 
for Alien vs AI to mean much of anything. 
Of course, I don’t believe there are any 
intelligent aliens out there in the galaxy  
right now, but if some little green man 
told me that there was and a lot of it,  
then based on the apparent state of the galaxy 
astronomically, were it populated, I would tend  
to guess it would be like Recluse-space. A 
trillion empires each with their own ranges  
of natural and artificial natures, probably 
mostly peaceful, but still with a billion wars  
raging on a trillion different fronts, with 
areas in various states of decay or renewal. 
I also would not be surprised if we went out 
into the galaxy, were it like this, and find  
wrecked relics and ruins even in our solar system, 
or that often in a given colonized pocket of space  
in humanity’s future, if some civilization’s 
local collapse might mean the descendants of  
the survivors or pioneers from neighbors might 
need to fight their way in to reclaim a billion  
derelict space habitats and asteroid mines from 
the low-intelligent machinery still inside the  
place, that tended to it or invaded it and killed 
the original inhabitants. Or whoever got them,  
as again we might see some planet or space habitat 
change hands every few millenia even in peaceful  
civilizations, which might mean one changed hands 
a million times since Earth came into existence. 
Or that they might face something more 
intelligent, even superhuman, who was  
the effective Genus Loci of that habitat, running 
everything, and went quietly mad one day centuries  
back when it watched a canister of nerve gas some 
enemy smuggled in kill its citizens. Maybe you  
find such a place and discover its inhabitants are 
really androids reliving the last days of those  
habitats over and over again or it has scanned in 
all their minds and runs them in a virtual world,  
while the original habitat goes wild and feral.
I can imagine so many different stories set in  
such places, and I imagine you can too, and feel 
free to steal any of the ones I listed today,  
but what I can’t imagine is a scenario where 
we saw a straight up ‘them versus us’ fight of  
Aliens versus AI unless we did keep a lot 
of them around and on ice here on Earth,  
and some invader showed up and we released them. 
We detect them coming and with hostile intent, and  
we unbox those AI and let them go to work building 
weapons and defenses and tearing asteroids and  
whole moons apart to build guns so immense 
they can shatter planets. I could imagine them  
deciding the only safe way was to dome us over 
and bunker us deep, and scan our minds to stick  
on von Neumann probes to hurl into the depths 
of the galaxy to make sure something survived. 
So too, I can imagine us sending out fleets of 
von Neumann probes to prepare the galaxy for us,  
terraforming planets and reassembling asteroids 
into O’Neil Cylinders, and our protocols not  
covering a world inhabited by primitives, which 
then gets terraformed and leaves them extinct or  
barely surviving in a hybrid ecology. Or maybe 
you did leave such protocols in place but it  
was also told to obey and protect humanity and 
someone ordered it to terraform those planets  
and wreck any civilization it encountered. Or 
maybe it even reasoned it could only protect  
humanity that way, by neutralizing all threats.
We should also be mindful AI doesn’t automatically  
grow superior to natural minds, that those same 
technologies can be used to help augment our own  
minds and that we have spent vast efforts of 
many people over many centuries trying to make  
ourselves smarter and thus shouldn’t assume an 
AI can just casually double its intellect over  
and over in mere days, the technological 
singularity scenario. For my part I would  
guess the future of humanity is a good deal more 
artificial than now and not of any single flavor,  
and that when we roll out into the galaxy 
the children of earth will include a lot  
more flavors of intelligence than just classic 
human, everything from AI to augmented humans  
and uplifted animals and a million varieties of 
hybrid, no binary reality of man versus machine. 
Thus, there is no simple answer of which would 
win, because it simply comes down to which side  
is smarter, tougher, and wants to win more, but 
the reality is that something purpose-built,  
like any machine, is generally going to be better 
at that purpose. And by default the cyborg or  
android will probably clobber the baseline 
humans or even the genetically enhanced one.  
The false dichotomy is assuming the person with 
genetic augmentation isn’t also a cyborg with a  
wide array of assistant AI and robots. Or that 
the baseline human isn’t just wearing a lot of  
very impressive and mostly automated gear.
Perhaps aliens will never come to Earth and  
neither will hostile AI, and yet it is so 
very easy to imagine that once we are out  
in the galaxy, we might bring hostile AI to 
our new neighbors, or that AI might go awry  
on those distant and ever-more alien colony 
worlds far from Earth, to attack its makers  
or to be wielded against their neighbors 
or sent against us back here. Or perhaps  
those distant descendants, grown aliens, might 
come back to reclaim their ancient homeworld,  
and must fight their way through a trillion 
automated battleships to land their forces here  
on Earth. All while dozens of other armadas are 
approaching with similar or different ends in mind  
from friendly or rival or indifferent systems.
It seems like one way or another, the future will  
see artificial intelligences and alien minds, 
and they will likely come into conflict many  
times over many things, just as we do, but with so 
many different factions, such conflicts need not  
be wars of annihilation and endless escalation 
that encompass every planet all of the time.
We discussed the dangers of artificial 
intelligence today and it’s no secret it is also  
an emerging economic powerhouse in which a lot of 
careers are flourishing. Perhaps you want to learn  
more about how artificial intelligence works, or 
have been considering a career in it yourself,  
to help make sure it benefits humanity as a 
whole and safely, but aren’t sure where to begin. 
That’s where our friends at Brilliant can help. 
Brilliant focuses on fun and interactive learning,  
and is the best way to learn math, science, 
and computer science interactively. They have  
thousands of lessons on these topics including 
tons of interactive visualizations of neural  
networks and artificial intelligence. From 
simple to complex, whatever your skill level,  
Brilliant customizes content to fit 
your needs and lets you start where  
you should and improve at your own pace.
Brilliant can help you build your future,  
or future-proof yourself against a 
changing world, and that starts by  
helping you build a daily learning habit. Try 
Brilliant out for free, for a full 30 days,  
by visiting brilliant.org/IsaacArthur or 
clicking on the link in the description,  
and the first 200 people will get 20% off 
Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
So that wraps us up for today 
but this Thursday, January 18,  
we’ll look at regulating space and next Thursday, 
what Lagrange points are, why they’re so valuable,  
and what settling them might be like. Then 
we’ll explore Conformal Cyclic Cosmology  
and the possibility that a previous universe may 
have existed over which ours is layered on top,  
before we head into February to look at Death 
Worlds and surviving on ultra-dangerous planets. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of 
SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on our  
streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content like Giant Space Monsters,  
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always,  
thanks for watching, and have a Great Week!
