This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
We often refer to solar energy as the ultimate
renewable energy.
Strictly speaking, that’s only true if you’ve
figured out how to periodically renew the
Sun, but don’t worry, as we’ll see today,
it is possible.
A few weeks back we were discussing what happens
if we can’t leave Earth, if all our hopes
for interstellar colonization, to build homes
around new stars, just turns out to be impractical
or undesirable.
I argued that while I very much hope for a
future in which we journey out to the galaxy,
that even if we were confined to our own solar
system or just our own world, that we still
had a very bright future ahead.
Indeed somewhat ironically, that is very literal
as our sun grows brighter everyday and a billion
or so years down the road would be too bright
for our world to keep its seas and sky.
If nothing is done, Earth would be turned
into a hot airless world much like Mercury,
and then as the sun grows old and expands,
and Mercury is swallowed up, there’s a chance
that solar expansion into a red giant might
consume Venus and even Earth itself.
Older models of stars tended to assume they
grew cold and died out slowly, freezing planets,
and indeed that would be Earth’s fate if
the Sun didn’t consume it.
After that roughly billion-year long epoch
in which the Sun had been an enormous red
giant, and then had shedded much of its matter
and collapsed into a white dwarf, Earth might
very well get resettled , but that white dwarf
would be far too dim unless Earth was brought
closer, and it would continue to grow dimmer
as the eons rolled by.
In speculation, both science and science fiction,
it was often contemplated that we might find
some way to refuel our own Sun, and that’s
what we’ll be discussing today, but it is
important to understand that, much like running
out of air in a space station or spacesuit,
the first problem isn’t actually running
out of a substance, but generating an excess
of another.
Humans breathe oxygen and exhale carbon dioxide,
the amount varies by the individual and activity,
but think between a pound to a kilogram a
day, but carbon dioxide is lethal to us at
relatively low levels, so, long before we
run out of oxygen, we would be poisoned by
our own CO2, though we often get around this
by blowing air out that still has plenty of
good oxygen in it, just to purge the CO2 building
up.
Same concept applies to our Sun, it is burning
through its fuel, hydrogen, but in the process,
it turns that into helium.
It also contains plenty of other, heavier
elements made in the older, dying stars that
formed our solar system.
Most of the elements heavier than hydrogen
and helium, which are all called metals in
discussion of stars, are in our Sun, not just
our planets.
They also positively affect a star’s lifetime,
actually extending it, whereas the buildup
of helium shortens a star’s lifetime.
And today we’ll discuss harvesting those
for construction uses, but also as part of
a process of extending our Sun’s lifetime
almost indefinitely, and even other stars
as well.
Including rekindling dead stars like white
dwarfs, neutron stars, and even black holes.
Now, this episode isn’t going to be a deep
dive on how stars fuse hydrogen into helium
or into other final products, nor on how stars
die, but the key point for today is that,
when you have a high enough pressure and temperature,
protons will slam into each other far more
often, and with far more energy, and for a
given collision energy, they have a chance
of sticking together in a way that turns the
three quarks in each of those protons, two
up quarks and one down quark, into a new big
ball of six that has 3 quarks of each type
rather than 4 up and 2 down.
Most of the time, that is not what happens,
we get a diproton, which just falls back apart
into two protons.
But sometimes we do get that quark change;
this is a proton and neutron now, or a deuteron,
the atomic nucleus of a deuterium atom, an
isotope of hydrogen.
In our antimatter factories episode, we discussed
more on how quarks work and how they can change
like that.
Deuterium running into another deuterium to
form helium, is often mistakenly thought to
be the next step, since a pair of deuterons
contains a pair of protons and neutrons, which
is what helium is, but that’s actually not
the normal situation.
Once a deuteron is made, there are four main
fusion reactions that can occur with it; inside
your typical star.
It can run into another proton and absorb
it, and now it’s helium-3, two protons and
a neutron.
Two of these can collide and produce a helium-4
atom, plus a pair of regular hydrogen nuclei,
lone protons again.
And we call this the proton-proton or the
p-p 1 branch.
Sometimes a pair of deuterons slamming together
will make Helium-3 plus a neutron, sometimes
it will make tritium and a proton, or a hydrogen
nuclei with 1 proton and two neutrons and
another lone proton.
Deuterium bouncing into tritium is very rare
because tritium only lasts around a dozen
years before decaying into helium-3, but it
is a very easy fusion process into helium-4
plus a neutron, and is why we want it for
controlled fusion here on Earth.
A Deuteron plus Helium 3 can also produce
a helium-4 atom plus a lone proton too.
Key thing is that none of this ever happens,
from an observer standpoint.
These particles are moving insanely fast in
a very dense environment, so they are slamming
into each other constantly, and at high energy,
but the odds of two protons colliding and
forming a deuteron is less than one in many
trillions, when these collisions happen.
The average proton will kick around the Sun’s
core for 9 billion years, colliding almost
constantly with other protons and bigger nuclei,
before successfully completing step 1 and
merging with another proton to become a deuteron.
A star with higher pressure and temperature
is exponentially more likely to have this
process occur, which is why a star only twice
as massive as our own Sun will go red giant
in less than 2 billion years, whilst a star
that’s half as massive as our Sun can live
nearly 60 billion.
It’s also why you don’t get stars much
bigger than our own Sun; the way Jupiter is
bigger than our planet, they couldn’t even
form before they would hit such a rate of
fusion that they’d be torn apart by their
own immense heat.
This is a factor in why you often have a whole
bunch of giant stars form near each other,
and often a big star will burn itself out
and explode before it could gain more mass,
especially as its blowing tons away as solar
wind once ignited.
This is also why a supernova, in mere seconds,
can fuse more particles than our sun will
in its whole lifetime.
A given particle is colliding many times per
second, they’re smushed together very tightly
compared to normal matter, and moving vastly
faster.
When the odds for fusion, from those many
collisions per second drop, from 1 in a quintillion
per second, like in our Sun, to just one in
a second, like in a supernova situation, things
change.
This is why we joke on the channel about controlled
fusion not being about trying to replicate
the fiery conditions in the heart of stars,
but rather needing to go far beyond that,
and we achieve something closer to that with
a hydrogen bomb detonation.
It is all about having an energy-level in
the particle collisions high enough to make
a fusion event likely.
Core matter of our own sun produces very little
power, it would take several tons of it to
run a lightbulb, but there’s an awful lot
of sun and those tons of matter will run that
lightbulb for eons, fusion is millions of
times denser in energy than an equal weight
of chemical fuel, like gasoline.
Now, in a star, all these fusion events, rare
as they are, make the star hotter, and heat
can only escape from them by radiation, so
the star cools very slowly.
Dead ones take eons to cool enough to not
be glowing white-hot anymore.
In living ones, or stars on the main sequence,
all that trapped heat makes the individual
particles move very quickly and they then
shove apart, while gravity holds them together,
and the hotter it is, the more likely fusion
is to occur, which would make it even hotter,
but the hotter it is, the harder it is for
gravity to hold it together and keep the core
pressure high, so every star reaches a size
and temperature that is stable, what we call
hydrostatic equilibrium.
Pressure and temperature are maintained by
the rate of fusion and radiation – or sunlight
given off.
But it’s not really stable.
As time goes on, all the deuterons and helium-3
and helium-4 particles start getting more
common.
In a younger star, there’s less helium,
and helium is denser than hydrogen, so, as
fusion makes more of it the star gets denser.
The star’s pressure is a function of that
density and temperature, so, it rises; and
the fusion rate rises with it.
Thus stars slowly get hotter as they age,
and thus brighter.
Eventually this tips them into being a sub-giant,
which can be several times brighter than the
star was when it first ignited, and then it
transforms into its red giant phase, which
can be many hundreds of times brighter than
the original star.
In truth, in these stars, what you really
have is a small core and an enormous, thin
atmosphere, whereas main sequence stars have
relatively large cores.
Emphasis on relatively, as our Sun packs about
a third of its mass into its core, but that’s
only about a fifth to a quarter of the Sun’s
width, about a percent of its volume.
So a grape inside a grapefruit, small but
still huge compared to a red giant, where
the analogy of the core would be more like
a shriveled-up grape, our raisin inside a
big beach ball, or even larger.
All that beachball region is too expanded
out from the core to swap in new fuel, and
the helium content is rising and making the
core even denser, so it chokes the star off
eventually, as layers of the outer red giant
are shoved out, away into space, while that
inner bit just shuts down into a big ball
of helium in most stars, though bigger ones
can go through another fusion cycle to make
heavier elements.
I mentioned earlier that the buildup of helium
accelerates fusion and thus kills a star,
but, I also mentioned that other metals slow
fusion down – every star has a metallicity,
and older stars that formed when the universe
was young, and with fewer metals, have lower
metallicity… which again, in astronomy,
is anything which is not hydrogen, helium,
or one of their isotopes.
It is far harder to shove two bigger nuclei
together to fuse into something yet larger,
so it requires far more pressure and density
and temperature to make that likely.
So, in a normal star, those as massive as
our sun or less, all those metals inside it
just bounce around and their collisions produce
nothing, a hydrogen isotope slamming into
a bit of iron or neon is just going to bounce
off.
The more of those metals that are in there,
the slower a star burns.
It might seem strange then, to try to remove
those metals, solar systems form from the
same basic cloud; planet and star alike, and
that means most of the metals and useful elements
are in our Sun.
It might seem crazy to think of removing those
from a star, but as we’ll see in a bit,
it can be done.
Now, a white dwarf is the final state of very
nearly every star, but because most stars
are less massive than our own Sun, and the
Universe hasn’t lived long enough for those
stars to die off yet, the ratio of bigger
stellar remnants is higher, but 97% of all
stars currently in our galaxy should end as
white dwarfs.
But again we do have a fairly large percentage
of neutron stars and black holes, just because
the overwhelming majority of stars large enough
to form either, having lifetimes much less
than a billion years, have died already.
Thus, we think we have about 10 billion white
dwarfs, about a billion neutron stars, and
about 100 million black holes in this galaxy.
Those are estimates, but it makes us about
1% black holes, 10% neutron stars, and the
rest, white dwarfs, currently, with dozens
of times that as stars still on the main sequence
or red giants.
Over time, the white dwarfs will become more
common, but they’ll also slowly cool to
being black dwarfs; ultra-dense balls of helium
or carbon, mostly.
Now, this episode is really more about refueling
our Sun so it never goes sub-giant let alone
red-giant and white dwarf, but let’s talk
about refueling these first.
Giant stars exploding as supernovae is just
one type of them, called Type II, and these
end as neutron stars or black holes.
Type 1a are actually white dwarfs which sucked
in new hydrogen off a binary partner and exploded.
This is actually very common because stars
often form as binaries and those pairs are
usually not the same mass.
So one will go red giant first, the more massive
of the pair, and often they’re close enough
that the other smaller star will end up orbiting
inside that red giant or stealing mass off
it, this can cause them to slow in their relative
orbit, from drag and mass exchange, so that
they’re even closer.
However, once that bigger star turns into
a white dwarf, it will be the second star’s
turn to go red giant, and now that white dwarf
is gaining hydrogen from the outer layer of
the red giant.
A White dwarf is essentially a star core that’s
run out of fuel, so dropping hydrogen on it
just causes fusion and it glows again.
Big chunks of this can cause a regular nova.
These are far more common and less bright
kind we see that are temporary new stars in
the sky.
There are usually several in our galaxy each
year, typically in Sagittarius, which is where
the galactic core is, and novae can happen
repeatedly to the same star, but they are
less bright so we only see the ones in our
own small corner of the galaxy, whereas supernovae
are visible galaxy-wide.
There were a few naked-eye visible ones in
2021, though barely visible, some are much
brighter, they last days to weeks, and recurring
novae can be periodic.
For example if the binary twin and it orbit
every decade, then a lobe of gas can get sucked
away at that frequency.
You also can get white dwarf pairs left behind
that eventually spiral into each other.
White dwarfs vary in mass, often around half
that of the original star, but they can only
be about half again as massive as our own
sun before they hit a critical point and can
now begin burning carbon and that result in
a rapid progress to supernova and nothing
is left behind by this, no neutron star or
black hole.
This results in a very specific and characteristic
explosion, and one visible by telescopes billions
of light years away, so we can very precisely
determine distance to a type 1a Supernova
by measuring its brightness to us and the
red shift of its various spectra.
That’s been instrumental in so much of our
research into the size and nature of the Early
Universe, Hubble Expansion, and Dark Energy.
But it’s not the sort of thing you want
to have happen in your backyard, and indeed
your typical nova is a bit much and brief,
so instead you would be manually feeding in
hydrogen at a steady rate.
You could potentially set this up in a binary
system with sufficient megastructures, but
you could trickle feed our own Sun Jupiter
for many millions of years of good light.
And if its white dwarf version was about half
its current mass, it should be able to take
a thousand Jupiters before exploding.
However this light is not sunlight, indeed
we have objects called Super Soft X-Ray Sources
that emit low energy x-rays, between 90 to
2500 electron volts, where red photons are
about 2 electron volts, or eV, and blue light
is about 3.
UV, or ultraviolet, runs from 3 to 30 eV,
then you get into the X-ray range, Hard X-rays
are about 1000 to 20,000 eV, beyond that you
get into gamma rays.
We believe these soft x-rays sources are from
white dwarfs and produced by steady nuclear
fusion on a white dwarf from small but constant
matter injection from a companion.
They’re still enormously bright, the dimmer
ones are a hundred times brighter than our
Sun, but a shell constructed around one which
could absorb the x-rays and emit them as safe
visible light could run a Dyson Swarm a hundred
to even ten thousand times as large as one
made around our modern sun could support,
whereas the typical white dwarf is hundreds
or even thousands of times less bright than
our Sun.
You should be able to import hydrogen to a
white dwarf though and with sufficient effort
keep it fed and modified to mimic the original
star it came from and for a period of time
longer than it originally lived on the main
sequence.
Everything landing on it is fusing after all,
whereas most stars don’t fuse all their
mass.
That mass limit, the Chandreskar limit, where
they explode, is slightly higher if the star
is spinning very rapidly – dead stars typically
do too, pulsar neutron stars can spin in seconds
or less, rather than days or months like many
planets and stars do.
It should be a bit higher if the white dwarf
has cooled a lot too, so a civilization reigniting
a white dwarf this way probably could push
that limit out a bit by a mix of patience
and dropping the matter to maximize angular
momentum, speeding the dwarf’s spin rate
up.
Eventually though your star is going to reach
that maximum mass and you would then have
a ton of time while a white dwarf that massive
cooled, but you are done, and anything more
will blow it up, possibly excluding the careful
dropping of a micro-black hole into it.
Neutron stars would follow a similar path,
though adding mass to them not only eventually
would push them into being a black hole, but
could cause a starquake, which can result
in a gamma-ray burst good enough to wreck
the ecosystems on worlds around neighboring
stars several light years away.
Again not something to play around with in
colonized areas of the galaxy.
Ironically black holes are the safest thing
to feed, you just pick a material that can
absorb gamma and x-rays well and has melting
temperature hot enough to glow in the visible
light range, like tungsten, and put that as
a spherical shell around that black hole,
then dump matter down into it at the rate
which you want.
The accretion disc that forms will give up
energy at a rate far more efficient than normal
stellar fusion and thus let you extend star
lifetime even more.
Indeed you could trickle feed a white dwarf
into a black hole and get positive energy
out of that.
There’s all sorts of ways to use black holes
for power this way, including creating a micro-black
hole whose radius was exactly the right size
to let you dump it into a gas giant and have
it suck in matter at a sustained rate, heating
the gas giant up, and probably producing secondary
fusion near the black hole too.
Blackholes don’t really gobble things up
the way scifi tends to indicate.
See our episodes Making Stars or Colonizing
Black Holes for more on these options.
And they are neat options for reviving dead
stars, but let’s get to keeping our Sun
alive.
First, as we discussed in greater detail in
our episode Starlifting, it is possible to
remove matter from a star.
Indeed they naturally push matter off them
all the time, that’s what solar wind is
and what flares and coronal mass ejections
or CMEs are.
If we heat a spot on the sun up, it will tend
to erupt out with a spray of hot plasma.
Now the upper layers of the sun are not thick,
don’t think of these eruptions as magma
like blasts.
The photosphere of a star is considerably
thinner than air.
That photosphere is what we usually think
of as a star’s surface because it’s the
layer the light we see comes from.
Light particles created below it usually will
pass through enough matter to be absorbed
by it and reemitted at a new frequency as
a new photon.
The Photosphere is where we’re far enough
out from the Sun that things have thinned
down and there’s not much left above, so
a photon passing through can often get away
without being absorbed and reach our eyeball
millions of kilometers away.
The temperature of the photosphere therefore
controls what frequency of light we see.
The core itself emits light in gamma and x-rays
ranges just like those naked or collapsed
degenerate cores we see with white dwarfs
and neutron stars, or the accretion discs
of black holes.
That photosphere is about 100 kilometers thick
and is made up of giant convective cells of
plasma we call granules that move at around
7 kilometers per second and usually last about
20 minutes.
Think of these as your boiling bubbles in
a pot of water.
If we heat these up more, they will blow more
matter off into the solar system that we can
capture.
Everything coming off the sun is ionized plasma
of ions and electrons, so shoving it around
magnetically is an option that works well.
Now, folks tend to assume all the heavier
elements collect in the centers of stars and
the onion models we show of supernovae don’t
help with that, where you have layers of ever-heavier
elements, but that’s not really how it works
and why the bubbling pot analogy is more apt.
Bigger atoms are denser and thus do tend to
slowly sink but the whole thing is highly
mobile and thus the photosphere of our Sun
is 74.9% hydrogen, 23.8% helium, and the remaining
1.3% is other metals, with oxygen, carbon,
neon, and iron making up most of that and
in that order.
Mining those out is just a matter of blowing
them out, and we detailed how in our Starlifitng
episode but the key ways are either to shove
it off magnetically or by super heating spots
on the Sun, or some combination thereof.
One of the methods involves making many rings
of satellites around the star, made of stations
that you can lift or drop, to let us expand
and contract each ring, which creates a big
magnetic shove below, then to do them as in
sequence as a wave to force matter to be squeezed
off at the north and south pole then caught
somewhere above by some mixture of magnetic
vacuum cleaner, reverse ion drive, stellar
windmill, and statite.
Your rings then use solar power to shove magnetically
back up in altitude for another drop, creating
an accordion-like pumping action.
This method pushes it out the poles rather
than into the orbiting plane of the planets
and an emerging Dyson Swarm.
And this can all be powered by the Sun’s
own illumination and requires no special new
science or super materials.
Just massive effort, and it’s the sort of
thing a civilization does when it's already
disassembled all its asteroids and smaller
moons and is trying to decide if they need
to disassemble planets for construction materials.
The Sun has more mass than all those planets,
and metals, so it becomes an attractive option,
but more relevant, it’s a civilization that
already has a massive presence in space and
has climbed a long way up the Kardashev Scale.
So building big ring stations around your
own Sun is not some leviathan task, it’s
probably comparable to building a highway
system for them, and it's how they get the
mass to build more civilization.
This might be something we’re contemplating
in even a few thousand years, but for our
purposes today it would be okay even if we
waited several million.
Because the key thing is that while it is
nice for removing metals, for fun and profit,
you are also removing tons of hydrogen and
helium too.
And you can just drop the hydrogen back in
if you want but keep the helium.
Indeed, lowering any star’s mass is going
to lengthen its lifetime, but by pulling the
helium out of the photosphere constantly,
as it mixes with lower layers and seethes
around, we can decrease the overall helium
content.
This is step one to lengthen the Sun’s lifetime,
because we’re removing the poison of helium,
which speeds fusion up and heats a star, and
in doing so we’d actually make the sun a
bit dimmer by lowering its mass too.
We get about 600 megatons of hydrogen turned
into helium, neutrinos, and sunlight by the
Sun every second, and virtually all of that
mass is helium.
So, while removing any at all would help extend
the Sun’s life, to keep up with things,
we want to remove 600 megatons per second.
Again we’re not refueling the Sun yet, just
removing things which kill it quicker.
The Sun masses two billion-trillion megatons,
about three quarters of which is hydrogen
currently – it had a lot to begin with incidentally
– but that represents about 75 billion years
of remaining burning if that was all used
and at a steady rate, not the five billion
or so we have before the red giant phase would
naturally occur.
Again, we haven’t done anything to refuel
the sun yet, just removed the helium, and
we’ve extended its lifespans many times
over by doing this.
Technically we are dumping a lot of hydrogen
back in, since most of our star lifting will
be hydrogen, but this is more like a solar
fountain off the poles that we’re filtering,
not refilling from.
Which brings up a good question of what we’re
doing with all that helium. 600 megatons,
or a bit less, every single second.
It’s not a horrible propellant for spaceships.
You could run some very impressive shipping
by directing external power beams into helium
tanks that spewed them out the back of a ship
at a million degrees.
See our episode from a couple weeks back on
Owning your own personal spaceship for more
discussion of that.
Helium makes a decent radiation shield too,
if you want to cram it into hollow tanks on
the outside of spaceships and space stations.
And you could dump it down black holes for
more power if you’ve got that technology.
I generally assume that if it is possible
and practical to make artificial black holes
then you’ve figured out how by several millions
years from now so it should not be out of
our thoughts for contemplating how civilizations
power themselves.
Incidentally Jupiter is 73% hydrogen and 24%
helium, very similar to what our Sun is and
what Saturn is, which is what I meant about
our Sun starting off with a lot of helium
in the first place.
I think folks hear the amount of the Sun that’s
helium and assume that it being nearly a quarter
helium is why it's halfway through its life
but no, it inherited almost all of that from
previous dead stars and the big bang.
Jupiter contains about 75 million years worth
of new hydrogen fuel for the Sun, Saturn about
25 million, and Uranus and Neptune a few million
each.
Small potatoes compared to the Sun’s normal
lifetime let alone its extended helium-filtered
life, but keep in mind just how long a million
years really is for a civilization, even the
smallest of our gas giants would be buying
us an extension of life hundreds of times
longer than our entire recorded history.
Speaking of that, when we’ve discussed colonizing
giant stars I pointed out that even though
those measure their lives in millions not
billions of years, that it still made them
logical to colonize.
Its occasionally suggested we would colonize
everything but these immense and short lived
stars and I argued in that episode that quite
to the contrary, these mega-systems which
might have hundreds of planets and be able
to support a Dyson swarm a thousand times
bigger than what our Sun could, might be the
great empires of future humanity.
Those stars simply have so much more power
output and so much more mass.
They are also way easier to starlift off of,
as the bigger ones are already gushing off
planets worth of matter from their sheer enormous
internal fusion and heat.
So it’s not too hard to mine them and to
helium filter them too, especially as you
lower their mass.
Well, what to do with that lower mass?
For our sun, as we pulled off all that plasma,
we sorted it and dumped the hydrogen back.
That’s an easy sort too because a magnetic
field will act a bit like a prism does on
light for ionized matter of different masses,
breaking things up by element on large distances,
a matter rainbow so to speak.
In these other suns though, fated to short
lives, we can massively extend their lifetimes
by not dropping all the hydrogen back in.
And while I think most systems would prefer
to keep their excess hydrogen around for long
term use, I’d imagine they would sell a
lot and I’d also imagine that Earth and
our Sun would be in a very good position to
stockpile at least several thousand solar
masses worth of hydrogen from the hundreds
of billions of them spread throughout the
galaxy.
Drop in the bucket, bought the planet and
solar system that’s likely to be the richest
and most technologically advanced system in
that galaxy for many millennia to come.
Presumably you store that as big planet-sized
or even brown-dwarf sized gas stockpiles.
Saturn-sized ones are a nice compromise spot
as a planet composed of hydrogen of Saturn’s
mass and size could have a shell wrapped around
it to further minimize leakage of hydrogen,
which would have a surface gravity similar
to Earth’s.
Shellworlds or Supra-Mundane Worlds of this
size don’t really need active support, because
the hydrogen inside – or helium for that
matter – would prop the shell up the way
gas in soccer or basketball keeps them rigid.
You build them about as far from the Sun as
Earth is, then you cover them with dirt and
air water and call it a planet, one with around
a hundred times the living area of Earth,
and containing enough fuel for the Sun to
run itself for 25 million years.
Incidentally, the Sun produces enough sunlight
to light up 2 billion Earths or 20 million
of these Saturn-Shells, so, hypothetically
you could have 500 trillion years worth of
fuel stored in them, and you could be replenishing
their hydrogen with helium to keep the mass
right as you tapped them.
I think you would probably not go that route
since it would spike the solar system’s
total mass up 6000-fold which definitely does
some strange things to orbital periods, plus
making a dyson swarm of actual planets is
not a good plan.
You could do many Klemperer Rosettes of Planets
in rings around the Sun, and each one further
out, and maybe has light beamed in by statite
mirrors above the Sun.
Done right, the increased mass of each ring
can let you keep the ring past it at the same
year length, as more mass in the center to
orbit around makes orbits faster.
Done really right, you could keep each ring
orbiting with the same year length and fixed
relative position and build giant bridges
between them, but that’s a whole different
topic for a whole different episode.
But you could have many thousands of them
near the Sun and many more far away in the
Oort Cloud, maybe getting power beamed out
to them.
Or just running on fusion reactors, a big
star pump for removing helium is a great way
to grab deuterium too.
And while there’s still room to doubt if
we’ll ever get commercial fusion reactors
working, you should be able to at least make
planet-sized deuterium fusion reactor work.
If we do have artificial fusion, one might
ask why we would bother doing this extension
on our own Sun, and more so if we had artificial
black holes.
The latter is trickier to argue but that’s
also much harder technology, and stars are
likely to be the cheapest fusion power systems,
it’s a process where letting raw mass do
the work is likely to result in the minimum
maintenance and cost.
It is possible we might never colonize beyond
this solar system, though it’s hard to imagine
we could engage in starlifting but not star
travel.
We discussed a few weeks back why we might
be able but unwilling to leave Earth and our
system, but we might send out robot collectors
even then.
So too, our Sun is not stationary, it orbits
through a giant sea of galactic dust and gas
and we could harvest a lot of that as we spiraled
around, by setting up collectors out past
the heliopause, it's not even a light day
away.
We have already sent spacecraft that far,
Voyager 1 and 2 both got there functioning,
so we should be able to do it again, and it
may be feasible to collect ionized interstellar
gas and bring it home to our own sun.
I don’t think we should rule that option
out, or for that matter other higher-tech
ones like opening a wormhole from our Sun
to empty space to clear out core matter and
replace it with hydrogen, or even weirder
options like opening a gateway to a younger
universe as an infinite supply of hydrogen.
More importantly though, Earth is always going
to be our first planet, and our Sun, Sol,
our first star.
And it wouldn’t be like hypothetical birthplaces
of mankind, where we only know in modern times
where our first tribe might have come from,
we’ll never forget Earth and the Sun, so
it's easy to imagine extreme efforts being
taken to preserve them for as long as possible.
Our first sun could then easily end up being
our last sun too, as others were disassembled
or died, but Sol remained.
Rising every morning for untold trillions
of days to come to give life to our world,
as it has for so many days before.
So we were talking a lot about Fusion today,
in stars and hopefully in power plants in
the future, and if you want an update on how
progress is going and what the challenges
are on Fusion, there’s a great episode of
Engineering the Future on Fusion over on Curiositystream.
Also, when I was working on this episode’s
video portion I ended up subtitling it Holding
Back Eternity because it seemed like that
was the main motive for refueling our sun
specifically, and I thought we’d take a
few minutes to run the numbers on how long
we could do that in an Extended Edition of
our episode, over on Nebula.
Nebula, which is now the largest creator-owned
streaming service, was started by a handful
of us as a way to give creators more options
for their work and a platform designed for
creators and their audiences, not ads, and
every new episode of SFIA comes out there
a few days earlier and without ads or sponsor
reads.
We also have an audio only-version of our
show available there too, early and ad free,
as a podcast, as well as all of our extended
editions like we’ll be having today and
some Nebula Exclusives like Planets vs Megastructures
and the Coexistence with Alien series.
Nebula is a great way to help support some
of your favorite channels while getting ad
free content and bonus material.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos like Engineering the Future: Fusion.
That lets us offer Nebula for free as a bonus
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using the
link in our episode description.
Again, you can get Curiositystream and Nebula
for less than $15 a year, just use the link
in the episode’s description.
So these kind of insane megaprojects require
efforts that are mind-boggling, but they get
a bit more believable when you have superior
automation, and next week we’re going back
to the near future to look at what automated
economies will look like in this next century
and also discuss worries about unemployment
in those emerging economies.
That will be a somewhat serious topic so we’ll
go from that to our Scifi Sunday episode,
Stranded on an Alien World, to lighten the
mood and contemplate how we would survive
if left on one and we’ll follow four stories
of people stranded on everything from places
much like Earth to worlds deader than the
most barren desert.
And two weeks from now we’ll contemplate
the exact opposite of a dead world, a world
which was alive itself, as we discuss the
Gaia Hypothesis Theory.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the
channel and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like to help support future episodes,
please visit our website, Isaac Arthur.net,
for ways to donate, or become a show patron
over at Patreon.
Those and other options, like our awesome
social media forums for discussing futuristic
concepts, can be found in the links in the
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
