Beneath a Martian dome we dwell, where crimson 
skies and dreams do tell; a refuge 'gainst the  
void's embrace, humanity's bold, new-found space.
One of the biggest questions we have about  
settling the Red Planet, right 
after asking if we should or not,  
is if we should be building domes there or living 
underground, or even favoring settlements up in  
space on rotating ring or cylinder habitats. 
Today I thought we would discuss if we should  
be building those domes on Mars and, if 
so, what purposes would they serve, where  
we should build them, how big, and from what?
Needless to say, a transparent dome is unnecessary  
in some cases, or even counterproductive, for 
the same reason we don’t make transparent roofs  
on houses. Likewise, some cases require them even 
when inconvenient or adding in a hazard. Though  
we can also see hybrids where a skylight in opaque 
ceilings and windows are used. With blast shutters  
to handle sudden damage to that transparent glass.
But before we get into a summary of the pros and  
cons of domes, by which we mostly mean transparent 
or translucent ones, we should note that the  
classic fear of the dome shattering and sucking 
everybody out to die in a near-vacuum is not a  
realistic one. Any dome is likely to be made of 
triangular segments no more than a meter wide,  
and it would be one of those that shattered. 
We can build out of much stronger transparent  
materials than glass these days, and given that 
diamond can now be economically manufactured and  
is just carbon, as is graphene, that 
wonder-material of tensile strength,  
we could potentially be having domes affordably 
built out of diamond sheets reinforced with thin  
transparent layers of graphene that would make 
even modern bulletproof glass look fragile, and  
certainly would make the roofs of houses and even 
the armor on lighter military vehicles look soft. 
But even if you blew out one of those transparent 
triangles completely, that doesn’t mean everyone  
suddenly falls over dead or gets sucked out 
onto the red sands. Air running from a hole  
into a vacuum only passes through it at a speed 
similar to the speed of sound at that pressure.  
Some large dome is going to have several seconds 
before any significant drop in pressure occurs  
and that’s enough time for some automated pressure 
switch to pop and let fly a patch, which needn’t  
be much more than a compressed gas capsule inside 
a sturdy inflatable beach ball which is now going  
to fly up and wedge into that spot to buy time 
for a better patch and evacuation. In other words,  
while there is an unavoidable hazard to any 
thin-shelled building separating breathable  
air from a near-vacuum, it is a manageable 
situation. The danger is rather overhyped  
and there’s a lot of room for plausible 
technological improvement and innovation. 
On the flip side, since there’s no real water on 
Mars and gravity is lower, a lot of the downsides  
of underground facilities go away. They get easier 
to build and reinforce from low gravity, and they  
can’t flood since there’s no water to speak of. 
Plus, they already provide a lot of inherent  
radiation shielding and leakage mitigation by 
their sheer thickness of material around them. 
So again, we’re not discussing an 
either-or situation, as we’ll have  
both domes and underground facilities, but the 
individual pros and cons determine if we have  
tons of domes and just a few underground 
bunkers or if domes are like anthills,  
the tiny surface entrance to a larger complex.
Unsurprisingly, both building domes on the surface  
of Mars and creating underground habitats have 
their own advantages and challenges, but moreover,  
the choice between these two options would depend 
on factors like the goals of the colonization  
effort, the available technology, and the specific 
conditions on Mars, which vary by where you are on  
Mars, and of course dome technology being used 
on other planets based of Martian designs will  
need to adapt too, where they have different 
air composition, gravity, and pressure… some  
designs are very different, for instance, if 
the planet you’re on has a thicker atmosphere  
than you want, rather than not enough air.
So, what are the main advantages of domes on Mars? 
First, Natural Light: Domes could allow 
natural sunlight to reach the interior,  
which is crucial for maintaining human health 
and well-being. We’re only now beginning to  
appreciate how critical the right types, spectrum, 
and duration of light are to normal human rhythms,  
same for animals and plants, and since Mars is 
basically the only planet with an even vaguely  
Earth-like day it makes sense to take advantage 
of that over purely artificial lighting. That  
day is close to Earth’s and off in a good way, 
I’d say – it’s a little over half an hour longer  
so a little extra sleep each day.
Second is Agriculture and Botany:  
Controlled environments within domes could 
potentially support plant growth just as well  
as artificial lighting underground and without 
a lot of extra power needs and equipment. 
Third, Solar Power: Domes could incorporate solar 
panels on their surfaces or under their surface  
to generate electricity, and you get some effort 
saved since you can clean them as a package or,  
if they’re under the dome, don’t need to 
put a spacesuit on to go tend to them. 
Fourth, Human Nature: One might be the toughest 
duster there is, who enjoys wearing their 2nd  
skin kind of isolated suit for weeks, but it still 
makes sense to do things like sports without it.  
For if your 2nd skin is impenetrable, your bones 
are still human. You can do sports underground for  
sure, but a wide open space like a park offers 
a much more interesting degree of freedom than  
a gym room. Besides, a jazz party under the starry 
sky might seem like a distraction for a scientific  
expedition. But might as well be vital for the 
survival of a permanent local community. If we  
want to settle Mars, we have to do it with people, 
and they have a lot of less tangible needs. 
And the last big one, fifth, Visibility: 
Surface structures could provide a view  
of the Martian landscape, aiding in research 
and exploration. You can go sit in a domed  
garden area, working on supplementing your 
food for a base or settlement, and still  
enjoy the Martian Landscape and night sky.
So those are the big five typically brought  
up in favor of domes, with the possible sixth 
that if you do fully terraform Mars one day,  
peeling off the Domes to enjoy the open sky or 
just converting the existing ones to agricultural  
greenhouses or parks would seem easier.
How about challenges? 
First, we’ve got Radiation: Mars lacks a 
substantial atmosphere and magnetic field,  
exposing its surface to higher levels of 
cosmic and solar radiation. Domes would need  
to be designed to provide radiation protection 
and one of our big problems with a lot of our  
transparent materials is they tend to take a 
lot of wear and tear from Ultraviolet light,  
which is also less filtered out by the 
thinner Martian atmosphere than on Earth. 
Second, we’ve got Micrometeoroids: Same as 
with radiation, the thin atmosphere offers  
less protection from micro-meteoroid impacts, 
so dome materials would need to be resilient.  
Though the protection isn’t zero like on an 
airless planet, and since most micro-meteors  
are very tiny, even the thin Martian Atmosphere 
does help a lot. Also, as we noted a bit ago,  
we already have much sturdier economically 
viable alternatives to glass and some on  
the radar that might rival battleship armor.
Third is the wider Temperature Range: Surface  
temperatures on Mars are much colder than Earth 
on average, so we need to heat a dome environment  
and give it good insulation. Also, while colder 
overall, the Martian temperature can vary widely,  
from extremely cold to relatively warm, and over a 
short period of time. So, you are getting extreme  
variation like you would expect in a desert, only 
more so. As a result, domes would need effective  
insulation and temperature regulation systems.
And this only adds to our fourth challenge with  
domes, which is the maintenance needs. Surface 
structures would be exposed to the harsh Martian  
environment, like dust and radiation, 
potentially requiring constant cleaning,  
maintenance, and repairs. There’s a good 
chance a robot could handle a lot of the  
exterior cleaning and polishing though, a 
Roomba for Mars rather than needing to suit  
up and go out to wipe off the dust and polish 
out scratches, and which would probably be able  
to do double-duty with cleaning solar panels.
I should also add that while domes are attractive  
for letting us see the sky and get some sun, 
they also would have a certain psychological  
burden for folks worrying it might be damaged and 
that only a thin dome protects them. When you’re  
already a hundred million miles from home on a 
planet with very few people and resources for  
handling problems, every little bit of extra 
stress and psychological burden is worthy of  
note and to be avoided where practical.
So that’s the major discussed pros and  
cons of domes. How does that contrast 
to building Underground Habitats:
 
First, we have an easier time digging a hole and 
using local regolith as shielding when we’re not  
needing clear and precisely engineered dome 
panels. As such, ISRU, or In Situ Resource  
Utilization, is way easier with underground 
facilities, assuming you even can practically  
make your transparent materials for domes on 
Mars rather than shipping them in from Earth,  
or perhaps the Moon. This is a very big factor as 
even if Domes have net advantages, if you need to  
spend a few billion dollars to bring the material 
in from Earth, that’s probably not going to result  
in any more domes than is absolutely necessary.
Second is Shielding, as the Martian soil and  
rock would provide natural radiation 
shielding and micrometeor protection,  
enhancing the safety of underground habitats. 
This is also a good reminder that a dome doesn’t  
have to be transparent. We could dig out some 
tunnels and use that regolith to form a lot of  
walls for structures on the surface, including 
covering inflated structures over with regolith. 
The third advantage of underground, or even 
thick rock domes, is temperature stability,  
the sheer thermal mass protects against 
extreme cold and heat on the surface. 
This contributes to our fourth advantage of energy 
efficiency, as underground habitats would require  
much less energy for heating and cooling due to 
the insulating properties of the Martian regolith. 
The fifth is the cost of maintenance. Building 
a dome might be costly, but keeping it clean  
and shiny is a constant expenditure.
There are some challenges though,  
beginning with needing equipment to dig with, 
and the reality is that machines and equipment  
for digging through rock and regolith tend to 
be inherently thick and heavy, and mass is not  
your friend if you’re a space traveler. We would 
also need a lot of field testing of designs built  
for a vacuum or low-pressure environment, for 
anything more complex than a shovel or pickaxe,  
though we may have prototypes for use on the 
Moon before this. And again this is one of  
the many reasons I strongly favor a focus on 
a Moon base before a crewed mission to Mars. 
And as with there, if you’ve got a ground 
penetrating radar you can find spots that  
are craters filled with dust that would 
be easier to scrape out. I would tend to  
guess that better and more automated drilling 
technology for making tunnels is something  
whose value on Earth will be great enough to 
see a lot of this technology get improved on  
here in the next couple decades. If you have a 
robot that can dig you a utility tunnel, you’ve  
got yourself a multi-billion-dollar invention.
Second, you must provide artificial lighting  
inside the tunnels anyway, which necessitates 
solar panels on the surface needing maintenance  
and cleaning unless you have a nuclear reactor. 
If you want to grow food on Mars, you need light,  
and sunlight would tend to seem easier.
The other big one is the psychological  
Impact. Living underground for extended periods 
could be brutal for astronauts and early settlers  
already enduring the stress of living on 
a distant and hostile planet. Moreover,  
the psychological effects on inhabitants 
due to the lack of natural light and open  
views might simply make this option impossible.
Needless to say, a combination of both approaches  
might be the most practical solution. Surface 
domes could serve as greenhouses, entrances, and  
recreational spaces, while underground habitats 
could provide the primary living quarters, or  
sleeping quarters, and offer radiation protection 
and easier climate control for storage facilities. 
And again, you have a lot of in-betweens. Much 
as the windows on your house provide a lot of  
lighting even if it’s only a tiny fraction 
of the sunlight pounding off your roof,  
an underground section or regolith 
covered dome could have skylights. 
You can do windows too, as that lower gravity 
means you could put a big stone slab overhead  
and leave the sides open with recessed windows, 
and bounce light in off mirrors around the hab.  
These can be manufactured from durable local metal 
so as to be easily polished back to a shine if a  
dust storm roughs them up, and gets you plenty 
of light while still giving you good insulation,  
radiation shielding, micrometeor protection. 
This works even better on the Moon or other  
lower gravity spots since you can heap tons of 
rock on top of your roof and not only not need  
much structure to support that but can rely on the 
internal air pressure to carry some of that load. 
Again, though, I don’t want to imply you have 
to rely on regolith for your protection. You can  
have a blast shutter ready to pop on a pressure 
switch or command to slam shut over a window,  
or even a whole dome. They don’t need 
as much help swinging up in low gravity,  
but you also don’t need to make them super-thick, 
as you could have ground up regolith ready to  
spray in between the shutter and damaged glass, or 
even just pump in water to freeze as a protective  
ice. Something like that might be standard 
operating procedure for protecting a dome too,  
some inflatable bags blow over on top of it and 
then your water reserves get tapped to pump a  
thin layer of water to freeze over the dome, and 
you melt it to reclaim most of your water after  
the dust storm or attack or whichever has passed.
As mentioned, we also have options for plugging  
gaps quickly. That inflatable beach ball patch is 
one, a drone shaped like a glass panel is another,  
and doubtless many others that experience 
will prompt from innovative minds. 
And I think that means we can contemplate more 
fragile materials too, so let’s move on to what  
we could build them out of. We can send materials 
like polycarbonate to Mars on a ship but that’s  
not likely to be viable beyond the first few 
missions with minimal domes involved. On the  
extreme end, as I mentioned earlier, we do 
have a lot of carbon on Mars and that’s what  
both Diamond and Graphene are exclusively made 
from. Indeed, you could suck in the local air,  
95% carbon dioxide and 3% nitrogen, with most of 
the rest being argon, and sequester that carbon  
from the carbon dioxide as diamond and graphene 
and use the left-over oxygen and nitrogen for  
breathing and for plants in those domes.
There’s not enough nitrogen on Mars for  
terraforming purposes, but relatively low-height 
domes need far less air and nitrogen in that air.  
You might need to still bring in comets 
for all the nitrogen you would need for  
doming over the entire Martian surface, what we 
call paraterraforming or building a worldhouse,  
a planet sized greenhouse, but otherwise you 
have plenty of nitrogen for those domes from the  
air present. Though thin as it is, other nitrogen 
sources on Mars would be preferable if available. 
Diamond domes and worldhouses are in that further 
future zone more beyond the scope of what we’re  
discussing today, the realm where we wonder if 
we should build orbital space habitats around  
Mars instead or be erecting vast space mirrors 
to warm the planet and orbital solar power arrays  
to run enormous electromagnets to create an 
artificial magnetosphere, see our episodes  
Springtime on Mars and Making a Magnetosphere 
for Mars for more details on such projects. 
Closer to the now, we have the option 
of using local regolith to make glass,  
which is plentiful in the silicon dioxide that 
glass is made of, along with other substance  
like ruby or sapphire, which themselves 
are only a little bit softer than diamond,  
as a reminder that transparent doesn’t mean weak 
and that diamond is not the exception to the rule. 
Solar kilns and ovens are probably your best 
bet and here the thin atmosphere helps us  
as we can more easily insulate it in a near 
vacuum environment, making heating, baking,  
and melting local regolith a bit easier. 
Nuclear power is also good for this,  
maybe better for running an arc furnace, and in 
both cases, running such production is a good  
use of the surplus power that you need to have 
available for safety’s sake or as an inherent  
byproduct of having solar panels out at noon 
that are big enough to still power the place  
when it’s less sunny in morning or evening. At 
noon you run your energy intensive industries. 
Basalt fiber or regular fiberglass 
should be manufacturable on Mars too,  
and Basalt Fiber is sturdier and a decent 
insulator. We don’t want to rule out locally  
manufactured acrylic glass or polycarbonate 
too though that feels like a heavier lift,  
even if they are materials that are often better 
to work with. When I built my own greenhouse,  
here on my farm, I used polycarbonate and 
definitely preferred working with that over glass. 
That said I probably would have saved net time and 
energy by just throwing new plastic sheeting over  
it every year and it is a reminder that 
giant inflatable structures are doable,  
and you could probably have multiple layers and 
removable segments so that worn down pieces could  
be brought in for recycling. This is why I tend to 
think early structures on Mars will lean heavily  
on inflatables. They don’t need to last forever 
or look pretty, and if you need the aesthetic,  
you can have a lot of cool and meaningful 
patches. You can bring along a giant heavy  
kiln for making glass – or a framework you 
might fill with ground regolith for the mass  
of insulation – or you could bring along a small 
test one which also produced oxygen from melting  
rock that your astronaut could breathe and use for 
inflating structures and keeping up with leakage. 
Indeed, a decent leak helps ensure you don’t 
need a carbon dioxide scrubber as long as you  
just keep making new oxygen. Early on, we would 
have different parameters for what is okay than  
when we're building permanent bases for a hundred 
people, let alone in the mid-settlement phase with  
tens of thousands of people living there. Though 
leakage might still be considered fine for them  
too. As we’ve mentioned before, the only things 
Mars lacks abundantly to be decently Earth-like,  
besides gravity, is nitrogen and hydrogen for 
air and water. The oxygen for both of those is  
in plentiful supply so blowing megatons of it 
out of your sprawling dome-cities every year  
might be considered free terraforming, as it 
slowly accumulates in the Martian environment. 
As a reminder, since inflatable structures 
make people think of wind blowing them over,  
while the wind can get fast on Mars and carry a 
lot of dust, the air is so thin that you could  
be standing in hurricane-speed winds and barely 
feel shoved on. It’s not the speed that matters,  
it’s the momentum transfer, and a handful of 
high-speed particles doesn’t shove you as much as  
a bunch of slower speed particles on Earth will. 
We can’t ignore wind altogether in our designs  
like we can when contemplating ultra-tall towers 
on the airless and lower gravity Moon, but it is  
a minimal factor and doesn’t limit the use of 
thin and light materials or inflatable ones. 
Nonetheless, it is hard to imagine we would keep 
inflatables as time goes on, with the caveat that  
they would likely have a role for travelers. If 
you’re the captain of an ice hauler bringing giant  
blocks of ice down to an emerging dome-city, it 
is very likely you have an elaborate inflatable  
shelter, possibly inflatable solar panels too, so 
that you can get out of your cargo truck and space  
suit during your journey of a few thousand miles 
over terrain with no roads or gas stations. In  
that same way, you might have charging stations 
along the way that had big batteries and panels  
and inflatable habitats for when convoys arrived.
Would we expand more underground or above ground?  
That depends. It might turn out we really don’t 
adapt well to twenty-four-and-a-half hour days and  
need to be underground for Earth-length artificial 
lighting. Or it may turn out Martian gravity isn’t  
enough for healthy humans in the long term, 
in which case you might see bedrooms or living  
quarters in big underground centrifuges with 
sloped floors to combine Martian and Spin Gravity. 
You might do that for a whole dome too, spin it 
and everything inside it and give it a sloped  
floor. Sometimes called a roto-city or a bowl 
habitat, and the lower the local gravity and  
higher total combined gravity you want, the more 
steeply sloped that floor needs to be. There’s  
no real maximum size on domes, especially with 
less air and gravity shoving on your structure,  
but this would be one reason why you don’t see 
kilometer tall and wide ones, or ones that look  
like bubble wrap with every single room being 
its own dome or structure, in favor of relatively  
large domes, but not truly enormous ones.
The nature of spin gravity is that the bigger you  
go, the more even and natural the spin gravity is, 
but the faster it needs to turn, which could get  
tricky in an environment with lots of rock nearby 
and at least some air in the native environment  
causing drag. And that size is likely to be under 
a kilometer wide and more than a couple hundred  
meters, both well inside practical engineering 
sizes for a dome, though you could get a diameter  
of nearly 20 kilometers with a structure spinning 
at just less than the Speed of Sound on Mars and  
only seeking to produce two-thirds normal 
gravity by spin to combine for full 1-gee  
Earth gravity with existing Martian gravity. 
That is a big enough dome that you would have  
significantly lower pressure at the top from sheer 
altitude even though it’s a pressurized vessel,  
and to have its own weather. Though you’ll get 
some of that in smaller domes too, the Goodyear  
Blimp Hangar here in Northeast Ohio was known 
for being so large it rained inside it sometimes.  
Factor’s like that, which we can’t really predict 
yet, are also likely to control dome size. 
Of course if you did want to avoid any drag issues 
on bigger spinning domes, you could use other  
tricks for rotating habitats in space of having 
a rotating structure inside a slightly larger  
non-rotating sheath with a vacuum that it can 
roll around in stably and friction free, another  
backup dome and one that if both get punctured 
is spinning so that the hole in the outer layer  
is not in the same place as the whole in the 
internal spinning layer. When we go beyond a few  
thousand people we need to stop thinking of micro 
meteors and start thinking of accidents, malice,  
or warfare as causes of punctures in a dome.
Would we see domes eventually  
sprawl all over Mars?
I think so, and honestly, I would  
not be surprised if even nascent oceans were domed 
over and switched to floating sea-domes later on.  
For one thing, low gravity affects architecture. 
We don't build too tall for normal homes away from  
denser parts of cities because height and gravity 
and wind make that structure need to be tougher  
and more expensive to build and leave you with a 
home you need to walk up and down a lot of steps  
for. When gravity is two-fifths normal, steps 
are a lot easier and the danger of falling down  
those stairs and being seriously injured is a 
lot lower. So, a house might have a big dome,  
or collection of interlocking domes, over the 
house or property. Those outer domes might be  
thinner and cheaper types because a drone that 
can race out and shove a breathing mask onto your  
face, spray your skin with vacuum-protectant foam, 
and drag you back to safety might be cheaper than  
building super-sturdy and safe domes on your 
property. Especially since you probably want  
that drone anyway. Some dome spaces are like 
a greenhouse, others more like a living room  
or work space with a clear ceiling. You probably 
have a lot of fans going to move air around too. 
Under those domes you have skylights set just 
above the ground level to more living areas,  
and since they’re in the ceiling it’s generally 
going to feel brighter than a room with similarly  
sized windows, so very comfortable even given the 
reduced sunshine on Mars from being further from  
the Sun. This can also still be garden and 
hydroponic space. Lower levels are sleeping  
rooms or less used space – nicely insulated from 
light and sound, and storage rooms below those,  
water cisterns and reserve air tanks, and maybe 
tunnels to neighboring dome habitats. After all,  
it's a little harder to make safe walkways 
unless you’re building tunnels, or dome-tunnels,  
the whole way. On the flip-side you can 
do some amazing railroads in low-pressure  
environments with pressurized cars.
You can do domes inside domes too,  
so the big cheap dome might have others underneath 
it, and Mars is just cold, so we either have to  
build millions of squares kilometers of reflective 
mirrors in space to add sunlight or we build domes  
over everything to keep the heat in. Maybe both.
Here’s the key thing though, with domes you  
get control over your local environment. If your 
neighbor is burning trash or the factory down the  
road is spewing out smog, you have a barrier. You 
can add lots of passages with remote operation to  
let things like pollinators or birds move through, 
so they need not each be independent ecosystems,  
and yet they offer far more efficiency 
and options to people. So I don’t think  
many domes on Mars would be removed even 
if they had an atmosphere terraformed in,  
and indeed I could imagine that trend coming 
home to Earth, to see domes get used here more,  
especially in tundra towns and desert domains.
Ultimately, while I fully expect humanity’s  
future on Mars to be a grand and varied one, 
that the Red Planet will be home to a billion  
different stories, I think most of those 
stories will be told under the Domes of Mars.
So we have some announcements and channels news 
coming up, but speaking of news, I’m sure you’ve  
noticed that the news often doesn’t seem focused 
on giving you a full and grounded view on any  
event or issue, but the reporter’s personal 
opinions or their outlet’s ideology. I’m glad  
to say coverage of science still tends to be low 
on partisanship compared to most topics, but even  
here we see it, particularly in polarizing 
examples like articles on Elon Musk. And  
since he’s so involved with topics like Mars, our 
topic for today, we have to worry that any report  
on Mars might be skewed by the reporter's views 
on Musk. As we see in comparisons of the same  
headlines, left-leaning outlets focused on the 
"clash between Sunak and Musk", while the right  
focused on Musk's warnings about AI capabilities.
Ideally it would be nice if news didn’t have  
biases in coverage, but in the absence of that, 
it’s nice to know what those biases are and that’s  
where Ground News can help. Grounds News is a 
website and app designed to help you pull back  
the curtain on media bias. Every story comes with 
a quick visual breakdown of the political bias,  
factuality and ownership of the sources 
reporting - all backed by ratings from  
three independent news monitoring organizations.
Ground News is a Platform that makes it easy to  
swipe between headlines to discover which details 
are emphasized, exaggerated, or left out entirely,  
and you can even see your own news bias 
preferences, so you don’t live in an echo chamber.  
I particularly like their blindspot feature, which 
shows what stories are being covered by one group  
while ignored or swept under the rug by another.
Ground News is a fantastic tool for sifting  
through the daily misinformation and bias. They 
provide all the tools you need to be a critical  
thinker, and I cannot recommend it enough. In 
fact, I believe Ground News is so useful that  
I’m offering 30% off their Vantage Subscription. 
You can only access this discount through my link,  
so go to Ground.News/IsaacArthur or click 
the link in the video description and  
support an independent news platform working 
to make the media landscape more transparent. 
So before we get to our schedule, I wanted to 
remind everyone that the National Space Society's  
Space Policy Debates Program is calling on high 
school and university students around the world  
to debate the hottest topics in space exploration, 
utilization, settlement, and governance. If you  
enjoy debate and are a student, or a teacher 
interested in mentoring them, and want to dive  
into the cosmos and shape the future, you can join 
this electrifying journey at the spUN Debates.  
I’ll link the details in the episode description.
Also the New Worlds Space Conference is coming  
up on November 17th and 18th, 2023, at the 
Bullock Texas State Museum in Austin Texas,  
along with their Space Cowboy Ball, so if you live 
in the area, grab some tickets and check it out. 
Next week we’ll examine the astronomy of Double 
Planets, where the big object in the sky isn’t  
a moon but a much larger and bluer and greener 
planet, and ask if life might be able to arise  
on such worlds and migrate between them. Then our 
monthly livestream Q&A is canceled this month,  
but we will still be having a short episode 
that day on Space Hygiene, before closing the  
Month out on November 30th with Agriworlds, and a 
discussion of how you could farm an entire planet.  
Then we’ll start December off on the 7th with a 
discussion of how to select crew for spaceships. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
