This episode is sponsored by Brilliant
Science fiction and fantasy loves to show
us brave archeologists and tomb raiders
uncovering some ancient ruins of a lost civilization,
but one day there might be whole civilizations devoted to it.
One of the most popular plots in science fiction
is where our brave adventures encounter a
ruined ship, typically of some ancient and
long dead alien race, or xeno-archeologists
hunting among such ruins.
These make for great stories, but lack an
element of realism in the context of the Fermi
Paradox and Galaxy-spanning civilizations.
You need some serious handwaves or plot contrivances
to explain not why a ship got abandoned or
planetary civilization fell or went extinct,
but why nobody else found it or re-settled
such a world almost immediately on astronomical
timelines.
Analogies to our own lost ships and civilizations
don’t really work out well in space or by
the capabilities of spacefaring civilizations.
These days when a ship sinks we know where
and can go hunt that thing down, our ancestors
couldn’t go SCUBA diving to reclaim their
lost treasures.
We also want to keep in mind that a lot of
the archeological past is either composed
of trash our ancestors didn’t care about
or repurposed, like using broken pottery in
following rounds of construction and repair,
or had cultural or religious significance.
We don’t find abandoned tracts of useful
land, just abandoned tombs or temples and
the like, and typically ones subject to many
rounds of ravaging or repair or reuse or robbery.
That’s not likely to happen to an entire
planet, unless it’s been subjected to such
destruction that ruins probably wouldn’t
exist, or was the only one some civilization
had, in which case it would imply they aren’t
overflowing with advanced technologies by
the standards of any civilization able to
get there and dig it up.
If you’re able to launch expeditions to
investigate worlds around alien suns, it means
you have the technology to reach and colonize
those worlds too, meaning if you find a world
with a dead civilization on it, it either
was very primitive compared to you or had
a very stay-at-home attitude to the galaxy,
as otherwise one if its other colonies would
come by and reclaim that world.
You’re also not likely to have planets used
as waste dumps, to any high-energy civilization,
throwing garbage down on a planet instead
of recycling that garbage or dismantling that
planet for raw material is like throwing money
into a trash can and setting it on fire, except
that your trash can is also made out of gold.
If you’re settling other worlds it’s because
you have very good automation or very good
energy production, and probably both, and
your bottleneck is always raw materials.
This would seem to really mess up this popular
fictional trope, but another area where authors
often mess up in science fiction is scale,
not just of how vast and huge our galaxy and
the civilizations in it would tend to be,
occupying huge amounts of space, but also
of time.
And that revives this notion of ruins and
derelicts and trash planets and the folks
who explore them for fun and profit.
A couple weeks back we were looking at how
we might go about maintaining all the vast
megastructures we hope to one day fill the
solar system with, and eventually even the
galaxy.
We’d expect to build trillions of them throughout
just our own solar system, as we move toward
building a Dyson Swarm and becoming Kardashev-2
civilization.
I noted there that even if we’re incredibly
good at maintaining those structures, in many
cases they would end up wearing down and get
abandoned, destined to float around until
they get recycled.
Even if they lasted as long as our own civilization
has, call it ten thousand years, and only
spent a decade abandoned and scrapped, that
would still mean one in a thousand would at
any given moment be sitting there as a derelict.
And mind you, that’s a way better reclamation
rate than we have in our civilization, where
a lot more than one in a thousand structures
is sitting around vacant and nominally abandoned,
or occupied by squatters.
Such being the case, these sort of megastructures,
each meant to be home to hundreds of thousands
if not millions or far more, and themselves
numbering in the trillions, would represent
the equivalent land area of a million Earths,
just in this solar system alone.
They’re a small fraction of a vaster civilization
that dwarfs them, but are just so numerous
that they dwarf us.
Even if these decommissioned space habitats
and industrial megastructures were only a
thousandth of their civilization, and even
if they only supported populations of hold
outs, squatters, or scavengers a thousandth
of our own population density, you’d still
be talking about many trillions of people
in any given fully developed, Kardashev-2
civilization.
And that’s just assuming long-lived well-maintained
habitats being only briefly out of play before
being recycled in some fashion.
It doesn’t include the countless quadrillions
of ships probably meandering around that solar
system or scenarios like one being abandoned
for reasons like a war, an economic or fashion
shift, or repurposed because its inhabitants
or maintenance AI went a bit weird in the
head.
Such places could easily just age out, not
from maintenance issues, but because in a
long-lived civilization with life extension,
they might fill up quick and be left with
nominal immortals.
Those folks wouldn’t last forever, they
might die or transition to a digital existence,
uploading their mind, and their neighbors
who have known them for centuries might want
to effectively entomb them and their way of
life rather than give that home and parcel
of land to someone else.
The same could happen on Earth, as we noted
in “Civilizations at the End of Time: Dying
Earth”, when building on a planet you don’t
have space issues, you have energy and heat
removal issues, so a culture with strong building
materials and automated maintenance might
be prone to just powering down someone’s
home and building over top of it in endless
layers, a rising planet-wide city or Ecumenopolis,
a Kardashev-1 Civilization.
They don’t really care about their possessions
much, as a raw material source, because it’s
not going anywhere, and they might not even
know if someone actually died or just uploaded
their mind or went on ice for some centuries
out of boredom.
Unpowered facilities don’t really count
to them, only those drawing a lot of energy
and producing a lot of heat matter.
Given a few million years, even if people
tended to live thousands of years on average,
that planet is going to be more necropolis
than ecumenopolis.
Same, if some habitat gets grey-gooed or overwhelmed
by some killer AI or super-virus, it’s as
likely to be quarantined as blown up.
Even if you opt for that route with it, or
recycle your abandoned habitats, you still
need to drag that off somewhere safe if you
can, plus a full-blown Kardashev-2 civilization
has that same waste heat issue an Ecumenpolis
has, plus the debris issue.
You don’t nuke a dangerous or derelict megastructure
in the middle of the Swarm if you can avoid
it, you give a push outside the main swarm
to a place where it represents no navigational
hazards or heat production limits or a vacant
and valuable lot in your solar englobement.
And they are quite likely to be towed off
to some facility that specializes in handling
the wrecks, or storing them till they can
be handled, those could easily begin to resemble
the classic Space Hulk of lumped-together
stations and ships, scrapyards of astronomical
proportions, and such a storage facility might
be a minor planet too, since it’s nice to
have just enough gravity to keep your debris
from floating away.
Probably some mined-out asteroid or moon that
had all its smelting facilities still but
nobody particularly wanted to settle in a
big way.
Indeed, much as communities often invite landfills
or prisons into their backyard for the extra
jobs and funds, while far more are happy not
to have them in their own backyard, places
fallen on harder times might fight to become
such repositories.
When we start looking at the sheer numbers
involved, even if we are ultra-conservative
and optimistic about it, it’s not that these
things are the norm, it’s just that they
are outliers of such an enormously massive
sample that they are everywhere.
This is a bit of a recurring concept in our
Rogue Civilization series, that many of these
less than utopian staples of science fiction
could pop up as phases places go through or
simply be so numerous by the sheer size of
the main civilization that even though they
are rare, they still outnumber our own modern
civilization many times over.
One quick note on this waste heat idea, and
the notion of time.
Assuming you are still bound by the Laws of
Thermodynamics, you can never use more power
than you can get rid of as heat, and this
places a lot of constraints on many of the
projects we discuss here that tend to get
overlooked and why I so often pound the drum
about waste heat as the bottleneck on advanced
civilizations.
Ultimately heat can only be gotten rid of
by radiating it away, which is based on your
total surface area and your temperature.
You can spread out to allow you to use more
heat, but for something like a Dyson Swarm
this means longer and longer travel times
and signal lag not only over the whole thing,
but between individual components.
Volume rises with the cube of radius or diameter,
surface area only with the square, that results
in an inverse relationship between population
and density, because a civilization a hundred
times more numerous in terms of energy use
needs a hundred times the surface area to
radiate that heat away, meaning it is ten
times wider and thousand times larger in volume.
Everybody has ten times more space, meaning
they are the cube root of 10, 2.15, times
further away from each other than before.
Every signal takes 215% as long to arrive,
every trip takes longer or requires more energy,
and thus more heat, and those signals, even
if as concentrated beams, need a bit more
power to deliver their message, and thus more
heat.
It also means you don’t really want people
smelting down a habitat in a grand display
of energy wealth right in the middle of that
swarm, nor do you want to push it out of that
swarm really fast, because heat is money in
these places, not energy.
But this has another aspect too, because you
can’t expand a planet to increase how much
it can radiate, so if you’re trying to disassemble
a planet for raw materials or terraform it
with nanotech, there is actually a maximum
speed you can do this at or you’ll smelt
all your equipment or little robots or terraformed
organic material.
It’s just an aspect of high-tech civilizations,
even ones we’d think of as post-scarcity,
waste not, want not, especially when it comes
to using energy inside the main portion of
a built-up civilization.
As another quick note, you might wonder, considering
how much energy is involved with moving things
at interplanetary speeds, if they might find
smelting something down inside the swarm energy
cheaper than shoving it away, but they can
reclaim most of that energy used to push it
up to speed away from them, and such derelicts
also make a handy place to adjust habitat
orbital paths with, by pushing off them, using
the various beaming or mass driver techniques
we’ve discussed elsewhere.
So long as they can push the habitat away
using less net heat than smelting it there
would take, they will shove it away, and slowly,
so its voyage may take many years.
So we’ve got all these derelict ships, ghost
town habitats, and all these abandoned layers
of Ecumenopolises that might be sitting around
not in use by the main civilization for any
number of reasons.
A given world might not do that Necropolis
approach we mentioned of course, indeed I’d
not expect most would, but there’d be many
such places and on some you’d probably have
teams of people who hunted around them.
Legally or not, a world might have some rule
that if no one heard from the owner in a century
they’re allowed to pry the place open or
auction the rights off to pay back taxes,
like we often do with homes or storage units.
Such things would vary from world to world,
and it might be very rare and orderly, or
it could be a totally illegal black market
thing.
It might attract romantic adventurers or scoundrels,
it might be some small club of bored dilettantes
or some university-style archeology department.
And remember time here too, if you’ve had
some isolationist habitat that utterly closed
up its shutters and ran on reserves of fusion
fuel and raw material, as they likely all
could do, it might finally go dark hundreds
of centuries later and when you crack that
open you might find layers of ruins and fossils
and inhabitants at the end who looked like
morlocks and were effectively an alien civilization
right in your own backyard.
Same, we’ve often talked about generation
ships meant to plow through interstellar space
for centuries, or even hundreds of centuries,
and if one got abandoned or damaged, or left
behind a colony in its wake that just didn’t
take off, someone is eventually going to want
to investigate that matter.
This isn’t like poking around one small
tomb or one wrecked ocean going ship, these
things are huge and old and could occupy whole
towns worth of experts for generations dissecting
what happened.
And you probably need to move slow about that
too, odds are their data is encrypted and
trying to find the 3M post-it note someone
conveniently left on their terminal with their
password might take a while, or you might
be negotiating with some half-mad ship computer
for access, only to find out that it went
nuts at failing to save its crew from a space
debris collision and later find out in truth
it had also wiped out the handful of survivors
in a berserk attempt to cover its shame.
You might get some fairly crazy crew on board
a lot of these ships too.
If you’ve been one of skeleton crew running
a ship for generations it’s not hard to
imagine getting a bit neurotic, or having
been, to have signed on for such a job in
the first place, and that ship might be brimming
with weird traps, hidden vaults, killer robots,
feral pets or genetically tailored maintenance
organisms, or some axe-crazy lunatic who murdered
the other crew and went on ice to await fresh
victims to add to his skull pile.
You send a team in there looking for information
or treasure, and you might find you bit off
more than you can chew, like they kept gene-hacked
or cyborged animals around for pit fights
and the ultra-redundant interstellar space
freighter has still got life support running
partially millennia after the dozen crewmembers,
or even lone crewmember, died somehow.
In Warhammer 40k, a setting notorious for
its utter disinterest in scientific realism
that still somehow manages to nail many ideas
more realistically than most scifi, they have
folks forever boarding derelict ships and
spacehulks or abandoned lower layers of Hive
cities and running into mutants and aliens
or leftover ancient and crazy technology,
that might occasionally happen in the future
when folks go in to investigate or loot such
places.
Not just plunder for artifacts or memorabilia,
you might have insurance investigators poking
around for years figuring out what happened
and salvage teams dragging them back to holding
yards where they might take centuries to arrive
and as long to get processed through a court
for who owned this or that or was liable for
what.
You could easily have an underfunded storage
yard of derelict ships or habitats under lockdown
while they waited for the courts to settle
the case, which might take centuries even
if they were expeditious just from many of
the litigants not living in the same star
system.
That’s quite an opportunity for anyone shady
too, both to occupy those places or take a
bribe to look the other way or to deal in
goods looted or produced in such places.
We’ll save space piracy for another time,
like quietly invading some isolationist and
primitivist habitat to use as a base, but
any place where the rule isn’t finders-keepers
on salvage, there’s likely to be that long
drawn out investigation period and given the
potentially ultra-hazardous junk inside, even
when the authorities do investigate it’s
likely to be slow and super-cautious.
If your job is to go in and investigate such
places, filled with potential death-traps
of automated defenses or broken bits, you
might be quite glad to look the other way
as a silent partner to some team of illicit
scavengers seeking treasure and excitement,
who will deal with most of the hazards themselves
and give you a cut of the plunder, if they
live.
For that matter, for every habitat being decommissioned
there’s going to be a period where most
folks don’t want to live there anymore but
it’s still rather habitable.
That’s very ideal for squatters and rogues,
and the nominal owner or oversight authority
might actually be inclined to turn a blind
eye as a disreputable crowd of squatters or
looters might encourage those folks still
stubbornly living there to vacate so they
can turn off the lights and bust it down for
salvage.
Or, if it follows that notion of inhabitants
slowly aging and going digital at some point,
living in the data cores of the megastructure,
they might encourage that so they can divert
the energy and resources to more computing.
They might be the ones pushing for an exodus
too, trying to turn the place into a ghost
town in a very literal sense, or the maintenance
AI might be wanting to turn the place into
a nature preserve to protect the increasingly
divergent mutated organisms living there.
So much depends on the psychology and society
of that civilization, and it’s likely to
vary all over the place, in both space and
time.
In the inner core of a Dyson Swarm you’ve
got that energy and heat issue but everybody
is pretty self-contained and self-sufficient
if they want to be, so that offers a lot of
room for divergent cultures, outlooks, and
so on.
But you’re also likely have millions of
Oort Cloud Habitats built by isolationists
or as part of border fort and detection system
or laser-highway relays, and you could have
whole migrant fleets that meandered around
those raiding abandoned facilities or squatting
in one relegated to neutral status in some
border dispute between two neighboring powers.
You’d have failed colonies, abandoned stations,
derelict ships, scrapyards for equipment or
dangerous material, old military hardware
floating about, facilities or ships scuppered
by their owners or captains for the insurance
money or to get out of some obligation.
Probably not a lot proportionally, especially
in the sort of utopian society we might hope
for, ethical, prosperous, and smart, but enough
in raw numbers to have whole civilizations
worth of people on the fringes engaged in
salvage, plunder, or squatting, and even if
entirely inside the law, whole facilities
devoted to it with staffs big enough and operational
times long enough to become their own unique
culture.
You could easily have some abandoned asteroid
mine turned scrapyard peopled by millions
whose whole economy for centuries was taking
apart dead megastructures towed there, and
that’s likely to be a fairly unique sort
of place.
Same for some settlers coming to a world or
habitat that was abandoned or failed halfway
done or transitioned to some digital existence,
living in the shadow of that prior civilization
with it influencing you, all the way down
to sneaking around the old dome or subterranean
colonial facilities with your childhood friends
looking for knick-knacks left by them or by
prior generations who set up their clubhouses
there.
For that matter, if everyone did go digital,
they might have whole layers of virtual worlds
in those abandoned ghost towns you might be
exploring too.
And again, time and divergence mean that whoever
was there first and whoever is there now could
be so different from each other they might
as well be aliens.
So maybe we never get to experience the classic
science fiction scenario of breaking into
alien spaceships to find high-tech artifacts
guarded by murderous aliens or xeno-archeologists
cracking open the tombs of fallen civilizations
on dead and sterile worlds sitting for millions
of years, but we might end up getting a very
close approximation.
I’m not sure if that would be a good thing,
but at least it would be exciting.
One of the points I was emphasizing today
was how things like astronomical scales and
thermodynamics can place limitations on even
very advanced civilizations or make entire
civilizations where we’d normally expect
just a few folks as outliers.
These often get missed in science fiction
even by authors who are pretty good about
doing their research and knowing their science,
and sadly many don’t.
But a good understanding of math and science
is what lets us try to look at the future
in a more realistic way, be it the far future
of humanity or just our daily lives and careers
nowadays.
It’s an area of knowledge whose usefulness
cannot be overestimated, something I suspect
anyone watching this show needs little convincing
about.
If you want to learn more math and science,
and have fun while you’re doing it, try
out Brilliant.
Their online courses and daily challenges
let you enhance your knowledge of math and
science with easy to learn interactive methods
from the comfort of your own home and at your
own pace.
To make it even easier, Brilliant now lets
you download any of their dozens of interactive
courses through the mobile app, and you'll
be able to solve fascinating problems in math,
science, and computer science no matter where
you are, or how spotty your internet connection.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
So we mentioned how all these derelict ships
and stations and worlds might offer some excitement
in the future, where we’d generally expect
things to be pretty prosperous but maybe a
bit boring, and while there are a lot of ways
we might amuse ourselves in the future, one
I get asked to cover a lot is what sports
will be like in the future and in space, and
next week we’ll take a look at what sort
of new options low or zero gravity can offer
us for our athletes and audiences in Space
Sports.
The week after that, we’ll return to Mars
to look at how we’d go about terraforming
it if we wanted to, in Springtime on Mars.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And if you’d like to support future episodes,
you can donate to us on Patreon or our website,
IsaacArthur.net, linked in the video description
below.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
