This episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
Our Universe is enormous and ancient,  
so we suspect it of being home to many alien 
races, and yet it may be but the tip of the  
iceberg. We may live in a Multiverse so vast as to 
dwarf our Universe, home to uncountable species.
 
The Fermi Paradox is the big question of 
why, in a Universe so vast and ancient,  
we don’t see any other bigger and older 
civilizations, and it arose from our realization  
in the early 20th century of just how big and old 
the Universe really is. At about that same time,  
we began to contemplate how we might have parallel 
realities and alternate Universes, leaving  
even more potential to search for alien life.
Our approach to the Search for Extraterrestrial  
Intelligence, or SETI, never really discusses 
Multiverse options, for the simple reason that  
almost everyone assumes we can find our first 
example of intelligent aliens in our own galaxy,  
and need not consider the whole wide Universe, let 
alone other Universes to find example number one.
 
And yet, there are several reasons this 
assumption might be wrong, and that our first  
encounter with aliens may involve alternate 
realities. Even if it doesn’t, the topic of  
interacting with and meeting aliens through the 
Multiverse is interesting in its own right.
 
We’ll begin by quickly reviewing what 
a Multiverse is, or what it might be.  
For more details, you may want to check out our 
episodes Alternate Realities & Parallel Universes,  
and Infinite Improbability Issues, for more 
discussion of the science of how these work,  
as well as the Quantum Cheeseburger. Speaking of 
Cheeseburgers, our Fermi Paradox episodes tend  
to be on the longer side so you might want 
to grab a drink and snack before starting,  
and if you enjoy our episodes, don’t forget 
to like, share, and subscribe to the channel.
 
So, what is a Multiverse? There are actually a 
ton of different ways you can have a Universe  
beyond our own, but the one most commonly 
discussed nowadays tends to be the Many  
Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics. This 
is the main alternative to the one presented  
by the Schrodinger’s Cat thought experiment, 
which is a popular example of the Copenhagen  
Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics, and I do want 
to emphasize that they are potentially alternative  
explanations of the same idea: either one is 
true, or the other is true, or neither is true,  
not both. To clarify, Schrodigner’s Cat is the 
example where a cat in a box has been poisoned  
by a poison delivery device triggered by the 
decay of a particle, which is an example of a  
quantum event acting at the macroscopic scale, 
or the subatomic acting at the human level,  
or in this case the cat level. The Copenhagen 
interpretation says that the cat is both alive  
and dead until we open the box, at which point the 
cat is either one or the other when we observe it.  
But until that observation is made, both alive 
and dead are equally valid states for the cat.
 
The Many Worlds Interpretation argues that the 
cat is alive in one reality and dead in another,  
and that opening the box to check just tells 
us which of those two Universes we’re in.  
Of course, this should be true for every event, 
so there’s a reality where the cat is alive,  
one where its dead, one where it never went 
into the box, one where it escaped the box  
and attacked Schrodinger, and one where 
it is alive in the box and a tree fell  
down on the other side of the planet, and one 
where it’s alive and the tree did not fall.
 
The idea that all of these potential realities 
exist simultaneously leaves you with many worlds  
for every event, with one world for every 
possible state or every possible action. And  
this isn’t just true of cats: there’d be countless 
Universes we could assemble from every state and  
configuration of every available particle. This 
number of Universes is so enormous that even just  
writing out that number on a piece of paper 
would take more sheets of paper than we have  
ever produced for every book ever written. Even 
if we were to limit every universe to a single  
unique address, like a Universe phone number, 
and store it on a digital medium so advanced you  
only needed one atom per bit of data, it would 
collapse under its own mass into a black hole.
 
In other words, it’s a lot of Universes. 
And mind you, that doesn’t even include the  
far more numerous options we have when we start 
contemplating different Universes. Ones identical  
to our own but where the Big Bang releases a few 
more atoms or a few less, or ten times as many,  
or where the speed of light was 3 billion meters 
per second, not 300 million, or 3, or 3.0001,  
or protons weighed just one millionth more than 
they do here, or a billionth, or a trillionth,  
and each of these have their own Multiverse 
that has an insanely huge number of possible  
combinations each atom can be in. 
And none of this contemplates an Infinite  
Universe. All of these, each scenario we just 
considered, would still amount to a finite number,  
and so is still essentially meaningless 
on an infinite scale. When considering the  
Fermi Paradox, which is all about how strange it 
seems that we’re alone in our giant and ancient  
Universe, taking the Multiverse into account 
exacerbates that issue to the point of absurdity.  
In a Multiverse, every possible option which 
can exist, must exist. So at some point you  
might even have a Universe where intelligent 
life is literally emerging from nothing,  
what we call a Boltzmann Brain, with no need 
for evolution or even a habitable planet, simply  
because there is a finite chance of it happening.
So what are the implications of all this? Well,  
if the Many Worlds Interpretation of Quantum 
Mechanics is right, then any alien that could  
ever exist inside physical laws must exist 
in our Universe’s Multiverse. In fact,  
because of the potential variation in those laws, 
it might be that there are some possibilities we  
can’t even imagine. It would mean they exist in 
at least one of Earth’s various reflections too,  
since there should always be some version of Earth 
in which that organism could also have existed,  
including ones where it had not evolved but 
simply formed, like our Boltzmann Brain. 
 
I mention that particular point because if 
it’s possible to travel between Universes,  
then our chance of encountering aliens needs to 
consider that they need not travel very far in  
space to meet us. Indeed, this is a big conundrum 
a Multiverse raises for the Fermi Paradox.  
If travel between these alternate realities is 
possible, it would raise two very big concerns,  
one of which would be aliens on 
copies of your own world visiting,  
with the other being that a given species 
needs no motivation to colonize other planets.  
Let’s address that second point first.
If you consider the implications of having access  
to other universes, it soon becomes apparent that 
you wouldn’t really need to colonize space at all.  
While there are billions of galaxies out there, 
with billions of star systems to settle, that  
number of potential new homes is still miniscule 
compared to all the effectively-identical Earths,  
where the only difference is that humanity never 
arose. Perhaps that first critter that we think  
of as the bridge between man and ape just didn’t 
occur yet, or died when it did, or its early tribe  
got eaten by predators a year before it would 
have divided to form another tribe, and so on. 
 
There would not be an infinite number of 
suchs worlds, but they would certainly  
outnumber the potentially habitable worlds 
in our current Universe. Indeed they would  
do so by a greater factor than the number of 
atoms in this Universe outnumber its stars.  
And that’s just the options where humanity could 
safely wander into those copies so close to our  
own we could hardly tell them apart, except 
for their having never been home to humanity. 
 
Which is a pretty big exception, since there 
should be a near endless number of worlds  
identical to the here-and-now, including all 
our buildings and crops, and warehouses full  
of manufactured goods, except that all the people 
on it died yesterday, or five minutes ago. Fully  
colonized and terraformed worlds you could just 
step through a portal and inhabit certainly seem  
preferable to trying to terraform Mars, much less 
spending decades travelling through the depths  
of space to some other, more distant place.
Now personally, I would think it a bit ghoulish  
and lazy to take over a corpse-reality where 
everyone had just died, rather than building  
fresh on some virgin world where mankind has 
never tread, even if it's just an Earth-clone  
where mankind never arose, or where the dinosaurs 
never died out. But I imagine that Corpse-Earths,  
near-identical to our present but with all the 
humans gone, would be a popular choice since  
they’re immediately ready to go. Presumably they 
would also be littered with novel bits of science,  
technology, and art that haven’t 
been produced by our civilization. 
 
I would still be worried about why they were 
uninhabited, though. It is true that there is  
always a random chance everyone just spontaneously 
ceased to exist, but the probability of that is  
stupidly low compared to some more mundane 
cause of mass extinction, and thus virtually  
every world you would find that had our cities 
but not us is going to have an accompanying  
reason for that absence, like a super-plague, an 
alien invasion, or some neutron bombs going off.  
Unless you have some way to pick or sort them 
beyond looking at them, you will nearly always  
have a clear and present cause for an extinction 
event that might get the colonists we send there.
 
Incidentally, the notion for random things 
appearing or disappearing in quantum mechanics is  
somewhat similar to the concepts we’re discussing, 
in that there is always a finite chance of a given  
particle or small group of particles undergoing 
some change of state that transmutes, teleports or  
changes them. There’s a very remote chance that 
a whole bunch of hydrogen atoms could fuse in  
exactly the right way to form a single molecule of 
chocolate. It’s a tiny chance, but it’s a finite  
one, and thus it happening twice also has a finite 
chance, though significantly smaller. The same  
is true of it happening a quintillion times in 
exactly the same place, with all the appropriate  
textures, to form a perfect bar of chocolate. 
Although, those random particle interactions  
would still be spitting out other particles, 
or radiation. So someone spontaneously turning  
into a big chocolate statue of themselves 
wrapped in gold foil ought to see the area  
heavily irradiated to the point of looking 
like a small nuclear bomb went off. 
 
However, nuclear detonation or fatal irradiation 
relies on those particles being absorbed by nearby  
matter. Since there is a finite chance any given 
gamma ray or alpha particle of radiation might  
be absorbed while traveling in any given medium 
for a given distance, there is a finite chance it  
will not be absorbed, thus not contributing to 
causing cancer or a thermonuclear shockwave. 
 
There is also a finite chance that nearly 
every particle of radiation produced in the  
event will travel vast distances before being 
absorbed or decaying too. Essentially there’s a  
finite chance a nuclear bomb could detonate and 
do no damage to the area at ground zero because  
none of the particles of energy produced 
randomly hit anything on their way out.  
This is the craziness that one has to 
consider when dealing with a multiverse.  
There’s a finite chance you could be sitting on 
a nuclear bomb when it detonates and not die,  
and there’s a finite chance that bomb will 
instead turn into several thousand cheeseburgers.  
There’s also a chance that all the energy 
released in that transmutation, which ought  
to exceed even a normal nuclear detonation, 
won’t kill you, instead allowing you to enjoy  
one of those tasty Quantum Cheeseburgers.
If this seems insane, it only gets worse.  
Since there would be a near infinite number of 
uninhabited Earth-clones, there should also be  
a near infinite number of worlds where humanity 
- or something like it - would also exist. And a  
near-infinite number of such groups of humans 
who also want to colonize all those worlds.  
This is exactly what Isaac Asimov considers 
in his short Story “Living Space”. Humanity  
invents a way to peek at other empty versions of 
Earth and colonizes them, sort of. Most are just  
colonized by a single family, as the worlds 
are so abundant everyone can have their own.  
In one case, they bump into a world where 
it wasn’t actually entirely uninhabited,  
but it turns out to simply be colonists from 
another reality who also saw it as empty. 
 
They then worry that there are a ton of these 
societies, and that each is probably only  
checking to see if the planet has a big and 
obvious civilization, so that likely many of  
the worlds they’ve colonized might also 
have other colonists in some small spot  
elsewhere on the planet. While they’re busy 
considering the issue of some of their colonists  
eventually bumping into other colonists from other 
Earths, and speculating on the idea of alien life  
finding its way to their homeworld, a colonist 
enters to complain about weird red creatures  
with tentacles peering in through his windows 
on his home in one of the colonized realities.
 
This raises the worrisome notion that 
someone might invade your reality,  
or that aliens in some reality might find 
Earth and invade all of its realities,  
or that something inhuman might evolve on 
a copy of Earth, and invade elsewhere. 
 
Truth be told, this isn’t actually as big a 
problem as one might initially think. First,  
it’s impossible to invade all possible realities, 
since there’s always a reality where an invasion  
did not occur. Second, the act of invading a world 
would subsequently create additional realities  
where something goes wrong in an infinite number 
of ways, or where the invasion was called off,  
and so on. And lastly, the entire concept is that 
there is a Universe for any possible combination  
of the available particles, so if you can actually 
add or subtract mass or energy from one universe  
to another - in other words to travel there - then 
that alters the number of available Universes.  
Indeed you not only have a whole array of 
different Universes with one more or one less  
atom, or one quadrillion more or less, you 
have to have an additional reality for each  
moment and location in which a Universe 
could gain or lose mass from another one.
 
The multiverse needs only interest us from a Fermi 
Paradox standpoint if such travel is possible,  
and since we can only detect or see things by 
sending a particle of light or some parallel, you  
can’t look at them or detect them or communicate 
with them unless you can exchange energy in some  
way. Even if you found a clever way to get around 
this by only exchanging information in a way that  
doesn’t move mass or energy, the simple act of 
sending the information is changing the state of  
something on both sides, which amounts to another 
new reality, or rather a whole new set of them for  
each possible combination of data you could send, 
and each place and time you might send or receive  
it, who sees it, and so on. If you find this 
all confusing, don’t feel bad, it really is. 
 
Essentially if travel is somehow possible, you 
should have at least one additional Universe for  
each possible travel scenario for each pair 
of Universes, or indeed for each possible  
combination of various Universes connecting to at 
least one other, multi-multi-verses as it were,  
and thus should never have to worry about running 
out of possible Universes to send colonists,  
in fact you are arguably getting infinite 
combinations splitting at infinitely small rates  
of time. I’m also not sure it would matter if two 
identical copies of me from different realities  
happened to step onto the same place and 
time onto identical versions of Earth,  
but there should be a unique reality for each 
person stepping onto each possible planet,  
plus more for each combination of 
accompanying people and equipment.  
Perfectly identical repeat events, down to every 
atom at the exact right nanosecond, may represent  
two different universes anyway, but I’m not 
sure how you could tell or if it would matter.
 
Now one thing that comes up in contemplating 
colonizing parallel universes in fiction is that  
they randomly jump to worlds and explore them, 
but if they like them they can dial the planet  
back up again. This is rather problematic though 
because assuming there was some unique identifier  
for each reality, the equivalent of a phone 
number, that code would be so long that even  
stored digitally it would be impossible to work 
with. It is possible the code might be relative  
rather than absolute, how far and in what 
direction of your own reality it is, though  
I’m not sure you could do that, since there might 
be multiple pasts that result in a given reality,  
not just futures springing from it, 
and there’s still a lot of realities.
 
Exactly how many realities there would 
be in a Multiverse is hard to pin down,  
but the approximate number typically kicked 
around for our Observable Universe is 10^10^77.  
To clarify that, that is a 10, followed by 10^77 
zeros, or ten followed by a hundred thousand,  
billion, billion, billion, billion, billion, 
billion, billion, billion zeros. Which means  
any given reality phone number you are dialing 
has that many digits. Your typical book has  
around a million digits in it, your typical 
modern harddrive, about a million times that,  
so if we used every harddrive on the planet, 
we might only need a billion, billion, billion,  
billion, billion, billion times that 
many to store a single Universe-code. 
 
In fact even trying to dial those numbers in 
as some stream of data in some period of time  
shorter than geological times ought to require 
passing data through a conduit with such speed  
and density that it ought to form a black hole. 
Which to be fair is not necessarily an issue,  
given that most notions for traveling to other 
Universes tends to involve modified black holes  
or wormholes to do it. It would be interesting if 
the method of making a gateway to another reality  
involved assembling a micro-blackhole 
gateway to it composed specifically of  
digits of its address sent in packets of 
energy. If any writers listening to this  
feel like incorporating that as a novel form of 
wormhole travel, feel free to steal the idea.
 
So it ought to be impossible to even keep a phone 
book of Universe addresses or dial them, but maybe  
we can come up with a way, and it's not that big 
a stretch compared to the stretch we already have  
to make to assume there’s an actual way to 
travel to these realities. It makes interstellar  
or intergalactic travel seem both vastly easier 
and vastly less desirable all at the same time.
 
So what does this all say 
about the Fermi Paradox? 
 
Well that’s tricky since our conclusion would 
depend so much on the specifics. For example, if  
you can pretty much open up a portal to clones of 
our Earth, you can presumably also open portals to  
parallel realities where Earth is a few minutes or 
hours either ahead or behind in its current orbit,  
and listen for SETI-style radio signals 
without the noise of a planet in the way.  
Or ones where Earth was Mars-Sized, or orbited 
a red sun, or both. The point being, you could  
rapidly flick through billions of possible 
Universes listening for loud radio signals in  
our area of space, while simultaneously looking at 
various weird combinations of stars and planets,  
until you get a pretty good idea of where life 
tends to pop up. If you have this capability,  
you ought to be able to get some useful answers 
about the Fermi Paradox rather quickly.
 
This is often the case with the Fermi Paradox: 
if you actually possess a given technology which  
would influence it, you also get a pretty good 
idea of how relevant it is to the possible answer.  
As an example, if we invented a cluster 
of technologies that make it very easy  
to get into space, and build big spaceships 
with internal environments able to survive  
centuries of travel in interstellar space, then 
we’d know that other folks could have done it too,  
so Fermi Paradox Solutions which rely on 
interstellar colonization not being possible,  
or on species killing themselves off before 
they manage it, no longer look as plausible.  
Incidentally, those are examples of what 
we call Late Filters of the Fermi Paradox,  
and indeed those two in particular are 
usually considered the big Late Filters,  
a capacity and desire for interstellar travel, 
and successfully surviving long enough to do it.
 
On the other hand, travelling through a multiverse 
also undermines one of the critical assumptions  
behind the Dyson Dilemma, which looks at how we 
can assume there are no advanced civilizations in  
our galaxy if certain conditions hold true, three 
of which are that space colonization is possible,  
that growth is desirable, and that space 
colonization is the most attractive path  
for that growth. If they have an option available 
like colonizing the Multiverse by just stepping  
through a doorway, then that’s what they do. 
Even those who want to practice terraforming,  
or find non-Earthly conditions, are going to 
pick a version of Earth that suits their needs.  
There should be Multiverses where Earth has less 
gravity, or is bigger, or has a double planet  
instead of a Moon, that reality where Venus got 
bumped into Earth’s orbital plane by a collision  
and the two fell into a double planet lock. 
That version of Earth with Saturn-like Rings,  
or that one where it recently had its 
surface ripped off to form a Moon,  
leaving exposed magma for you to easily mine 
for metals for return to your own world.
 
So there’s just no reason to go out and 
colonize space. Not even to escape from  
entropy, since there should always be some other 
reality with less entropy or even the ability to  
run a heat engine through a gateway to 
lower entropy here and raise it there.  
On the other hand, you’d have virtually 
endless resources to build spaceships with,  
so you might still have folks doing 
it for the sake of exploration. 
 
Now to address another big question: 
if such travel were possible,  
would aliens ever visit Earth? 
That is harder to say, but probably not, because  
they’d feel an overwhelming urge to explore 
space, the same as we would in their shoes.  
They ought to be focused on exploring copies 
of their own world, rather than visiting ours.  
We might also want to consider if we’re just 
talking about alternate histories or Universes  
with different physical laws, because if there are 
realities we can reach where the speed of light is  
faster, then those would be the ones you would 
expect folks to focus on exploring, or perhaps  
even using to travel around their own Universe. 
A popular approach to faster than light travel in  
science fiction is to use some dimension 
or universe congruent to your own,  
where either travel is faster and easier or 
space is smaller, making for a shorter distance  
to travel. You pop in, travel, then pop back out 
to our Universe. Think of Hyperspace and its other  
analogies in various sci-fi settings. Such being 
the case, we might be in a type of Universe folks  
don’t bother traveling to or exploring much 
because it's harder to travel in and explore.  
Or fatal, you might be able to extract energy 
from some place with different physical laws  
but by and large even a tiny change in physical 
constants should make you explode or implode.
 
We also have to remember that in the 
context of a Multiverse, where every  
possible reality can exist, there must always 
be places where a given event does not occur,  
so there would always be ones in which no other 
aliens ever exist, or choose to visit if they  
do. Indeed, that’s another Isaac Asimov story, 
where people who can choose possible timelines  
pick one for humanity where humans are the only 
intelligent species to arise in the galaxy. 
 
You can never explore or colonize the entire 
Multiverse since it is by definition every  
possible scenario and that means there’s always 
a bit of it you haven’t explored, colonized, or  
conquered, and while you shouldn’t think of events 
spawning new universes, in this sense of them not  
having previously existed, conceptually if there’s 
a reality where the aliens decided to invade,  
there’s one where they did not too, there’s one 
where they visit on Tuesday and one where they  
visited last year and ten thousand years 
ago and never but there should always be  
an equal or greater number where they did not.
How about that scenario where the aliens are from  
Earth, but just a different copy, one different 
enough we would call them alien not human?  
Same premise. If I’m jumping to another world, 
there’s a reality where I arrived at that given  
time and place and its twin where I did not, 
and one for each scenario where I arrive at a  
given time and a given place, where I stepped 
out in Dallas, Texas on January first and  
another where I exited in London on March 2nd or 
Paris in 1903, and one for each of those option  
where you did, or where an alien did. But there 
would be vastly more where it did not happen.  
Just because there are a near infinite number 
of worlds where you or someone nearly identical  
to you is alive, doesn’t mean there are 
not vastly more where you’re not there.
 
There should be worlds where intelligent races 
exist and travel to copies of their world  
different enough and inhabited so that it’s 
basically alien contact, but these ought to  
be a tiny minority of them. While it's hard to 
run the numbers, it ought to be very improbable  
that you’d ever dial up an inhabited world. If you 
randomly dial places, then presumably very nearly  
all of them don’t even have anything resembling 
Earth there, but mostly because it's a dead lump  
or empty space. If we assumed some sort of 
congruity, like being more likely to dial  
up versions of Earth similar to our own, then 
for it to be inhabited by something human-smart  
but distinctly in-human ought to be unlikely, as 
that would imply some evolutionary divergence a  
long time back, not a minor change. Though it 
would depend on how that congruity happened,  
and while it strikes me as a fun thing to 
contemplate for a science fiction story, it would  
likely take us entirely into that realm, and away 
from even the remotely-possible science-fact.
 
Multiverses and travel to them is at least in the 
realm of science, even if it’s near the fringe.  
Though I would emphasize that we don’t know such 
places exist nor have we any idea how we could  
travel to them if it's even possible. Again, 
the Many Worlds Interpretation is one of many,  
Schrodinger’s Cat and the Copenhagen 
Interpretation being the other popular one, and  
they aren’t both true, it’s just a question of if 
either is, or if they’re both wrong. There’s zero  
evidence to suggest that Many Worlds is right, and 
the same is true of our other Multiverse concepts,  
and so far we’re not even sure how we might 
design an experiment or tool that could check.
 
This a fascinating option though, and one that 
would have very unpredictable consequences for the  
Fermi Paradox. We only explored a handful today 
and, as mentioned, we explored some other related  
concepts in our episodes Alternate Realities & 
Parallel Universe, Infinite Improbability Issues,  
and Aloof Aliens, which considers options 
like alternate physics in more depth.
 
I’d say that the key take-aways are that more or 
bigger Universes don’t necessarily exacerbate the  
Fermi Paradox, as it requires that they be able to 
reach us. And bigger means more numerous, but not  
necessarily more dense. In a multiverse scenario, 
aliens would absolutely exist, and absolutely have  
visited Earth, but it doesn’t necessarily mean 
they came and visited our Earth, or that they  
exist in our area of the Universe, or Multiverse. 
It may even be that our universe is the case where  
nobody else is there, and nobody decides to visit, 
in which case we would never even know.
 
So we were talking about Multiverses and the Many 
Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics today  
and if Many Worlds is right, then on one of them 
there’s a version of you and I who both picked  
up and understood Quantum Mechanics with ease, 
but for most you probably found the topic as  
counter-intuitive as I did when first learning 
it and for that matter often still find it.  
When things get small, things get weird, and if 
you’re looking for a creative and interactive way  
to learn about the topic, there’s an excellent 
course on Quantum Objects over at Brilliant.
 
Memorizing formulas and listening to lectures 
isn’t the best way to learn any topic, let  
alone Quantum, and our friends over at Brilliant 
understand that. Brilliant is a website and app  
built off the principle that you learn best 
while doing and solving in real-time. Jump  
right into solving problems and be coached 
bit-by-bit until, before you even realize it,  
you've learned a new subject in STEM.
We have a ton of research telling us what  
the best methods for learning are but it probably 
won't’ surprise you that the most critical part of  
learning is that you have to do it. You learn 
best while doing and solving in real-time,  
and Brilliant’s website and app 
are built around that principle.
 
You won't need to memorize long messy 
formulas and endless facts — just  
pick a course you’re interested in, like 
Quantum or Computers or Quantum Computers,  
and get started. If you get stuck or make 
a mistake you can read the explanations  
to find out more and learn at your own pace.
Brilliant has something for everybody — whether  
you want to start at the basics of math, science, 
and computer science, or dive into cutting-edge  
topics like Cryptocurrency or Quantum Computing, 
and they do it all in a fun and interactive way.  
If you'd like to join me and a community 
of 8 million learners and educators today,  
click the link in the description down 
below or visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur.
 
So that will finish out April 
but May will be jammed packed,  
as we look at Biotechnology next week 
and how it will impact our civilization.  
Then we will move on to Alien Languages and how to 
decode them, and later in the month we’ll discuss  
Laser Pistols, Lightsabers, Arcologies, and Solar 
Flares and their impact on the Fermi Paradox.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,  
and if you’d like to help support future 
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are 
linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media forums 
where you can get updates and chat with others  
about the concepts in the episodes and many other 
futuristic ideas. You can also follow us itunes,  
Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our 
audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
