This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. 
Get access to my streaming video service,  
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
About 300 million years ago, there existed a small 
shrew-like species who really wished the Earth  
wasn’t so full of big, pesky dinosaurs, and while 
that creature is long extinct, its descendants now  
dominate the planet. As it was with them, 
so it likely will be with us in the future…  
and maybe in hundreds of years, 
not hundreds of millions.
 
There once was a single mammal, possibly the 
Morganucodontids, a creature resembling a mix  
of rat, opossum, and shrew, from which every 
future mammal descended. Back then this critter  
and siblings were a single species and as far as 
we know the only mammals, so mammals would have  
been a species and not a class, yet. Millions of 
years later that species would have become a genus  
composed of many species, millions more and it 
would have become a Family composed of many genus  
each of many species, then eventually an Order 
composed of many families, and finally a Class.
 
That rat-like ancestor of ours existed 
just a few hundred million years ago,  
when the Universe was around 2% younger than 
it is now, and it would seem like it will not  
take nearly that long for humans to split 
out into a Genus, then Family, then Order,  
then Class all its own. As we spread out to the 
stars, those alien environments should change us.  
Even without cybernetics, genetic engineering, and 
distinction blurring concepts like mind-uploading  
and artificial intelligence, humanity as it is now 
would seem but a temporary thing in the long run.
 
But we probably do not have to wait 
eons for such divergence of the species,  
not with things like cybernetics and genetic 
engineering, both likely becoming big factors in  
our civilization before this century is out. And 
this is where we get to the concept of transhumans  
and eventually post-humans, those creatures and 
people who might have us as common ancestors,  
but are radically different from us and each 
other, human clades grown into their own species  
or even further apart. We’ve talked in many past 
episodes about various ways human beings might  
alter ourselves or our offspring, to adapt to the 
various environments and new tasks we’ll face as  
we spread across the solar system and galaxy. 
Today, we’re going to look at relations between  
those various types of post-humans, particularly 
the degrees to which they might coexist,  
come into conflict, or just physically separate 
from one another. We’ll also look at the extent to  
which they’ll biologically separate, eventually 
into forms that can no longer breed with one  
another – qualifying them in any reasonable 
taxonomy as entirely separate species. But  
this examination of the post-human, multi-species 
community won’t be complete unless we also pay a  
visit to the many species that humans will 
eventually construct--animals we’ll uplift  
to human intelligence and robots we’ll make 
sentient and sapient from scratch—species that  
we’re currently trying to create even now.
This will be a lengthy conversation so now is  
a good time to get whatever analog to 
a drink and a snack is compatible with  
your biology and settle in for a while.
At the core of all of this is the notion of  
species and speciation. We’re going to challenge 
and bend the traditional idea of a species,  
but the concept of speciation will 
still apply so lets review that.
 
Species is the lowest level of the traditional 
taxonomy that’s been used to classify plants  
and animals since the 1750’s, with higher-level 
categories called genus, family, order, class,  
continuing up to phylum, then kingdom, then 
domain, under the umbrella of life. We would be in  
the chordate phylum of the Animal Kingdom of the 
Eukaryotes Domain... those life forms whose cells  
have a nucleus, and we would probably need another 
tier above that specifically for Earth-based life,  
since cells and cells with nuclei might be fairly 
common off Earth but wouldn’t be related. 
 
As mentioned there are a lot of 
other classifications in there too,  
subspecies, subkingdoms, and so on, with often 
only loose agreement on what they should be or  
where to draw dividing lines. We should always 
remember that any taxonomy, whether it’s of living  
things or celestial objects, is an attempt to fit 
things into categories that people invented, based  
on things they’d observed up to that point. 
Discovering new things after you defined  
categories is how you end up in long discussions 
about whether Pluto is a planet or dwarf planet,  
or frustrated at the platypus for not quite 
matching the criteria for being a “mammal”.  
And when you do finally resolve those 
controversies, you haven’t actually learned  
anything new about Pluto or platypuses, you’ve 
only changed the definitions of words.
 
One of the traditional criteria for designating 
two types of creatures as different species  
is that they couldn’t interbreed and produce 
fertile offspring. So for example, horses and  
donkeys are separate species even though they 
can produce mule offspring because the mules  
are infertile, incapable of reproduction. 
And in fact we use mule as shorthand for any  
infertile cross-species hybrid. But this part 
of the definition of species has been seriously  
challenged by our later discovery of quite a 
lot of successful interbreeding by creatures  
we already called separate species. For example, 
modern humans and Neanderthals have always been  
considered related but separate species, but it’s 
now pretty clear that they frequently bred with  
one another, swapping DNA many of us still have. 
A more current but still rare example of  
such cross-breeding is between polar bears and 
grizzlies, as environmental change brings them  
into each other’s territories. But while being 
able to cross-breed is no longer a sound criterion  
for putting creatures in the same category, it’s 
still pretty reasonable to say they’re separate if  
they can’t cross-breed at all. But then we also 
have to re-examine what counts as being “able”  
to cross-breed. Genetic manipulation will enable 
us to hybridize creatures that absolutely would  
not be able to in nature. And at the extreme, 
digital beings like AIs and downloaded humans  
have a genetic code of sorts of their own, and 
we’ve already created novel AIs by combining  
features from several AIs with desirable 
performance traits, which is actually a  
pretty good definition of the word breed.
An important notion for this discussion is  
speciation, the formation of a new and distinct 
species. In nature this can occur from species  
interbreeding or more often from a single 
species splitting into multiple species.  
It’s very often driven either by environment 
changes that must be adapted to or by migration  
into a new environment. So for example, a tribe 
of monkeys living mostly in the trees might  
find themselves needing to come down from the 
trees to forage for food in open grasslands.  
 
In time, the monkeys best at surviving in the 
grass will roam farther from the tree line,  
practice standing on their hind legs so they can 
see over the grass, and eventually adapt to that  
lifestyle so well they don’t see their 
cousins back in the trees much anymore,  
let alone breed with them. They evolve on their 
own separate path, and a new species is born.  
 
The same thing happens when grizzlies in the 
cold far north suffer a mutation that makes  
them albinos with fatty skin, and they find they 
can now survive on the vast snowy plains ever  
farther north than their cousins can. Notice 
that in both cases, there is a feedback loop,  
in which small differences in physical traits 
help them adapt to a new environment, which leads  
them to migrate farther into that environment, 
which takes them physically farther away from  
those that lack the adaptation trait, which 
exacerbates the difference in traits. The two  
groups could have interbred all along, but they 
didn’t because they were physically far apart,  
and so they also drifted genetically apart.
Feedback matters a lot in our discussion too,  
as an example, organisms might speciate but also 
converge in weird ways. A person might upload  
their mind to a robot body, or an artificial 
computer mind might upload their mind to a  
cloned or biologically engineered body, and either 
might have progeny who do the reverse, returning  
to the original organism after a few steps, while 
their cousins might have diverged in physical  
form in just a couple generations by more than a 
million natural generations could have.
 
 
But for future humans, gradual evolution 
will probably be far less of a force than  
sudden deliberate changes brought about by 
biotechnology, and those same technologies  
might make crossbreeding possible. So too, 
they might matter less. It is not impossible  
to imagine a human marrying an android, with 
whom they could never naturally breed but which  
leaves some questions about where and how 
the hybrid offspring would live. 
 
It is not just that we have to ponder all 
these various post-human groups and how they  
would interact with each other, like how the hive 
mind gets along with the super-intelligent dogs,  
or how the latter don’t get along 
with the super-intelligent chatbots.  
Nor is how the uploaded minds get 
along with artificial intelligences,  
or how cyborgs get along with the AI who download 
themselves into synthetic biological bodies.  
Instead, ultimately, it will be how a thousand 
flavors and blends of each get along.
 
But for simplicity and in the nearer term, 
let us ponder how each of these major groups  
will be adapted to their environment, and 
how this will preclude breeding. 
 
We can imagine some of the more probable genetic 
divergences in humans, be they long term natural  
adaptations or accelerated by biotechnology--for 
example, alteration to live in low-gravity,  
such as on the Moon or Mars, or even essentially 
no gravity, such as on most asteroids or in  
non-rotating space habitats. See our episodes 
on Life on Low-Gravity Planets or Zero-Gravity  
Civilizations for further discussion of those. 
Of course many worlds might have higher gravity  
too, and we can see worlds with different 
atmospheric densities and compositions  
which might require extensive engineering to 
make livable. We can imagine eyes adapted or  
altered to see in dimmer or brighter light, or 
in frequencies of light invisible to us now.  
Of course we can imagine goggles or contacts 
or even cyborg eyes performing that role too,  
and a critical concept of transhumanism is that 
these sorts of technological integrations can  
be viewed as a part of speciation in 
the same way as a genetic mutation. 
 
All of those examples also illustrate how physical 
separation will accelerate the genetic separation.  
If you are genetically adapted to be at 
home on a high-g planet with visible light  
and a slightly acidic atmosphere, you 
probably won’t spend much time hanging  
out with attractive people who live in zero-g, 
breathe Earth-like air, and see in dim infrared.  
Even if you could overcome the logistics, mate 
with them, and produce fertile non-mule offspring,  
those offspring will probably not inherit the 
correct full set of adaptive genes to be able to  
live in either parent’s environment, so they’d 
either need cybernetic implants to help them  
or a special environment customized to their 
needs. Of course, the mixing of genes doesn’t  
have to be so haphazard as it is in nature. Just 
as biotechnology will enable rapid adaptation,  
it could also enable controlled, 
safe interspecies cross-breeding,  
and we’ll return to that topic later.
We can also imagine a hive organism,  
such as the Star Trek Borg Hive Mind composed 
of many different species, and yet itself only  
a single organism, and this would be an example of 
a post-human. So too would a person who was part  
of a Hive Mind, or an artificial intelligence 
who chose to join a hive mind, or which had  
hundreds of robot bodies it operated, which 
is the opposite of a Hive Mind in many ways. 
 
What about a person whose great-grandfather 
was a cat, who had been genetically modified  
to be smarter, who was followed by a cat, the 
grandfather, who was modified to be even smarter,  
near human, and have hands rather than paws, 
who was followed up by something like a cat  
human-hybrid, having fully human intelligence 
and humanoid form, who fell in love with and  
married a human girl. Finally, their child 
opted to be altered to be entirely human  
in DNA and appearance, even while many of his 
cousins still dwelled in the ancestral home  
as regular or slightly modified cats. 
This is the potential awkwardness of the  
post-human family, not to mention confusing 
genealogies. Your neighbor comes by for a visit  
and you have to introduce your grandmother to 
him as the cat on their lap they’ve been petting.  
Or that your step-brother is the car in the 
driveway, who is also part of a hive mind,  
or that you actually have seven biological 
parents, each of whom contributed DNA to you,  
that you were grown in a tank, and that 
you also regard the House AI as a parent,  
as well as the super-intelligent Dolphin who has 
been like a mentor to you since you were a kid  
and oversaw your doctoral thesis when you attended 
the University where he’s a professor.
 
It’s important to understand that a species 
can split even if the product species aren’t  
physically separated. In nature, a species can 
split simply because different members adapted  
to different ecological niches. Predators who take 
down prey and scavengers who clean up the scraps  
often descend from the same species, and they’ll 
develop traits suited to their niches a lot faster  
if each group breeds among themselves even 
while they coexist. They will do this even  
more rapidly if they can add those traits when 
they desire them, and a group already used to a  
little of some new trait, like the ability to see 
infrared, might be more inclined to embrace those  
who decide to add in other sensory augmentation 
and mental augmentation and alteration needed  
to handle and use those senses.
Cyborgs may be heavily genetically  
modified to accept the synthetic interface and 
to not have bodily needs like physical touch and  
diverse nutrition. They may often be Frankenstein 
entities, using entirely different DNA for given  
limbs and organs. Even if we tried to force 
the interbreeding with genetic manipulation,  
the cyborgs might simply lack the genes to 
create intact non-cybernetic living things.
 
Hive mind people will probably require 
similar modification, at the very least  
a brain interface that connects their minds in 
ways that ours can’t, that makes them a true  
hive rather than a mere close-knit community. So 
where interbreeding people adapted to different  
physical environments might leave you with 
offspring adapted to nowhere, crossing hive- with  
non-hive-humans might leave you with people who 
can’t function in either social environment.
 
Even if such interbreeding is still physically 
possible or can be forced in a lab, it probably  
won’t take place often if there is not some 
compelling reason to do it. Humans were probably  
able to adapt to cold hard northern environments 
much faster by breeding with the brawny  
cold-resistant Neanderthals who were already there 
and adapted, even if those brutes weren’t very  
bright. But it’s hard to imagine what similar 
issues future humans with biotech would solve  
quite that way, and we will be exploring various 
biotech options in a couple of weeks.
 
We might also ask which groups will be most 
numerous, to form the new majority or major  
factions at least, and that may depend heavily 
on which human adaptation will best allow  
people to spread quickly across the galaxy and 
colonize new spaces? The ability to withstand  
cryosleep, for instance, might be partly 
genetic, either natural or engineered,  
and it might be an advantage big enough to make 
such folks the majority of interstellar colonists.  
So might the ability to quickly erect 
livable habitats, like the folks adapted  
to zero-gravity can, since they need not go to 
the effort to build large rotating habitats.  
Or the ability to breed quickly, an option 
artificial intelligence would seem to  
have or those who embraced some equivalent to 
cloning and duplication, of mind or body. 
 
Many worry that humanity might face 
overpopulation, but many also worry we might see  
our birth rates drop below replacement levels, 
were this concern to materialize as a threat  
to our continued survival folks might embrace 
creating folks by more artificial and rapid means.  
Indeed we might see techniques that resulted in 
very short childhoods become popular, while on the  
flip side, parents might embrace technologies 
that extended childhood to several decades  
rather than one or two. Such groups might not get 
along with each other very well either.
 
Which sort of traits would let 
us best spread out to the galaxy?  
And could regular old humanity do it? 
I mentioned how some of these traits might  
be advantageous for colonizing space and thus 
contribute to a given faction becoming more  
numerous. Now a given faction colonizing space 
more aggressively than others and growing does  
not mean they themselves are not diverging 
too. Indeed the simple limitation of light  
speed for travel and communication would seem 
to ensure divergence and a lack of cohesion,  
so we are not really asking here what traits 
might let a given type of transhuman or posthuman  
dominate the galaxy as some cohesive empire. 
That said, one trait that might do it isn’t about  
how quick they could get out and colonize, but how 
slowly they diverged or how devoted they were to  
remaining united. A posthuman clade modified to 
be obsessed with no further alterations - which  
regarded its current form as perfect or nearly 
so - or which was obsessed with unity even across  
interstellar space, might maintain some 
sort of interstellar empire. After all,  
shipment or transmission of “approved” DNA 
wouldn’t be very difficult. They also might make  
for very worrisome neighbors, though this trait 
need not necessarily be combined with xenophobia  
or hostility, or aggressive recruitment like 
we tend to assume Hive Minds would engage in.
 
Of course folks fixated on avoiding 
divergence or dissension, friendly or not,  
are often the opposite of expansionist. Isolation 
in nature can cause an ultra-niche species,  
like some creature that is ultra-adapted to 
one specific diet in one specific climate  
and defense from one specific predator. However 
in artificial rather than natural circumstances  
it can make it easier to avoid drift, genetic 
or cultural, and so folks looking to maintain  
some trait without divergence or drift might seek 
out circumstances or environments that favor that  
trait heavily, or even create them. 
That’s a topic we could probably spend an  
entire episode on all by itself and may do so 
at some point in time, but an environment where  
poking noses into holes always gets them bitten 
discourages curiosity not just genetically but  
culturally too. Either that or the evolution of 
a longer and tougher nose. If you’re trying to  
discourage lots of socializing in person, then 
setting up your colony in some radiation blasted  
environment and releasing tons of infectious 
diseases is a good way to encourage folks not to  
go outside and play or hang out together. Those 
are extreme and simplistic examples but if your  
goal is to keep some trait around for millions 
of years, you might go to such lengths.
 
There’s always the question of if 
old humanity will go extinct and in  
some ways the answer is yes, as we go extinct 
every generation, that original first mammal,  
some sort of rat-possum-shrew-thing, is both gone 
and everywhere, how can something be said to be  
extinct when its descendants dominate virtually 
every ecological niche? Should we care about  
baseline humanity going extinct in favor of a 
trillion diverse clades we created anymore than we  
care that you or I personally will not be around?
And of course we might be around, you and I,  
and the most important trait for interstellar 
colonization, fundamentally, is longevity. This  
can mean either personal longevity so that 
you reach the stars, or cultural longevity  
which is accomplished by being able to pass your 
culture’s way of thinking and doing things onto  
your descendants or successors. Even ignoring the 
huge travel times, colonization of a system is a  
long and deliberate process. This is why another 
important trait in natural selection is the urge  
to grow and expand. This is true of species taking 
over a tidepool or a galaxy, because an organism  
lacking this trait is not one claiming new 
niches or even maintaining control of old ones.
 
We can talk about post-humans replacing us but 
you or I might end up as those post-humans. Life  
extension is likely to be one of those critical 
technologies we discover before going truly  
interstellar, in large part because its likely 
a lot easier to get volunteers for interstellar  
travel when a century long voyage is not something 
that you wouldn’t survive to finish and be able to  
do something else when you’re done with the trip. 
The prestige and curiosity of interstellar travel  
might bring on volunteers when it’s new, to fuel 
that first dozen colonies, but we need hundreds of  
billions of such colonies to fill the galaxy and 
we will probably get them regardless but they’d  
be a lot easier to find if the volunteers can 
expect to live many centuries or millennia. 
 
At this point, this person who is baseline 
human except for not aging may or may  
not be able to have other transhuman or 
post-human alterations as time goes by,  
but it is hard to argue that you or I, as a 
post-human a million years old, is less of a  
human than someone who is naturally descended from 
regular human reproduction for a million years  
or someone we whipped up a million years from now 
with purely modern DNA. Some human-intelligent  
cat-person made in 50 years or some android might 
feel, with some cause, that they are as much a  
legitimate spokesperson for modern humanity as 
those two cases I just suggested too. We should  
also keep in mind that genetic divergence into 
many groups might not mean physical separation.  
We are a specialist society and we might 
diverge into castes with genetic differences,  
a popular notion in science fiction which 
sometimes shows alien species divided into various  
sub-species who specialize at given tasks.
I suspect they will be around though,  
baseline humans of the modern period. They may not 
be competitive in a given environment but neither  
are most animals in a human-dominated environment 
but we still preserve them and a few dedicated  
worlds out of countless trillions used for keeping 
the 21st century human around is plausible enough,  
especially given that these need not be real 
planets, they might be simulated worlds entirely  
on some computer buried in some post-human 
civilization’s bunker-libraries become zoo. 
 
And those post-humans are human descendants 
whether we made them in a lab, on a computer,  
or more traditionally. It doesn’t 
matter if we intended them either  
or if they were the creation of one of 
our creations or one of our creation’s  
creations, anymore than it matters if that 
shrew-like critter from 300 million years ago  
meant to make us. Indeed one might argue a machine 
mind you made intentionally has a better claim as  
a true successor than some critter a thousand 
generations of mutation removed from you.
 
One way or another, there probably will be 
folks around claiming to either be human  
or their true and legitimate successors, whether 
they’re hyper-intelligent brains on a computer the  
size of a planet or some nature preserve set aside 
by such a creature, in real or virtual space.  
Of course it's always possible we already are in 
such a preserve and just don’t know it.
 
So this was one of our shorter episodes, but 
if you’re looking for more information on  
Transhumanism, there’s a great episode by Jason 
Silva on Transhumanism over on CuriosityStream,  
and a point he raises in that is that humans 
use tools and they almost become appendages to  
us. That can be fairly literal and is something 
we’ll be looking at it in our Biotech episode  
in a couple weeks, but one thing we didn’t 
talk about much today is the mental changes  
that might come with post-human or transhuman 
existence so we’ll spend a few minutes on that  
in an extended edition of today’s episode 
over on Nebula in a segment about life in  
the fast lane and what it means for speciation.
I wanted to thank Curiositystream for their help  
growing Nebula, and our viewers even more so, 
since they’ve stuck around as we’ve continued to  
grow and improve it until its started making waves 
and bringing in ever more creators who want an  
alternative to Youtube, and if you’re interested 
in helping out the show while getting to see all  
our episodes ad free, and some with extended 
editions, like today’s, you can join Nebula.
 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself 
but we have partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational 
videos, to offer Nebula for free as a bonus if  
you sign up for CuriosityStream using the link 
in our episode description. This means you can  
watch all the amazing content on Curiositystream, 
like Jason Silva’s discussion on Transhumanism,  
but also all the great content over 
on Nebula from myself and many others.  
And you can get all that for less than $15 by 
using the link in the episode’s description.
 
So we’ve got a Livestream coming up this Sunday, 
where we’ll be taking your questions live in the  
chat, Sunday, April 25th, at 4pm Eastern Time. 
Then we’ll close out the month of April with  
a look at how Multiverses and Quantum Mechanics 
might impact the Fermi Paradox. That will finish  
out April but May will be jammed packed, as 
we look at Biotechnology, Alien Languages,  
Laser Pistols, Lightsabers, Arcologies, 
Solar Flares, and Simultaneous Evolution.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,  
and if you’d like to help support future 
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are 
linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media forums 
where you can get updates and chat with others  
about the concepts in the episodes and many other 
futuristic ideas. You can also follow us itunes,  
Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our 
audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
