This episode is sponsored by Skillshare
Explorers have found life in the deepest,
driest, darkest, hottest,
and coldest corners of our planet.
As resilient as life seems to harsh environments, maybe we might find some in space,
and if not, maybe we can make some.
In this episode, we’re going to talk about
lifeforms in space, specifically about the
evolutionary pathways that could lead to lifeforms
that can live there, we will explore more
artificial or designed life in future episodes,
starting with Space Whales and Bioships this
Thursday.
At first glance, life evolving in space seems
implausible.
We tend to think of space as a cold, lifeless
vacuum—or perhaps a blazing hot, lethally
irradiated, lifeless vacuum.
But we’ve always been tentative about the
lifeless part, because life has surprised
us in many environments.
Extraterrestrial life of even the crudest
forms would confirm some important theories
about how life originated, and it would create
a new zeal for searching all the remote corners
of our solar system for critters hiding under
the ice, in the rocky crags, and among the
clouds.
I should make a distinction right up front,
between life originating in a place and adapting
to that place.
Life can adapt to harsh environments it probably
could never have formed in, and any life that
might exist in space would almost certainly
have started its evolution in a more protected
environment and adapted to space later.
Indeed, as we discussed in our look at the
Panspermia Theory of life originating in space
and coming to Earth, one might argue that
planets, serving as an incubator for life,
whether it originated there or not, are where
it develops before emerging from those cocoons
to spread across space.
The Panspermia theory, even if true, which
it probably is not, still only suggests simple
life emerged off planets and seeded them,
and for today we’ll look at how simple life
originating in the void might develop into
something more complex and diverse.
As of now, we have no evidence of life anywhere
off Earth, though an assumption of its absence
even in this solar system is premature, because
at this point we’ve just barely begun to
explore the bodies nearest to us.
Mars seems like a good prospect because it
has the right ingredients and most likely
environment to host—or at least have hosted—primordial
life, as it may have been friendlier to life
in the past.
But even on Mars we’ve only done fairly
simple bio-signature tests and only in a few
spots.
The Moon and Mars are the only bodies we’ve
checked even that carefully.
While a developed civilization orbiting a
distant star would leave traces we could identify
from light years away, we might at best detect
non-technological life around other stars
by atmospheric signatures, and living things
smaller than a forest are difficult to detect
even from a Galileo or Cassini probe orbiting
above.
We might not even know if we were looking
at life either, as we’ve said elsewhere,
intelligence recognizes intelligence, but
it would be very easy to mistake a patch of
simple lichen observed from orbit that was
sprawling over a continent-sized patch of
ice as some type impact dust scatter or mundane
geological phenomena.
We also have to keep in mind as we get further
from the Sun, or visit worlds without thick
atmospheres, that any such life is likely
to be hidden below and might be quite peculiar.
Science fiction’s portrayals of creatures
on other planets are sometimes plausible,
sometimes not.
But the popular visions of life that might
exist elsewhere in space are generally fantastical.
Space whales or leviathans are a popular trope,
as they are natural extensions of the “space
is an ocean” trope that pervades sci-fi.
But I’m sure I don’t need to tell most
fans of this channel that a whale would fare
poorly in space.
Tails only work for propulsion when you’re
in a viscous medium like water, and the same
goes for maneuvering fins.
And of course, hauntingly beautiful whale
songs are right out when there’s no medium
to carry the sound.
However, if a large creature lived in orbit
above a planet, there would be good reasons
for it to have distinct dorsal and ventral
sides.
There is no up or down in space, until you
get near a planet.
If food or threats usually came from either
above or below, it would make sense for the
animal’s sensors to be mostly on that side.
It would also be advantageous to be colored
something like an inverse orca, with a dark
belly that blends into the sky above and a
dorsal surface colored like the surface below.
But could big creatures really somehow exist
in space?
Certainly not by themselves.
No creature can exist without an entire supporting
ecosystem around them, with the exception
of Boltzmann Brains or arguably a hive mind.
Whales can’t live anywhere unless there’s
plankton, krill, or fish around for them to
eat, and the same goes for their analogs in
space.
So instead of individual space creatures,
we need to think about how an ecology could
be established in space, a Void Ecology.
And by the way, I’ll often describe creatures
by the names of their counterparts on Earth,
not because I expect space creatures to look
much like Earth ones, but because they would
very likely occupy analogous ecological niches.
In any environment that’s constantly likened
to an ocean, the apex predator deserves to
be called a shark.
But let’s back up an eon or two, because
life has to exist first before it can evolve
into whales and sharks.
Earth life probably formed in the protected
environment of the oceans, where it could
perform vast numbers of delicate experiments
in RNA and DNA self-replication in a relatively
stable temperature range and safe from the
ionizing radiation above.
The first lifeforms existed exclusively in
the oceans for eons before they ventured anywhere
else.
This is an important principle to understand,
that while life can thrive in diverse environments,
it does need a somewhat sheltered environment
in which to form in the first place—and
it needs to evolve to at least a certain extent
and have certain mechanisms well established
before it’s ready to venture out.
Probably the most life-friendly region of
space besides planetary surfaces would be
the rings of a large planet like Saturn, but
perhaps one closer to its sun than Saturn
is.
Though the geothermal energy and tidal forces
near such planets might be sufficient initially,
just as they likely were on Earth, before
we had photosynthesis.
In among those rocks and ice chunks are an
abundance of compounds containing the necessary
elements for life.
The cavities and craggy surfaces of small
natural satellites also offers a fine physical
environment for life, plenty of rough surface
area for the photosynthetic creatures to anchor
themselves to, and caverns insulated from
the radiation and the extremes of temperature
fluctuations.
The one problem life would not have in space
is finding enough energy.
Photosynthesis is certainly an option, as
are any number of chemical processes, and
we have found radiotrophic fungi in and around
nuclear facilities.
With the entire EM spectrum available in raw
sunlight, any number of photochemical processes
could be used to convert EM energy from different
bands into storable chemical energy.
Nor should we rule out more photovoltaic approaches,
the conversion of light into electricity rather
than chemical energy.
The role of oxygen in Earth’s history illustrates
an important principle in understanding evolution.
Oxygen is sometimes poorly described as a
waste product, but evolution is not very tolerant
of waste, so releasing O2 wouldn’t have
continued for very long unless it conferred
some survival advantage on the organisms doing
it.
Oxygen is highly caustic and destructive to
most organic molecules.
The very first algal cells that released oxygen
into their primordial ponds were probably
harmed by it, but they were quickly naturally-selected
for their ability to tolerate it.
Those that adapted to oxygen gained a major
survival advantage over their neighbors—whom
they had poisoned.
Of course, those neighbors were also soon
naturally-selected for their ability to tolerate
oxygen—and eventually for their ability
to use it.
Oxygen does another neat trick that was rather
convenient for the evolution of life of Earth.
When diatomic O2 is exposed to UV radiation,
it turns into triatomic O3, ozone, which blocks
UV radiation.
When enough of it built up in the primordial
atmosphere, it shielded the proto-life below,
enabling it to evolve into more complex delicate
molecular forms that couldn’t have withstood
all the UV.
Similarly, many creatures evolved to keep
a layer of dead skin around them, as a protective
layer of armor, another example of waste being
repurposed into a useful role.
So we’ve established that primordial life
needs a somewhat sheltered environment to
form and incubate in, before it’s ready
to venture out and adapt to harsher environments.
Caverns inside of ice clumps in a planetary
ring might be an adequate nursery for more
complex lifeforms to emerge from.
But if not, it’s also possible for life
to form first on planets and then migrate
into space.
As we discussed in our look at Panspermia,
it appears possible for microbe-laden rocks
to be ejected into space and survive to land
elsewhere, indeed we also discussed how it
might develop on a simple icy comet.
How likely they are to survive and adapt on
landing on a new world depends on how well
their previous environment prepared them,
but if the destination is unpopulated, at
the very least they will experience no competition.
Tardigrades, moss, and lichen have all been
found well above the 20,000 foot or the 6
kilometer mark in the Himalayas, and bacteria
and algae have been found in clouds as high
as 10 miles up.
It’s entirely possible that under the right
circumstances and with more available biomass,
those ragged fringes of our biosphere could
gradually adapt to live in vacuum.
Indeed we’ve found bacteria living on the
outside of our space station.
Something like this could easily happen on
a dwarf planet with mountains that rise above
the atmosphere.
Large rocky planets tends to pull tall mountains
down, but small ones can have huge mountains
and thin atmospheres, both in height and pressure.
A body with small oceans in which to incubate
life and mountains that life can climb to
adapt to vacuum and gamma rays might be the
idea cradle for life awaiting a meteor to
knock them into space.
Planets can also slowly lose their atmospheres
and magnetospheres, and this happens on geological
timelines, potentially quite sufficient for
evolution to adapt to it.
Nor is a meteor impact the only way for microbes
to reach orbit from the surface.
Many planets and moons have volcanoes or cryovolcanoes
that eject material into orbit.
Indeed it’s quite probable that on small
double-dwarf planets like Pluto and Charon,
that matter is regularly exchanged this way,
and more volcanic moons like Jupiter’s Io,
might easily spread matter to their siblings
moons and rings.
And that brings up back to our most likely
habitat for life in space, the rings of a
planet.
Once a variety of microbes are established
there and thriving on the available ammonia
and organics, they can form an ecology and
evolve into all of the ecological niches.
And the great thing about space is that if
your species is not genetically diverse, the
radiation will make you so.
Wherever some creature is creating chemical
energy from sunlight, some other creature
is going to evolve to just take that chemical
energy instead of creating its own, and the
predator-prey evolutionary race is on.
So if some microbes evolve to live in space
like lichen or moss, there’s an ecological
niche available for something that eats them,
and advantage to that creature if it is mobile
and can handle travel in a vacuum, same for
the spores of that space moss.
Same too, we might see fairly sophisticated
coral emerge, as it’s quite easy to encapsulate
and reshape even entire asteroids and icebergs
when there’s little gravity or typical erosion
forces constraining you.
One might even imagine them slowly hollowing
such places out and expanding them like big
balloons, for more sunlight, and perhaps creating
pockets of gases or liquids inside such reef
structures or even entire pressurized bubbles,
spawning a new interior ecology.
One other reason planetary rings may be the
preferred environment rather than larger belts
around a star, like the Kuiper Belt or the
Asteroid Belt, is their density.
Planetary rings have shepherd moons that capture
escaping material and bounce or fling it back
inward, keeping the rings dense with raw material
and habitats.
Distance is less relevant in space, with no
water or air requiring constant effort to
push against when travelling, but hardly something
we can ignore either, and in such rings, the
closest objects are separated by mere kilometers,
not many thousands of them.
So you could have creatures not only spread
out, but even migrate, to graze new areas.
It’s also important that the dense collection
of orbiting bodies offers an archipelago of
habitats that are somewhat isolated from one
another but reachable with some luck and effort.
Collisions between ring objects will knock
pieces off and create opportunities for creatures
that have evolved successfully to migrate
all around the ring, something akin to rapid
continental drift.
Cycles of isolation and contact are important
for evolution because they drive diversity
and adaptability.
In times of isolation distinct evolutionary
paths are explored separately, to be tested
against each other later in times of mixing
and contact.
Waiting for the rock you’re on to get bumped
by another is obviously not the only way to
get around in space.
There’s no classic wind or sea currents
in space, but you can still release spores
although you’ll need to give them a push
to set them adrift, or provide them some means
of locomotion.
And it won’t only be spores drifting about
in the hopes of finding a fertile new home.
Chances are, any creatures living in space
will need to be able to endure long periods
of scarcity, and the best survival strategy
for that is dormancy or migration.
On Earth lungfish survive summer droughts
by aestivating, which is basically hibernating
but in the summer.
A creature who has exhausted his food on one
rock might find that his best bet is to jump
off into the void and go to sleep until colliding
with a new habitat.
Hibernation is always a high-risk survival
path, a last resort, and migration is better,
but one must begin with baby steps even where
migration is possible, and one big difference
from Earth, in space one is likely to go dormant
while migrating.
So some creatures will simply gather solar
energy and become active only when they encounter
a wisp of methane or ammonia or detritus to
consume, then go back to their semi-dormancy
until they encounter the next.
At this point, they’ve essentially evolved
into space plankton, albeit in an ocean less
nutrient dense than Earth’s.
With all these spores, eggs, plankton, and
sleepers drifting around, our space ecology
has a well established bottom level—and
there are wide open evolutionary niches for
herbivores, insectivores, small predators,
bigger predators.
And yes, majestic leviathans that drift gracefully
about, capturing krill and plankton.
There are advantages for size and for storing
materials for the journey.
More size means thicker skin for shielding,
via the square-cube law, same as we’ve discussed
for spaceship armor.
Used up resources might be expelled as gas
or solids to provide propulsion, for the sake
of good taste we won’t explore the delta-v
available from strategic use of bodily waste,
but it’s not minimal especially in the context
of a planetary ring environment.
Moreover, a thick skin need not always be
massed together, one might imagine an organism
developing quite large wings or fins to approximate
solar or magnetic sails, which can be folded
to protect against radiation as well.
This also offers energy, and propulsion without
losing matter, which is important, as there’s
plenty of energy to be collected while floating
in space, it’s only matter that is scarce.
We might also imagine that it might develop
some internal equivalent of a weak ion drive.
One might imagine methane and oxygen based
bio-rockets as well, but it’s critical to
remember that high thrust won’t be very
important unless dealing with a moon or asteroid
with an escape velocity of at least hundreds
of meters a second, which while small compared
to Earth’s gravity well, is something you’d
find on only the few hundred most massive
objects in a solar system, not the millions
of smaller bodies.
Of course you’re quite likely to encounter
such bodies and be dragged down onto them,
which is a nice place to get stranded at least.
You might also find organisms that dwelt in
orbit of such places, waiting for other life
to drift in and be captured by the gravity
well.
Or an organism that entirely takes over a
large rock, like a big space crab, waiting
for things to fall down onto it.
But if you’re a rock-clinging creature who
happens to get stranded on the surface of
a big space crab or whale, you might find
that it’s a life worth adapting to, living
in a place that predators steer clear of,
always near a food source.
Our space leviathans might soon find themselves
covered in barnacles, moss, and remoras—and
that they’ve quite unwillingly become mini-ecosystems
themselves.
There too, we mentioned coral earlier and
them developing colonies over an entire rock
and even turning it into something like a
big balloon body, and this too might be an
avenue for a space whale.
Those space whales might interact with weak
but significant gravity wells, those with
several meters per second of escape velocity,
by lowering down a tentacle or long tongue,
saves it delta-v or damage by litho-braking,
which is to say, crashing into the object
to slow down.
So our space whale, which we noted might have
huge thin sails for wing rather than fins,
might also look more like a giant space squid.
Indeed these things could conceivably get
big enough to have their own noticeable gravity
well, especially ones that evolved into a
niche for expanding out to beyond those planetary
rings and moons, either down to a planet or
off to distant Trojan Asteroids of that planet.
As the whale’s shape is meant more for buoyancy
such space leviathans might start skimming
gas giants and evolve to more of that big
balloon whale-like shape complete with fins.
Or maybe one that didn’t live in the upper
atmospheres of gas giants, but just dove down
to grab gases.
Neat notion, but before we get too carried
away imagining designs for a bioship, we need
to remember some things about how natural
selection works and how it develops solutions
to problems.
We often speak figuratively about evolution
developing certain adaptations for a certain
purpose, but it really doesn’t work like
an industrial design process, the ‘evolution’
of the car or airplane is a textbook example
of intelligent design, not natural selection.
Natural selection is a process by which small
changes incrementally either improve or diminish
a creature’s ability to survive and reproduce.
There are no other goals or purposes.
Every incremental change needs to bring about
a survival advantage for that generation.
So while we can picture how to make a rocket,
fuel, and oxidizer organically, in nature
those parts would have to come about in an
unplanned way, each of them having enhanced
the creature’s survival in some way before
they came together as a full-fledged rocket
or solar sails or magnetic sails.
And while it is plausible to chart a pathway
for storing gas and expelling it as a weak
rocket, or developing small thin protrusions
initially to allow change of attitude then
to grow to act as solar sail wings, we can’t
just assume some space leviathan is going
to evolve a high power source like a fusion
drive that would let us contemplate using
such a creature as a genuine spaceship.
But here we can start bringing intelligent
design into things, because while we can imagine
life possibly evolving along these lines,
indeed maybe even to enormous complexity,
diversity, and size, what we can do with intentional
design, via genetic engineering or blurring
the lines between the biological and machine,
alters things enormously.
Will be exploring this idea this summer, and
we will begin this Thursday with a look at
Spacewhales and Bioships, and we’ll begin
seeing just what amazing options we have for
void ecology once we bring technology into
play and blur the lines between life and machine.
But while such a thing occurring naturally
would seem fairly improbable, maybe it’s
not too improbable, and the Universe is a
big place, so perhaps somewhere there is a
large and diverse natural void ecology.
While I generally write the episodes here
and other help edit them, sometimes an episode
is also co-written by one of our editors and
today’s episode and our followup on Thursday
were co-written by Jerry Guern, and of course
I wanted to thank him for that but I also
wanted to mention that he’s recently released
an anthology, Purple Dreams, a collection
of sci-fi and fantasy short stories, one of
which is about the Ecology of the Void, and
I talked him into recording that and it’s
up on his new YouTube channel if you’d like
to give that a listen.
You can also read a short story about the
topic of Thursday’s episode, the perilous
lives of Bioships, in the free Preview window
of his Amazon page.
You’ll find both of those linked in the
description below.
Quite a few of the folks who help write and
edit episodes here on SFIA are authors as
is a fair amount of the audience, that can
vary from a fun hobby to a serious profession
but it does take a lot of skill and practice
and while everyone’s style and medium is
different, a lot of those skills overlap and
there’s no point reinventing the wheel.
For a fiction writer, be it modern fiction,
fantasy, or science fiction, ultimately everything
is about the characters, and there’s an
excellent course on Storytelling 101 by urban
fantasy author Daniel Jose Older that helps
go over the basics of characters, conflicts,
context and storytelling that can help you
sharpen your skills and avoid a lot of the
mistakes folks make when first working on
a story.
Skillshare has a ton of other videos on writing
too, as well as many other creative or hands-on
skills from drawing and animating to computer
programming and how to fix a car.
A Premium Membership gives you unlimited access
to over 20,000 high quality classes on must-know
topics, so you can improve your skills, unlock
new opportunities, and do the work you love.
Join the millions of students already learning
on Skillshare today with a special offer just
for my listeners: Get 2 months of Skillshare
for free.
To sign up, visit the link in the description
and the first 500 visitors get 2 months of
unlimited access to over 20,000 classes for
free.
Act now for this special offer, and start
learning today.
We’ve a busy schedule for the rest of the
month, in addition to today’s bonus episode
we have our regular Thursday episode which
as I’ve mentioned is a companion piece to
today’s, on spacewhales and bioships.
Then a week from today we have another bonus
episode, or two of them, as we team up with
Jade from Up and Atom to look at the concept
of a Boltzmann Brain, a randomly assembled
mind, and what the Anthropic Principle tells
us about the probability they might exist,
or that we ourselves might be an example of
one.
We’ll then finish out the month with a return
to Alien Civilization series to look at possible
alien invasion scenarios and motivations,
from overt attack to infiltration, in Invasive
Aliens, before doing our monthly Q&A session.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please like
it and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
