This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
Our world represents but one tiny pale blue
dot in a sea of darkness, the only bastion
of life in the ocean of the night we know
of, and yet there seem to be billions of billions
of stars and planets, what are the odds our
pale blue dot is the only such bastion?
Today we'll be looking at the Fermi Paradox
and Drake’s Equation.
The first of these looks at the probability
of other aliens existing, based on the size
and age of our universe, while the second
highlights the immensity of that scale in
space and time.
The Drake Equation is essentially a formula
for calculating how many alien civilizations
there ought to be in our galaxy right now.
Today, we’ll be looking at that equation,
and plugging in some of the known numbers
to see what our estimates might look like.
But we’ll also be highlighting some of the
problems with the equation, and the assumptions
it can lead to.
Dr. Frank Drake, who posited the equation
in the form we’ll be considering here, is
an accomplished astronomer, astrophysicist,
and pioneer in the search for extraterrestrial
intelligence.
He was actually part of founding the SETI
program, and was the creator of the Arecibo
message, our own first attempt to say ‘Hello’
on the Galactic scale.
So where did this idea come from?
Well, the Universe is huge and old, really
huge and really old, and by the 1960s it was
getting pretty clear just how big our own
galaxy was and how likely it was that a lot
of those other stars were going to have planets.
I’ve heard folks say we were surprised by
just how many exoplanets there were, once
we’d actually started discovering them,
but to be honest I don’t remember anyone
thinking otherwise.
Even as a kid in the 1980s first exploring
astronomy and science fiction, the usual sentiment
was that planets would be fairly common, and
it was just a question of how common.
Nobody was thinking that a galaxy of billions
of stars was going to have anything less than
many millions of planets, unless they were
thinking it would have effectively none, in
case our solar system was a bizarre fluke.
The bigger question seemed to be how many
of those millions or billions of planets might
plausibly be Earth-like, or put another way,
how many might conceivably make a home for
us in the future.
The next question, heavily related, was how
many of those same planets might already be
home to another civilization.
This is where the Drake equation comes in.
In 1961, astronomer Frank Drake proposed a
Probabilistic Argument to estimate how many
such civilizations there might be.
The equation itself is pretty non-controversial,
since it’s a very solid basic approach to
discussing the notion of alien civilizations
in terms of frequency.
But what the factors are, how we determine
them, and whether they warp our perspective
for discussion, are all factors for debate.
I tend to take that latter view, that they
warp our perspective, and will get to that
in a moment.
But first, let’s discuss those factors.
Before we even start into the equation itself,
we should take a moment to consider that this
equation is only discussing the Milky Way
Galaxy, which is one issue I have with it,
and is something we’ll revisit later.
Secondly, it aims to calculate the number
of active civilizations in this galaxy at
the moment which we can detect, not which
have ever existed.
Because of these issues, the equation is often
restated with slightly different variables.
But for today, we’re focusing on the basics
and the original framing.
With all that being said, the factors of the
Equation are as follows:
The Rate at which stars form in our galaxy.
The Fraction of stars that have planets,
The average number of those planets with potential
habitability.
The fraction of habitable planets on which
life actually develops at some point,
The fraction of planets which develop life
which is also intelligent,
The fraction of intelligent life which develop
technology which is detectable to us by its
signature,
And lastly, the length of time for which that
technology is releasing said detectable signature.
As we mentioned earlier, this is often stated
differently, but the original notion was about
detecting alien civilizations by radio from
here on Earth, which is reflected in the way
the equation is phrased.
Were we to consider it in a more modern context,
it's not just that we could speak about some
of these factors with tighter constraints,
but also that we’d probably rephrase the
variables based on what we now know.
For example, looking for oxygen absorption
lines in an exoplanet’s atmosphere might
indicate an ecology existed on that planet,
and is another approach to looking for aliens,
but it is not in any way dependent on the
last three variables of the Drake equation.
And there are many other such bio- and techno-signatures
which we might reasonably include today, based
on the knowledge and technologies we’ve
developed in the last 60 years.
So too, an alien civilization might abandon
a given techno-signature, such as no longer
using a power source that generated that signature
in favor of a better one, rendering that means
of detection a bad one or at least one only
good for detecting civilizations in a very
short window of usage.
People often figure radio signatures themselves
are one such short-term techno-signature in
favor of some hypothetical faster than light,
or FTL, communication system.
Bio-signatures are potentially handier as
detection methods, because we know nothing
about those last three variables, the ones
relating to alien life.
On the other hand, we have the first and second
ones, star formation rate and planets-per-star,
pinned down pretty well at this point, to
at least an order of magnitude.
Truth be told, we wouldn’t really care about
star formation rates these days.
If you’re a channel regular, you’ve probably
heard me talk about why certain terms and
phrases, like ‘our sun is a yellow dwarf
star’, are rather outdated.
This is because when we came up with these
terms, we were still missing large pieces
of information we now know: the number of
different sized stars, for instance, or how
long they live.
We also hadn’t really locked on the Age
of the Universe by then, the Big Bang model
had only been proposed a generation before,
and I’m not even sure if we had switched
to calling it the- Big Bang yet.
It was originally used as a derogatory reference
to the theory - we may have still been calling
it the Primeval Atom Hypothesis, the original
name proposed for the Big Bang.
Even with the original variables, we can apply
some knowledge from today: very few of the
stars which have formed, and which could plausibly
have had life like ours evolve around them,
are likely to have expired by the present
day.
The big giant stars that represent the lionshare
of visibly-dying stars don’t stick around
long enough for the likely evolution of complex
life, and very nearly every star has planets,
so we can probably safely just assume there
are at least 100 billion stars in this galaxy
with at least one planet, probably more.
There are likely trillions of planets.
The rate of formation has more to do with
the assumption that civilizations pop up on
a life-bearing planet after 4 billion years
or so, then disappear at some point.
I really do think that suffers from both assuming
that life arrives at complex intelligence
at the same rate as Earth, and that civilizations
inevitably wipe themselves out.
This seemed to be a very common view of scientists
and academics during the days of the Cold
War.
I’m sure it will come as no surprise that
I disagree with both of those assumptions.
The first one is overly simplistic, and overlooks
all of the variables involved in the story
of life and civilization, as though it should
be exactly the same in every case, regardless
of factors such as elemental abundance, ecological
relationships, and important events.
As for the second, I’d personally caution
folks about being overly fatalistic or pessimistic
about their fellow humans, and have never
thought it very likely you could have a doomsday
scenario that got everybody, without replacing
them with other folks of a different type.
In considering the Drake equation, we have
to imagine this as being almost insignificant,
since it would only generate a pause in detectability.
Even if you nuke yourselves, some folks will
generally survive, and nobody in the Cold
War was aiming for ‘wipe out humanity’
as their end-goal, nor were any of our weapons
capable of doing so at the time.
Fallout does not last forever, and humans
breed pretty quickly on galactic timelines.
Even if you kill off 99% of the population,
a couple of centuries later everything is
rebuilt and your numbers are restored.
Alternatively, if you get replaced by some
killer machine intelligence, it doesn't really
matter to the Fermi Paradox anymore than us
replacing the Neaderthals would: for our purposes,
it’s still an intelligence.
And that’s a good example too, because we
really didn’t replace the Neanderthals,
and any artificial intelligence or other civilization
replacing us is likely to be at least part-human
in some fashion, even if it’s a metaphorical
kinship as in the case of AI or uplifted animals,
like super-intelligent humanoid cats, dogs,
or dolphins.
A lot of times the future doesn’t belong
to A or B, but some hybrid of both.
An individual or group which replaces another
generally has some superior array of traits,
though that might mean they are more coordinated
and generous or more hyper-aggressive or very
good at being sneaky and stabbing folks in
the back.
Most of these options actually make a replacement
species more likely to be detected, not because
they are necessarily more likely to be broadcasting
hello signals into space, but because we generally
see signatures of civilizations.
In general the more successful something is,
the more noticeable it is.
It is often suggested that they might hide,
and we’ll come back to that point later
too, but I would point out for now that civilizations
hiding themselves is not a tactic that seems
common in our own history.
Cities and nations don’t hide themselves,
but are far more likely to spend tons of money
on various monuments and attractions to advertise
themselves, and building roads and infrastructure
to connect with other peoples and places.
While there are numerous reasons a group may
or may not advertise itself in some form or
another, either directly or indirectly so,
it seems fair to say that we observe this
behaviour as a general rule.
Conversely, groups which choose to hide themselves
are typically doing so to deliberately avoid
a larger, potentially dangerous civilization,
which by necessity they must be aware of in
order to know there’s something to avoid.
With the Fermi Paradox, we’re not talking
about trying to find a specific hidden alien
civilization, but any of them at all, so while
we might miss one civilization hiding from
another, it’s extremely unlikely that we’d
miss who they were hiding from.
Some civilizations might attempt to hide,
while others might blow themselves up, or
fail to recover from another sort of doomsday
event.
But with a bit of reflection, it seems like
this group might be the minority.
Let’s take an example: still assuming that
at least 100 billion stars in our galaxy have
planets, we’re left with five remaining
factors to consider.
If we assume that only 10% of stars have planets,
and that of those only a further 10% are potentially
able to support life, and only 10% of those
actually developed life at some point, and
only 10% of those developed intelligent life,
and finally, that only a tenth of all such
civilizations ever released detectable signature
into space, we would still have had 10 million
such detectable civilizations throughout our
galactic history.
I’d argue that if even 10 million civilizations
reached our technological level, it’s likely
that at least one of them would not be self-destructive
or replaced by something which was, especially
since it seems more probable that such cases
should be the majority, rather than some freak
minority.
Let’s discuss that more, though.
Drake’s Equation, the Fermi Paradox, and
SETI - the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence,
principally by radio signals - all suffer
from being a bit outdated, conceptually speaking.
Outside of Science Fiction, nobody was realistically
expecting galactic empires to exist when these
ideas were developed, and that hasn’t really
changed.
Such a civilization would need to rely on
faster than light travel and communication,
and current science says that probably is
not in the cards for the future, if it’s
possible at all.
But historically, it was less about FTL, and
more about materials and energy.
It merits consideration that when Drake first
posited his equation, we hadn’t even been
to the Moon.
And while nuclear designs for spaceships were
being considered as a basic concept, even
then, the notion of sending a crewed mission
on a centuries-long voyage to another star
seemed like a long shot, the sort of thing
a civilization might only do once or twice
over their entire collective existence, perhaps
in order to save themselves from an extinction
event.
If radio communications are a consideration,
as the Drake equation originally assumed,
then on the scale of interstellar empires
they are likely to be extremely loud and fairly
easy to see, due to various issues involved.
But if we’re looking at anything smaller
than that, where we’re trying to hear from
a single planet or solar system among billions
of duds, it’s a proverbial needle in a haystack,
trying to find maybe a handful of planets
transmitting faint, undirected radio sources.
For the sake of context, let’s consider
ourselves: even if we were looking directly
at ourselves, we likely wouldn’t be able
to hear our own civilization from beyond a
very small pocket of the galaxy, much less
from significantly further away.
Civilization has existed here for thousands
of years, but our transmissions haven’t
reached out very far, and probably blend into
the larger background on the galactic scale,
so if we’re still assuming others would
follow the model of life on Earth, why would
we expect them to be any different?
There’s also no real reason to assume alien
civilizations would broadcast louder in the
future unless they decided to stick with omnidirectional
radio signals.
Rather, it’s more likely that more advanced
technology would make such broadcasts more
difficult to find, since technology tends
to favor weaker signals with higher compression
rates that make them look like noise.
In fact, that’s the whole point of compression:
to remove patterns by replacing them with
a short note describing that pattern, effectively
removing parts of the message to the point
that it would be difficult to understand even
if it were somehow picked up and determined
to be alien in origin.
Also, given the fall-off of radio signals,
dropping as an inverse square to the broadcast
distance, it would seem like interplanetary
and interstellar communication would most
likely use directed signals.
Laser beams broaden with distance too, but
using one to send a message to a distant location
avoids using a lot of power and significantly
extends your range.
But in terms of detection, unless these beams
were using significant amounts of energy,
spotting them might be more difficult than
the sort of idealized, symmetrically-transmitting
civilization the Drake equation seems to assume.
So if we could see only a millionth of the
Milky Way Galaxy by radio, and only 10 million
civilizations had ever existed in the galaxy,
we’d only expect to ever see around 10 of
them.
If they didn’t really spread out, but maybe
colonized a few other neighboring systems
to avoid having all their eggs in one basket,
then it is still basically ten.
And if they didn’t last for billions of
years, but only a few millennia or centuries,
then the odds that any would still be around
at the same time as us for our instruments
to hear them would be parallel to winning
the lottery.
And this makes a lot of sense too, considering
the context.
A lot of folks thought that giving us coin-flip
odds of surviving the Cold War was being generous,
and if we assume such generosity could be
stated as having a 50/50 chance of surviving
a given century, then our odds of surviving
two centuries would be 1 in 4, our odds of
surviving 3 centuries would be 1 in 8, our
odds of surviving 4 centuries, 1 in 16, and
our odds of surviving 10 centuries would be
1 in 1024.
Of surviving 10,000 years, just 1 in a million.
And ten thousand years is a very short detection
period on the galactic scale.
Now, there are a ton of flaws in those assumptions,
which we’ve discussed in more detail throughout
our series on the Fermi Paradox and Alien
Civilizations, but I wanted to restate them
here for context.
It’s important to understand that in the
1960s when these concepts were new, the assumption
that alien signals would be hard to detect
actually made a lot of sense.
Of course, on this show we have a few counters
to that argument, including the Hart Conjecture,
the Hart-Tipler Argument, the Dyson Dilemma,
and finally the general notion that even Intergalactic
Colonization should be possible without resorting
to FTL.
Without going into depth, Michael Hart is
an Astrophysicist who in 1975 did a detailed
analysis of the Fermi Paradox, which is when
it got its name, and who essentially argues
that interstellar colonization should be possible
and that life, which he argues evolves to
be pro-growth, would make efforts toward furthering
its expansion.
We can imagine this to mean that if a civilization
settles their neighboring star systems, it
follows that they should eventually continue
to do the same, exponentially spreading outward.
The analogy I like for this is that early
humans spread over the whole planet without
needing to coordinate with each other or sending
out colonists from a single origin point,
presumably somewhere in Africa.
Instead, we established new regions, new economies,
and new bases for expansion along the way.
Each successive group has a motive to split
and send out new colonies, dividing to produce
more, and so on.
Cosmologist Frank Tipler essentially added
on the notion that this could be done through
the assistance of machines, as a way of getting
around the various issues with conventional
Generation Ships, namely that the original
colonists would have long since died off before
they arrived at the colony world, not too
mention the difficulty of maintaining a closed
ecology in a spaceship in deep space, then
setting one up on a new planet when you finally
arrive.
We tend to take that ability for granted on
this show not because it is easy but because
we have discussed the challenges and problems
in depth, see our Generation Ships Series
for details on that.
Some folks feel that the Fermi Paradox should
be renamed the Fermi-Hart Paradox, or the
Fermi-Hart-Tipler Paradox, in part because
Fermi himself didn’t regard it as a paradox,
he just figured aliens were rare, that civilizations
are probably short-lived compared to galaxies,
and that interstellar travel wasn’t viable,
which, as we noted earlier, would solve the
problem entirely if true.
I doubt we will ever see it renamed though,
as sadly both Hart and Tipler have unenviable
reputations unrelated to the Paradox which
we won’t delve into here.
The Dyson Dilemma, which I’ve often regretted
naming such myself, basically argues that
civilizations don’t really colonize planets,
anymore than we colonized mountain caves,
but instead would tend to build up artificial
structures from available raw materials.
Things like the O’Neill Cylinder, vast artificial
habitats which make use of regionally-available
raw materials to create an artificial living
area.
Just as your average house or apartment complex
is significantly more efficient and useful
by comparison to a cave, a space habitat with
around a million times more efficiency than
a planet has a similar analogy.
Continuing with the idea that it makes sense
on such a scale to eventually build a house
in space, we can imagine that larger civilizations
would continue to build such habitats, creating
the analogy to a city, if we’re still thinking
of the planet like a cave.
Even well before that point, a civilization
is likely going to want other resources in
space, with energy being a primary concern.
Since our Sun puts out a couple billion times
more sunlight than what lands on Earth and
powers our ecosystem, it might be a reasonable
assumption that home stars gradually become
wrapped up by such artificial habitats and
power collecting structures, until they either
englobe the thing completely - what is called
a Dyson Sphere or Dyson Swarm - or until they
run out of raw materials.
Such a process, even partially complete, would
alter a star’s visible spectrum and brightness,
with anything approaching total englobement
effectively dimming the star into the waste
heat frequencies of the infrared range.
In an ideal form, such constructs would appear
mostly dark, being visible only in that they
would still be warmed by the starlight as
they use it.
Finding these objects is what’s referred
to as Dysonian SETI, and we would solidly
classify such a civilization as being “type
2” on the Kardashev Scale.
While perhaps not as well known, this represents
another major type of SETI, hunting for the
infrared emission or techno-signature of such
objects rather than radio signals.
Civilizations which would be capable of even
small-scale structures on this level would
represent populations millions, if not billions
of times greater than our own, but rather
than spread out, they’re packed into a single
star system.
No FTL, advanced communications, or loud noises
required for this model.
And with a few modifications, those O‘Neil
Cylinders and similar constructs also present
the basic framework for ideal generation ships,
if you were to strap an engine on the back.
More importantly though, the sheer power available
to such civilizations makes sending such ships
to other systems possible, and not at a slow
crawl either, but at an appreciable fraction
of light speed.
What’s more, those civilizations are not
limited to finding only rare ideal planets
around rare G-types stars: since they’re
working with the raw resources of planets
and other objects, they can essentially build
copies of their civilization around any star
with enough components in its neighbourhood.
Like a pioneer building a cabin in the woods,
as long as they have trees to make logs - in
this case, asteroids, planets, and even the
star itself - they can build their home anywhere
they please, not where they find a comfortable
cave.
Given that this would make colonization comparatively
easy after a certain point, the Dyson Dilemma,
is essentially the argument that unless some
factor prevents or dissuades a civilization
from participating in this type of expansion,
it seems implausible that they wouldn’t
eventually do so.
Once they’ve spread out a bit, they shouldn’t
really be subject to extinction events, and
since each new colony would have the capacity
to continue the expansion, it should self-perpetuate
across the whole galaxy, and even beyond.
If we consider the possibility that this could
be the case, if even a single such civilization
ever arose in the galaxy and successfully
pursued that policy, they should have colonized
the whole place by now to an extent that we
couldn’t possibly miss them.
And considering the time scale we’re dealing
with, it most likely wouldn’t be just our
own galaxy, but probably the whole supercluster
of thousands of galaxies by now.
Again, see our Dyson Dilemma episodes and
Generation Ships series for more detailed
discussion of that concept and the methods
that should make it possible.
Back to Drake’s Equation.
This intergalactic issue is one of the big
flaws, since you can’t just run your numbers
on our own galaxy.
If you’re not contemplating massive self-perpetuating
interstellar colonization, with or without
FTL travel, then other galaxies don’t matter,
so leaving it out of the equation at the time
made perfect sense, and was necessary in any
case since we had no idea how big the Universe
was in terms of galaxies at the time.
That first factor then, the rate of star formation
in our galaxy, is not enough from the perspective
of an intergalactic scale.
But this is something folks often seem to
skip over anyway.
Even when I mentioned it earlier, it was to
say how many stars were in the galaxy, not
a discussion of the rate at which they form.
This is because a precise formation rate is
hard to pin down, since we still don’t know
how many stars there are, or exactly what
their breakdown is in terms of type and lifespan.
They also tend to form in clumps of space
and time from events that cause lots of them
to be birthed, like nebulae and supernovae.
But if it’s around a hundred stars per year
in our galaxy, on average, it would seem pretty
solid to say that probably at least 10 stars
per year are likely to have both the lifespan
to support planetary evolution, and some form
of rocky planet or moon that falls into the
loose range of being life-plausible.
That factor, the average number of life-potential
planets per star that has planets, is a total
wild card.
And it only gets worse, since it’s actually
the only factor we can really even guess about,
with all the remaining factors being complete
unknowns.
Folks often talk about how we have pinned
Drake’s Equation down a lot more these days,
but we really haven’t.
Rather, all we have is a better understanding
of some of the data for the first variable,
and some better-informed ideas about how the
others might look.
All we really know, in the context of the
equation, is that most stars probably have
planets, and that the galaxy has about half
a trillion stars.
We also now know that there are billions of
galaxies, and indeed a lot of stars in between
those galaxies as well.
But again, all this really does is change
the educated guess we make about that first
factor.
It lets us go from guesses about 1 in 10 stars
having planets, to talking about 1 in 100
or 9 in 10 having them, an uncertainty of
a couple orders of magnitude dropped to less
than one, and while that’s certainly helpful,
it ultimately changes very little.
It also has the downside of introducing a
mental bias, because we start by talking about
that first factor of planets around stars,
and tend to frame it as somewhere between
1% and 99%, which frequently gets simplified
to 1 in 10, and we seem to tend toward assuming
that the other factors are probably in that
range as well.
We did that earlier in this episode, specifically
saying 1 in 10, and still ending up with 10
million civilizations having existed in our
galaxy at some point.
Even if we decided that each of those factors
was only 1 in 100, it would only have dropped
down to 10,000 civilizations.
What’s crucially missing here is that final
factor, how long they exist and are detectable,
and if they can and do expand into the galaxy,
which isn’t considered in the 10,000 we’ve
arrived at, and it matters a lot.
A civilization that’s spread throughout
the galaxy is probably detectable forever,
or at least on fairly arbitrary timescales,
whereas one that lasts a mere million years
still represents less than a thousandth of
the period the galaxy could plausibly have
had intelligent life in it.
In this case, it gets a lot more believable
that we just aren’t in the one-millionth
of the galaxy where their radio signals could
be heard during the tiny fraction of time
their civilization was around out of a few
billion years civilizations could have been
around.
And for perspective, we should probably consider
that such a civilization, lasting for a mere
million years, would still have existed for
over one hundred times longer than our own.
If a civilization sticks to one planet, it’s
a lot more plausible they’ll die off eventually,
but you don’t really need them to do so
in order to solve the Paradox, because you
just have to find values for the other 4 factors
which add up to one in a million or less.
All that’s needed is for each of them to
be 1% or less.
Indeed, given that 100 cubed is a million,
if one of those factors was 100% the others
could still be 1% and still make hearing a
civilization less likely than not.
Another big flaw though is not with the equation
itself, but with how it’s framed.
Probabilistic arguments are only meant as
loose setups until you can get better data,
and people have a tendency to assume each
term is in the same general region of likelihood.
All those factors might be 1 in 10 except
1 of them, and the probability could end up
being 1 in 10 quintillion, rather than a smaller
number we might be expecting based on intuition.
The probability of the others doesn’t matter.
As an example, if we did a version of Drake’s
Equation to calculate your odds of winning
the state lottery, I might set that up as
saying it was the product of your odds of
living in a country that has states, the probability
those states can have a lottery, the probability
you live in one that does, the probability
you regular visit a place that sells tickets,
the probability you ever buy one, and the
probability a ticket is a winner.
All those early factors were somewhere in
the 1 in 10 or better region, but that last
one is very low.
Indeed knowing the last one is low might discourage
people from buying tickets, lowering the second
to last factor’s probability, because it
is a bad idea, lowering the odds further of
winning.
That’s an important thing to remember about
probabilistic arguments, such as the Doomsday
Argument, people often get locked into viewing
them as immovable and not subject to intelligent
critters contemplating them and altering their
behavior.
Many probabilistic arguments can seem very
convincing once considered mathematically
even when intuition on first hearing them
says they’re wrong, and often that is quite
true.
What’s more, the number of factors is arbitrary,
so if you have one that has eight factors
and one that has six, and you’re estimating
loosely by assuming it’s all 1 in 10 per
factor.
With six, you’re looking at 1 in a million,
while eight gets you 1 in 100 million.
And unfortunately, that’s easy to do with
Drake’s Equation.
Factors 3 and 4, the probability of planets
that can potentially support life and the
probability that life actually develops, could
easily be rolled into one factor, or split
into another to include complex life that
develops Eukaryotic life, biological cells
with nuclei, one of the more popularly suggested
Great Filters life must evolve through before
it can get to that final status as a detectable
alien civilization.
Now, all this just represents a tendency toward
mental bias in folks considering the Fermi
Paradox and Drake’s Equation, and it’s
not actually a flaw in the math or in the
equation itself.
But over many years of discussing the Fermi
Paradox with thousands of people, I would
rate that as probably one of the most significant
problems it encounters.
Folks just look at it, hear the first coupled
factors, and say “Well surely, even if it’s
1 in a million, if there are billions of worlds,
there must be life”, but nothing about the
equation itself implies only 1 in a million,
or even 1 in a quintillion.
Another missing factor relates to zones of
detectability.
Again, if we’re assuming that we’re just
listening for copies of ourselves, of other
folks broadcasting terrestrial radio and TV
and occasionally a louder or more deliberate
shout, then we would have problems hearing
that outside of a radius of some hundreds
of light years.
That area would not contain even a million
stars, let alone a million plausible stars
for Earth-like worlds, and would represent
only around a millionth of the stars in the
galaxy.
The odds of hearing, or being heard, could
be fairly low indeed.
Of course, you can build much bigger transmitters,
and much bigger receivers, see our Mega Telescopes
episode, but we can say with pretty decent
certainty what that factor should be for us
looking for our analogue,and it cuts nearly
all of the galaxy out except for a tiny little
volume of space some hundreds of light years
around, with the galaxy being a hundred thousand
light years across.
To be fair, aliens might be much louder, but
there’s no reason to assume they would be
if they’re only transmitting within their
home system, and maybe to some nearby neighbors
with tight beam signals.
Alternatively, if they didn’t, then the
entire final factor of civilization duration
can be removed or treated as a value of 1.
Let’s dwell on that a little more, because
that final factor, where a world has made
it through all of the filters to having technologically
advanced life emitting radio could have existed
for only a millionth of the time the galaxy
has been around, and was detectable to only
those nearest stars occupying a millionth
of that galaxy, or they could have spread
out across the galaxy and endured in various
forms since they first invented rockets, potentially
for billions of years.
The difference between those two scenarios
is a factor of a trillion.
That’s the difference between a single star,
and an entire large galaxy, the difference
between one small shack that existed for a
few days, and every structure on this planet
that we have ever built in the history of
our existence.
It is the difference between running into
intelligent life on a planet that’s been
inhabited for centuries with vast empires
and civilizations, or bumping into one random
alien survey team that just happens to be
investigating the same planet as you.
And that’s just the impact of that one final
factor meant for contemplating our odds of
detecting them if they ever even existed at
all.
So yes, we can nail down that first factor,
stars having planets, as being very high,
and we can probably nail down the second factor
of planets with the right size and temperature
as being decently common - though those two
likely don’t include all the options for
letting a planet potentially support life.
But we have no idea about the odds of life
actually emerging, much less all the factors
which might be involved, and getting to intelligence
is another matter entirely, with a myriad
of other factors varying in probability to
consider.
Even if we get through all of that, we still
have the final factor for longevity and detectability
to consider, which can be anywhere between
1-in-a-trillion, and near certainty.
Every time we have a new discovery relating
to exoplanets, or a solution to some astronomical
or geological phenomena which adds new insight
to our origins, folks ask if we can finally
pin down Drake’s Equation.
The answer, as we’ve seen today, is no.
There’s just too many unknowns involved,
and clearing some up only changes things in
a Bayesian sense.
If we don’t know how probable something
is, we can still have a discovery that tells
us that it’s twice as likely or unlikely
as before, but it really doesn’t help us.
We still wouldn’t know if it was near certain,
or worse than the odds of winning the lottery
ten times in a row.
Fundamentally, 60 years after its been proposed,
I think it is worth asking not whether Drake’s
Equation is right or wrong, but rather if
discussing it really helps us solve the Fermi
Paradox.
Truth be told, we won’t actually know the
answer to those variables until we have discovered
hundreds of worlds with alien life and had
the chance to examine them, and even then
all that will really tell us is that it is
possible for intelligent life - our own species-
to arise on a planet, and journey to hundreds
of others with life, thus implying that final
factor of longevity and detectability is high,
and that the other factors about the potential
for life to arise might be based on how many
planets we find where life hasn’t been found,
versus where it has.
But we still wouldn’t know about the rest,
and could still only arrive at educated guesses
at best.
The implication of searching a million star
systems and finding life on a hundred of them,
but no highly intelligent life, would be that
life probably evolves often enough, 1 in 10,000
systems, or 40 million in the galaxy, but
that technology develops very rarely, since
we could only find one example and could show
that one example - us - had the ability to
spread throughout the galaxy by investigating
all those worlds in person.
It’s the Catch-22 of the Fermi Paradox.
Since we’ve already done a lot of astronomy
looking for radio signals and for the infrared
signatures of Dyson Swarms, unless someone
stops by to tell us they exist, we’ll probably
only get the answer by going out there and
investigating in detail.
And that act of investigating itself will
ultimately answer as many questions about
the Fermi Paradox as the results of the investigations.
In the end, the only way to prove if anybody
else is out there, unless they come to us,
is to go to them, and that’s just one more
reason why we should head out into space,
in case avoiding being wiped out by misfortune
by staying on our one lone world, our pale
blue dot, wasn’t enough reason to venture
into the galaxy.
Our episode ran rather long today, as it often
does with Fermi Paradox episodes, so I cut
out some discussion of human population growth
rates and why they are not declining, as that’s
a popular objection to the notion of galactic
expansion.
It also tends to be a touchy topic that might
cause a stir with Youtube’s Algorithms,
so it’s doubly ideal for a Nebula Extended
Edition, and if you’d like to catch that
discussion or any of our other extended editions
on Nebula, they do replace our sponsor reads.
Our episodes come out on Nebula early and
ad free, and we do have some exclusive episodes,
like our Coexistence with Alien Series as
well as these new Nebula Plus Extended editions.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos, to offer Nebula for free as a bonus
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using the
link in our episode description.
This means you can watch all the amazing content
on Curiositystream, like the “Is Anybody
Out There” which delves into the SETI Project
of looking for alien signals and habitable
exoplanets, but also all the great content
over on Nebula from myself and many others.
And you can get all that for less than $15
by using the link in the episode’s description.
I mentioned us discussing population growth
or a lack thereof as a reason civilizations
might not colonize the galaxy, and a missing
chunk of that is that we have good reason
to think Lifespans will keep going up, potentially
radically so, and especially if that included
an extension in fertility which would have
massive impact on population.
You can have a lot of kids in a few centuries
if you’re so inclined, and that is one of
the Effects of Longer Lifespans and this weekend
we’ll have our monthly SciFi Sunday Bonus
episode to look at other effects.
Then next Thursday, April 15, we’ll look
at another challenge future civilizations
might have in terms of creating a sense of
purpose in a post-scarcity near-utopian world,
one which may not be populated by modern humans
in the biological or psychological sense,
and something we’ll look at in two weeks
as we examine Transhumanism and Post-humans.
Then we’ll wrap April up with another Fermi
Paradox Episode, where we will ask what the
impact and changes to our discussion of the
topic are when we contemplate concepts like
Multiverses and the Many Worlds Interpretation
of Quantum Mechanics.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us itunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
