This episode is brought to you by Squarespace
Sleep has been a necessity, a curse, and a
great pleasure throughout human history.
In the future, it might also be the key to
space exploration.
Space exploration is a long, gradual process.
Although even our earliest spaceships traveled
faster than any vehicle on Earth, the distances
to our neighboring planets make the travel
time itself one of the hardest challenges
to overcome.
The distances to the nearest stars are so
immense that even light takes years if not
decades to arrive.
This is obviously a problem for traveling
to other star systems, at least if you want
to get the original crew there.
You can shorten the travel time by making
the ship faster, but fans of this channel
know that physics puts an absolute limit to
maximum velocity for any given propulsion
system.
Science might extend the crew’s lifespan
enough to make interstellar journeys, however,
there’s a question of how those years or
decades of boredom would affect them psychologically.
So a more appealing option would be to just
hit the pause button on the crew’s lives.
Today we’ll be looking at options for doing
that, suspended animation, cryogenics, and
stasis.
We’ll also examine how you might automate
the ship and the many challenges involved.
On an interstellar voyage we’re not generally
concerned about the energy needed to support
the crew.
They have to stay warm and have lighting for
growing food, which requires a constant supply
of energy, but would be peanuts compared to
the energy needed to speed up and slow down
from interstellar velocities.
This wouldn’t apply in every case though,
the energy necessary to maintain life support
only drops to a trivial fraction of your budget
if you’re going over 1% of light speed.
What’s more, you have to supply that energy
for the entirety of the journey from primarily
internal systems, whereas your acceleration
energy to speed up and slow down can potentially
come from outside the ship.
You might be pushed up to speed by a laser
and we’ve discussed various way you might
slow down without a conventional engine in
our episode Exodus Fleet.
Such being the case, you might find it infeasible
to provide energy for life support the entirety
of a journey, or may not want to allow supplies
and equipment to decay or wear down.
We make a lot of assumptions about interstellar
colonization here, one of the big ones being
that we have vastly superior automation that
would allow us to create and repair fairly
sophisticated machinery while traveling.
We obviously can’t do this now, and I don’t
take for granted that we will in the future.
I do think it’s likely and I don’t think
you’d try a colonial venture to a distant
star if you didn’t have that ability.
But it may turn out that there’d be equipment
they couldn’t make en route or in situ just
as we have plenty of things nowadays that
we can’t make or repair without access to
a global industrial infrastructure.
Such being the case, a ship might want to
minimize use of equipment and the associated
risk of breakdown and decay by putting everything
on ice.
Consider the freighter, a classic spaceship
traveling between two stars carrying perishable
goods, they obviously want those arriving
intact.
Folks often say that shipping material between
stars for trade is not realistic, that it
would just be initial colony efforts, data
transfer, and maybe immigrants, but this is
very debatable.
A sufficiently developed system, such as a
Dyson Swarm under construction, could easily
have a high, steady, and long-term demand
for raw materials.
This sort of mass import of materials wouldn’t
necessarily break the bank either, at least
in terms of fuel.
So long as you travel slow enough, you could
ship things very inexpensively.
You obviously still have to pay upkeep on
that space freighter, which would include
salaries if it was manned, and even without
them, you would need to use energy to regulate
temperature.
Heat is not your friend when maintenance is
concerned, the colder everything is, the slower
it decays, the warmer it is, the faster.
Interstellar spaceships probably don’t need
much crew during the flight, they pretty much
just drift along and at those kind of speeds,
you don’t really need to worry much about
collisions with microscopic dust particles,
very thick armor can pretty much handle it,
armor probably made of bulk cargo.
For moving freight, you probably got pushed
up to speed by a laser and will get slowed
down by one at the other end too, probably
ones bouncing the energy off you and back
to collectors to recover a lot of that energy.
That sort of case is almost ideal for automation,
and very simple automation, except for maintenance.
Of course an AI would seem to make more sense
than thawing the crew out periodically to
do maintenance but there’s a good chance
human-level or smarter AI will never be legal,
or that its authority will be restricted,
it’s very dangerous and not really necessary.
Now, if it’s regulated it means it might
be a thing banned in certain places, and some
scifi stories have used that to suggest robots
would be allowed for mining in space but not
on Earth, like in Isaac Asimov’s various
robot short stories.
However, if you’re worried about AI rising
up against humanity, the one place you most
definitely ban it is any place where it’s
far from people.
Unlike explosives, it’s the kind of danger
you want to keep under your nose, where you
can easily check on it, not running an autonomous
ship deep in the void of space that nobody
sees for centuries at a time.
If you have sophisticated AI that can outperform
humans at tasks like maintaining equipment,
and which you are not utterly confident about
the trustworthiness of, the last thing any
sane person would do is stick it in charge
of a ship full of repair robots, megatons
of raw materials, an utter lack of supervision
for centuries, and a permission slip to dock
deep inside your territory.
Even if you do go fully automated, it’s
probably wise to go the Sleeper Ship route
anyway, just keeping minimal automation online
most of the time, with a more sophisticated
AI that wakes up briefly for scheduled maintenance
or emergencies.
The whole point of AI at the human or higher
level is to enable them to be creative and
adaptable, which means that the more time
it has to sit by itself thinking, the more
likely it is engage in or adapt to some new
way of thinking.
In general I’d be particularly worried about
what anyone in isolation will come up with
too, not just an inhuman intelligence.
We talked about cultures shifting on very
long voyages last time in the series, in the
Ark of a Million Years.
If you’ve got a really long voyage, there’s
a lot to be said about keeping the crew on
ice as much as possible, and certainly the
passengers.
That way it is your original crew showing
up, which won’t be the case otherwise, even
if they are all biologically immortal and
don’t have any kids during the trip, they
are still not really the same people as the
ones who left.
I can send folks on a mission for a few years
and they will come back very different, push
that up to centuries and that change will
be vastly larger.
Now, it’s worth noting that most probably
the same technology that lets you freeze and
thaw people is what’s needed to make someone
biologically immortal, and we’ll talk about
why in a moment, but if that’s the case
you don’t need to freeze them to let them
make the journey intact.
You might still want to so that they aren’t
experiencing the trip, with all the potential
boredom and mutation of mind that implies.
Also probably the salary.
We probably don’t have to pay colonists,
you would have to compensate freight crews
I’d think, and you might can get away with
paying less if they are sleeping most of the
way.
Being the crew of a Sleeper Ship is either
an awesome experience or a particularly brutal
form of torture, same as freezing someone
and waking them up centuries later.
A popular, if bizarre, punishment in a lot
of science fiction.
You’re essentially kicking someone ahead
to a time when their family and friends are
dead and the culture they knew is radically
different, that’s presumably the punishment
angle, but of course you’ve not in any way
rehabilitated them or otherwise punished them.
And that’s a very subjective punishment,
many people would cheerfully pay money for
a trip to the future, even a one-way trip,
and while I hate to generalize, there are
people who don’t really care much about
their friends and family, and I suspect there’s
a decent correlation between them and the
sorts who would be getting convicted of the
sort of crimes heinous enough to be dumped
into carbonite over.
Probably a thing to keep in mind when picking
crews too, while most who sign up for a century
long trip as a popsicle are unlikely to be
monsters, you do need to consider the basic
mindset of anyone willing to sever ties with
home forever.
That’s less a concern for colonists, who
would often be taking their families with
them and going off to build a new world, but
for a freighter it probably wouldn’t be
about pioneering spirit or simply wanderlust,
since this isn’t going backpacking for a
year in another country or enlisting for a
term with the military or signing on to crew
a merchant ship to distant ports of call.
Or rather it’s exactly that last one but
with very distant ports where you’re not
coming home to find some changes and maybe
one or two friends or family members married,
born, divorced, moved, or dead, for such voyages
even the short trips would be like leaving
during the Renaissance and returning home
to the here and now.
It is, in a sense, one way time travel.
I don’t doubt you’d find many volunteers,
for the same reason I’d imagine they could
sell their cargo too, and even with our current
population and screening out the mentally
unstable, I’m sure I could find thousands
of volunteers and also thousands of people
who would pay a fortune for a bottle of wine
grown on an alien planet, or even just a random
rock.
Your typical civilization capable of mundane
interstellar travel probably has a population
many orders of magnitude higher to select
from, and to sell to.
You could still crew the ships with families
as well, and after a bit the crew becomes
your real family anyway, as you leapfrog ahead
down the centuries, and if someone decides
to leave, odds are you’d find someone else
at that port who either wanted to try it out
or who already has done it many times but
either changed ships or took a break from
it for a while.
You could easily get your own sub-culture
from this, something Alastair Reynolds works
with in many of his novels, such as the Ultras
from the Revelation Space series, a group
of mostly cyborgs who roam from system to
system and add a new braid to their hair for
every voyage they make, or the various Shatterling
families from House of Suns, a bunch of clones
who all meet up every couple hundred thousand
years to share experiences.
They all take advantage of freezing or stasis
or simply relativistic time dilation to avoid
experiencing all that voyage time, not because
they’d die otherwise, but because they worry
about experiencing all that time.
Again though, there’s that notion that you’d
freeze yourself to avoid dying of old age,
but in reality this isn’t the case.
You’re not asleep when you’re frozen,
you’re thoroughly dead, these are truly
Tomb Ships, not a place where folks actually
sleep, and that probably is not a semantic
difference.
When we freeze someone they are obviously
dead now, but to wake them up we essentially
have to reconstruct all their cells.
We’re not trying to freeze them to avoid
cell destruction so we can just warm them
up either.
We freeze them so that destruction is rebuildable,
like carefully disassembling a house brick-by-brick
while cataloging where each one was.
That’s why the process is a lot more complex
than just dumping someone in a vat of liquid
nitrogen and why modern methods usually only
bother with the head, we know we can’t thaw
any of those folks out until we have the technology
to replace their body anyway.
In theory, you can come up with ways to freeze
and thaw people that wouldn’t necessarily
mandate you also had life extension technology.
Such processes would likely involve genetically
re-engineering people or use some process
more akin to the carbonite-treatment Han Solo
got in the Empire Strikes Back, or some equivalent
to plastination, which we sometimes do to
biological samples or corpses, replace waters
and lipids with polymers, though presumably
in a reversible fashion.
With actual freezing you have to worry about
your cells exploding, so we could imagine
some material essentially inserting itself
to carefully pad and protect the interior
of every cell that could be purged later on.
We could also genetically engineer ourselves
to have cellular repair mechanisms and antifreeze
by default in our cells, much as some fish
in Antarctica, or some amphibians like the
Alaskan Wood Frog.
We could even modify our bodies to tolerate
a certain amount of dehydration, allowing
ice crystals to form without causing cell
damage, as many insects do in order to overwinter.
It’s not like there’s a lack of working
examples in nature we can copy, each of which
offers distinct advantages.
I should note that nature gives us a warning
about this too, hibernation strategies are
very risky in nature, and are only ever employed
when there is no other viable survival strategy
available.
The same may apply to using this for space
travel.
This concept though isn’t just limited to
making corpsicles, again an AI might be a
sleeper crew by only booting up periodically,
and people who have gone the cyborg route
might do the same, either through something
akin to suspended animation or by slowing
down their subjective experience of time.
Interestingly a cyborg might actually be someone
you could speak to quickly if they were frozen.
If hypothermia is anything to go by you need
at least a day to bring someone safely back
up from the lowest body core temperatures
anyone has survived, which were still well
above freezing, let alone liquid nitrogen
temperatures, so waking anyone in under a
day would seem unlikely and we could be talking
about weeks.
On the other hand, some cyborg or transhuman
with a lot of mental augmentation, usually
assumed to involve having your neurons replaced
or subsidized by various metal conductors,
which typically conduct better the colder
you get, might be someone you could chat with
while they were frozen.
In fiction frozen crew members often get woken
up for an emergency, either the whole crew
was on ice with an automated system to wake
them up if something occurred or someone with
a special skill set gets woken because of
some unexpected event they’re best qualified
for.
In practice that could only really be done
if it was a long term kind of crisis.
An example would be finding out your destination
system for a colony ship wasn’t what you
expected so you wake the astrobiologist to
review the data on alternate planets you can
divert to, a decision you likely have months
to decide about.
It’s also worth considering that you might
not be shipping whole people, but just their
heads.
Most folks who get frozen these days just
do the their head, not the whole body, and
while that’s often because they actually
died first of some ailment that would require
a new body anyway, it’s unlikely to be a
sticking point.
I’ve seriously considered cryo as opposed
to burial or cremation, and probably would
do it one day, and I’d prefer my whole body
be frozen but I don’t really much care,
and most folks I know who contemplate doing
it don’t seem to either.
So it might not be a ship full of frozen bodies,
corpsicles, but just a bunch of frozen heads.
I’ve also noticed most of us who are fine
with being frozen are generally more okay
with the notion of being a cyborg too.
Which would imply a decent chance any frozen
crew woken up for routine maintenance activities
might just be activated, body or brain still
frozen but conscious and piloting a robot.
To top this all off, as we mentioned earlier
in the series, there’s quite a lot of radioisotopes
in the human body, part of the background
radiation we all get, only internally rather
than from the actual background.
This is minimal but stacks up over time, when
you’re frozen and nothing is regenerating
damaged cells.
It takes a few thousands years to get a lethal
dose, and you could presumably unfreeze people
occasionally to get some regeneration and
cellular repair, during which a little healthy
exercise repairing the ship would probably
help too.
Though you could probably avoid this, or seriously
extend the timeline by feeding them for a
while in advance with foods grown on materials
missing those isotopes, that would require
them spend quite some time doing that, and
saving them time is sort of the point of freezing
them.
Interestingly there is some research that
indicates we might need a little radiation
to be healthy too, so this might end up being
a careful balancing act.
Obviously this all brings up why you would
use such a ship, as opposed to run one by
uploaded minds, AI, or cyborgs, but just because
a technology is available, which it might
not be, doesn’t mean everyone chooses to
use it.
Also, let’s not overlook suspended animation
for trips too.
As best as we can tell, putting people into
hibernation, with hydrogen sulphide gas for
instance, really does lower their metabolism
and thus slow their aging too.
You’re losing some life but not equal to
the time that’s passed, and you are saving
on supplies and energy, which currently for
spaceflight is quite important.
In this regard it matches the normal reason
for hibernation in nature, a dangerous and
desperate survival strategy you only employ
because there are no alternatives.
But that could be very handy for something
like deep space travel, where a mission might
last a few years during which you’re trying
to conserve supplies, like heading out to
the Oort Cloud to lasso a comet, or just a
routine freight drop.
It’s quite likely, as we mentioned in both
Colonizing the Oort Cloud and Colonizing Neptune,
that both the Kuiper Belt and Oort Cloud will
be heavily colonized and dependent on large,
low cost, low frequency supply drops of fusion
fuel and presumably other trade goods of a
non-perishable nature.
Sticking the crew in suspended animation during
some big circuit run from a gas giant to hundreds
of habitats where the crew goes into suspension
makes a lot of sense.
They are not actually asleep though, if mimicking
animal hibernation or torpor, there’s no
REM sleep, so presumably no dreams.
Which is a pity in a way, as one might imagine
using mind augmentation to allow shared dream
states or such, possibly to keep brain synapses
active.
I suppose one might do that with our hypothetical
cyborgs who could still function mentally
while frozen, if you wanted or needed to keep
them just a little awake, some very slow group
simulation, maybe rehearsing for emergencies
or practicing colonization or whatever their
end mission was, which might be an invasion
or something.
So how would you crew such a ship if you’re
using these methods?
You could have a crew who woke up in shifts,
say 1000 people for a 1000 year voyage, with
each awake for a decade and ten people a shift.
You could have one crew of 10 who were woken
every decade to do repairs, unless some emergency
happened.
You could have a generational crew, separate
from frozen passengers, the latter making
the whole trip frozen while the crew lives
and breeds and dies and passes their responsibilities
on to the next generation.
This would make sense if you had a small but
decent chance of dying when frozen and thawed,
especially if the risk rose cumulatively,
say 1% chance the first time you were frozen
but 2% the second, 3% the third and so on,
I’m not sure why that would be the case,
but it’s popular in fiction and one could
imagine a method of freezing and thawing that
left you a bit more damaged and less likely
to survive each time.
A thing to keep in mind about small crews
is that it’s easier for them to go nuts
and easier for them to do damage if they do.
You might be more likely to have a single
person go axe crazy out of 20 people rather
than 2, but odds are it won’t be 10 times
more likely and they’re in a much better
positions to do damage, they just have to
deal with one fellow crew member to have the
run of the ship.
So you probably need a lot of research to
find your sweet spot, with the minimum risk
of someone going nuts from isolation, or just
life in general, and actually being able to
do significant damage while they’re about
it.
This also raises the point that a computer,
an AI, while a risk for going rogue itself
might be less of a risk than a crewmember
doing so.
Any crew or AI smart enough to deal with a
weird and unlikely event might be much more
likely to go off the deep end than any of
those events are to occur.
If you’ve had thousands of missions to draw
data off of and found there was only 1% chance
of anything unexpected happening that a person
or AI could actually prevent or deal with,
but a 2% chance a crewmember or AI would go
nuts and destroy the ship during the voyage,
then you don’t have anyone awake for the
trip and just toss the dice.
There’s a big caveat though, if you can
wake people up, and easily enough that you’re
contemplating using this tech routinely, potentially
periodically to wake crew in shifts or for
scheduled check ups, then someone can sneak
a device on board to wake them up at a time
of their choosing.
One can think of tons of reasons someone might
do that.
A group that wanted their own colony, under
their own radical ideology, but couldn’t
get funds or permission to do one, might sneak
such folks aboard to wake up at a secretly
scheduled time for a coup or to kill some
of their fellow travelers.
Potentially even converting it from a sleeper
ship to a generation ship, so they can expand
their numbers, or the crew might kill off
their frozen passengers and become a generation
ship.
That could even happen accidentally, with
the cryo equipment breaking.
Similarly some enemy nation or terrorist group
or doomsday cult might want to scuttle a colony
ship, and sneak a saboteur onboard.
We can also contemplate a virus that got the
AI mid-flight, causing it to blow up the ship
or plot a new course.
And of course this doesn’t only apply to
colony ships, there are tons of reasons to
hijack or sabotage a freighter, it’s one
of the few ways you might be able to plausibly
do space piracy.
It’s usage also isn’t limited to fixing
problems during emergencies, freezing people
is a good way of making escape pods for emergencies.
Normally any pod to evacuate a damaged ship
would rapidly run out of air and food and
energy long before it could be rescued, but
if it freezes you, centuries could pass before
rescue and you’d be fine, and also experience
no dread waiting for rescue.
Now we’ve talked about hibernation, freezing,
and the AI and cyborg routes, but what about
the more classic scifi concept of a slow-time
pod that you just enter and time inside slows
or stops until the timer outside dings?
There isn’t much in known physics that permits
this, but it’s not actually banned either.
We know two ways to slow down time, traveling
at close to the speed of light or creating
a very high gravity potential around your
ship.
Travelling at close to the speed of light
seemingly solves many of the problems we’ve
been discussing here thanks to relativity.
Everything from radioactive decay to the need
to even contemplate freezing and thawing,
because travelling at close to light speed
is the ultimate stasis, basically slowing
everything on board down to a fraction of
the time experienced by the outside universe.
In theory, we could simply travel at a ludicrous
speed for a subjective day and a whole light
year would have passed outside.
At these speeds, not accounting for speeding
up or slowing down, we could wave goodbye
to Earth and be in Alpha Centauri four subjective
days later.
The rest of the universe would see us get
there over four years of travel time, but
on board we would experience only four days.
Our entire Milky Way galaxy could be crossed
from one end to the other in a quarter of
a century of a person’s subjective lifetime
at these speeds.
This is the pinnacle of life in the fast lane,
seeing the universe subjectively much faster
than the speed of light allows.
Of course, if you did that, over 100,000 years
will have passed for everyone else.
That would be quite a homecoming if you swung
back to tell everyone about what you saw and
experienced on your fantastic journey.
Not only would everyone you know be long dead,
but you probably wouldn’t even recognise
anything as being human because while you
would have been gone for a half a century
of your time, nearly a quarter of a million
years would have passed back on Earth, making
the sum total of Earth’s human history when
you left look like a blip in comparison.
This is a well-worn sci-fi trope, though one
few do well.
Alastair Reynolds Revelation Space series,
or his novel the House of Suns, are examples
of it being done very well.
While it’s attractive, unfortunately, there’s
a lot of handwavium involved.
To get that kind of time dilation, you’d
have to be travelling at 99.99999% the speed
of light.
You’d need an insanely powerful drive not
only to get to that speed but to maintain
that speed against all the drag the not-quite-vacuum
of space would be exerting on you.
But of course every single atom would be hitting
your ship at that same speed, in other words
with the energy of an atom bomb.
And even the cosmic background radiation coming
at you from ahead would be so blue-shifted
your ship would be ablated like you were being
bombarded with ultraviolet lasers.
Remember too that as you approach light speed,
the amount of energy you need to increase
speed goes up exponentially.
You also have to accelerate that whole time
too, trying to maintain more than 1g of acceleration
for months on end would be hard, and you need
to spend a year accelerating at 1g just to
get near the speed of light.
That’s part of what make inertial suppression
fields of interest in scifi, and indeed since
relativity tells us gravity and acceleration
are the same thing, that is one plausible
application of artificial gravity.
Speaking of gravity, earlier, I mentioned
that other approach, creating a high gravitational
potential around your ship.
Even by the scales often contemplated on this
channel, natural gravity created by lots of
mass, or dense energy technically, isn’t
very realistic as a means of ship stasis.
Any black hole big enough to slow time significantly
for those near it, without shredding them
to atoms from tidal forces, would be a supermassive
black hole.
Considering even the normal stellar mass kind
weigh more than our sun, that’s an awful
lot of dead weight to be pushing around, though
you might actually employ some trick like
that for intergalactic travel, especially
to other superclusters.
We’ll discuss options like that later on
in this series.
We did mention artificial gravity though.
We have a concept on this channel we call
Clarketech, in tribute to Arthur C. Clarke’s
famous quote about any sufficiently advanced
technology being indistinguishable from magic,
and it’s our catch-all term for technology
that doesn’t seem permitted under known
science or for which there’s no theoretical
pathway at this time.
Faster than Light Travel, FTL, and Artificial
Gravity, are two better known examples, though
arguably even some of the stuff we’ve already
discussed today falls under the Clarketech
banner.
We don’t know what folks might come up with
in the future, some Clarketech for freezing
time or creating closed timelike loops at
the macroscopic scale for instance, but artificial
gravity is one pathway that might allow stasis
fields.
Gravity slows time, and it’s tidal effects
rip people apart, so if we could make a classic
flat uniform gravity floor like the ones so
typical in scifi, then stick one in the ceiling,
there wouldn’t be any force of gravity between
those two plates but there should be a big
gravitational potential, and if we kick the
power up time should slow down even more,
do it enough and you’ve got stasis, or ultra-slow
time at least.
Of course if you don’t do it right, you
might have different rates of timeflow in
the pod, causing bits of you to age faster
than others.
The effect would be similar to the tidal sheer
inside a black hole, except that it’s time
sheer tearing you into spaghetti.
We do also have some quantum effects that
play around with time but you’d have to
be able to entangle a whole body of trillions
of trillions of atoms to use these, and we
have a rough time entangling even a handful
of particles, essentially a similar technique
to some of the teleportation methods we’ve
discussed in other episodes.
That’s one last form of stasis too, teleporting
someone but not instantly, you hold them in
a quantum suspended state and reassemble them
later.
That’s very like the Seed and Data Ship
notions we’ll discuss next time in the series,
that basically transport information not material.
So there’s a lot of ways we might do a Sleeper
Ship and lots of advantages and disadvantages
to each method.
We’ve also discussed the various motivations
for doing each method, though one last motive
incidentally would be stealth.
There’s no true stealth in space but everything
is relative, and it’s a lot easier to hide
a more compact and cold Sleeper Ship than
one warmed up and spacious enough for a crew
and all their life support needs.
On the whole though, odds are pretty good
the various technologies that will allow sleeper
ships will also give us other options like
life extension, and a Methuselah Ship, another
topic for another day, that would make Sleeper
Ships unnecessary for interstellar travel.
But as we have seen, unnecessary doesn’t
always mean pointless or without advantages
that might make it preferable.
So I do think we will see these ships in the
future, even if in some unexpected roles.
So as we move into our final episodes before
starting the new year, we’ll be doing some
improvements and upgrades to the channel.
Some of those will be with our website, IsaacArthur.net,
and it’s a good reminder how important a
website is to any enterprise these days, but
they can be time consuming or expensive or
both.
You still need one, whether you’re a science
and education channel or growing a business,
and that’s where Squarespace comes in.
They have beautiful templates by world class-designers
that make it easy to create your own website,
something that stands out, showcases your
work, and lets you get easy analytics about
who is visiting.
Squarespace’s aims to make it easy for you
to make a website on your own, but they also
have 24/7 award winning customer service ready
to help you out.
If you’d like to let Squarespace help you
make your dream website a reality, you can
get 10% off by going to http://squarespace.com/isaacarthur
We talked a bit in this episode about artificial
gravity fields, the kind of thing that would
let you make a Flat Earth.
Next week we’ll be looking at building flat
planets but doing so inside known physics
in Megastructures: Flat Earths.
The week after that we’ll start December
off by asking how we might start off the real
space age, in Kickstarting Space Industry.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and hit the notification bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
