This episode is sponsored by Audible
One of the most disappointing moments in my
life was when I realized that as cool as they
look, giant robots just are not practical war engines...
or are they?
So today we are taking another look at how
warfare might adjust to the future, as we
develop better technology and shift into other
battlegrounds like outer space, cyberspace,
virtual reality, or even the human mind.
The human mind, of course, has always been
the principal battleground and origin of all
these changing battlefield landscapes, and
when hypothetical technologies show up in
our fiction and daydreams they’re not always
well-bounded by pragmatism and hard science.
Giant robots that people can pilot, or exoskeletons
and power armor we can don, are two such examples,
and also great examples of how a storyteller’s
medium impacts what stories they can tell.
Fundamentally giant humanoid war machines
just look awesome, so they mostly appear in
fiction we can see, initially comic books
and graphic novels rather than traditional
text-only novels.
When they showed up later in TV and film,
it was first mostly in animation like the
Gundam franchise where they weren’t so technically
difficult and expensive to film and didn’t
still come out looking clumsy and cheap.
Part of the reason they tended to be humanoid
in non-animated live-action shows was because
you could make your robots and monsters giant
by scaling down sets around actors in costume.
Some early examples like Godzilla and Mechagodzilla
showed that you don’t have to stick too
closely to humanoid form even for costumes,
but deviating from it very much introduces
budget and filming problems.
Just like earlier aliens in science fiction,
who always look like people with some minor
makeup or prosthetics on, this often challenged
people’s feeling of realism.
Devoted fans could argue that maybe a humanoid
shape would be a common one to evolve to,
convergent evolution to a practical form,
but that is rather dubious.
However for giant robots, the in-story argument
for them is generally a bit more well reasoned
and more tied into their success with audiences.
While it is true that the humanoid form is
not really ideal for combat, especially scaled
up larger in size and deployed in conflicts
with ranged weapons, the one thing they have
going for them is that human form is very
easy for humans to control.
And since combat is generally high speed and
reflexive, and battlefields are full of distractions,
it does behoove you to use a shape folks are
already used to manipulating at high speed,
reflexively, and while distracted.
These need not be a close parallel to a human
shape, shows like Exosquad generally limited
the basic form to humanoid for easy natural
control, but didn’t stick to that too closely
and even skipped it entirely sometimes.
From an entertainment angle of course, it’s
also easier for us to relate to and project
ourselves into a giant humanoid robot that
evokes the image of a classic knight or samurai,
and that implies something elite and special
deployed singly or in small groups, rather
than huge infantry battalions marching around
together in lockstep formation.
Of course we don’t deploy forces in large
formations anymore either, most modern military
units rarely assemble into a battalion-sized
formation and when they do it’s usually
for something ceremonial.
Company sized units of about a hundred troops
usually do form up two or three times a day,
but not for combat, just headcounts, assignments,
news, and updates.
Since the first rule of warfare is not to
be an easy target and give your enemies high-impact,
low risk investments for their ordinance,
standing around or even moving around in a
big tight formation isn’t a good idea.
Phalanxes and shield walls made sense in the
past but we’ve two critical paradigm shifts
that generally make it a bad policy nowadays,
super-powerful, long range guns and high-volume
but complex industrial production of gear.
Offensive weaponry is almost universally very
powerful and long range, and where it isn’t,
it’s because it’s calibrated to maximize
something else, like mobility, accuracy, endurance,
and duration of an infantryman in combat.
In general, a bullet carried by a soldier
doesn’t need to be any more potent than
is necessary to kill an enemy soldier.
Adding more mass or propellant to the bullet
or making his machine gun fire more rapidly
might seem like improvements, but they reduce
the number of rounds a soldier can carry,
make him burn up his ammo more quickly, and
introduces a lot more recoil.
Despite what movies and TV show, bullets actually
don’t have much momentum behind them, indeed
the person firing it absorbs slightly more
momentum than the target because the bullet
loses some passing through the air.
Planes, tanks, and armored vehicles can mount
far higher-powered anti-personnel weapons
because they can absorb the greater recoil
and also carry all that additional weight
of ammo.
They can also carry the weight of protective
armor.
Armor’s heavy and somewhat awkward, though
less than folks tend to think, even the old
steel stuff from centuries ago.
Mostly it’s very exhausting to wear, all
that weight wears you down and it traps heat
and moisture inside too, I’d often get a
cloud of steam coming off me when I took mine
off after missions, and you always breathe
a sigh of relief when you can take it off.
If you can recall the feeling of stepping
into a climate controlled building after being
outside on a hot muggy day, multiply that
sense of relief by ten.
And the same is true of pretty much all protective
gear.
Humans are very good at sweating for heat
dissipation.
It’s what let us be such good persistence
predators, jog for hours at a time, and run
that massive supercomputer on top of our shoulders.
Be it body armor, sports gear, or space suits,
they all turn into exhausting sweatboxes,
with firefighting gear possibly being the
worst, as it’s an awful lot of gear that
you wear during heavy exertion in a very hot
environment.
All of which makes us think it would be a
great idea to have some sort of protective
gear that was able to carry its own weight,
though the ability to cool itself and deal
with moisture is probably just as important
and rarely gets mentioned much in these discussions.
We’re pretty much there in terms of technology
able to add strength smoothly in tandem with
a person’s own motions, which is a lot harder
than just slapping hydraulic pistons on, but
modern computing and miniaturization has improved
enough to allow that.
Ditto, it’s not really hard to do the cooling
and de-humidifying.
The issue is power, and we discussed that
more in Portable Power and with armor specifically
in Planetary Invasions, so we’ll mostly
bypass that today.
The other issue of course is cost, and that
is the second of those paradigm shifts I mentioned
a couple minutes moment ago.
In Olden Days, while many civilizations did
have military training incorporated into daily
life, like practicing archery or riding horses,
armies often rounded up every able-bodied
person they could get, gave them a weapon
and a little training, and marched them off.
This was another reason for wanting big formations
besides normal battlefield advantage, most
of the folks in them weren’t exactly professionals
so grouping everyone together helped with
training, transport, communication, coordinating,
and resisting the urge to panic and run off
to find a less dangerous vocation.
But quantity has a quality all its own, and
of course that’s the first rule of warfare,
always outnumber your opponent.
As we get into more modern times, industrial
era and beyond, there’s usually a much larger
investment in training folks before they can
be useful in war or peace.
A culture where everyone owned a bow or rifle
for hunting can convert those folks into reasonably
effective archers or rifleman fairly easily,
but we’re more complex and specialized so
we can’t convert folks into troops as quickly.
We do have some modern universal tasks like
driving or using a keyboard, but even a tracked
vehicle like a tank isn’t very like driving
a car, and piloting a plane, helicopter, or
submarine is obviously a lot different, to
say nothing of learning how to do everything
else besides moving it.
Indeed that’s why humanoid suits or robots
have an appeal, they’re likely to be quicker
to learn and master, particularly since they’d
probably have civilian equivalents for industry,
like the exoskeleton we see Ripley using in
the Aliens film, which would seem a lot more
effective than a forklift.
Or for sports for that matter.
Amusingly, in the future, kids might be donning
such suits for their little league games,
same as we have them don protective gear now.
So you have to invest a lot of time into training
someone before they can be useful, and you
have to do the same for folks back home supplying
the gear and funds to make and buy it.
The tipping point for whether or not to increase
your army size during a major conflict is
whether or not the typical person assists
the war more by being in the direct conflict
or home producing stuff.
Can they produce more war-fighting gear staying
back in factories or contributing to the general
economy than being removed from that economy
for military training and deployment.
A blacksmith forging swords is a lot more
valuable to you doing that than swinging one,
so it’s not a new concept by any means,
but modern technology has very complex supply
chains that tend to make it advantageous to
use few troops with tons of top notch gear,
and train them heavily.
Indeed we often narrow things further by having
military vehicles with very large maintenance
teams but only a handful of crew or even a
single pilot.
Though a billion dollar super-suit that lets
one guy equal the value of a hundred is still
a poor investment, particularly if it needs
a big maintenance crew too, unless your economy
is so potent that a hundred guys can produce
a billion dollars to pay for that super-suit.
I should also note that improvements in automated
production and 3D printing could flip that
dynamic backwards, requiring few people to
build and maintain the gear, but at the moment
elite, well-trained and equipped troops seems
to be the best approach.
Elite professional soldiers is hardly a new
thing, but the general trend in more recent
times has been to invest more to quality over
quantity, of people anyway, we add to their
battlefield quality by enhancing the quantity
of the firepower available and the precision
of its usage.
In that regard, while the really big humanoid
robot suits will be hard to justify, the sorts
of power armor we see on folks like Tony Stark
in Iron Man or the larger but fairly humanoid
exoskeletons like the dreadnought from Warhammer
40k, are not unreasonable, and I expect we’ll
see those in common use within a decade or
two of someone cracking the power supply issue.
I would tend to bet the first versions of
these would feature a modestly large battery
and a big cable running back to a generator
on whatever vehicle they used for transport.
We do actually have atomic generator designs
that are very high-powered and compact, but
that’s not really ideal for incorporation
into something someone would wear.
Though I could easily imagine a robotic equivalent
of knights and men at arms and squires popping
up for a time too.
Having a guy in power armor who is followed
around by cadre of robots who carried generators,
replacement cable to link to that armor, extra
ammo, sensors, and great big hulking metal
shields would not require huge amounts of
advanced artificial intelligence and automation,
but still lets you put a well-trained and
intelligent person right on the ground for
tactical control.
A droid nearby with an atomic generator and
power cables that trots along with you is
fairly viable, though you wouldn’t want
it trotting too close to you, and all that
radiation shielding would make it a pretty
tough droid too.
You can minimize the issues of the cord tangling
you up and so long as you have a battery good
enough for brief operation if the cord breaks,
you should be good, plugging in a new power
line wouldn’t be any trickier or disruptive
than reloading a fresh magazine.
That’s one alternative to increasing the
firepower at the disposal of that soldier
instead of just enlarging the suit to some
giant war mecha, you give them a squad of
automatons they can control.
Of course this whole concept is mostly about
limiting your own casualties and while that
sounds good on first glance it’s not your
actual first priority for a war, winning is,
and a commander that forgets that can be nearly
as ineffective as one who throws their forces
at the enemy like they have infinite reserves.
Ignoring the ethics of that, it’s just inefficient,
even if you’re using disposable battle droids
you want to spend them frugally.
Which raises a point, for our last example,
if you’ve got some cadre of droids with
your powered armored knight, do you actually
even need that guy?
And if you do, does he need to be on site
or just remote control drones instead?
Military hardware and doctrine change with
technology, so I’d expect to see phases
where each of these approaches was used.
That cadre of automata accompanying an armored
soldier might be the preferred arrangement
while artificial intelligence is still crude
or not entirely trusted.
That lone trooper can control them most of
the time well enough, even in combat in a
pinch, but they could be augmented by remote
pilots who can assume direct control when
necessary.
If the control signals are jammed, the drones
would have their own simple software for basic
tasks.
More sophisticated software upgrades might
automate more complex tasks, even combat,
and eventually replace the remote pilots but
not yet the human on the ground.
At that point, we hit an impasse where the
armored human directing the drones is the
most vulnerable part of the system.
He is essentially a tough shell with a gooey
interior, and it’s time to consider replacing
the goo.
The good news is that in the age of advanced
robotics, the technology to create an android
body and enable a human to control it is pretty
much the same technology that goes into prosthetics.
Instead of putting fragile humans into suits
of armor, it would be more practical to ask
some soldier who has already been killed,
but whose brain is more or less intact, if
they would like a second life as a giant weaponized
cyborg.
Same as we see in Robocop or the Dreadnoughts
of 40k.
And this gets us back into the bigger mecha,
because whether you cyborg someone up or just
put them in a combat android with a direct
brain interface, there’s no longer any reason
the mech needs to be human sized.
In a lot of the older fiction like the BattleTech
or Mechwarrior franchise, the pilot usually
messed around with various buttons and joysticks
while sitting in a cockpit just like they
would in a modern vehicle, but that’s fairly
unlikely to ever be the case.
Remember, while humanoid shape isn’t really
ideal for combat, the one great advantage
it has is intuitive control, which you lose
if you’re tugging on sticks and levers.
So you probably wouldn’t build giant humanoid
mecha unless you had cyborgs or direct brain
interfaces.
I was always rather fond of the Battletech
franchise and tabletop game, partially because
it was a rare example of science fiction that
remembered that heat dissipation is a big
issue with technology and combat, but I noticed
fairly early on when we got a supplement for
adding tanks and artillery instead of big
humanoid robots to our games, that those tended
to be a lot cheaper and more effective, and
probably what actually got me thinking on
this topic originally and likely influenced
me going into artillery when I later joined
the Army.
And artillery of course is one of the things
that killed off big unit formations of infantry.
Standing far back and lobbing tons of ordinance
at people is very effective and the principal
reason artillery and bombers aren’t used
almost exclusively in warfare these days is
that most of it is low-intensity and asymmetric
warfare.
You have a lot more accuracy at close range
and also typically don’t want to blow up
towns you occupy or intend to occupy, and
if the firepower is very one-sided, your enemies
either trying to ambush you at fairly close
ranges and in places where you’re constrained
about how much firepower you can bring to
bare or they lead very short careers.
This works against the really big robot approach
for several reasons.
First, weapons are getting a lot more precise
and long range, especially in terms of where
the triggerman needs to be, since the weapon
might be on a drone far away from the pilot,
much like how a drone can be piloted by someone
far away.
Part of the reason for a great big robot is
to mount a great big gun, and you don’t
really need a giant cannon if it’s very
precise, or the bullet is self-propelled,
or if all you carry is a little targeting
reticle that aims for a giant cannon far away,
much like modern forward observers for artillery.
Even using that power-armored lone trooper
with robot cadre example from a bit ago, odds
are most of the weight on his suit is protective
armor, and the big guns would be on his droids.
The second reason is the robot is handy for
close-quarters stuff, same reason infantry
is, but combat pretty much only ever happens
at closer ranges if one side wants to negate
the other’s advantages in firepower, so
you aim to ambush people inside urban areas
where they can’t see you till your close
and can’t cut lose with artillery volleys
and air support, both because those might
hit their own people and would certainly inflict
lots of civilian casualties and property damage.
Great big mecha the size of buildings are
generally hard to hide, being a lot more vertical
than something of equal mass and firepower
like a tank, which also doesn’t have arms
and legs sticking out that need a lot more
armor and a lot more hydraulics and power
to move them once armored.
Therefore they’re a lot easier to target
with big guns and more vulnerable to small
guns, and will be smashing up the real estate
too.
In the old Robotech cartoons, we get a lot
of examples of the pilots smashing up the
cities they fight in, and supposedly protect,
and that’s a common feature of a lot giant
robot series.
I think that’s the working assumption for
why they so often use swords, beyond that
they look cool of course, it cuts down on
the collateral damage.
Which is certainly true, considering any gun
on something about the size of building isn’t
going to just be an up-sized regular gun,
you’d have reached the point where the bullets
could just be small atomic bombs instead.
Even before then, they shouldn’t just be
big slugs but various rockets with guidance
packages.
Both because they can carry a payload and
steer themselves, and because you can shoot
a bunch at once.
Volley fire is how you overwhelm a point-defense
system, everything comes in at once, a normal
gun, regardless of rate of fire which they
presumably can match, is one bullet at a time.
Even if that time is milliseconds.
Sometimes we see logical reasons in scifi
for reverting to melee combat, like the personal
shields in Dune that could repel basically
anything but had to be tuned to let people
move and breathe in them, so were vulnerable
to slow attacks, so you could fight someone
up close and personal, and the obvious method
of adjusting the threshold speed for penetration
as needed doesn’t work so well in a setting
that forbids computers, so no rapid or smart
automatic adjustments of the shield.
Still a handwave though, as we never see anyone
wearing armor under the shield for stopping
knives even though we know they have levitation
technology that could make that armor lighter.
Anyway the main problem is that while swinging
around a big chunk of metal would absolutely
do a lot less collateral damage than opening
up with giant machine guns, rocket volleys,
or atomic weapons, the main reason it will
do less damage is because you’ll never get
a chance to swing it.
Your opponent will have blown you to smithereens
before you got close, that is the first rule
of warfare after all, don’t bring a knife
to a gun fight.
And it won’t be some weird ridiculous duel,
since you wouldn’t hold one right in the
middle of valuable real estate and your respective
commanders are likely to ask you dismount
from your incredibly expensive war machines
and fight with normal swords instead of banging
up the multi-million dollar hardware.
And if you do have both disputants in a conflict
subscribing to a policy of duels as some way
of settling conflicts with minimum losses,
they are bound to have training simulators,
and those could let both of them fight without
damaging property, civilians, valuable war
machines, or valuable pilots.
Of course all the mechanical and engineering
issues with a giant human aren’t an issue
in VR, but if you’re taking that approach
to conflicts, essentially proxy combat through
games, there’s no real reason to use big
machines anyway.
We do, however, have four good excuses to
use big war robots, three of which apply to
principally humanoid ones.
So we’ll close out by covering those.
The first actually is that duel excuse, it’s
not a very good one but people do like to
see fights, they like ones that seems decidedly
human in form, and they prefer to see contests
live rather than on screen, so great big robots
fighting in an arena does actually seem plausible
and needless to say wouldn’t involve shooting
the other guy with an atomic machine gun.
And if you live in a fairly warlike culture
it’s not completely implausible you’d
have a lot of rules meant to minimize how
often your cities and planets got trashed.
Given that you’ll always do better with
something you’re practiced at and is part
of your culture, that could maybe make these
a common platform.
However, that intuitive control aspect of
the humanoid option, our second good excuse,
also is handy if you’ve got really good
automation and are fairly peaceful rather
than warlike, since you could rapidly build
tons of such machines and dump relatively
untrained people in them.
So that’s your third excuse for humanoid
mecha, if you’ve got real cheap construction,
flooding the battlefield with tons of giant
war machines piloted by folks with minimal
training is likely to still be pretty effective,
plus it’s likely to be easier to get them
to practice as the entire reason we even contemplate
such machines is they sound so cool to pilot.
The last one though isn’t limited to just
humanoid forms, one advantage bigger war machines
have is that you can armor everything a lot
better, as we’ve mentioned before in this
series, the square-cube law means that you
can get away with thicker armor the bigger
you get, and a lot more redundancy of most
components.
So your machine can just take way more punishment
than not just individual smaller ones but
possibly more than an equal mass of those
smaller ones, who also have a lot more pilots
who’d be killed each time one got broken.
Even if that bigger one required more crew
to run effectively, like the multiple pilots
we see in the big Martian Titans of Warhammer
40k, they enjoy a lot more protection.
Bigger is better, with the exception of when
being smaller lets you avoid getting hit so
much.
That’s a major advantage but the problem
is that in the future weapons aren’t likely
to miss much.
And that causes a major shift in how you want
to fight.
If the enemy’s fire never goes wide and
can’t be dodged, you need to blow it up
before it hits you, point defense, or absorb
that hit, and for both of those it’s likely
to be advantageous to go big.
However that doesn’t necessarily mean humanoid,
and indeed you want to keep to blockier and
compact forms, least surface area, though
that might be debatable for deflecting fire
or if your big limitation is heat dissipation,
but I suspect that intuitive control plus
heat dissipation won’t equal out to compact
shapes with more armor covering your sensitive
gear even thicker.
Particularly since it’s so likely you could
either train folks to use that less intuitive
form or create something that it was intuitive
for, either a classic artificial intelligence
or just the militant version of a smart self-driving
car.
Or something more organic in nature or form,
and we’ll talk more about living vehicles
later this spring when we get to Space Whales
& Bioships.
Also a good reminder that a culture that has
things as smart as humans that it can use
instead of humans has to deal with the moral
dilemma of whether or not those unmanned automatons
are actually unmanned.
We’ll talk about that more in Bioships too,
however while a machine as smart as a human
but optimized to that war machine’s inhuman
physiology would be advantageous for operating
it, they wouldn’t include the advantage
of cutting down on casualties that unmanned
machines have.
Amusingly though, while we probably won’t
ever see lines of people at the recruiters
waiting to pilot a giant mecha, the parking
lot at the recruiters might be rather full,
since they might recruit everyone’s car
and automated vehicles to plug into those
military vehicles when wars break out.
Sadly, while I can see a lot of power armor
and smaller exoskeletons of humanoid form
in the future, especially if we overcome the
technical challenges discussed in Portable
Power and Planetary Invasions, I still can’t
see a good enough reason for human-piloted
and human-shaped giant war robots in the future,
but the case is maybe a little stronger for
them than we first thought.
On the other hand, it would be really awesome
to pilot one, and as we regularly say in regard
to technologically advanced civilizations,
they often don’t need any better justification
for doing something than “Because We Can”,
so maybe one day we will get to see them in
real life.
So were talking about how in general this
concept of piloting a giant war robot tends
to be more practical in fiction than reality,
and that we don’t see too many examples
of it novels since they lose the visual aspect.
There are some exceptions, usually where there’s
already a visual medium to expand off of,
like tabletop miniature games, and a lot of
those have expanded universes of novels, as
do a lot of pen and paper RPGs, video games,
and of course film franchises like Star Wars,
which is what popularized the term Expanded
Universe, to refer to a lot of novels written
by many different authors in a single, shared
setting.
There’s quite a few authors, including some
of my favorites, who either got their start
writing in shared settings or specialize in
it and written for many different ones.
One of my personal favorites is Michael Stackpole,
whose probably best known for his Star Wars
X-Wing series, that gave us a look into Rogue
Squadron.
Before that, though, he was one of the early
authors central to flushing out the Battletech
series, which expanded from being a tabletop
game into a collectible card game, an animated
show, the well known MechWarrior video game
franchise, and of course the novels and audio
performances.
I tend to feel a lot of the authors for shared
settings don’t get the recognition they
deserve, considering how many of us have whole
shelves full of novels from these settings
that have influenced, inspired, and entertained
us, and given today’s topic, I can’t think
of a better series that explores the concept
of mecha better, and tries to to look at it
in a practical and serious way.
So our audiobook of the month goes Michael
Stackpole’s Blood of Kerensky trilogy, an
the abridged audiobook collection on Audible.
It’s a personal favorite, a good place to
start with the series, and a great dip back
into early-90s Space Opera nostalgia, and
if you enjoy it, you will have no shortage
of other works.
That’s one of the best parts about Expanded
Universes and shared settings, the sheer amount
of material and lore that each has created
for it make the settings feel that much more
real.
That’s doubly the case for the Battletech
series, as while it’s set a thousand years
in the future, it simultaneously feels fantastic
and down to Earth.
You can pick up a free copy of the Blood of
Kerensky collection today, just use my link
in this episode description, Audible.com/Isaac
or text Isaac to 500-500 to get a free book
and 30 day free trial, and that book is yours
to keep, whether you stay on with Audible
or not.
And if you don’t enjoy the book, you can
exchange it for another book, no questions
asked.
Next week we’ll be returning to the Earth
2.0 series to examine Matrioshka Worlds, many
layered concentric shells to live on with
vastly more living area than regular planets,
and a type of megastructure Earth itself might
be converted into one day.
The week after that, we’ll be revisiting
the concept of spaceships powered by a black
hole, and see how this sort of drive system
may be far superior to others we’ve looked
at and might be something our early interstellar
ships use, not something of far distant futures
and science fiction.
We’ll also follow that episode up down the
road with a look at Colonizing Black Holes
as well as Weaponizing Black Holes.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel
and hit the notifications bell.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
You can also support future episodes by donating
to the channel at our website, isaacarthur.net,
or on Patreon.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
