This episode is sponsored by Audible.
We often see aliens crashing on Earth in scifi,  
but what would it actually be like to be 
stranded on some alien and hostile planet?
So, welcome back to another Scifi Sunday here 
on SFIA, where we relax a bit of our scientific  
rigor from our normal Thursday episodes, 
to explore concepts from science fiction  
and see how realistic they are, or what the other 
implications of such situations are. Today’s topic  
was inspired by some of our recent episodes 
on damaged spaceships and crashed saucers,  
or being an alien refugee, and it made me ask what 
I’d have done in that fictional alien’s case and  
what a human should do if they crashed-landed 
on, or were exiled to, some alien planet. 
It was also partially inspired by our 
look at Alien Impostors some months back,  
which is actually the episode coming out 
next as I write this, because I do the  
videos a couple months after the scripts, and 
I found myself asking how I would have acted  
if I was the shape-changing entity we see 
from the film The Thing, or the Xenomorphs  
from Aliens, or the Predator from that franchise.
The big question is always how the heck the alien  
can even survive on the planet, different air, 
different food, no knowledge of the environment,  
all messed up from being on a world that 
differs in so many ways, from gravity,  
lighting and pressure, to all the plants 
around it, that it probably feels like its  
in a hallucination or a fever dream. Which it 
might actually be too; an accident or crash can  
cause injuries, and it might be disoriented 
for neurological or chemical reasons,  
not just by the weird environment’s shock value.
Of course, in fiction, the default answer is that  
the creature is either from a parallel environment 
or is just that tough, in body or mind, and maybe  
any plotholes in the story where it acted dumbly 
can be attributed to that unfamiliarity and  
disorientation. Indeed when I thought about it, 
that’s not a bad excuse, given that an invader  
probably prefers to invade worlds a bit like 
their own, and that anything evolved to be its own  
world’s apex lifeform is probably pretty tough and 
clever. Plus it might be some engineered lifeform,  
like the Xenomorphs of the Alien Franchise, 
or just really augmented as a life form. 
We spend a lot of time on this channel talking 
about space colonization and about transhumanism,  
augmentation of the human mind and body, be it 
cybernetic, genetic, or various other options  
and combinations thereof. However, we often don’t 
spend as much time thinking about combinations  
thereof when it comes to settling space and being 
an augmented transhuman or posthuman doing it.  
We tend to look from the basic human 
perspective. And when you think on  
it from that post-human perspective, finding 
yourself crashed on some alien planet is not  
necessarily a pathway to instant doom.
As I’ve pointed out in other episodes,  
if an alien ambassador shows-up, demanding to be 
taken to our leader, shooting them is not just  
dangerous because their civilization might want 
some payback. It’s entirely likely that they,  
personally, are so amped up on mental and 
physical augmentation that they might be  
entitled to their own comic book. If you shot 
them, it's entirely possible their nanobot laden  
blood might be oozing into the ground getting 
ready to replicate and build some subterranean  
manufactory that will burst forth ten thousand 
war machines a month later. Or preemptively,  
their ship launched some self-replicators at 
a crater on the moon or a few spare asteroids  
as it was approaching, with orders to copy the 
ambassador and give him an entourage of killbots. 
We don’t really know how far things like 
self-replicators can really go in terms of  
productivity and speed or durability. In terms 
of realism, nanobots would be like viruses,  
ultra-fragile, but fast to reproduce and numerous, 
and very specialized. So for today we will assume  
that our person crashing might have access 
to some very advanced technologies but not  
quite that impressive. We’ll assume the person 
or alien in question here isn’t regenerating  
at Wolverine or Mr. Sinister levels and the ship 
doesn't either and isn’t made out of adamantium,  
even if it might be way tougher than steel.
Afterall, if their repair capacity was that great,  
then the ship probably could fix itself while it 
was crashing, and our stranded person or alien  
could be a wrecked corpse impaled on their own 
control console after they both slammed out  
the front of this ship, and it would still have 
them all put back together again in short order,  
and ready to go, once it finished sweeping up 
all your scattered and half-incinerated remains.  
So even if it took a few hours, assuming you fell 
to the ground in a remote place, you’re good to  
go. And the same for any easily repaired damage 
that’s basically the equivalent of a flat tire. 
Also odds do favor you falling out in the 
middle of nowhere, because even nowadays,  
most of this planet is nowhere. Even ignoring 
how much of this planet is water, or ice,  
half the planet’s population is packed into 1% 
of its land, a lot of the remaining land isn’t  
just rural but downright uninhabited, tundra 
or desert or mountain, where it might be a  
mile or more to any human-built anything, 
let alone a person who was coincidentally  
watching the sky when your ship meteored 
in. And a crashing ship would tend to look  
like a meteor and radar might not see it, or 
just see it and tack a note on that X Return  
at Y Time had Z vector in case anyone wants to 
reference it against some meteorite they found.  
There’s no joint service that investigates 
meteors even in the US, let alone worldwide. 
If your ship leaves some mile-wide swath 
of fiery ruin in its wake through a forest,  
yeah, you’ll be getting noticed pretty 
quickly, and depending on the country,  
the welcoming party might be arriving in the form 
of helicopters and commandos. But even in cases  
like that, I’d figure you’d still have several 
minutes to get out and move somewhere else. 
And you might be able to move really fast. I mean, 
if you survived a crash like that, it's possible  
your crash system was good enough that you’re 
uninjured, or at least that a vehicle on your  
ship was, your high-tech personal shuttle, rover, 
dunebuggy, or hoverbike, or that you survived it  
because you are a pretty tough post-human. So, 
maybe you can run fast, or maybe you just dished  
up 32 flavors of buttkicking on the welcome party.
But, assuming you didn’t stumble out of your ship  
armored and armed to the teeth with megaweapons, 
and decided you needed to abandon your ship,  
you’re going to be limited to what you’ve 
got on you, and what you can forage from the  
electronics and hardware stores to fix your 
ship, build a new one, or build a signaling  
device. This of course assumes there are any 
hardware stores, and that you can fix anything. 
So I thought we would contemplate a few different 
cases here. We have four different people  
from four different hypothetical future human 
civilizations, Martin, Athena, Turok, and Noonien. 
Martin is an anthropologist exploring a 
planet designated 6319, with intelligent  
life and civilization, and not too far 
from achieving spaceflight themselves. 
Athena is a fleet officer whose 
ship was patrolling a remote system,  
when it got damaged and she had 
to abandon ship in a drop pod,  
and landed at daybreak on a planet BSG-2004, with 
intelligent life, but little to no technology. 
Turok is the warden of Planet Tal’Set 
with alien life, but not intelligent  
and sapient life. He maintained the 
quarantine of it from his space station,  
but crashed on that planet after the station 
blew up while he was returning from a survey. 
Noonien is an augmented human who is stranded 
on Ceti Alpha, a barren and lifeless world. 
Congratulations to everyone who got 
all those references and easter eggs,  
though for those who did, we’re not holding 
much to the specific characters beyond that. 
Now, in Martin’s case, his people had found a 
planet, 6319, inhabited by aliens who weren’t  
all that dissimilar to them in basic appearance, 
and like every alien world we’d found in the  
galaxy with intelligent primitive life on 
it, we slapped a quarantine down banning  
anyone from going there, even to study, 
because so many early attempts failed at  
doing that well. Tampering always occurred.. 
But he’s an anthropologist, so he and some  
others decided they would check it out anyway.
Martin was selected for both his skill in the  
field and his willingness to die if necessary 
to prevent either tampering with the planet,  
or exposing his secret allies. He had to agree 
to extensive cosmetic surgery, and by pooling  
their resources, they were able to get a small and 
decently stealthy spaceship. Though their great  
achievement was getting a sympathetic officer 
of the fleet stationed there for quarantine,  
who was able to take the detection grid offline 
for a while for maintenance while Martin snuck in. 
He was almost done with his mission of several 
decades and was ready to leave, but that officer  
in the fleet had long since rotated out and they 
weren’t so sure that stealthy ship would be up for  
the task, especially as it hadn’t had the best 
maintenance over the decades and he guessed the  
fleet might have had some upgrades. So he decided 
to try to mimic one of the new aircraft the people  
of 6319 had recently invented to disguise his 
atmospheric ascent from the fleet’s interest,  
but one of the radar stations of 6319 - who 
amusingly also call their planet Earth in  
their local language - spotted him, and one 
of their fighters shot his spacecraft down. 
Martin is surprised they could do that, but 
figures they must have hit some vital ship  
component whose backup wasn’t working anymore, 
after decades of skilled but limited maintenance  
by himself. It can’t make the speed to get to 
space and isn’t going to stay in flight much  
longer, but he’s able to glide the ship down 
near one of the many hideouts and bolt holes  
he stayed at around the planet for some 
weeks or months at a time in his studies,  
just a cave really but out of the way.
The ship is badly damaged, possibly beyond repair,  
as is his transmitter, a powerful laser which can 
be used once a local year at an exact moment, to  
send a very brief pulse of data, with the help of 
gravitational lensing, to a very distant satellite  
around another star that his allies own and can 
then transmit it on to them. He estimates that if  
he can get his transmitter working again, then he 
can signal his distress, and that in as little as  
fifty years they might be able to receive that 
message, come up with a way to help, and get  
it here. Alternatively, he can try to repair his 
spaceship. He believes he has vital information on  
the people of 6319 that is well worth risking 
his life to get to the academic community,  
and while he has a modest if condescending 
fondness for the locals, he does not want to  
spend the remaining centuries of his life here.
So what are his options? Well first, he is nigh  
immortal in an aging sense. He wouldn’t 
survive being blown-up or machinegunned,  
but he’d probably recover without treatment from 
any wound that wasn't instantly lethal, and he’s  
basically disease-proof. He doesn’t have any magic 
technology on him though. Just a few implants  
designed to help with the recording and storing 
of data, none of which are necessarily much more  
advanced than a smartphone without internet, and 
those are all designed to burn themselves out if  
he dies or signals it, so that he doesn’t break 
his species’ prime directive. He is very smart  
and technical too, but he hasn’t got endless 
diagrams of high-tech devices in his head, or a  
sonic screwdriver or any other widget the people 
of 6319 could use to back-engineer tech off of.  
His spaceship has lots of tech of course, but even 
that is kept to a minimum, and it has all sorts  
of tamper safeguards, including outright blowing 
itself up, some of which he is unable to turn off. 
He has more options than those that might 
first come to mind though. To begin with,  
he could signal the fleet easily 
enough. They will come and get him,  
he thinks. They might just drop a small fake 
asteroid on his position to blow him up, but  
what he knows of the protocols are that they would 
want to get their hands on him to interrogate him  
to find out what he’s done on this unauthorized 
expedition, who it was with, who his allies were,  
and where bits of their technology might be lying 
around this primitive planet. That’s not the end  
of the world, he will go to jail for a long 
time, but it's no gulag - hopefully anyway;  
he’s been out of touch for over a century, 
so things might have changed - and they won’t  
spitefully destroy his data. His people 
are curious by nature, they just follow a  
prime directive, illegally acquired data is 
not destroyed and indeed he isn’t the first  
person to have done an illegal anthropology trip 
and then semi-anonymously published the results. 
His next option is just to keep at what he’s 
already been doing, until this civilization  
becomes spacefaring themselves and no longer comes 
under the protection of the Prime Directive. He  
expects that the alterations to him which 
make him incredibly long-lived and durable,  
will hold up for many centuries, but he believes 
with sufficient time he could build a cryo-unit  
to go into stasis for a couple decades at 
a time and check conditions. One thing his  
ship isn’t lacking is a library of old TV 
shows and films, and he has watched a lot  
of the stranded alien or time traveler ones from 
obvious personal sympathies with the characters. 
So he knows of Star Trek and how often they have 
been back in time or around some primitive world  
and had to talk about abandoning ship and living 
out the remainder of their lives among the people  
of that time, as got suggested in Star Trek: 
First Contact, when they’re back in time,  
fighting the borg before humanity discovers warp 
travel. He wonders why they didn’t just tear out  
a few replicator units and have an agreed upon 
rendezvous point where they could manufacture  
stasis pods set for one day after they left 
their own time. Or even cobble together simple  
freezer pods to hide in a camouflaged cave and 
a beacon designed to go off on a chosen time  
and date to come rescue and restore them.
He can try to fix his ship, he is very  
knowledgeable of the culture after all, and does 
look like one of them. He is still an alien to  
them so often comes off a bit weird in manner and 
tone, but he could probably pass for eccentric.  
He knows he would need a lot of money to fix 
his ship, the damage and repairs are going to  
require too complex a supply chain, or way too 
expensive of custom and highly precise work,  
even if he limits it to bits and pieces 
that aren’t functioning super-tech,  
and does those parts on his own. He has a lot 
of ways to get rich, the most tempting being  
to pick a technology he knows they’re going to 
invent sooner than later and running with that. 
Being a tech billionaire that’s eccentric wouldn’t 
be surprising but would tend to draw official  
interest in his background, and he believes the 
6319-ers Air Force suspects they shot down an  
alien craft, or an enemy nation’s prototype, and 
might be hunting for him. A tech billionaire who  
keeps coming up with new tech might trip 
a mental alarm fingering him as an alien  
visitor. On the other hand, the vast majority of 
technology isn’t invented by a future billionaire,  
he doesn’t have to introduce semi-conductors 
or the internet. A relatively mundane widget  
that’s very useful for flight might easily let 
him run a profitable factory with a connection  
to aerospace that would conceal a lot of his 
weirder and secretive buys as merely a company  
experimenting and trying to keep their R&D quiet.
But it could be even more mundane. The most  
important invention of 1962 is usually considered 
to be the communications satellite, but the  
invention of the cordless electric drill the year 
before in 1961 was a very big deal, and someone  
who also already knew what tool innovations of 
that sort were popular among his people of that  
era could rapidly dominate that market, or simply 
be content to be a millionaire many times over,  
and with no one thinking alien visitor. His goal 
is still to slip by unnoticed afterall, and get  
his equipment fixed or wait out the time till he 
can openly book a spaceflight to his homeworld,  
centuries down the road. His goal is not to set 
himself up as another Thomas Edison or Tesla, or  
Musk or Gates or Jobs. He’s not aiming to takeover 
this planet or be worshiped as a god, after all. 
Athena, emerging from her drop pod on planet 
BSG-2004 with the sun rising at her back while  
dozens of the primitive natives gather in awe to 
see this fiery egg falling from the sky, probably  
has some reason to wonder if that might be the 
easiest course of action. She’s somewhere in  
the gray area between being a cyborg and android 
herself, and thus inhumanly strong and durable,  
and she doesn’t really look like the locals, 
who are humanoid but not much more similar in  
appearance beyond that. So she’s quite capable 
of playing god to the paleolithic culture that  
found her but also not really in a position to 
either live on her own completely, or change her  
appearance to match theirs. She looks human, 
really thinks of herself as one too, and she  
can’t change shapes or perform cosmetic surgery 
on herself and she would need to be a foot shorter  
and have her knees turned around backwards to have 
a chance of passing as one of them, no amount of  
makeup is going to make her look like one of them.
She thinks that, given enough time and  
contemplation, she could figure out how to build 
some sort of transmitter, but that might take her  
many decades, she really has no bigger advantage 
in doing this than you or I would, with a decent  
basic knowledge of how radios and electromagnetic 
radiation and power generation work. She figures  
she can use her decent basic grasp of science and 
some experimentation and sheer determination to  
eventually get a radio working. But a spaceship? 
Not a chance. She knows the transmitter in her  
pod is broken because it says so, along with how 
it’s running out of power, and she has no idea how  
to fix that any better than most of us would if 
the camera on our phone was clearly smashed and  
we don’t even know which bits of circuits connect 
to that, and the diagrams are on the same system  
that’s currently busy running out of power.
Athena knows her best path to getting that pod  
-or any bit of it- working again, would be to 
hope she can guide and teach these primitives  
into becoming a technological culture and letting 
them poke at the pod in several centuries when  
they get there. She’s not sure if the pod would 
still be useful by then or if she would still  
be functioning. In practice, she is assuming her 
fleet’s home base is eventually going to send an  
investigation out but she’s not sure if anyone 
else survived or would just happen to have had  
the good luck to land on this planet, which is a 
very tiny target against an entire solar system,  
but also way too big for her to have any chance 
of searching for other folks from her ship.  
She also doesn’t know how long it will take 
before a search and rescue effort is made - if  
ever - or some other patrol comes through, but 
figures it would likely be some decades at least. 
So, her options are to go full-on 
hermit and survive as long as she can,  
possibly viewed as some loch ness monster or 
Grendel equivalent, possibly as fairy or god.  
Or she can join this tribe. She doesn't speak 
their language and actually doesn’t have all  
the right hardware to do so, as it appears to be 
a mix of yips, barks, and high-tempo leg tapping,  
but signs and gestures work a bit. So she can’t 
even tell them yet that she’s not a god, and she’s  
not so sure she should try. They might assume 
she’s a demon instead, and they’re not really  
philosophically advanced enough to have a formal 
theology on what is or is not a god, so epic  
warrior of vast strength, durability, knowledge 
and lifetime, who fell from the heavens, might  
check that box, and even an honest explanation 
of the situation might leave it checked. 
Of course, we’re assuming Athena is somewhat 
ethical, but in the event she falls somewhere  
between ethical and tyrannical monster, she 
might decide being housed in a temple built  
in her honor, and being waited-on hand and hoof 
by the locals is an entirely justified reward for  
making sure their descendants thrive and survive.
She held some rank in the service so she is used  
to being in charge and knows the burdens of 
command and was screened out for obvious signs  
of extreme narcissism or being a psychopath, so 
there’s no question that she won’t be abusive to  
the locals, except maybe by accident. There’s also 
no plausible physical attraction going on here,  
the plumbing isn’t even vaguely compatible, so 
she’s not demanding to be fanned by scantily  
clad servants feeding her grapes like some 
Egyptian Pharaoh. But, like a Pharaoh,  
she is in a position to soon have tens of 
thousands of people working on some big task  
like pyramid-building. Or a mega transmitter.
Now, in theory she could put a fair amount of  
time into teaching them basic metallurgy so that 
she could get some copper wire and just build a  
very crude steam engine, turning a dynamo and 
powering a big simple radio. That could be put  
together in a relatively short time, maybe a few 
years tops, with a couple years spent learning  
the language and persuading, or conquering, 
nearby tribes. That would produce a radio  
signal loud and artificial enough that a search 
and rescue team would pick it up and investigate. 
We don’t know how they’d respond at that 
point if they did spot the signal. They  
might embrace her and take her home, or clap 
her in chains for tampering with or enslaving  
a primitive world. Or they might celebrate her 
ingenuity, and leave a detachment behind to  
claim the planet or just nuke the surrounding 
region to cut out the contagion, so to speak,  
that region that received technological uplifting. 
She might be concerned something like that might  
happen. We also never said how her ship got 
damaged or what they were patrolling for,  
it could have been enemy ships and this world 
might be left alone because it’s part of some  
neutral zone. Or maybe the enemy is pretty vicious 
and she thinks her side is losing and wants to  
help these people get a chance to survive should 
the enemy win and turn their eye on smaller prey. 
Or maybe the radio just doesn’t work. Whichever, 
if that option passes then Athena might realize  
that her own knowledge of science and technology 
is good, but not enough to rebuild a computerized  
spacefaring culture. She can tell them 
lots of basics and also lots of goalposts,  
like knowing whether or not deuterium or helium 
3 was the better path to fusion reactors or not  
knowing how to build a carburetor but knowing they 
existed and what they were for. So, how fast can  
she take a paleolithic culture to modern tech?
Well, the early periods are actually the easiest,  
once you get the language down, it shouldn’t 
be that hard to take any paleolithic culture to  
neolithic or early copper age just by showing them 
copper and pottery and few hours of discussing  
plants and plowing and such, again once you 
learned their language and had them explain  
their planet to you. There’s no guarantee for 
instance that the plants actually have seeds,  
maybe it’s all spores and rhizomes, maybe 
they don’t need a boost in nitrogen,  
phosphorus and potassium, and those aren’t the big 
nutrients to boost. Primitive doesn’t mean stupid,  
though they are aliens so there’s no particular 
reason to think their brains parallel humans,  
they might be smarter or dumber in all things 
or better or worse at certain mental tasks. 
But that should be a one or two generation 
project, and then it’s really more about  
growing numbers and showing them what you 
know and describing what you can recall.  
We already know plenty of stone-age tribes 
from the colonial era picked up technology  
comfortably enough after a fairly short period of 
being awed by it. But if Athena determined that  
she had components that might not last more 
than a century or so, and that it would take  
at least three or four to get the tech to make a 
spaceship or interstellar beacons or replacement  
cyborg parts, she might devote her efforts 
to accelerating them as much as she can while  
writing down or dictating all the tech knowledge 
and descriptions she could recall, then teach them  
how to make liquid nitrogen and vacuum-walled 
chambers, neither of which are very difficult,  
along with everything she knew about cryo and 
restoration afterward, and have herself frozen. 
I suspect that might be easier to do as an 
ancient hero of the people who came from  
a distant star and asked for their help 
and gave it in return then as a fake god,  
as they would want you back as much as we would 
want back a Benjamin Franklin or Leonardo Davinci,  
and all the more so if they turned out to be 
alien, not least because they could serve as a  
guide or ambassador to their people for us, but 
you can make an argument for going either way. 
Turok has no such option, as his own ship 
is crashing into the jungles of Tal’Set, the  
world he serves as guardian of and has done for 
a very long time. It’s a truly primitive planet,  
nothing with a brain much bigger than a chicken’s, 
but with some giant chicken-like creatures around.  
This world has dinosaurs, and here at least, 
they do have feathers, and they roam the jungles  
and mushroom forests trying to eat anything 
tasty, and Turok is about the right size. 
Before he was dragging himself out of his crashed 
ship, he and a few others had the duty of guarding  
this planet from potential colonization or 
from reckless explorers, or from asteroids  
or other world-ending events. This world is 
quarantined and he is its keeper. The system is  
23,000 light years from Earth and it’s the year 
97,022 AD, so the main wave of colonization is  
still way far behind and this system is outright 
owned by the NPPP, which is headquartered on Earth  
but controls thousands of systems and defends 
them ruthlessly. The Native Planet Protection  
Pact may need 23,000 years before they even 
realize their station blew up and one of its few  
dedicated crew survived, let alone send anyone 
from Earth to help, or maybe hire a mercenary  
company closer to the spot to protect the system 
and rescue Turok, once more people settle it. 
Turok doesn’t know if his station was 
attacked, maybe by poaching dinosaur hunters,  
or just hit by a micrometeor, or had received 
sub-standard maintenance, he just knows that  
when he was docking from a routine sampling 
trip to the surface, the station exploded,  
damaging his ship, which was also low on fuel. 
He also knows that any rescue that might be  
coming is either going to be those hypothetical 
dino-hunters or else be several millennia in the  
making. There are only a handful of colonies 
within a thousand light years of here and  
most are from various groups which might be called 
eccentric or unreliable, who had essentially spent  
fortunes to migrate far, far from Earth when 
countless nearer worlds were still available. 
Repairing and refueling his ship wouldn’t let him 
do anything other than maybe get back into orbit  
to scan the debris or for other ships, though he 
contemplates that he could cannibalize the various  
defense and recon satellites around the planet. 
There’s a whole constellation of them up there,  
but without active maintenance they probably won’t 
survive more than a century. Ironically his GPS  
is working fine and he has plenty of access to 
information on his ship. It’s not going anywhere,  
though he’ll need to protect it from nature, 
and he has all the bits and pieces necessary  
to rig up some solar power for a bit and then make 
a dynamo and other electrical production hardware. 
What does he do? Try to repair 
and refuel? If he was attacked,  
does he try to deal with the poachers 
and become Turok, Dino-Hunter-Hunter,  
or does he just cut a deal with them, figuring 
he can’t stop them but he might be able to  
talk them out of particularly ecological 
harmful actions and get a ride back home,  
or some place than can become home. Or 
maybe he goes the cryo and beacon route too,  
sleeping on ice in the Savage Land until rescue 
comes or civilization arrives the slow way, by  
colony ship or by the intelligent descendants of 
the chicken-dinos. Maybe he could even engage in  
selective breeding and engineering to bring about 
smarter dinos and an eventual sauron civilization? 
He still has options and a lot more than our last 
case, Noonien, the exiled leader of a defeated  
empire, a once great Khan, now abandoned or 
fled to the lifeless world of Ceti Alpha,  
with only the basic tools for a meager survival. 
Is the world entirely lifeless or just devoid  
of anything abundant or complex? Or perhaps 
the world held life, once his great capital,  
but all that’s left after the bombing is deserts, 
traces of atmosphere full of radioactive dust,  
and his bunker where he and a few of his 
loyalists held out till the end, buried alive. 
Now, crashing on a lifeless world like Mars 
presumably leaves few odds for survival  
without rescue, but a scenario like in Andy Weir’s 
Martian is more plausible with just a handful more  
technology than the character in that story had. 
It wouldn’t be likely there would be a breathable  
atmosphere unless it was a case like earth from 
a bit over a billion years back, before we had a  
real land ecology but after life had switched from 
regarding oxygen as a dangerous waste product,  
to one that could be used as part of our fuel 
process, then excrete carbon dioxide as a waste  
instead. Noonien is very augmented though, he 
could survive in a radioactive environment that  
would kill us in minutes, or in low-pressure 
or low oxygen environments for extended times,  
and he’s smart and tough and strong.
He knows that with any decent supply  
of electricity he can turn not just water or 
ice but actual rock into breathable oxygen,  
rock is mostly oxygen afterall. He knows 
he can use wind turbines for power in dust  
storms and solar thermal in an airless or low 
air environment, or hydropower or any number of  
options. The big question is if there’s anything 
to eat, either local or in his supplies, and if it  
can be made to last long enough to grow more. 
A ship or bunker might well have hydroponics,  
and a person stranded there as an exile probably 
would have that too. Though pre-packaged food  
might not have anything that was viable as a 
seed, possibly as a byproduct of processing and  
packaging it, and possibly intentionally too. His 
ultra-durable food stores given by his captors or  
exilers are just a bit over the amount needed 
for him to survive the rest of his long life. 
In such a case, hypothetically, even a slurry of 
microbes grown from a sample from your own gut  
bacteria or excretions might provide sustenance. 
A sufficient mastery of biology and the right  
equipment might allow you to take DNA from 
food to clone up, and indeed, you might be  
able to vat-grow a clone of yourself, or many 
of them and more than one gender too. And the  
name aside this isn’t Star Trek, so there’s no 
copy fatigue on cloning, one person could supply  
the gene-stock for an entire planet, especially 
with advanced tech but even modern tech could do,  
which would allow you to tweak genes to 
restore other hair and skin colors and  
other human traits. I could imagine Noonien and 
his fellow survivors or clones, living in some  
cobbled-together domes on some duststorm-wracked 
deathworld for generations, eking out an existence  
on what they could hydroponically grow 
by artificial lighting and manufacturing,  
or in algae vats, using power generated by wind 
turbines, and one day growing Ceti Alpha to be  
a terraformed paradise planet, home to a 
genetically diverse ecosystem and people. 
With sufficient technology, that might be possible 
just for one relatively normal human in an  
advanced spacesuit, one with limited 3D printing, 
nanotech, and good data capacity archives,  
able to keep a survivor alive who fell onto a 
barren asteroid, by just eating up the local  
scenery to build solar collectors, habitation 
domes and drums, biology labs and hydroponics,  
copies of its own AI to help, and eventually 
growing more plants, animals, and even people. And  
maybe just turning the asteroid into one big space 
habitat or spaceship, able to take itself back to  
civilization. Or maybe just do a simple ship and 
place the person inside into hibernation. And  
of course that spacesuit might actually just be 
someone’s own internal augmentations, as opposed  
to something a normal modern human could wear.
In any of these cases, with enough brains,  
technology, and sheer willpower a person 
can survive and get home, using real science  
rather than turning coconuts into radios like in 
Gilligan’s Island. Getting stranded on an alien  
world might be mostly a thing of science fiction, 
depending on the case, but as we saw today,  
survival is possible, with a combination 
of luck, skill, tools, and determination.
So this SciFi Sunday we were talking about getting 
stranded on an Alien Planet and referred to Andy  
Weir’s the Martian, and I was producing this video 
while writing up our upcoming December episode on  
Farming on Mars and discussed those potatoes he 
grew in the novel and film. I’m quite fond of  
that novel and it won our Audible Audiobok 
of the Month back in October 2019, in our  
episode on Hi-Tech Search and Rescue, as did 
his novel Artemis 4 years ago. Andy Weir is  
rapidly becoming one of the Greats of Scifi and 
his newest novel Project Hail Mary, featuring an  
amnesiac who is the sole survivor of a mission to 
Tau Ceti to save Earth, did not disappoint, and  
I’m very glad today to give Andy Weir’s Project 
Hail Mary our Audible Audiobook of the Month. 
All of our Audiobooks of the month are 
available on Audible, the Home of Storytelling,  
which has thousands of audiobooks and literally 
centuries worth of content for you to pick from,  
and more being added every day faster 
than you could listen to all of it,  
which is wonderful whether you’re stranded on an 
Alien Planet or just stuck inside for the winter. 
But they don’t just have audiobooks, 
they also have many excellent podcasts,  
such as Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur, 
where we have every single episode on Youtube,  
plus several audio-only exclusives I’ve made 
over the years. That’s just some of the great  
content in the Audible Plus Catalog, which also 
has sleep & meditation tracks available, as well  
as guided fitness programs, and Audible Original’s 
like Neil Gaiman’s Sandman Act III and Roadkill,  
the newest work by my friend Dennis E. Taylor, 
who many of you know from his awesome Bobiverse  
series, which are also available on Audible.
The whole Audible Plus Catalog full of free  
books and other content, comes as a bonus when 
you join Audible, for you to stream or download  
to listen to anywhere and anywhen, in addition to 
the usual one free title a month and great member  
discounts . Audible’s incredible selection makes 
it truly the home of storytelling, and listening  
to audiobooks lets you get more books into 
your life. Let Audible help you discover new  
ways to laugh, be inspired, or be entertained. 
New members can try it free for 30 days. Visit  
Audible dot com slash isaac or text isaac to 
500-500. That’s Audible dot com slash isaac or  
text isaac to 500-500 to try Audible free 
for 30 days. Audible dot com slash isaac. 
Incidentally for everyone who 
caught all those references,  
yes I was making fun of the 2004 TV Reboot of 
Battlestar Galactica’s last episode Daybreak.  
If you don’t know the series it's definitely 
worth a watch even if I didn’t like the ending,  
and if you’re in a rush and don’t want to sit 
down for nearly a hundred episodes, Spacedock  
did a fun 8 minute summary of the show a couple 
years back, and is definitely a great channel to  
tune into if you’re looking for more discussion 
of realism in scifi, or a lack thereof, to tide  
you over to our next Scifi Sunday episode, which 
will be on Planetary Civil Wars on December 11th. 
We’ve got a lot of episodes in November still 
coming up, starting this Thursday with a look  
at the concept of living planets, including 
asking if Earth might be one, in the The Gaia  
Hypothesis. Then it's onto our Thanksgiving 
Episode, Thursday, November 24th, for Reasons  
to Be Optimistic about the Future, followed by 
our Monthly Livestream Q&A two Sundays from now. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like to  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social media  
forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
