After over half a century, it is time to return
to the Moon, and use its vast resources as
a bridge to countless new worlds.
Welcome to Science & Futurism with Isaac Arthur,
and I am your aforementioned host, Isaac Arthur,
writer and producer of this show and also
President of the National Space Society, an
organization dedicated to a future of space
settlement.
And when it comes to settling space, finding
a way to set up self-supporting bases on the
Moon is necessarily always at the forefront
of those efforts.
After all, if we can’t make things work
on the Moon, the only celestial body within
real-time communication distance of Earth,
how could we ever hope to make things work
on any other planet?
At its core though, the Moon is not just the
prototype place to try out space settlement,
but also the gateway to those other places
because it is very rich in resources to mine,
process, and refine, but also low in gravity
and air, the two things that make getting
off Earth and into space so hard.
This is why we have done many episodes on
the Moon, and will doubtlessly do many more,
and why today we will be focusing on how we
get those resources; and in the near future,
with existing technologies.
And it all comes down to economics and the
tyranny of the rocket equation.
If I want to put a spaceship on another planet,
I either need a vastly better fuel and propellant,
or I need to be willing to launch dozens of
ships into space carrying a payload of fuel,
just to be able to have the fuel to send one
of those spaceships off to another planet.
That ship isn’t moving too fast either.
Even if a better fuel is found, it is still
better sourced on the moon, but so is all
that air, water and honestly anything that
we can build there instead of here on Earth.
That might get sophisticated as we improve
automation and options like 3D printing.
For now though, it’s okay if we have to
fly every sophisticated piece of equipment
up from Earth, every microchip or control
panel, if we can produce big, thick shielding
panels for the ship, or water tanks, or the
water for those tanks, on the Moon.
Or simply get the resources there and move
them to orbital factories and dockyards near
Earth.
After all, on the Moon, we have a power generation
issue.
There’s no fossil fuel or wind or hydropower,
but there is half a month of sunlight followed
by half a month of darkness, which makes solar
kind of viable, and there are plenty of options
for using nuclear reactors there as there’s
not much worry about radiation.
Or rather, the place is already pretty irradiated
so it’s not a big concern to add to that.
We could contemplate some sort of arrangement
where nuclear combined with solar ran a lot
of power-intensive projects at a base for
two weeks, then shifted to lower-power ones.
Maybe you smelt metal for two weeks and then
spend the next two weeks surveying for, or
collecting, new ore.
We do have a lot of ways to supply power in
the dark period too, and for that matter there
are places on the Moon that are more or less
dark than the average.
Some crater bottoms are perpetually dark,
or nearly so, and lava tubes too, whereas
some crater rim walls, especially far from
the equator, get much longer periods of light.
Those craters and lava tubes are of immense
interest to us as resources sites too.
Now, when we talk about building a lunar economy
up and extracting material from there, it’s
worth noting that this is not pie in the sky.
Carisa Christensen, CEO of Brycetech, says
the annual investment in the lunar economy
is currently around 10 billion dollars a year.
This is principally government funding, and
Project Artemis is around 7 billion of that.
But it means we are, and have been, putting
billions into R&D focused on the Moon.
And by we, that does include both private
sector spending and other governments, the
Canadian Space Agency (CSA) and Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA) are both big partners
on Artemis.
Incidentally, for the raw facts and figures,
I’ll be drawing heavily today on John F.
Kross’s 2022 Ad Astra Article, “The Lunar
Economy”, as this episode is intended to
be how we get stuff off the moon economically
this century, not in the more distant future.
So while we might one day mine Helium-3 off
the Moon for aneutronic fusion reactors, for
today we’re assuming we don’t have any
new power generation technology beyond minor
modifications to adapt stuff we already have
to be functional on the Moon.
Same for other technologies, it need not be
something we have streamlined or achieved
mass production of or even built an official
prototype, but it does need to be solid tech.
That said, a little later in the episode,
we will dip a bit into harder lifts like a
Lunar Mass Driver for getting cargo off the
surface.
That technology is pretty solid but it does
still have some hurdles to clear and more
to the point, it represents a pretty big piece
of infrastructure, and our other limitation
today is that we’re not really contemplating
megaprojects.
Our biggest limitation on getting to space,
and then getting to the Moon from there, and
finally getting things off the moon, is fuel,
and the majority of the weight of the fuel
isn’t actually the fuel itself but the oxidizer
we burn with it, which is typically oxygen.
The downside of rockets is they can’t be
air-breathing because there’s no air off
Earth and even making an air-breathing rocket
for use during travel through the atmosphere
is often considered impractical.
Though designs like SABRE for the Skylon spaceplane
seek to make it otherwise.
Whether or not they succeed in that effort,
it doesn’t help once you’re in space or
on the moon because you need that oxidizer
and it is literally the supermajority of that
ship’s mass, out-massing every drop of fuel,
piece of ship, and item of cargo combined.
Oxygen is heavy, and our two major rocket
fuels are liquid hydrogen and kerosene, both
of which combine with oxygen molecules to
make water, or water and carbon dioxide.
A water molecule, H2O, may be two to one hydrogen
to oxygen atoms, but that single oxygen atom
is 16 times more massive than hydrogen atoms;
and water is 89% oxygen by mass, while carbon
dioxide is 73% oxygen by mass.
So, even just being able to produce our oxygen
on the Moon would let us save massively on
the return fuel for any lunar trip, or for
shipping anything off the moon for orbital
construction.
We also need oxygen to breathe, and so looking
at how we can get oxygen on the Moon will
be our first topic.
And the first step of that is finding oxygen,
but amusingly that’s the super-easy part.
For a place where there is no air we tend
to think of getting oxygen as hard, but oxygen
is the third most abundant element in the
Universe and the most abundant element on
the Moon.
42% of the Moon’s mass is oxygen, tied up
in rocks like silica, SiO2, AKA quartz, much
as on Earth, where oxygen is the most abundant
element in our crust and the second most abundant
overall, shortly after iron, of which there
is a vast quantity of in our core.
So, finding oxygen on the moon is easy, you
literally can’t walk there without tripping
over the stuff.
Getting it out of the rock is trickier though.
This is a lot of the reason why hidden deposits
of ice in craters or lava tubes is very interesting
to us in exploring the Moon, as it takes considerably
less energy to get oxygen out of water or
ice than out of rocks like Silica or Alumina,
which includes sapphires and rubies, or Lime,
which you might have had to clean out of your
bathtub if you have hard water.
Plus, the process also frees up that hydrogen
in the water.
You can then burn that hydrogen and oxygen
right back together into water as a rocket
propellant.
This is a very simple process but takes more
energy to separate it than recombining it
is going to get you, which is why we don’t
just burn water as a fuel on Earth, but it’s
a good way to make an energy-rich portable
fuel – for rockets or for rovers or smaller
satellite facilities, if you have a big, bulky
stationary power source, like a nuclear reactor,
or several acres of parabolic mirrors focused
on a solar thermal tower that could produce
tons of fuel and oxidizer during those two
sunny weeks and then lie dormant thereafter,
till the sun rose again, letting you produce
a ton of fuel and oxidizer in the meantime,
at a rate of about 13 million joules per liter
or kilogram of water to be separated, though
probably a decent chunk of that would be lost
to various conversions and inefficiencies.
In the absence of readily available water
though, we have an alternative to electrolysis,
and that’s metalysis or cracking rock, which
is generally about 45% oxygen by mass on the
Moon.
This takes a lot more energy, varying by the
rock type, and instead of getting oxygen and
hydrogen, what you usually get is some metal
plus oxygen.
Which is a plus too, as we want to be able
to mass produce steel or aluminum or titanium
or silicon there, not just air.
There is a million dollar prize from NASA
for the first team to demonstrate a method
to extract five kilograms of oxygen from simulated
moon rock in eight hours or less, which works
out to 15 kilograms or 33 pounds a day.
That might not sound like much, and indeed
isn’t for fuel, but it's all the oxygen
you need for several humans to breathe during
that time.
We go through a little under a kilogram a
day per person, 0.84 kilograms or 1.85 pounds,
on the space station and presumably the consumption
would be similar on the Moon.
Around 15 years back, Derek Fray of Cambridge
had put together a reactor that could do about
a kilogram of oxygen for 142 megajoules, which
is an order of magnitude higher than electrolysis
of water but was producing metals as well,
and that would work basically anywhere, on
or of the moon, on some asteroid.
For context though, a rocket booster might
easily go through hundreds of thousands of
kilograms of oxygen to get off Earth, and
tens of thousands to get off the Moon.
So if I wanted to get ten thousand kilograms
or ten tons of oxidizer produced every day,
during a day cycle on the Moon, we are talking
over a trillion joules of energy, or 16 megawatts,
to produce about 7 kilograms or 15 pounds
of air per minute.
Enough for a 80-person team to breathe for
a whole day, produced in one minute, or enough
for a modest daily launch of a roughly equal
weight of cargo off the moon.
Meaning you could be running a depot somewhere
producing refined metals that are launching
using the oxygen released during the making
of those metals.
16 Megawatts is both a lot and not much, a
couple months back we looked at various small
modular reactors for nuclear energy and the
smallest module we discussed there was a 20
megawatt design by Last Energy.
On the solar front, there is no air in the
way on the Moon, so a whole bunch of shiny
aluminum parabolic dishes pointed at a solar
thermal tower should have no problem providing
at least 100 watts per square meter of actual
electricity, and a good deal more in terms
of heat that might be used to assist processes
for separating rock.
So a field 70 meters in radius should do the
trick.
One of those alternate oxygen-creation methods
is to heat rock to above 900 Celsius, and
many metal-forging processes are heat-dependent,
so energy being lost to heat in the usual
flow of making electricity can at least be
partially productively repurposed.
We also have magma electrolysis, where you
melt lunar regolith by running electric current
with it, liberating oxygen at temperatures
of 1400 degrees Celsius or 2500 Fahrenheit.
Given that making big shiny metal panels shaped
as parabolic dishes out of native aluminum
is not that hard of a process, one could imagine
landing with some pre-built ones or a reactor,
and using that power to build more, in situ
bootstrapping of energy.
As a minor sidenote, during the daytime on
the Earth-side of the Moon, it is usually
night time on part of the planet, so power
creation on the moon, without air to interfere,
could plausibly beam energy back to either
Earth itself, during Earth’s night phase,
when Earth-based solar doesn’t work, or
to various satellites and facilities in orbit
of Earth but currently in its shadow.
Every little thing that might make money on
the Moon or decreases losses on surplus production
is one more thing that makes lunar settlement
viable.
This is definitely a thing of the next couple
of decades too.
Citigroup analysts are expecting the annual
revenue of the space industry to hit a trillion
dollars by 2040, which isn’t that far off
anymore, and they’re predicting a 95% reduction
in launch costs by then.
This is not assuming any new technologies,
just anticipated ones making expected progress
at streamlining and improving, paying off
the research costs and scaling the production
of the technology up.
One of the notions suggested for scaling up
fuel production on the moon would be setting
a guaranteed price for a time, several hundred
dollars a kilogram, and at that point in time
someone can rely on a decade of steady revenue,
which makes it feel less risky of an investment.
But if we imagined a single parabolic dish
or photoelectric solar panel around a meter
across that was steadily producing 100 watts
on average for a decade, then under electrolysis
we would be able to produce over 2000 kilograms
of rocket fuel by electrolysis or 2-300 kilograms
of oxygen and a similar amount of metal.
If you’re expecting to make several hundred
dollars on each of those kilograms, then you’re
looking at somewhere around a hundred thousand
dollar return off that single panel or dish.
Such a panel might only mass a kilogram, or
even less, especially first generation ones
brought from Earth, which might then get to
the Moon for under a thousand bucks a piece
and recoup that investment in a month or two.
I should also note that our options aren’t
just electrolysis of water or metalysis or
cracking of rocks.
We also have some carbon dioxide on the Moon
and we are getting pretty skilled at separating
carbon from oxygen.
Carbon is quite valuable too, and needless
to say carbon dioxide is handy for plant growth
on the Moon, which would reduce food you need
to bring in.
As another minor sidenote, since gravity is
small on the moon and there is no air or wind,
your panels and dishes can be large with relatively
little structural support.
Your big issue is cleaning dust off if it
gets on there, which would mostly be from
astronauts walking around or from rovers milling
about to do errands.
You can potentially be sticking 10-meter-wide
panels atop telephone poles, tall, but skinny
supports.
And given the low gravity, it’s not that
much work if someone needs to climb a ladder
to one either.
One critical thing to building anything on
the moon is that every bit of structural support
can be vastly weaker and thus lower in mass
and all of these factors reduce the cost.
The exception to that is storage tanks, since
any vessel under pressure on the moon actually
needs to be a bit tougher than on Earth, where
we at least have one atmosphere of pressure
pushing back already.
And this is one reason why molten salt techniques
for generating and storing energy are nice
on the moon, as molten salt is not under any
pressure, and thus doesn’t need to be sturdy
like a steam engine or turbine on the Moon
would still need to be.
Molten salt approaches also potentially allow
oxygen production as a byproduct.
So, using molten metals to produce air and
generate and store heat is attractive on the
moon, where insulation is easier anyway, and
this might be getting energy by nuclear or
by solar thermal farm or solar photovoltaic.
And possibly a mix thereof.
Running power cords on the Moon between facilities
isn’t terribly tricky either, nor is avoiding
the dark cycle by just having some power-beaming
satellites orbiting the Moon, and given that
space-based power production might be one
of the big industries of the Moon, they may
have relatively cheap access to it.
Solar thermal and nuclear are both attractive
options on the moon, but silicon photovoltaic
cells remain a strong option there too.
Blue Origin has been working on Blue Alchemist,
their solar panel design made from lunar regolith
simulants.
Their reactor produces iron, silicon, and
aluminum through molten regolith electrolysis,
running current through the regolith, and
produces oxygen as a byproduct, with silicon
that’s been purified to 99.999%, and they
have now made working solar cells from this
simulated regolith.
The process they developed may have applications
back home too, as it’s entirely electricity-based
and appears to be much more environmentally
cleaner than currently employed methods for
getting silicon.
There’s a lot of silicon on the moon too,
silica or silicon dioxide is the most common
compound on the moon’s surface, at nearly
half, followed by alumina, di-aluminum trioxide,
at around a fifth to a quarter, and then a
rough three way tie between lime, which is
calcium oxide, Iron Oxide, and magnesia, or
magnesium oxide, each making up a tenth or
so of lunar surface compound, depending on
region.
Titanium dioxide comes in at a few percent,
and sodium dioxide at a bit under a percent,
and everything else at far lower concentrations.
But that means from a practical standpoint
we have an unlimited supply of Oxygen, Silicon,
Aluminum, Iron, Magnesium, Titanium, and Sodium.
Note that hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen, potassium,
and phosphorus, all fairly critical to life
and farming on the Moon, aren’t casually
abundant and may be easier to truck in initially.
We don’t have to get everything in situ.
If you can get 90% of your raw mass on the
moon instead of Earth, that massively alters
the space economy.
For one thing, it also creates one, since
you’d have all that industry and freight
capacity to and from the Moon that would make
other industrial and economic sectors easier
to start and piggyback off of.
It is important to keep in mind that we really
don’t know the best way to get resources
off the Moon yet, other than that, many techniques
from Earth probably still apply well while
other crazy options might work too that would
never work on Earth.
For instance you might use a roving mining
facility that trundled around to good small
deposits then basically went over top them,
suction-cupped over them, then blew out huge
inflatable mirrors the size of football stadiums
to act as a solar oven on that spot, vacuum
up the superheated gas and centrifuging it
into its constituent bits.
Such a tactic would be utterly insane on Earth,
and probably isn’t the most efficient approach
on the Moon either, but even so, it would
actually work.
I would say your processor might just be a
vacuum cleaner rolling around the moon’s
surface but vacuums don’t work on airless
planets, so just a scoop would have to do.
That low gravity and lack of air also make
it fairly easy to move cargo around, so we
needn’t really contemplate onboard refining.
Rather, we can expect surveying drones to
wander around looking for the best deposits
of the desired material and then for something
bigger to come on by and get it, probably
by either that scoop, or a sweep approach,
maybe by an actual robot, hand-picking up
loose rocks of a desired material.
This might not be on the Moon’s main surface
either.
Those craters in many cases are going to have
some nugget of some meteor in them which might
be a nice individual find, and those immense
lava tubes might be great places to mine too.
I don’t want to give the impression that
our options are limited to just dumping energy
into rocks to melt them down.
I like that one as a general one-size-fits-all
approach that’s easy to explain to folks
new to the topic but in all probability it’s
one that will rarely get used.
It is essentially the brute-force energy approach,
which is mostly handy for its simplicity.
Also, it may be needed in some cases simply
from restrictions.
I am strongly of the opinion that the Outer
Space Treaty can be ignored as a placeholder
awaiting something more informed and useful,
but it is entirely possible it or some future
modification or successor of it might see
restrictions on resource utilization.
We might see a ban on fission reactors there
or power beaming from there or limits on mining
techniques that involved throwing lots of
high speed dust or releasing certain vaporized
materials or quantities thereof.
I think your two biggest non-fuel demands
are going to be steel and aluminum, truthfully
we don’t need much oxygen to breathe and
much would be recycled by growing some supplementary
plants and herbs for fresh greens and flavor.
Aluminum is abundant but the preferred source
is assumed to be anorthite, one calcium atom,
2 aluminum, 2 silicon, and 8 oxygen, and would
typically be obtained by grinding anorthite
out of anorthosite, and then magnetically
separated from magnetic anorthite.
The FCC Cambridge Process is a favored process,
using electrolysis of the ground up anorthite
in a bath of molten calcium.
After the oxygen comes out and the calcium
melts into the bath, we would expect the silicon
to remain solid and the aluminum, being denser
than calcium chloride, would drip out the
bottom for collection.
The process would probably need fine-tuning
for a lower gravity environment.
It would anticipate yielding, 46% oxygen,
20% Silicon, 19% Aluminum, and 14% calcium
by mass.
A parallel approach works for removing Iron
and Titanium from Ilmenite, found plentifully
in the Lunar Maria and is magnetically separable,
and gets you 37% Iron, with the balance of
the mass equally split between titanium and
oxygen.
There are other ways to get Aluminum out too,
like raising it to 2000 Celsius in a vacuum,
and again; any of these materials can be taken
down to the atomic level with sufficient application
of energy.
The trick for optimal processing is finding
that goldilocks spot of effort, time, equipment,
and energy, and that will be different for
every material, but an abundance of sunlight,
lower gravity, and lack of air are the three
critical factors, likely to shift which processes
work best on the Moon as opposed to Earth.
Also, here on Earth we have vast supplies
of water as a coolant or solvent, and a surplus
of manpower and replacement components.
Stuff built on the moon needs us to contemplate
cooling options beside air or water, and must
be very durable and potentially need replacement
components that can be easily 3D printed.
Remote control and maintenance options are
also viable on the Moon, as it’s close enough
that signals lag on a couple seconds, not
minutes or hours as with the rest of the solar
system.
Also while we talk about it as a great place
to get oxygen or aluminum off of, valuable
elements like gold or platinum are every bit
as plentiful on the moon as asteroids.
Speaking of Aluminum again though, while it
is a high-energy cost material to make, it
is a handy one for production on the moon
for many reasons, but maybe most of all, early
on as an alternative to water.
Hydrogen and hydrocarbons aren’t the only
things that burn when combined with oxygen,
and aluminum is a great example of that.
Aluminum will burn with water, to produce
alumina and hydrogen molecules, and vice versa,
you can use hydrogen molecules to take alumina
and turn it into aluminum and water.
This fuel is called ALICE, short for Aluminum
Ice Rocket, and is likely to be a great in
situ fuel any place where ice and rock are
both plentiful, like the outer asteroid belt,
or moons of Jupiter and Saturn.
But if the moon turns out to be a hard place
to get water or hydrogen from, we can combine
iron oxide and elemental aluminum to instead
produce aluminum oxide and elemental iron,
and release a lot of energy in the process.
This is also known as thermite, and is already
used in some rocket thrusters.
Producing thermite on the Moon and processing
it into rocket fuel is a relatively simple
process, and I like it as an option not because
it’s any sort of miracle fuel, but because
the stuff is going to be plentiful any place
you land, even places where no in-situ water
is a stark reality.
And it’s not just aluminum either; boron,
chromium, magnesium, silicon, titanium, zinc
and others all have pyrotechnic combinations
with some sort of oxidizer, which isn’t
just molecular oxygen but a number of common
oxides.
So if the Moon is where we’re getting a
lot of our fuel and raw materials for expansion
out into the solar system, using fuel systems
that can be refilled at the destinations or
waypoints is a good plan.
Carrying return trip fuel with you is beyond
brutal, again the Tyranny of the Rocket Equation,
and likely to suck any profit or practicality
out of any venture needing to bring stuff
home in quantity.
Amusingly your rocket exhaust is partially
vaporized metal so it’s not a horrible idea
to contemplate shooting things out of a long
tube or tower, like a gun barrel, where your
metallic and oxide exhausts can be partially
reclaimed.
Again, there’s no air on the moon so even
some lavatube shaft repurposed and shored
up to serve as a long runway is a possible
option.
This would still apply to water or an alternative
fuel like methane, and I think we hear these
options discussed more because they are a
lot easier to make and use, and we have grown
increasingly optimistic about getting water
on the Moon.
Long term, the Moon hasn’t got much water
or hydrogen, so it’s not a good source for
it for ages to come, but it’s a good boon
for starting up, and water and hydrogen are
stupidly common elsewhere in the solar system
and can be fairly cheaply imported back in
later generations.
But if it turns out we’re wrong about that
hydrogen and water supply on the Moon, it
just shows we have different options, and
also shows us our pathway to mass-producing
metals there too.
Many of which are magnetic and would be very
easy to magnetically propel out of a mass
driver.
We also do not need to achieve the super high
velocities that we have to in order to get
off Earth, nor do we need any sort of megastructure
tens of miles high for the tube to open out
of above the atmosphere, since there isn’t
one.
Done with the right timing, things launching
off the Moon already have a lot of the extra
delta v they need to get to a more distant
destination, or vice versa, have their velocity
dropped enough to make an orbital insertion
around Earth or to aerobrake down to earth
relatively cheaply.
We might one day have big orbital installations
around the moon, including lunar elevators
or orbital rings, but early on we can probably
get away with a launch tube running over the
surface that only has a tube for the sake
of keeping dust out, and thus need not be
very substantial.
A human ship aiming to achieve low orbit of
the Moon, at around 1 mile or 1.6 kilometers
per second, only needs an acceleration track
long enough for 160 seconds of 1 gee acceleration,
something like 80 miles or 130 kilometers
of track.
Or alternatively, a 4g acceleration of 40
seconds, which would be a rougher ride, comparable
to your typical rocket off Earth, but only
need a track a quarter as long, 20 miles or
32 kilometers.
And a cargo launcher sending relatively dumb
matter, just sheets of panel or ingots of
metal, probably could get away with 40 gees
or more, a 4 second acceleration down a mere
2 miles or 3.2 kilometers long, and short
enough you might just leave this out in the
open on a flat spot and have a robot run down
the rail before a launch to take any dust
off from the last one.
In terms of power, this isn’t a trivial
amount either, but it requires no propellant
and avoids the rocket equation.
So if you’re flinging an object into orbit
of the Moon at 1.6 kilometers per second,
you are probably able to pull that off with
a mass driver for an energy cost of a few
megajoules per kilogram lifted, making it
a good deal less than electrolysis to make
a kilogram of fuel from water, at 4 times
that cost, or cracking oxygen out of rock,
at 50 times that cost.
Your freight bill goes way down.
Longer tracks or higher accelerations could
send you off the Moon with all the speed you
need to reach your target, though timing would
be absolutely critical in such cases.
Thankfully there’s no weather windows and
delays like we often have for launches from
Earth.
This is why, while Mars is often contemplated
for colonization, or even Venus or Titan or
some asteroids, the Moon is always the best
place to get your start.
From there you can stop building and fueling
spaceships on the cheap, with barely enough
fuel to get a ship to another planet and with
barely enough radiation shielding to keep
the crew from dying.
With the moon as your source for fuel and
building materials, we can pre-stage huge
amounts of supplies to destinations before
a human ever gets there, and send them faster,
and on bigger and better-equipped and shielded
ships.
All supported by vastly superior near-Earth
orbital facilities, industries, and habitats.
In this way, the Moon becomes our Gateway
to all those other worlds, and the stars beyond.
It seems like after over fifty years we’re
finally truly on the road back to the Moon,
and while that time gap after Apollo was disheartening
to go through, it is a reminder that to obtain
huge goals often means working for a lifetime.
The same is true of personal learning too.
You don’t just become an expert one day,
the secret to achieving huge learning goals
and staying sharp for a lifetime is learning
a little every day.
It’s also why many dreams never get off
the ground.
The billion-dollar start-up idea, the invention
that’s going to change the world, or the
career you know you’d love.
Because getting the skills and knowledge to
make them happen takes effort.
But here’s a secret to beating the odds
and actually achieving your goals—learning
every day on Brilliant dot org.
Brilliant is the best way to learn math, science,
and computer science interactively, they have
thousands of lessons — from foundational
and advanced math to AI, neural networks,
space, rockets, and more — with new lessons
added monthly.
Brilliant’s visual, hands-on approach is
such an effective and engaging way to learn—
it makes building a daily learning habit easy.
Interactive learning has been proven to be
6x more effective than passive learning, like
watching lecture videos, so Brilliant helps
you learn by doing.
Create programs with drag-and-drop coding,
interact with charts and graphs, and play
around with so many stunning visualizations.
Brilliant makes it easy to build a daily learning
habit, and you can try everything Brilliant
has to offer, for free, for a full 30 days,
by visiting brilliant.org/IsaacArthur or clicking
on the link in the description, and the first
200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's annual
premium subscription.
Incidentally, I’d imagine many have you
noticed by now that we’ve been doing some
short form content, a mix of original material
like the Quasar Cannon and clips from some
of our compendiums.
I’m not sure if that’s permanent feature
of the show or not yet, but I figure I need
to release about half a dozen a month for
a few months to see what the effect is, and
if it’s worth doing.
I’m also kinda curious if I can explain
concepts in under 60 seconds, I’m not exactly
known for my brevity, but for anyone who is
worried, no we are definitely not replacing
any of our normal content with shorts, this
is just added material like our monthly livestream
or Scifi Sunday episode or image polls to
help pick future episodes.
Regular episodes on Thursdays are still what
this channel is focused on.
Speaking of that, next Thursday, July 13th
we’ll move on to the idea of moving cities,
from those floating through the clouds to
those on massive tank tracks or even legs.
Then it will be time for our mid-month scifi
Sunday episode, Robots and Warfare, and a
look at the role drones and autonomous machines
might have in the future, along with finding
out what the first Rule of Warfare in the
future will be.
After that we’ll discuss whether or not
lifeforms might be based on ammonia instead
of water, and what that might look like.
Then we’ll continue our look at the future
of warfare with Dropships and planetary invasions
or boarding actions.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
