Our galaxy is a dangerous place for life. A 
vast storm of stars in which new ones are born  
and die in deadly displays, as we gobble 
up smaller galaxies and whole planets are  
irradiated or ejected into the void. How much of 
the galaxy is truly safe for life to emerge in? 
 
Today we’ll be examining the concept of 
Galactic Habitable Zones, both in terms of  
where – and when - life might have arisen, and 
where we might be able to safely make homes,  
even with entire regions of our galaxy being 
fairly hostile to life. We will also examine  
other galaxies and ask if our own Milky Way is 
more, or less, hospitable than most galaxies,  
and if there were periods where a galaxy might 
be more, or less, hospitable. We’ll also ask if  
this might play a role in the formation 
of hypothetical alien civilizations.
 
When it comes to the Fermi Paradox and the big 
question of where all the intelligent alien life  
is, we have discussed many different scenarios, 
and the three big categories are that they hang  
out here all the time but we’re just blind or 
in denial, that they are common but we just  
have problems seeing or hearing them, and that 
Intelligent Life is just very rare because the  
so-called Great Filters prevent lifeforms from 
making it through. This channel has no official  
stance on which category is right, because none of 
the proposed solutions seem without their flaws,  
but we definitely tilt toward the Great Filters 
camp, that life may or may not be abundant  
out there but that intelligent technological 
civilizations are not, either because they occur  
rarely, or they don’t last long when they do pop 
up. The latter we refer to as Late Filters, for  
options like self-destruction by nuking yourself 
or never mastering interstellar spaceflight.
 
For my part, I like the Great Filters theory but 
of the many proposed filters, I tend to feel it's  
less of one thing being a quadrillion to one 
chance of occurring and more of a lot of lesser  
filters acting as cumulative hurdles and just 
weeding out candidates at each step on the road  
from life beginning, to mastering spaceflight. 
However, even so, we can’t ignore the conditions  
which form planets before life even begins, nor 
events from beyond a planet and even its solar  
system. While asteroids might wipe out dinosaurs 
and bigger ones might rip the whole crust off a  
planet – as we think happened to Early Earth to 
form our moon – there are a lot of things out  
there in our galaxy that could seriously hinder 
development of habitable worlds or result in one  
being destroyed or rendered uninhabitable. 
Much as each star should have a habitable zone  
around it, a place where a world like Earth 
could exist with liquid water oceans and  
oxygen-rich atmospheres, we can contemplate 
habitable zones inside our own galaxy,  
or others. We can also contemplate this in terms 
of not just spatial regions but periods of time.  
Much as our sun has changed its brightness over 
time, growing hotter and brighter, and has thus  
shifted its habitable orbital zone, our galaxy 
has also changed a lot since its early days.
 
With that in mind, our goal today is to examine 
not just where life might form but where  
humans and terrestrial life might safely venture. 
And that requires a big initial caveat, because as  
show regulars know, we have some fairly extreme 
terraforming and bioforming options available  
to us that probably would let us put space 
habitats which you or I could live in safely.  
This could include those within spitting distance 
of the monstrous black hole at the Galactic Core,  
about 24,000 light years away from us, and 
massing 4 million times as much as our own Sun,  
or 4 million solar masses. So where life can 
start and thrive is not the same as where  
technological civilizations can make a home.
But that core is a good place to begin. That  
black hole is not really very big compared to the 
Galactic Center, which in turn is tiny compared to  
the wider Galactic Bulge. If you drew a sphere 
around Earth one parsec, out 3.26 light years  
wide, you wouldn’t find any stars beyond our own 
Sun there, except maybe some unknown Brown Dwarf.  
The nearest known star is Proxima Centauri, 
over 4 light years away. In the past, though,  
there have been stars closer to us, probably 
within a lightyear and probably several times,  
as stars move and migrate, but at the moment, 
that sphere is empty. At the galactic Center,  
that same sphere would contain about 10 
million stars, dominated by Red Giants. The  
core is a place where the usual refrain about 
space being really empty just isn’t true. 
 
Planets can still form in this region, but 
given how many supergiant stars are there,  
and how often novae or supernovae occur there, 
and the constant perturbations of many close  
stars on everything there, it’s not likely to 
be a place in which life could dwell even if a  
planet did manage to form and cool and exist long 
enough for abiogenesis to occur. There’s also that  
brightness. Earth is 1 AU, or Astronomical Units, 
from our Sun, nearly a hundred million miles. If  
our sun were made a million times brighter, its 
habitable zone would extend a thousand times  
wider, 1000 AU to Earth-like sunlight levels, 
not 1 AU, which would still be far short of a  
light year, as a light year is 63,241 AU.
What that means though is that even in the  
Galactic Center where stars are millions of times 
more tightly packed, most of that space is lower  
on sunlight than we are. Even if their night sky 
never has less light than our full moon anywhere,  
photosynthetic life couldn’t plausibly exist 
in terms of available light energy. Also,  
surface life would have a hard time existing 
anywhere in this region, because regular  
supernovae, various powerful Gamma sources 
and X-ray bursts would make it so difficult  
to survive, or keep surface water or air.
We also need to understand that the Galactic  
Center isn’t really a terribly unique place in the 
galaxy. Indeed, as we were discussing a few weeks  
back in our look at colonizing other galaxies, 
our local group of galaxies really consists  
of tons of minors galaxies in various states 
of absorption by the Milky Way or Andromeda,  
and many of those had their own lesser galactic 
center regions, many of which currently orbit  
either galaxy, often inside what we call the 
Galactic disk, the wide but thin disc where  
most stars in the spiral galaxies are located 
and which give them their characteristic look.
 
Ultra Compact Dwarf Galaxies often have a radius 
of only around 100 light years but might contain  
as many as a hundred million stars. For context, 
the 100 light years around our own world contain  
60,000 stars, so an ultra-compact dwarf galaxy 
is packing more than a thousand times as many  
stars into one place, and yet I’m reluctant 
to say such a place is hostile to life,  
especially as concerns of radiation really only 
apply to surface life on planets like Earth,  
not deep sea life, like we might find in 
Oceanic planets or icy moons, and not Hycean  
Planets like those we discussed last month.
That example was an Ultra-Compact galaxy but  
that’s not the only type. The Canis Major Dwarf 
Galaxy is an irregular dwarf and the one that’s  
the closest dwarf galaxy to us. It contains 
fully a billion stars but over a larger volume.  
Furthermore, the prior record-holder 
for the closest-known dwarf galaxy,  
the Sagittarius Dwarf Elliptical Galaxy – which 
itself contains 4 globular clusters – is nearly  
10,000 light years in diameter and 
masses roughly 400 million Solar Masses.
 
Indeed, not only are there lots of dwarf galaxy 
core remnants – dozens in and around our galaxy  
alone that we’ve identified, which are often very 
dense, we also have lots of globular clusters,  
and indeed the dividing line between them 
can be hard to pin down. Omega Centauri,  
the biggest known globular cluster, is suspected 
of maybe being a core remnant of a disrupted  
dwarf galaxy, rather than a globular cluster. 
If it is, at 16,000 light years away from us,  
it would be the closest dwarf galaxy. Some of 
you may recall we used it as a setting in our  
Extragalactic Sanctuaries episode, and it is a 
region of about 150 light years wide, and contains  
10 million known stars, mostly red dwarfs, with 
a combined mass of 4 million Suns, same as the  
black hole at the center of the galaxy. Or the 
supermassive black hole anyway, there are almost  
certainly dozens, if not thousands of other black 
holes within the central region of the galaxy.
 
Nor is our galaxy particularly big, even if 
it and Andromeda each contain more mass than  
all the other galaxies in our local Group. The 
Milky Way and Andromeda are each on an order of  
a trillion solar masses, there are galaxies out 
there with more than a hundred times that mass  
and sprawling over a million light years, and 
indeed our galaxy is a fairly remote one too,  
being inside a cosmic void. Such mega-galaxies or 
more dense regions of galactic superclusters might  
seem likely to host far more planets and thus far 
more life, but they may also be hostile areas,  
too heavy on radiation and perturbation.
Now, the galactic central bulge is very dense,  
containing roughly 10 to 20 billion solar masses. 
But while the center is where a lot of new stars  
form, the bulge is mostly made of old stars, those 
more than 9 billion years old. Now, traditionally  
we thought it was roughly spherical, but these 
days we think it got stretched into more of a  
peanut-shaped or bar-like shape from one of those 
many galactic mergers. It should be noted that in  
many ways it is actually much easier for us to 
look at other galaxies’ centers than our own,  
as we have to look through a thick plane of 
the galactic disc to see ours, and indeed this  
region is called the Zone of Avoidance. Which 
sounds a bit scary or intriguing but just means  
it’s bright, and difficult to see through, so 
astronomers avoid trying to look through it.  
We do a lot of observation of our galactic core 
by looking at other ones, which ironically means  
if our galaxy had something very odd about it 
that made it more hospitable to life than other  
galaxies, we might easily miss it by assuming it 
is fairly normal and filling in our observational  
gaps and shrouds by using other galaxies. 
This is an example of where we don’t know if  
we should be using the Mediocrity Principle or 
Anthropic Principle to look at our existence.
 
Globular Clusters or Dwarf Galaxies and Remnants 
are not the only places that are dense with stars.  
Stars often form in large nebulae as open clusters 
that slowly spread and dissipate as they orbit the  
galaxy and get tugged on by neighbors and shoved 
around by supernovae as the larger members die  
sooner. Larger, younger versions of this are often 
called super star clusters and we see this often  
in events of Starburst, where dense formation 
of new stars is occurring, which we believe can  
also be a periodic event where a pair of galaxies 
are merging or its galactic center is disrupted,  
or possibly collected a thick ring of gas 
around it, which replenishes after formation. 
 
There’s also no guarantee the right elements 
are in place for life to emerge, as contrary to  
popular belief not all atoms bigger than hydrogen 
or helium are formed from giant stars exploding,  
many are formed principally by white dwarf 
detonations or by neutron stars ramming into  
each other. Stars in more remote places 
may also form with lower metallicity,  
which is the percentage of things beside hydrogen 
and helium in them. And the relative abundance  
and scarcity of elements can play a huge role in 
the viability of life beginning and flourishing,  
as we discussed in our episode on the 
Fermi Paradox and the Phosphorus Problem. 
 
Stars can only form from cold gas, relatively 
speaking. It might sound a bit weird to think  
of space as hot, but temperature is about how 
fast individual particles of gas are moving,  
and because stars form by pulling particles 
in that aren’t moving fast enough to escape  
their gravity, star formation occurs 
in cold gas… though cold is relative  
here and might be as hot as a rocket 
flame. How much heat a region has,  
in terms of energy, is about how much matter 
we have there and at what temperature it is,  
so that a pot of lukewarm water can have more 
heat than an equal volume of very hot air.  
Very high temperatures particles, but too 
sparse to give the area much total heat.
 
We also have regions of the galaxy which are 
maybe too sparse for life to have emerged,  
and we may want to ask why that could be, since 
one lone star and its worlds far from other  
should be safer from calamity. There are even 
stars – probably many with planets too – which  
are entirely ejected from our galaxy and on 
which life might one day evolve and be unable  
to see any stars in their night sky, and maybe 
not even a faint blob of a distant galaxy. 
 
But principally, the reason a star might be 
alone is that it got perturbed away from where  
it formed, which often rips planets away in the 
process. And Planets form from the same proto-star  
nebula as their sun and with a similar initial 
ratio of materials. But when a star ignites,  
the solar wind off it, along with other 
radiation, slowly strips hydrogen and helium  
from less massive objects, leaving more 
rocky planets behind like Earth or Mars,  
or the bigger Hycean worlds, which are young and 
massive enough to retain much of their hydrogen.  
Stars which have low metallicity, are what we 
call population 2 Stars, which again are very  
common in the galactic bulge near the center. 
Population 2 stars are generally older stars  
though they can be relatively new, even a billion 
years old, if they formed somewhere relatively  
low in metals, but they mostly date to old times, 
with less accumulated metallicity from supernovae  
and other metal-forming events like neutron star 
mergers. Collections of population 2 stars may  
be very low in planets, having only Chthonian 
remnants of Hot Jupiters or small asteroids. 
 
So, on the one hand, these stars, when old, 
would have more time for life to evolve,  
but also be less likely to have planets for life 
to emerge on and thus might be rare to have it,  
or even so rare as to basically be ‘never’. 
Ironically, any examples of first life – which  
might include us – are likely to be from places 
that are atypical, so it is entirely possible the  
first civilization to arise did so on a population 
2 star and might have had a rough time finding any  
raw materials in space, or planets to colonize in 
their own solar system or neighboring systems.
 
Of course that also depends where in 
the broader galaxy, as for instance,  
there are giant elliptical lobes north and south 
of the galactic core which we call Fermi Bubbles,  
probably caused by the Core’s supermassive 
black hole, which jets out plasma,  
and these regions are pretty devoid of stars 
but high on hot gas and gamma and cosmic rays,  
and are also apparently high on ultra-high-energy 
neutrinos, which is a relatively recent and  
baffling discovery. Such an area though might 
not be super-hospitable to surface life either.
 
Why surface life? Well in terms of whether or 
not life exists somewhere, whether or not it  
is on the surface sucking up sunlight to power 
itself is not a strong indicator. Our current  
lead theory for the origin of life here on 
Earth is that it formed deep in the ocean,  
well-shielded from very powerful radiation 
sources, and photosynthesis took quite a while  
to evolve. In that context it should hardly matter 
if a planet was in some cluster of stars where  
supernovae and x-ray bursts were common, or if its 
orbit around the galactic core of many millions of  
years swung it through such places occasionally.
But fundamentally, the Fermi Paradox isn’t about  
where life can exist, it’s where life can 
plausibly evolve to have the technology and  
longevity to leave a visible and enduring 
mark on the galaxy which we might detect,  
essentially what we call loud aliens, which 
we would tend to assume means that it was,  
and potentially still is capable of practical 
interstellar spaceflight and colonization. 
 
Hopefully in the next few decades we’ll be able to 
start spotting biosignatures around exoplanets and  
then we might be able to deduce how common such 
life is likely to be, and the answer might be very  
nearly every star system, or that the whole galaxy 
is devoid of even simple microbes; outside of this  
pale blue dot. But the conditions for a world with 
life to become a world with the vast biodiversity  
and sheer biomass Earth has, which we assume 
is the easiest path to intelligent life, is one  
very dependent on being able to use sunlight 
for fueling the bottom of your food chain.  
That means an atmosphere that isn’t so thick 
that sunlight can’t reach the surface without  
heavy attenuation, which also means that it must 
be one thin enough that it and the life below  
can be badly mauled by a nearby supernova. 
If your surface life is restarting every 10  
million years because the ozone layer gets ripped 
off and ruins most of your surface biosphere,  
you’re not likely to make it to space. So too, if 
you’re in a region where stars all whirl around  
near each other, rarely more than a few thousand 
AU apart, then even a planet in a stable orbit  
around one star is at some point likely to 
have stars pass close enough to burn them.  
How would Earth fare if for the next year 
we got twice as much sunlight and much of  
it coming in from a different direction so as to 
illuminate the night? If such close encounters  
were occurring every hundred thousand years – 
which is not that high a frequency in such a dense  
cluster – then your surface life would undergo 
mass extinction by incineration, regularly.
 
Now, we can imagine ways around these 
problems which life might be able to pursue,  
or with some luck, bypass that danger, and 
they may occur sometimes and might make for  
the basis of some good scifi stories – Isaac 
Asimov’s classic novel Nightfall comes to mind,  
about a civilization that has 6 stars lighting 
their planet. Of course, we can’t really have a  
real idea what conditions are truly antithetical 
to life or intelligent life, and Robert Forward’s  
equally classic novel Dragon’s Egg even explores 
how life might evolve on a neutron star,  
so we are essentially speculating off what we 
know about Earth’s life and our assumption that  
intelligent life evolves rarely. Not to tangent 
off but a lot of the best scifi is about ‘what if’  
scenarios in weird environments, or how humanity 
adapts to them, even if it is a less popular  
topic to write about in scifi these days.
Anyway, this is essentially the crux of the  
concept of galactic habitable zones: does a 
star exist in a place where its planets will  
get blasted by radiation? Does it have 
too low a metallicity to have planets,  
coming from a region dense in old stars. Does 
it pass through regions where supernovae or  
other powerful radiation sources are frequent 
or where planetary perturbation can occur? 
 
If so, then it would seem the odds are stacked 
against life emerging and thriving to eventually  
become technological civilizations, but what 
about technological civilizations migrating to  
such regions and surviving, or even thriving?
With science and technology on our side,  
many a barren radioactive wasteland might 
become a paradise, and that includes places  
like the Galactic Core itself. Indeed we can 
even contemplate moving or dismantling stars if  
it came to it, but such extreme measures aren’t 
necessary for basic human habitation. With the  
use of starlifting, a civilization can acquire 
all the metals and heavy elements it needs even  
from metal-poor stars, and reduce dangerously 
old or large stars to manageable levels. 
 
Normally I’m a huge fan of space habitats 
specifically because they are low on mass  
compared to planets for the same 
living area and can be tailored,  
but even more so in the core regions or 
other areas where radiation is a problem,  
and where micrometeors might be far 
more common and higher-speed. So,  
living on the surface isn’t wise, and living 
inside a rotating habitat is better. Less mass  
savings though, as you probably want to put 
a thick superstructure around your habitat,  
maybe hundreds or even thousands of meters of 
shielding. Of course in terms of mass usage,  
a planet has thousands of kilometers of ground 
under every step, so it's still a big saving.
 
It is also likely to be a place where our normal 
approach of using lots of thin and cheap mirrors  
for power collection will need improving, as 
they are likely to get worn down far faster by  
such an environment, and so too, spaceships 
will need greater armoring and shielding,  
and thus more fuel, though on the other 
hand everything is closer together.
 
There really is no reason why humanity might not 
settle the actual core of millions of stars packed  
into a few light years, where our classic notion 
of a galactic empire from space opera becomes far  
more plausible than it normally is in a No-FTL 
Universe. All our normal options like Dyson  
swarms and mass extraction from stars or larger 
planets remain entirely viable, so as a whole,  
this is a very tempting region to colonize, 
you just need to be ready for truly powerful  
emissions of radiation. You would live in bunker 
colonies and your spaceships may get cooked if the  
local space weather forecasts weren’t accurate.
On the end of this, speaking of mass extraction  
from stars, this makes even incredibly sparse 
areas of space habitable, via starlifting,  
where even the poorest of metal poor stars still 
contains huge amounts of metals compared to the  
asteroid belt. As we looked at in our deep space 
habitats episode, even areas without suns can  
become thriving and prosperous space settlements.
Truth be told, it’s too many suns that represents  
the only likely bar to life evolving in a 
region that might otherwise be habitable,  
and that may extend beyond regions 
of a galaxy to regions of galaxies.  
As mentioned, the Andromeda and Milky Way 
essentially both make up two halves of a bigger  
galaxy with tons of minor galaxies in and around 
them, and the Triangulum Galaxy as a distant third  
place in mass in our Local Group of Galaxies.
It’s not that dense a region of galaxies even  
compared to our Local Sheet, the relatively flat 
plane of space in which many other galaxies exist,  
the bigger dozen of which encircle us 
and are called the Council of Giants.  
And yet this region is actually very low in 
galaxies, compared to many other superclusters.  
We, and most of our own supercluster of 100,000 
or so other galaxies, exist inside a vast cosmic  
void called the KBC Void or Local Hole, a rough 
sphere, 2 billion light years across. Obviously,  
‘void’ is rather relative here, since it 
has many thousands of galaxies inside it,  
and we live in one of the sparser regions 
of main galaxies and galaxy filaments.
 
As we mentioned earlier, there are galaxies 
hundreds of times more massive than our own,  
and there are collections of them far denser 
than the region where we’re at. They can also  
be far more active in terms of their nuclei, not 
simply the ultra-powerful quasars which seem more  
common in the past, but lesser forms that could 
potentially sterilize their own galaxy during  
periods of eruption as active nuclei, and indeed 
that might be far more ominous if it turns out  
life originated on comets via panspermia to 
planets, rather than the more popular deep  
sea thermal vent or tidal pool options. 
That brings up the time factor too because  
Quasars seem to have been most common and active 
10 billion years ago, and as we mentioned earlier,  
when thinking of galactic regions and 
habitability, we need to think in terms of not  
just space, but also time. 10 billion years ago 
is about when the first population 1 stars formed,  
those with more metals in them than population 
2. Most formed then would have been population 2,  
and those oldest population 1 stars are still very 
low on metals, about a tenth what our Sun has,  
having been born 5 billion years ago. 
Metallicity isn’t just about time for  
individual stars and nebulae, it’s about the 
local accumulation of metals from various  
supernovae and other nucleosynthesis 
events, and that rises with time. 
 
So 10 billion years ago, vast Quasars were at 
their peak in terms of quantity, gushing radiation  
over many young galaxies, which were often smaller 
then too, since our own galaxy is not unique in  
its cannibalistic tendencies. At the same time, 
metals to form planets would be very rare.  
Imagine a planet forming around a star 
10 billion years ago that was high in  
metallicity for its time, but still just 10% 
of our own Sun’s metallicity. It might have  
its largest rocky planet not be the mass of 
earth, but a tenth of that, a mass parallel  
to Mars or Mercury. Fewer big moons, fewer big 
asteroid belts, just worse odds all around. 
 
But every year, that would improve, every year, 
the average metallicity of newly forming stars  
would be higher, and the odds of having big rocky 
planets would rise with it. Every year, the areas  
grow more stable too, with galaxies merging and 
the era of quasars trailing off and periods of  
active galactic nuclei growing rarer or more mild. 
Eventually life would have emerged and emerged  
somewhere that surface-based life could thrive 
with decent odds of not being obliterated by some  
cosmic event or local asteroid. The question is, 
was this the place where intelligent life first  
emerged or was it luck and in spite of extreme 
conditions that some unexpected world first  
became a cradle of civilization. Or even not in 
spite of, but because of such harsh conditions.
 
Time will tell. As we improve our ability to 
peer deep into space and time, it may be that  
we are the first civilization, or even the first 
life, and it may also be that life that emerges  
further down the road in distant galaxies that may 
look at our world and think it was a statistically  
unlikely and harsh place for life to begin. But if 
I had to make an educated guess, I would say our  
planet has been very fortunate in its composition 
and in the stability of the Sun it orbits,  
and in not being saturated by massive asteroids 
and ionizing radiation bursts all the time. Either  
way, now that we’re here and developing, as we 
venture out to claim stars, with a bit of hard  
work and ingenuity, there should be no zone 
in our galaxy we’re unable to inhabit.
 
So some folks had mentioned in the comments on 
recent videos that the volume was getting louder  
on the background music, for good or ill, and I 
was sure I wasn’t mixing it any louder. For some  
background context, I have partial deafness 
in my left ear, from my time in the Army,  
and so the speakers on my desk are more on 
the right side. Well, I went to my doctor the  
other day and she’s looking in my ears and, short 
story, she found an earbud tip in my right ear.
 
Which had apparently given me an ear infection 
and some serious congestion and headaches the  
last few months. The culprit was a pair 
of earbuds I’d gotten online a few months  
back for after Raycon had sent me a new model of 
theirs, and I wanted to compare them to something  
in the same price range. I knew it lost a tip. 
I'd just assumed it got lost in the carpet.
 
I’m not quite sure what the moral of the story 
is, but those other earbuds just didn’t have  
very good sound quality and one thing I disliked 
about them was the poor fit and how it fell out  
of my ear - most of it anyway - my Raycon’s 
have never randomly left a earbud tip inside  
my ear for months, and they’ve got comfortable 
custom gel tips. They’ve also got good sound  
quality and they’re durable, I accidentally 
washed my original pair and they still work.
 
They also let me work too. I can have one or both 
in to leave an ear free, or set them to noise  
isolation or awareness mode, depending on whether 
I want to minimize background sound or need to be  
able to hear things around me, lie my kids, and 
you can change back and forth, raise or lower  
volume, or answer phone calls with quick easy taps 
on the earbuds, which will not fall out of your  
ear when you tap them like many others do.  
Sound quality, durability, battery life,  
and listening experience are important, and it 
doesn’t have to break your budget to have them.  
So treat yourself to crystal clear audio quality 
for work and relaxation and feel the difference.  
Are you ready to buy something small with a 
BIG impact? Click the link in the description  
box or go to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur 
to get 15% off your Raycon purchase!
 
So the newest issue of Ad Astra Quarterly hit 
last week, it’s the magazine of the National  
Space Society dedicated to the creation of 
a spacefaring civilization and it’s full of  
inspiring, educational, and insightful articles, 
including one by me, the first of hopefully many  
more editions that I’ll have an article in. 
I’ll link to it in the episode description.
 
And we still have plenty of upcoming episode 
this April, starting with a discussion of Nuclear  
Energy and Small Modular Reactors, and an update 
on the state of that industry, next Thursday.  
Then it will be time for our monthly Scifi 
Sunday episode, to contemplate Super Weapons,  
from the kind that blow up planets all the way to 
the things that could rip holes in reality or kill  
Universes. And in two weeks, we’ll look at the 
possibility of life forming on giant moons, like  
Yavin IV from Star Wars or Pandora from Avatar, 
how such strange non-planets function, and if we  
might want to colonize such fascinating places.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like, 
subscribe, and notification buttons. You can  
also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting our website, 
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s  
episodes early and ad free on our streaming 
service, Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
