This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. Get 
access to my streaming video service, Nebula,  
when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
The rings of Saturn are a majestic jewel 
for our eyes, but they and other planetary  
rings around distant worlds and stars may be 
critical to colonizing the galaxy with life,  
and indeed may be where some life originated.
 
So, some years back, when we began our Outward 
Bound series, we did our first 3 episodes on Mars,  
Venus, and Titan respectively, and I always 
regretted that by doing Saturn’s Moon Titan  
rather than Saturn as a whole, that we 
skipped a lot of cool discussion around  
Colonizing Saturn’s Rings themselves, or even 
extreme options like crafting a shell world  
around Saturn to make a giant Earth-like planet.
As I got to thinking about it, it occurred to me  
that Planetary Rings are fascinating from quite a 
few angles, both Saturn’s, and those around other  
worlds, in our solar system, and those around 
distant exoplanets around alien stars. Indeed,  
they represent one of the more plausible 
places alien life could conceivably emerge  
from besides our typical earth-like planet. 
Furthermore, we can have rings around not just  
gas giants, but also around rocky worlds like 
Earth, and the composition of those can vary too.  
We believe Saturn’s ring is composed mostly of ice 
– water ice, but also things like frozen ammonia  
and carbon dioxide – and some dust, like silicate 
particles. Ones that are closer to the inner solar  
system would probably lack those ices as they 
would boil away, much like asteroids in the inner  
belt are rocky, versus the distant Kuiper Belt 
where they are more comet-like balls of ice. 
 
There are a lot of reasons to be motivated 
to settle the Rings of Saturn or any other  
dense ring system we find, though we should 
start from the outset by saying that one of  
those reasons definitely isn’t for sourcing 
the water to terraform Mars. Saturn’s rings  
may be immense but they’re thin and only have 
a mass a bit over a percent of Earth’s Oceans,  
so even though Mars is smaller than Earth, it 
wouldn’t make for much ocean depth and if memory  
serves; the Hellas crater on Mars, which is one 
of the biggest and deepest in the solar system,  
and certainly the deepest on Mars’ surface, 
would swallow the whole thing. If you wanted  
to fill the Hellas crater on Mars with water, it 
would probably require all of the water ice in  
Saturn’s ring, and still need more, and that’s not 
even thinking about all the water we would need to  
terraform the rest of Mars. Saturn has several 
moons that each individually mass more than all  
those rings combined do, and each individual moon 
would also provide more water than all the rings  
combined would too. As do Jupiter’s moons like 
Europa or any of the gas giants’ Moons. You have  
to work harder to get the ice off those moons 
because they have more substantial gravity but  
then the rings are closer to Saturn and you 
have to burn fuel to escape its orbit too. 
 
If you’re just mining for ice, and time is not a 
big factor, you want to do that out in the Kuiper  
Belt where there are tons of icy bodies with low 
gravity, enough for a hundred oceans at least and  
even more as you move to the Oort Cloud. You do 
have to burn fuel to get your equipment out there,  
but you are then dropping the big massive chunk 
of ice ‘down’ the solar system’s gravity well to  
bring it closer to the Sun and inner planets, 
fuel free. This is a much better source if you  
want planet-terraforming volumes of water and 
as we’ve discussed elsewhere in the series,  
you can’t truck in water super-fast to planets. 
10 centimeters or 4 inches of rain every day would  
still take a century to fill a world to Earth 
Ocean depths and because the stuff would be  
coming in at orbital speeds, which involve more 
heat energy per liter of water than a liter of  
rocket fuel would have, it's coming in hot, 
even if you toss it down as a big ice cube.  
You’d boil the planet if you went too fast. You 
have to go slow, so mining out of Kuiper and Oort  
Cloud and taking your time, isn’t an issue and 
affords you a cost savings of fuel and energy.
 
We also want to keep in mind that the amount of 
energy needed to move a water molecule around the  
solar system is a lot more than the energy 
needed to move a hydrogen molecule. Oxygen  
atoms mass 16 times as much as hydrogen atoms 
do, so H2O water is only 11% hydrogen by mass,  
and oxygen is the biggest chunk of most planets 
since rocks usually contain a lot of oxygen.  
Most of Earth is Oxygen and iron by mass, and 
about 45% of the moon is oxygen, it's just bound  
up in rock, and the energy needed to release it 
is generally going to be less than is needed to  
move a water molecule across the solar system. So, 
you might send hydrogen, not water, especially in  
a fusion economy where Saturn itself looks like 
a massive supply of not just hydrogen, but its  
isotope, deuterium and Helium-3, both considered 
to have good potential as fusion fuel sources.
 
That doesn’t mean that Ice around Saturn doesn’t 
interest us though, either for local use or  
throughout the solar system, and we don’t have 
net positive fusion of hydrogen or helium of any  
isotope at the moment and maybe never will. Going 
from the lab to commercial reactors might be too  
big a hurdle. But it does seem increasingly 
likely we might be entering the generation  
that puts boots not just back on the Moon and 
onto Mars, but actual bases. If that happens,  
and once that infrastructure is in place, sending 
probes by the hundred to various local bodies,  
like gas giant moons or rings, becomes one 
slightly bigger step, not a great leap. 
 
Even crewed missions or permanent bases then 
become more of a biology and sociology problem,  
rather than a matter of rocket engineering. The 
technology that can get us to Mars doesn’t need to  
work much harder to get us anywhere in the solar 
system. Now it might be a bit optimistic to think  
a base will appear near Jupiter and Saturn within 
a generation of a Moon Base or a Mars Base,  
but I don’t think it's implausibly optimistic 
that should be the case or not long thereafter,  
as the rings of Saturn hold great 
interest and potential usefulness.
 
And in large part as fuel and propellant. 
In the early days of solar expansion,  
water is super useful, especially if you don’t 
need to fight gravity for it. Processing water  
into fuel and oxygen gets you oxygen to breathe, 
whilst requiring less energy than extracting  
it from rock would, and separated hydrogen and 
oxygen is basically our best modern rocket fuel.  
Hydrogen is also a good propellant all on its 
own if you’re pumping in your power source. We  
often talk about propelling ships along by hitting 
its reflective sails with laser beams, and that’s  
great for getting around the rocket equation 
and aiming for higher speeds for relativistic  
interstellar travel. However in-system and early 
days, a power-beaming system can send energy to a  
ship to superheat gas to shoot out the back, and 
hydrogen is your best gas for that, as hydrogen  
atoms give more thrust than an equal mass of 
a heavier element that’s heated to the same  
temperature would, and temperature is going to 
be a major limit here, as your thruster can melt.  
Your speed is controlled by how hot you can get 
your hydrogen before damaging your ship’s drive.
 
What’s more, those rings are not just water 
ice, and ammonia for instance is critical to  
plant-based life as it contains nitrogen, a pretty 
rare substance in the inner system. And while it's  
true that Titan has far more nitrogen, it has 
far more of a gravity well too, Venus also has  
plenty of nitrogen, the only other abundant 
source in the inner system, besides Earth.
 
Here’s the key thing though, we don’t really 
care about which place has the most of a given  
resource in early solar system colonization 
days, we care about which has the easiest  
access. There’s around fifteen quadrillion tons 
of water and other volatiles in Saturn’s Rings.  
That might be peanuts compared to what Saturn’s 
Moons have but it is still 15 quadrillion tons,  
several million times what you would need to fill 
a larger space habitat like an O’Neill Cylinder,  
or more than a billion Kalpana One Stations.
So, there is enough water and volatiles to  
build space habitats large enough to hold more 
people than are alive today, and in comfort too,  
along with farms, gardens, and nature preserves, 
while still giving them fuel to move around.  
I’m not sure what year it will be when we have 
billions of humans living in space but presumably  
at least a few centuries after we have a couple 
hundred living in space and, as I said a bit ago,  
once we get to that point, the beautiful rings 
of Saturn would be in our reach and unless  
we’re trying to fuel a million spaceships 
and habitats out of there, we can access  
the materials in those rings more easily than we 
can the moons, and we can export those materials  
more easily from the rings too, depending 
on the available technologies and how their  
practical economics and engineering work out.
Now, dismantling them might seem a sad loss but  
in fact the most obvious habitat to have out 
there is a parabolic habitat, as we discussed  
in the Megastructure Compendium. This is your 
normal ring or cylinder habitat, except that,  
behind it relative to the sun, we put a big but 
thin parabolic solar mirror about a hundred times  
the surface area of the interior of the habitat, 
and probably only about a hundredth of the mass,  
much like a parachute need not be that heavy. 
Saturn’s rings are bright because they are a  
diffuse collection of icy chunks of varying sizes, 
many the sizes of houses or even football fields,  
but most smaller, that scatter the light that 
hits them. A big parabolic dish would do that too,  
as would mirrors or shiny metal hulls 
or an even scatter of solar panels. So,  
a settled ring of space habitats around a planet 
tends to look like a Planetary Ring anyway,  
unless you intentionally, takes steps to minimize 
glare and scatter, as we might on Earth, and  
indeed might tend to indicate a K1 civilization. 
Now, an O’Neill Cylinder has about 800 square  
kilometers or 500 square miles of interior surface 
needing to be lit, and masses a few gigatons,  
a decent fraction of which is water and nitrogen 
harvested from this ice. A parabolic dish to  
light it, way out at Saturn where the Sun is 
about a percent as bright as we’re used to,  
needs to be 100 times bigger, 800,000 square 
kilometers or half a million square miles,  
but keep in mind that one ton of aluminum can 
do about 25,000 square meters of foil-thickness  
reflective surface, so, 40 tons per square 
kilometer or 3.2 million tons for the whole dish,  
and the habitat still masses a thousand times 
that, and a giant dish like this has other uses  
too, not that it has to be a single dish or 
just for regular sunlight light as opposed  
to beamed-in energy. Such habitats likely would 
have other large facilities besides the habitation  
drum and light dish too, many presumably for 
spaceship docking and harvesting and refining.
 
An Ice miner moving out to Saturn could do some 
interesting types of harvesting. In a solar  
economy, one where everything is done by beaming 
energy around as regular light or microwaves, from  
large spaced-based solar collectors, you can move 
a ship out there by bouncing energy off big thin  
sails on the ship. However, once out there you can 
do another trick, you setup your power collector  
to receive microwaves beamed in from collectors 
nearer the sun and use those to melt or ablate the  
outside of an icy body on the opposite direction 
of where you want it to go, providing rocket  
thrust and letting a relatively simple ship with 
just a number of packages containing expandable  
reflective sails, and some microwave receivers 
or rectenna, to send back vastly larger chunks  
of ice than your ship weighed, and new packets 
of those basic materials can be shipped to you  
from the Moon, the Asteroid Belt or even some of 
Saturn’s Moons. Those have plenty of metal too.
 
The other neat thing about those rings 
is that they are close enough to Saturn  
that you can gravitationally anchor some 
pushing mirrors there, letting you bounce  
light or energy beams from nearer the Sun, 
off those and back toward the inner system,  
allowing ships to travel this way, not only as 
a return journey from Saturn and back to Earth,  
but also allowing lightsail-equipped ships to 
travel beyond where those energy beams originate  
from, as an example, a ship that is parked near 
Earth, could travel in a direction that is moving  
away from both Earth and Saturn, propelled by an 
energy beam that originates from near Earth. This  
can either be absorbed to power a pushing laser by 
Saturn or reflected off very precisely controlled  
mirrors gravitationally-anchored and situated in 
Saturn’s rings, and then onto the spaceship to  
push back toward the Sun. Also, you can quarter 
light with sails much as with wind, to move at  
an angle. Though in many cases you will use that 
energy to instead superheat hydrogen or helium to  
serve as a propellant, both are abundant on Saturn 
and other gas giants which we might use as anchors  
for such arrays and maybe mining gas giants would 
be a good topic in some future episode, we looked  
at it only in passing in Colonizing Neptune.
It’s a reminder that when we’re looking for  
places to colonize, here and around other stars, 
those selections are built with space travel in  
mind and thus don’t tend to match up with what 
we would expect. The classic image of space  
colonization is to land on a planet and set up 
your domed base on Day 1, or even your open-air  
houses and farms. In practice you wouldn’t want 
to lose your space infrastructure or presence  
and it's vastly easier to establish those first. 
Indeed, in many systems, there may not be a proper  
candidate for terraforming and so space habitats 
might be what you’re planning from the outset.  
Icy rings near a gas giant are a great place 
to go for refueling to let your main ships  
or shuttles start getting work done building that 
infrastructure, or deploying a prepackaged one. 
 
In our ‘life in a space colony’ series, we 
suggested that the icy moon of a gas giant  
would be a good first base when getting into a 
system, but planetary rings might make more sense.  
Instead of mining a large object you just swallow 
up multiple smaller ones and disassemble them,  
possibly just heating and centrifuging 
them, to separate out the volatiles,  
water, and dust and rock. You might have 
drones or shuttles that launched out from  
you as they entered that area of space to grab 
these drifting icebergs and pull them back to  
your bays for dismantling and for providing 
both the fuel for those harvesters and the  
raw materials to build more of them. Though 
the moons better shield you from space junk  
while the rings obviously have lots of them, 
however it's not time consuming or tricky to  
build a hollow sphere of ice around your ship for 
protection, and the need is still fairly minimal.
 
We’ve often talked about how the moons, trojans, 
and rings of gas giants like Jupiter or Saturn  
are essentially their own mini-solar system 
and this is an example of how they might start  
as the effective center of a newly colonized 
system, especially in a fusion-based economy.
 
In a solar-based economy, you still need 
those near-star arrays of power collectors,  
but conveniently, if you are an interstellar 
vessel from a solar economy, that was probably the  
first thing to arrive in the system anyway. We’ve 
a handful of plausible ways to slow ships down  
from relativistic speeds on arrival into a star 
system – Orion-drive nuclear bomb detonations,  
magnetic drag sails, and a fusion drive if you’ve 
got that technology – but another we’re fond of  
and discussed in our Exodus Fleet episode, is to 
detach a big solar sail from the front of your  
fleet which can expand and slow as it approaches 
the star, and beam energy back at the fleet,  
or to the next solar sail behind it, which is 
slowed by that beamed energy and the normal  
sunlight, and can beam more back, to the next 
sail, and so on until you have a chain slowing  
your main fleet with beamed energy and stations 
near that star, absorbing sunlight which they  
can use for slowing your ship or ships, but 
also now for beaming energy out to them,  
or to those stations and harvesters you are 
building and deploying once arrived. They are our  
fuel-free way of slowing a fleet from very high 
speed, in the absence of working fusion drives.
 
Those are probably not super durable as 
you want them lightweight, basically big  
sheets of aluminum foil or some other metal, or 
maybe even a molecule-thick 2D material. Plus  
they might have taken some beating when passing 
through a star system at high speed and hitting  
gas particles and so on. Such being the case they 
probably need to be replaced sooner than later,  
but they and any spares you had could 
generate your power early on, and beam  
it right to where you need it, including your 
aluminum mines, refineries, and foil factories,  
for replacements. At least where you have 
line-of-sight and aren’t having to do unplanned  
maneuvers that prevent them from connecting the 
beam, especially with all that light lag. Mirrors  
can help with line of sight issue but chemical 
rockets and beamed energy storage might still be  
needed to help with light lag issues and 
reconnecting after an unexpected maneuver.
 
Some months back we looked at Crawlonizing the 
Galaxy; our options for colonizing the galaxy at  
a relative crawl if we never got fusion or black 
hole generators, or weren’t comfortable with ships  
that fired thousands of nuclear bombs off as 
their propulsion method. Laser or beamed-energy  
sails can do a lot better than 1% light speed 
– hypothetically they can do 99%, see our  
interstellar laser highways episode – but there’s 
a lot of issues keeping those beams on track and  
they are also ultra energy intensive, remarkably 
inefficient in terms of power utilization,  
and require precision coordination which 
doesn’t allow much flexibility in movement. 
 
Slower ships using those beams principally for 
superheating gas or running ion-drives from  
collected hydrogen are way more energy efficient 
for in-system use, and might imply a reservoir  
of hot gas that’s still working as a propellant 
for a bit after you lose your beam connection,  
to help move to get it back. So a fleet coming 
in-system slowed by that big solar array could  
go into high orbit around a ringed gas giant 
and send its drones and collectors out to start  
acquiring resources while they used those and 
beamed in energy to run factories and refineries  
to make fuel, solar collectors, more drones, 
habitat hull-plating, and big bioplants to start  
churning out the various organisms the colony 
will need, from animals to trees to microbes. 
 
This need not ever involve terraforming any 
planets, but it sure does help pre-position you  
with the resources you’ll need to do that quicker 
and better, and a key thing to remember about  
terraforming is that it’s ultra-disruptive and 
destructive of a planet’s surface, all that water  
coming in is ultra erosive, same for the air, so 
it’s not a great place to be trying to live during  
that process, constant mudslides, floods, and 
avalanches are not a nice neighborhood feature for  
raising a family. Until those tasks are done, most 
would be in favor of living in orbital colonies,  
which might be out in rings themselves. The 
mechanisms by which planets get and keep rings  
are still a bit mysterious to us, as they could 
come from big collisions or could be replenished  
by volcanic or cryovolcanic activity of a moon 
that’s spewing material up to form those rings,  
but nothing about it requires a planet be a gas 
giant, or be out past a system’s frost-line. 
 
Except that icy bodies wouldn’t last too 
long closer into a star. Rocky rings are  
certainly an option, as are icy rings around 
cold but Earth-mass planets. Rockier rings are  
a gold mine for resources, as it’s a dense and 
low-gravity hoard of material to use. We also  
might find Earth Mass worlds out past Mars 
distances, which had icy-rock rings around  
them and those would make it very easy to enter 
orbit around, then use the materials to build  
all your infrastructure, including great 
big solar mirrors to warm that planet up. 
 
Planetary rings may be temporary or ancient, 
we have variously assumed they were as old  
as the planet itself or recent debris falling 
away from some collision not that long in the  
past. We think 10-100 million years old, 
at the moment, but that’s Saturn’s Rings,  
and some worlds might have had some dense rings 
that have been around since the planet formed,  
whilst others might have gotten them more recently 
– heck, you might have accidentally crashed  
a scout ship into a planet and given it some. 
Either way, planetary rings shouldn’t be too rare,  
even reasonably thick ones, and where they 
are present they are likely to represent a  
valuable startup boost to colonizing that 
system, or rogue planet too as they are  
likely common around ejected planets and 
brown dwarfs in the interstellar void.
 
So, it is not too hard to imagine life in a 
solar system starting in the planetary rings  
of some world, but while we’ve been meaning the 
place we first transplanted life from our world,  
they also make a plausible place life 
might have originated on its own too.
 
Could life start among the ice and dust circling 
a world? Impossible to say yet, we’re not even  
sure where life began on Earth, or even if it did, 
as opposed to starting from a comet that fell to  
Earth. That theory isn’t favored currently 
but it's still considered scientifically  
plausible. The basic ingredients would seem to 
be there, much as with a cometary body, only,  
we have a power source at hand that might work 
better, being closer to a star and also having  
tidal heating in play. Moons near planets 
are warmed by tidal heating and indeed that  
shoving and warming is able to cause volcanic 
activity that jets off that moon at above its  
meager escape velocity, to replenish the ring 
or move material from one moon to another. 
 
A Ring system like Saturn’s, especially if closer 
to the sun, could provide the necessary place for  
life to first germinate inside a muddy iceball, 
then spread via occasional collision to other  
such iceballs. The varying size and compositions 
of those ring objects, as well as the varying  
distance to the planet and orbital periods in 
regard to sunlight, would represent a lot of  
options for biological diversification. 
Now, that life might have germinated  
inside some Europa-like icy moon, one that is 
volcanically active, and has a subsurface ocean,  
then some of the life in that ocean gets spewed 
into space by an eruption or collision. Usually  
dying of course but surviving once or twice.
Whether it originated in the rings or was  
transplanted from a Moon, once it’s up there, 
that’s a great position to be in to spread  
around that whole planet and indeed even to other 
ringed planets or asteroids. Any organism that had  
adapted to seed between such icebergs in space 
probably handles long dormancy periods well,  
and as perturbations and collisions 
occasionally knock objects free,  
one might drift a few years and be swept up 
by another planet or into an asteroid belt or  
trojan asteroid group. Over millions of years they 
could drift to every place in that solar system.
 
As we looked at in our Space Whales and Void 
Ecology Episodes, there are some pathways for life  
that evolves in low-gravity and in proximity to a 
vacuum to be able to adapt to being spacefaring,  
and actively create a void ecology around 
a star, possibly even a natural Dyson Swarm  
or Kardashev 2 ecosystem without any 
intelligent critters and technology.
 
There may be star systems out there where this 
is the case, and indeed, with sufficient skills  
with genetics and cybernetics and hybridizing 
those two concepts, we might be able to make  
such an ecology, as an alternative to sending out 
big intelligent replicator swarms of machines,  
or sending colonists to uninhabited and 
undeveloped star systems. Seeding life with  
void-adapted plants and animal life, a sort of 
intentional and artificial approach to panspermia,  
might be one way to make new star systems 
ready-made for colonization when we’re ready  
to send folks there, or ahead of slower and safer 
colony ships, without them needing to arrive in a  
barren star system which still requires centuries 
or millennia of work to make truly habitable.
 
As newer and better telescopes come on line, 
we will begin getting a better idea what the  
frequency and distribution of various types of 
planets are, and that might include a better  
idea of which of those have dense rings and how 
often they occur. As we discover those, it adds  
an additional layer of majesty to these already 
beautiful crowns around our great solar bodies,  
to think that they might one day be the first 
places to host colonies around new star systems,  
their capitals and birthplaces… or maybe some 
are already the birthplaces of new life.
 
I mentioned when we started today that my regret 
about doing the episode Colonizing Titan way,  
way back was that it skipped other 
options near Saturn, not just the rings  
but a shellworld option and all those moons 
besides Titan, which at last count was 82,  
more than even Jupiter has. If you 
want to find out more about those,  
there’s a great episode of Breakthrough, “Saturn: 
The Moon King” over on Curiositystream. 
 
I also thought we could explore the option 
of turning Saturn into a Shellworld,  
one with nearly a hundred times the living area 
of Earth, and options for terraforming that,  
and we’ll do that in a brief extended 
edition of today’s show over on Nebula.
 
Nebula, which is now the largest creator-owned 
streaming service, was started by a handful of  
us as a way to give creators more options for 
their work and a platform designed for creators  
and their audiences, not ads, and every new 
episode of SFIA comes out there a few days  
earlier and without ads or sponsor reads. We also 
have an audio only-version of our show available  
there too, early and ad free, as a podcast, as 
well as all of our extended editions like we’ll  
be having today and some Nebula Exclusives like 
Planets vs Megastructures and the Coexistence  
with Alien series. Nebula is a great way to help 
support some of your favorite channels while  
getting ad free content and bonus material. 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself but  
we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream, 
the home of thousands of great educational videos  
like Saturn: The Moon King. That lets us offer 
Nebula for free as a bonus if you sign up for  
CuriosityStream using the link in our episode 
description. Again, you can get Curiositystream  
and Nebula for less than $15 a year, just 
use the link in the episode’s description.
 
Before we get to our schedule of upcoming 
episodes, I wanted to wish a happy birthday  
this weekend to my good friend Jimmy Church, 
the host of Fade to Black Radio. I gather he’s  
going to be at the pyramids in Egypt with 
a lot of his audience for the occasion,  
and the event planned sounds awesome. There’s no 
show I enjoy being a guest on more than Jimmy’s,  
he’s just a pleasure to work with, and for all 
our Fadernauts in the audience, don’t forget  
to wish him a happy birthday this weekend.
Next Weekend we’ll be touching on a topic  
near and dear to his heart, as we take a 
look at the concept of Alien Environments,  
from the strange to the mundane, the writing 
of which has already resulted in a few more  
episodes on related topics for later this Fall.
Before that though, we have our regular Thursday  
episode coming up next week, October 13th, to 
ask the question of what we do if all these  
options for space travel never pan out, 
and we are stuck here on Earth. And the  
week after we’ll go the other direction, and 
ask if it’s possible that space travel might  
become so mundane you could have Your Own 
Personal Spaceship, which we’ll look at on  
October 20th. Then we’ll ask what would happen 
if you damaged that spaceship on October 27th,  
and then close out the month on Halloween weekend 
with our Livestream Q&A, on Sunday, October 30th,  
at 4 pm Eastern Time. Join us live to get your 
questions into the chat so they can be answered.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like to  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social  
media forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
