This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
For centuries humanity has used the stars
to navigate our own world, but our future
is to navigate to those stars and the worlds
around them.
We’re deep into the holiday season this
week, and I remember when I was a kid there
was a lot of media attention given to trying
to find or backtrack the location of the Star
of Bethlehem, or Christmas Star, mentioned
as guiding the Magi in the Gospel of Mark [Matthew].
There have been a lot of theories advanced
as to what that might have been, star, comet,
nova, and so on, but it stuck in my head as
a kid, having taken up a deep interest in
astronomy, that the stars move relative to
each other and us.
Our sky changes slowly but it does change,
some of it cyclically, some of it not.
It's something folks don’t often appreciate
about trying to send a ship, or even a message,
to another star.
If you aim for it, it won’t be there when
you or your message arrive.
Today we’ll be looking at Interstellar Navigation,
but for completeness we won’t just look
at slower than light travel today, but also
faster-than-light navigation issues and intergalactic
navigation issues and even problems with popping
forward or backward in time through a wormhole.
But even without time travel, the galaxy shifts
a lot over time and not in the regular and
repeating way we see in solar systems.
While objects do orbit the galaxy, much as
moons orbit planets and planets orbit stars,
there’s very little recurring pattern to
this.
The Earth has orbited the Sun over 4 billion
times, and the Moon orbited Earth probably
about 50 billion times, and each orbit is
nearly identical to the last.
Nearly.
But our Sun has only orbited this galaxy about
20 times and the galaxy never looked vaguely
the same between each orbit.
A few of the stars near us have been since
our Sun’s beginning, co-moving from the
original Nebula they all formed from, but
many have been swept out of that pack and
some have migrated toward us, while many more
are just passing by at different angles and
were not our neighbors a million years ago
and won’t be in another million.
The Alpha Centauri system is well known as
the closest one to us, but its three stars
are not siblings to our Sun, which is nearly
a billion years younger.
At the Moment our solar system is moving in
the general direction of Altair, the 12th
brightest star in the night sky, 17 light
years away.
But what that means is that we’re moving
toward it’s approximate current location
at 26 kilometers per second, which is still
less than 1% of 1% of light speed.
So don’t worry, we won’t hit it, not even
close, though our Sun has often passed near
other stars.
Everything about the interaction of stars
in this galaxy can be thought of as very temporary,
at least in the timescale of a star’s lifetime,
not like the patterns of planets and moons.
Altair is rather young, just over a billion
years old, but it is one of the bigger types
of stars, an A-Type nearly twice our Sun’s
mass, and it will turn into a white dwarf
well before reaching our Sun’s age of 4.6
billion years.
Both our Sun and Altair orbit the galaxy roughly
every quarter billion years, so they’ve
both already completed several orbits, but
many giant stars won’t even live a billion
years and won’t live long enough to complete
a single orbit.
Even in a ship capable of near lightspeed,
you can’t just aim it at a star and expect
to arrive there, because you’re looking
at old light the star emitted tens or hundreds
or thousands of years ago, and you’ll see
the star moving along as you get closer to
the newer light.
Of course you would try to predict the star’s
trajectory and plot an intercept course, but
remember the star isn’t in a simple elliptical
orbit like a planet around a star, it’s
on a complicated trajectory affected by all
the other stars that will pass anywhere near
it during the millennia of your travel.
So you’ll have to project the motion of
all those stars as well.
In other words you’ll need to model the
motion of an entire section of the galaxy,
so let’s hope you have the data and processing
power to do that.
And while you’re at it, make sure you won’t
encounter any poorly-timed supernovas and
that your star isn’t going to be dead when
you get there.
You’ll often hear people talk about navigating
by pulsars, and that’s both a very good
and also very limited means of navigation.
First, we should clarify that a Pulsar is
not exactly a unique star category, but rather
most are fairly recently formed Neutron Stars,
and are visible as pulsars from certain angles
and during their more energetic youth.
All Neutron Stars are produced by a giant
implosion of a bigger star, most of which
is blown away in a supernova, but the explosion
occurs in the middle layers of that star,
so it pushes the outer layer away, exploding
outward, and the inner core gets pushed inward,
and the implosion forms a hyper dense chunk
of super-hot degenerate matter.
This is effectively a dead star now but it
retains all the heat-energy and all the angular
momentum it used to have before getting crunched,
and gains even more heat energy during that
implosion.
Stars generally rotate on an order of days
to months, but angular momentum is a product
of mass, radius, and velocity, and is conserved,
so when the radius crunches down a thousand-fold,
the velocity goes up a thousandfold, and since
the object’s radius and circumference are
a thousand times smaller now too, the rotational
rate will jump a thousand squared or a million
times faster.
Pulsars can vary in rotational rate from as
little as a few millisecond to several seconds,
but each pulsar is pulsing at a very specific
rate and spectrum, essentially a unique signature,
though one that changes with time as the pulsing
is taking up a lot of energy and the neutron
star produces no new energy, just what it
has in terms of heat and rotational energy.
This pulsing is also not omnidirectional,
coming off the poles of the star, so is not
visible as a pulsar from all angles.
Thus even though we estimate there are over
a billion neutron stars in our galaxy, we
have only detected a couple thousand.
We suspect there may be a hundred times as
many not yet detected, but that still means
not even 1 in 1000 neutron stars is a pulsar.
Or at least is one anymore.
The Crab Pulsar, in the Crab Nebula about
600 light years away, is one of the few optically
visible pulsars, and believed to be the remnant
of the Supernova SN 1054, recorded by Chinese
astronomers in 1054 during the Song Dynasty
as a ‘guest star’.
It’s only a thousand years old from our
perspective – the star having died several
thousand years ago but we are seeing it as
it was when the light left.
That’s a thing to remember though, if you
traveled there now, it would seem to age very
quickly as you approached, especially if you
were jumping there by warp travel of some
sort.
Its current period is 33.5 milliseconds, or
33 and a half million nanoseconds, and it
is slowing down.
Its period increases by an estimated 38 nanoseconds
a day, or 0.0139 milliseconds a year.
So if you suddenly fell through a wormhole
to arrive nearby it, you wouldn’t find it
at that 33.5 millisecond rotational rate,
you’d find it at more like 120 milliseconds,
because it’s 6000 years older now that you’re
closer and has slowed a lot.
As I said, there’s estimated to be over
a billion neutrons stars in the galaxy and
most would have been pulsars at some point,
but we figure on only about 1 in 10,000 of
them being visible as pulsars and have only
detected about 1 in a million of these neutron
stars as known pulsars.
This isn’t just a distance issue, some of
those known pulsars aren’t even in our galaxy.
It’s a time issue, they just don’t stick
around that long, and those pulsars in other
galaxies aren’t going to look even vaguely
the same if you jumped there, assuming you
could even detect one.
Nor can you assume that a neutron star is
slowing at a precise and constant rate over
thousands of years.
Any absorption of mass for instance can alter
a neutron star’s characteristics, and they
are often formed in places where lots of material
is floating around to be absorbed.
Indeed most of our heavier elements in the
Universe are the products of neutron stars
merging with other neutron stars, rather than
a dying star exploding.
Key thing here is, while pulsars are a great
way for figuring out your location during
relatively mundane interstellar travel, it
won’t help you for getting hurled through
vast amounts of space and time by some entity
or anomaly as we often see in science fiction.
You don’t get chucked halfway across our
galaxy, even to the same point in time – which
is a pretty dubious concept anyway – and
just check your local pulsars for a quick
positional fix.
They won’t be where they were on your map,
they won't be spinning at the rate you expect,
and they won’t have the same spectral characteristics.
Given time to find all the local pulsars and
get a fix on the galactic center, the Andromeda
Galaxy and so on you’ll be able to guess
your location decently but this won’t be
fast and it won’t be precise and it isn’t
something just fixed by having way better
computers.
If we are talking about getting hurled into
other galaxies or any motion in time, then
you are pretty much out of luck with pulsars.
However, that still leaves them good for local
navigation, right?
Sure, but in basically the same way stellar
navigation is handy for getting around town.
You can do it but it’s both overkill in
terms of effort and way less precise than
just using a map, let alone a GPS with a map.
Pulsars are great for local interstellar navigation
but aren’t really necessary because you
aren’t going to just suddenly pop out somewhere
on some unknown trajectory if your spaceship
is operating under known physics.
They’d be handy for getting a fix if you
whack some bit of space debris and your ship
was in a tumble and lost lock and it took
you so long to restore everything, like years,
that you couldn’t just grab an image of
the starscape from right before the accident
and tilt the ship that way and be back on
course.
That could plausibly happen to an interstellar
sleeper ship whose computers got damaged and
some backup protocol woke up the ship’s
pilot and navigator.
In general though, the sheer amount of energy
available in any given solar system, and the
sheer amount of energy needed to run an interstellar
ship’s engines, is so massive compared to
the energy needed to broadcast an omnidirectional
radio signal folks could hear for a few light-centuries
around, that you would expect every single
star system we visited to have at least some
automated transmitter that just sat around
watching some radioactive isotopes decay and
shouting out the time and its identification
number and the frequency it transmitted at.
You pick up the signal, and it says its 104.9
FM, and 8:45 AM December 17, 202020, and yet
you are picking it up on 103.8 FM, telling
you the frequency red-shifted 1.06% and that
you are moving approximately 3000 kilometer
per second away from the transmitter, or 1%
of light speed, your radial velocity.
You can then look at your own clock and compare
the dates for the actual distance.
If you can pick up a few more you can triangulate
your position very accurately and way better
and faster than by pulsar.
It is just GPS, only the G stands for Galactic
not Global.
It’s also important to understand that while
the exact method, ID, and names might vary
over a galaxy wide civilization, if you are
traveling slower than light you are going
to have decades elapsing between times you’d
need to worry about potential alterations
of such a system and plenty of time to be
contacting nearby systems for updates and
news on any major changes on navigational
systems.
And these sorts of calculations can be done
easily and near instantly by modern computers,
but also fairly quickly manually, there’s
nothing high-tech about picking up a loud
radio signal and doing some trigonometry and
redshift calculations against some catalog
of local stellar nav beacon IDs, and given
the time it takes to travel, you could literally
raise a child from infancy and hand them the
manual on how to do it, and still have plenty
of time to make your corrections.
You are also not too dependent on any given
system either.
Space is three dimensional and wide open,
if your ship can pick up the default navigational
beacon orbiting the average star from a few
hundred light years away, then you should
have many thousands of beacons to pick from.
Even if some can’t be bothered or they’re
automated and several fail, or even if some
intentionally tamper with their beacons to
screw people up, you shouldn’t have a problem
getting a fix, and when in doubt you can be
using pulsars or other things too big or cosmic
to fabricate to confirm things are about right.
You can also enforce beacon trustworthiness
and function fairly easily too.
As an example, Earth is likely to be the effective
center of the galaxy for a very long time,
at least to humans, not just as the center
from which colony ships emerge, but the place
where most of the research is getting done
and where most colonies probably had an embassy
to make sure they got that new technology.
It would be very easy for Earth to say they
will send the signal containing the tech data
only to beacons transmitting the right date,
time, and transponder code.
Odds are pretty good that it would be a fairly
standard protocol for neighbors too.
The one type of interstellar commerce we can
be confident will be common and large in content
is the transmission of information at light
speed.
I can’t see neighbors cutting off all transmission
if a navigational beacon went offline or screwy,
but that information is money and power, it
might even be digital people transmitting
copies of their own minds.
So you are probably not transmitting that
to some system that went haywire on transmission
and navigation protocols, and no system has
a motivation to not have plenty of backup
beacons online.
They are not that power-hungry, a gigawatt
radio signal can be heard many light years
away easily enough, and a gigawatt might be
a lot to us now, but it would barely run an
interstellar spaceship of the most modest
sort.
It’s also not that much to us either, we
have plenty of power plants in that energy
range and we might not use the entirety of
one for a SETI signal but we sure would if
it was a central piece of our markets and
economy.
In all probability it would actually be lower
power than that though, with lots of megawatt
or even kilowatt beacons scattered throughout
deep space too.
There’s always the question what you’re
navigating around because it is, at sublight
speed and under known physics, pretty hard
to miss a star if you started off aimed in
the right direction.
And yes they do move and quickly too, but
even if for some reason you didn’t calculate
that into your original trajectory it’s
not going to be hard to track it as it goes.
Rather you will probably be navigating around
and tagging all the minor bodies in deep space.
Interstellar navigation is mostly tricky for
avoiding all the tiny junk in space, and we’d
be talking about millions of minor planets
per solar system and trillions of things too
big to vaporize or allow for the ship to absorb
the hit.
I would tend to guess that most systems that
were decently developed but still hadn’t
totally consumed all the natural raw materials
in their Oort clouds, would probably leave
radar arrays beacons on every minor planet
they found to inform folks not just that they
existed but to sweep the area for space debris
and let ships know about it.
Much akin to the role of lighthouses, or buoys
marking shoals.
This is another reason we never talk about
stealth in space.
It’s really hard to hide ships when everyone
who needs to deal with spaceships also needs
to deal with pebble-sized nuclear bombs, because
that’s the kind of energy an interstellar
spaceship is going to receive as a blast if
it runs into a pebble no one detected and
it’s the kind of energy any pebble sized
bit of garbage lost by that ship is carrying
if it runs into a space station or planet.
I know we all like to think of the future
in space as a peaceful place, but don’t
ever assume that means it’s demilitarized.
A developed star system is going to offer
a lot of things to visitors and traders, just
about anything they could be looking to find,
and if they’re looking for trouble, they’re
going to find that too, because your typical
K2 Civilization, just one lone star system,
even a pretty low tech one with no fancy sci-fi
science, could beat the snot out of most of
the fictional galactic empires we see in sci
fi.
We’ll talk about that more next week, but
short form, you’re listening to all those
local navigation beacons less to find your
position and speed precisely, which you can
of course, and more to make sure you don’t
do anything that is going to cause any of
the tons of telescopes around that system
pointed at your ship to tell any of the tons
automated weapons platforms to point your
way too.
That’s the first Rule of Warfare after all,
don’t pick fights you don’t have to, especially
with people bigger than you.
The nature of interstellar spaceships is one
where you’ve got potentially megatons of
ship moving at speeds where each kilogram
of that ship amounts to a nuke, and very little
time for contemplation or chat.
Warning messages are things a ship’s captain
pays attention to because warning shots do
not exist, and if some megaton space freighter
moving at 10% of light speed into a solar
system veers off the accepted course and deceleration
pattern, the next thing it finds along its
new and unauthorized trajectory is likely
to be enough ordinance to level a continent,
because that’s the kind of kinetic energy
it is carrying if it hits something.
So what about the classic scifi case of your
ship getting thrown through a wormhole or
some other anomaly and emerging at an unknown
place, or even unknown time?
Ignoring that our current knowledge of physics
says that probably can’t happen, how would
you figure out when and where you were?
Well the first thing you would be doing is
settling in for a long wait, and one probably
long enough to move your ship to the nearest
star system to be picking up raw materials
for construction, because this won’t be
fast.
The first thing you would want to do is start
pinpointing galaxies and their red shift away
from you.
You might get lucky and find you are in or
near your own galaxy and fairly close in time,
but you can start estimating your own speed
– you probably did not emerge at a relative
stop – by the speed of those local galaxies
relative to you.
Their distance from each other and relative
speeds to each other can give you a good hint
where you emerged in time too, because everything
in the Universe is expanding away from everything
else, in general, and the rate and average
distances will tell you a lot about time.
So too will the frequency of the cosmic microwave
background radiation, or CMB.
We tell people that the CMB is at 2.7 Kelvin,
or more precisely 2.72548 Kelvin plus or minus
0.00057 Kelvin, and that’s the peak wavelength,
it is a spectrum.
It also varies a bit by direction you look,
that plus or minus being those cold and hot
spots you see on the CMB maps of the Universe,
variations of less than 0.02%, and corresponding
to a frequency of about 160 GHz, or 1.9 millimeters
wavelength, in the Microwave range of the
spectrum.
That is for today, when the Universe is about
13.8 billion years old, it was at a much higher
frequency when the Universe was younger since
those little photons weren’t microwaves
when they were made, they were in the visible
or high infrared range and have red shifted
around a thousand fold in their interim journey.
So if your spaceship pops out of some anomaly
at an unknown point in the Universe and you
measure the CMB at about 4 or 5 kelvin, not
2.7 Kelvin, you know you have plenty of time
to find your way home because you’ve popped
out in spacetime to about the time when Earth
was first forming.
Alternatively if the CMB is colder, you know
you’ve gone ahead in time, and can calculate
by how much, how precisely just depends on
how precise you can measure that CMB from
your ship, how good your civilization’s
measurement in your computer archive is, and
how solid your model of the Universe’s expansion
is.
I gave it above to six significant digits,
so that’s presumably what we could do now,
and should let you pin down your date to within
a range of a hundred thousand years of this
general era of the Universe.
If you emerge trillions of years in the future
when the CMB is down into the radio range,
not microwaves, you’d be looking at estimating
to the hundreds of millions of years, and
another big clue will be that you will either
find no galaxies or just one very big one,
as by about a trillion years from now galaxies
will all have coalesced with their nearer
gravitationally bound neighbors while the
others have all done the same with their neighbors
but expanded so far away they fell over the
cosmological event horizon, leaving you in
a volume of space essentially vastly bigger
than the current observable Universe but with
only one single large galaxy, which may be
dying off by then, star formation generally
expected to begin ebbing around the trillion
year mark and finishing off well before a
quadrillion years.
If you’re further ahead than that, and assuming
you had awesome sensors, you could be guessing
the age still of that CMB as it red shifts
ever further and also off black holes.
They are expected to evaporate and give off
energy over truly long periods of time - see
our Civilizations at the End of Time series
for discussion of surviving in this era by
farming those black holes.
However, if you can sample a lot of them for
their mass and Hawking Radiation rates, you
should be able to guess decently accurately,
relatively speaking, about how old they all
are.
Your margin of error for this, even if very
small, is likely to be a period of time longer
than the current age of the Universe.
You also might – if your sensors are high
tech enough, be able to pickup telltales of
the gravitational waves given off by black
hole mergers, which are monstrously energetic
events even compared to supernovae.
Or for that matter be able to pickup neutrino
background radiation from the very beginning
of the Universe.
The CMB all originates from when the Universe
was about 300,000 years old, what we call
the Last Scattering, as before then the Universe
was so dense photons generally got absorbed
rather than wandering through light years
of space, but neutrinos would not have been
absorbed and should have a CMB equivalent
that we could use to look at the earlier Universe
even before the Last Scattering, if we get
better at neutrino detection.
Could you figure out where you were though?
Well, maybe, there are some very large objects
in the Universe in a nebulous sort of sense
that are pretty unique, and if for instance
you have mapped out the various cosmic voids,
you would probably be able to calculate a
decent idea what their size and shape was
when they were younger or older and match
that to your time estimate for the Universe
to figure out which voids you were seeing
were which ones in your archives.
So too, quasars are monstrously powerful and
visible Universe wide, and you might have
good luck calculating position off those if
you can make good guesses as to which were
which.
Of course when I say Universe Wide I mean
the Observable Universe, and that will be
different if you magically teleported to a
different piece of it, when or where, as we
assume the actual Universe is much bigger,
maybe even infinite, see our episode on Alternate
Realities and Parallel Universes for more
explanation of that.
In such a case, you might not ever be able
to get your “Where”, but you could still
get your when, unless you were in a different
Universe, not just a different part of it.
In the end, if you get lost in space you probably
ought to follow the same policy when getting
lost on Earth, sit still and listen for a
bit, to see if you hear anyone or someone
saw you and comes looking, or head for the
brightest source of lights or noise.
In this case that’s just going to be a star
or Dyson Sphere, or galactic core, or some
galaxy-scale megastructure like a Birch Planet
maybe.
Or just some random star that is closest and
looks promising as a possible colony.
Patience is a virtue if you’re getting lost
or traveling in interstellar space, and doubly
so if you’re getting lost in interstellar
space, let alone intergalactic spacetime.
You might need to park your spaceship at some
planet, terraform it, and wait a hundred generations
till you’ve got the skill, knowledge, manpower,
and infrastructure to figure out where and
when you are.
The road to space is going to be a long one,
and before we can navigate interstellar space
we first have to build up our presence in
interplanetary space.
As we often discuss on the show, asteroids
are likely to be a focus for much of that
buildup, in terms of mining them and settling
them, and that begins with exploring them.
At the front line of that exploration is the
OSIRIS-REx probe, our asteroid hunter, and
there’s an excellent video on OSIRIS-REx
over at partner and sponsor - Curiosity Stream.
Curiosity Stream has thousands of fun and
educational videos, but they’ve also partnered
up with us at Nebula, our Streamy-Award Nominated
streaming service, to offer Nebula’s content
along with their own, if you sign up at the
link in the episode description.
That means you will not only get Curiosity
Stream, and at a 26% discount, but also lets
you catch SFIA episodes early and without
ads, and help support our show while you’re
doing it, as well as see our Exclusive Coexistence
with Alien Series and other great content
from our sibling shows.
Again you can get a year of both Curiositystream
and Nebula for less than $15, get to support
the show and see our episodes early, and get
all that for less than $15 by using the link
in the episode’s description.
So we are almost done with 2020, but we still
have a couple episodes and a livestream to
go.
Next week we will look at how we go about
building our own solar system up into a Kardashev-2
Civilization, then on Sunday December 27th
we will have our Monthly Livestream Q&A, and
finally we wrap the year up on December 31st
with Becoming an Interstellar Species.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
