This episode is sponsored by Audible
 
Some say Humanity’s future will be a 
utopian era, where human effort and  
ingenuity are focused on the betterment of our 
fellow humans and the restoration of nature,  
and where conflict is a barely understood 
concept from the distant and uncivilized past.  
Others believe that in the grim darkness of 
the far future there will only be war. 
   
 
The history of warfare has been one 
of constant change and innovation,  
even before modern times where technology changed 
so fast that each generation saw an entirely new  
landscape. So today we will be looking at 
what new technologies might be introduced to  
the battlefield and what the impact might be.
It’s easy to overestimate the scifi aspect of  
military technological changes but it’s important 
to keep in mind that military hardware generations  
take a long time. Rifle, pistol, and machine 
gun technology has changed so little in the last  
century that many weapon designs from back then 
are still in use, or even the weapons themselves.  
Fighter jet generations are currently 
around 30 years. By the end of world war II,  
humans were sending missiles into space and 
had nuclear weapons. All they needed to do  
to make an ICBM was to make the missiles a little 
larger, and the nuclear weapons a little smaller,  
but it still took 12 years before the 
first successful launch of an ICBM. 
 
Technological developments tend to follow an S 
shaped curve. Progress will be very slow until  
a few breakthroughs make very rapid improvements 
possible. After that, the technology will mature  
and further progress in that area becomes 
very slow. The ICBMs currently fielded by  
the USA are just slightly upgraded versions of 
a missile that was first fielded 58 years ago.  
58 years before that, the Wright brothers 
were the cutting edge of aviation. 
 
Currently things like drones, 
AI, surveillance technologies,  
and cheap space flight are probably 
in that rapid phase of development.  
Armor and guns are very mature technologies. This 
isn’t to say that it’s impossible for technologies  
to deviate from this curve - batteries were 
very mature but recently have experienced a  
period of comparatively rapid improvement 
- but it’s a pretty good rule of thumb. 
 
Needless to say war is a terrible thing, 
and we will not seek to glorify it today.  
As someone who spent nearly half their adult life 
in the military and over a year of it in the front  
lines of a war, I can say what most folks who 
have done that will say, war sucks, and it is at  
best sometimes the lesser of evils. Only 20 years 
in, there have already been dozens of wars, civil  
wars, and major conflicts in the 21st century 
and so it seems likely there will be dozens more  
in the next century. There has been no year during 
my lifetime in which there wasn’t a war going on  
somewhere on the Earth, and indeed the Next 
Century may see the first wars off Earth too.
 
War in space has been more on folk’s 
minds in recent years as we see our  
dreams of space exploration and colonization 
surging forward again at a rate they haven’t  
done since the Space Race 50 years ago, so 
that topic will get special attention today,  
but it’s just one of many we will cover.
The other elephant in the room for future  
war is robots, and we will look at their 
possible roles on the battlefield today too,  
but this will be our first topic, asking 
what the battlefield actually will be.  
Prior to the 20th century that was always land or 
sea, army or navy, and while terrains mattered a  
lot, your two big variations in land warfare were 
whether it involved a built up area, like a city,  
castle, or fort, or was in undeveloped land, be 
it a smooth field or dense jungle or the forest  
or mountains. A key notion there, especially with 
the invention of cannons, being whether or not the  
combatants were trying to preserve any of the 
enemy’s infrastructure and people, but for the  
moment it emphasizes that each of these sorts of 
battlefields has entirely different approaches. 
 
A fight in a city is usually trying to avoid 
blowing everything up, a fight in low Earth Orbit  
needs to avoid fragmenting everything and setting 
off a Kessler Syndrome event of space debris,  
while constantly constrained by both sides 
and all third parties being able to set one  
off if they choose to. The former variety, urban 
warfare, has often resulted in us going backwards  
in our combat organization, returning to the 
small squad and platoon sized units doing the  
fighting instead of huge regiments and giant war 
machines. So too, while you can put immensely  
powerful weapons in space, as we looked at 
a couple weeks back in Orbital Bombardment,  
often your only route for true victory will be 
small surgical strikes that do little damage.
 
This is where we get to a notion we will call 
Fractalization, the concept that military units  
should be deployed at all scales. Not simply 
unit sizes ranging from the Squad to Division  
or larger, or from the small patrol craft to 
behemoth warships potentially kilometers long,  
but at the microscopic scale too, and 
that these would generally make up the  
numerical bulk of your forces. In the past the 
smallest possible unit was a lone infantryman,  
or the lone fighter plane, but things like 
drones make that lower threshold changeable. 
 
Now not all of our soldiers were human, 
we have used a lot of animals in war,  
from dogs and horses to pigeons and cats, either 
in direct roles like horses carrying us into  
battle or dogs joining in the fight to navy ships 
keeping cats on board to deal with rat and plague  
issues or using pigeons for messengers. We can 
use them as a parallel for discussing the use of  
robots of lower than human intelligence. 
We also want to keep in mind that war and  
conflict predate humanity, we see it in nature 
all the way down to ant hives fighting each other,  
and from there we can draw some ideas. We are 
not so much contemplating biological warfare,  
such as using viruses, as recognizing that we 
need to be able to deploy forces at that level,  
and might want to emulate virus strategies 
in countering them or deploying them. So too,  
as we often discuss in regard to nanotechnology, 
a single species of nanobot probably isn’t ideal.  
We want something more like an ecosystem of 
them, and here we can potentially replicate  
military organization down to the microscopic 
scale, same as we have mixed force strategies for  
deploying tanks, infantry, artillery, carriers, 
logistical support, supply chains and so on.  
 
How do you best fight a virus? Obviously 
something much on our mind in recent times.  
A vaccine itself is one example of nanotechnology, 
and our own methods for dealing with it,  
multi-front offensives and strategies, reminds 
us that might be something we would do at the  
nanotech scale too. One set of nanobots is your 
recon, looking for viruses, another might be  
your big guns, attacking heavily infected cells 
while others try to fight off viruses entering  
uninfected cells and still others hunting 
around for viruses recently entering cells.  
At the higher level you might have larger machines 
in people’s mouths, throats, or lungs, microscopic  
or larger, who monitored anything entering the 
lungs and sterilized problems, for instance. And  
those all interfacing with macroscopic systems, 
all the way up to national or global systems.
 
Speaking of viruses though, we also have the 
computer sort and the cyberwarfare theater,  
and that is exactly where we might need to 
fight conflicts of just the sort I mentioned.  
Direct attacks to steal secrets or cripple 
someone’s computer networks are one thing we  
need to be able to defend against, but those more 
subtle approaches can be insidious and lethal.  
Consider something as subtle as infecting your 
enemy’s data mining operation for best recruitment  
policies of soldiers. They use something to 
help them find ideal recruits and encourage  
them to join, and you tamper with it to instead 
highlight folks that look ideal but show sympathy  
to your country or cause. Or on the flip side, 
to tamper not with who they are focusing on but  
instead their actual recruitment, if they 
micro-target ads, to misalign them so folks  
were offended or discouraged by what they saw. 
The easiest way to win wars is to sabotage your  
enemy’s ability to fight one before a shot 
is even fired, or a fight is even desired.
 
Weapon power or armor strength remain important 
in warfare but over the past century we have seen  
an increase in our ability to know where 
the enemy is to strike them or avoid them,  
knowledge of the enemy’s locations 
and abilities is profoundly valuable.  
That’s the First Rule of Warfare, know where 
your enemy lives so you can drop by for a visit.
 
If you know their position and strength, then 
given that information, any target on Earth (or  
in orbit) can be readily destroyed. In the 1940s 
we reached a point where even a battleship could  
not carry enough armor to protect itself from 
a few cheap airplanes. By the 1970s even deep,  
ultra hardened bunkers like NORAD could not 
provide enough protection to avoid immediate  
destruction by high accuracy ICBMs. In the 1990s 
bunker busting smart bombs meant you didn’t even  
need nuclear warheads to destroy most bunkers. 
In general bullets are cheaper than armor and  
avoiding being hit negates a need for armor, 
whether it's by speedy evasion or stealth.
 
This trend may continue into the next century. 
Detecting the enemy, and avoiding detection by the  
enemy will be paramount - especially when a human 
crew is involved. Every drone, by definition,  
has sensors and communications, and is thus 
a useful source of surveillance information.  
When one contemplates fielding tens of thousands 
or even millions of flying, crawling, swimming,  
and orbiting drones at a time it becomes clear 
that the problem is not one of having enough  
data about the enemy, but rapidly and accurately 
sorting through that overwhelming and continuous  
flood of data for the critical tidbits needed to 
locate and characterize targets. We already know  
about how useless a massive amount of data can 
be if you can't sort it properly and rapidly.  
I say rapidly because knowing where a supersonic 
drone was located a half hour ago is useless. 
 
Almost certainly this will involve simple AI 
routines doing the first round of sifting. Only  
data flagged as interesting by the AI will make 
it in front of a human, who will conduct a second  
round of sifting before passing that data along 
to someone who can make a decision about it. Being  
able to trick those AI will be handy, and they 
may be vulnerable to classic tactics like marching  
your small army in a parade around the block 
repeatedly to make them think you’re bigger.
 
Meanwhile one must expend all possible effort 
to disrupt the enemy’s efforts to surveil your  
own forces, assuming you are not letting 
them do it to feed them a pack of lies.  
This will involve jamming and providing 
disinformation. If your military force doesn’t  
have particularly strong ethical concerns, 
you will likely disguise your military units  
as civilians - for example, by having your 
drone radio traffic mimic cell phone traffic,  
or putting shrouds on your ground drones 
to make them look like civilian vehicles. 
 
Communications will almost always be conducted 
by the most tightly focused beams available,  
be that by laser, maser, or beam forming radio or 
sonar. Units will use the minimum power possible  
to still convey the message. Communications will 
always be encrypted and unlike in the scifi,  
the encryption will be unbreakable in practical 
terms. Even if quantum computers become  
ubiquitous, this won’t change that fact as quantum 
resistant encryption schemes already exist. 
 
I mentioned fractalization in warfare, 
the ability to deploy units at all scales,  
be it big or microscopic, but there’s also the 
need to do it in all dimensions, as it were,  
taking your warfighting capacity into virtual 
space. That will also continue to be a great  
place to prepare for war too, and militaries 
often explore or utilize games as a way of  
recruiting or training, all the way back to 
encouraging various sports like archery over  
those with less obvious battlefield usage. That’s 
the First Rule of warfare, Train the way you fight  
because you’ll fight the way you were trained. 
These too can be hijacked, subtly inserting flawed  
training, or putting out free games that appealed 
to more peaceful pursuits. Victory in warfare most  
often goes to the folks that planned way ahead and 
thought outside of the box, and if you put out a  
very popular game or movie that predisposes 
folks to think conflicts are best conducted  
by defeating the foe economically or by 
prestige of sports or best research academies,  
that could pay dividends down the road. Possibly 
by making folks more inclined to less violent  
conflict, which I think most of us would agree 
was preferable, or alternatively by making them  
highly vulnerable to attacks the game or media 
convinced them were generally ineffective. They  
just never believed you do something as stupid 
as roll tanks over their border and sieze their  
capital, after all it would be a public relations 
disaster. Anyone who's been involved in strategy,  
war strategies or other types, can testify how 
often ideas are dismissed or ignored because  
“everybody knows” something does not work, until 
someone makes it work and catches everybody off  
guard. As the saying goes, common sense isn’t too 
common, but common sense is also often wrong. 
 
Going back to fractalization, another reason it 
would be nice to have units smaller than a single  
human is that things can often “punch above 
their weight”, like a lone sniper crippling  
a whole battalion by shooting their leader. 
Theoretically that only costs you one bullet,  
but it requires training a sniper both to 
shoot and to sneak in and out of place,  
and you gamble them every time you use them. A 
drone rifle controlled from far away gambles a  
lot less, and a self-propelled micro-missile 
able to home in on a target from another  
continent potentially gambles even less. 
Not all conflict takes place on a classic  
battlefield either, indeed civil wars make up a 
huge portion of modern conflicts and casualties.  
How big does a drone need to be to have 
a camera on it and a GPS sensor and wifi,  
so it could facial ID its target and zip in 
and get them in the middle of a crowded city?
 
Does it even need to be bullet-sized? What 
about a piece of ordinance small enough and  
sharp enough to just sever someone’s spinal 
cord? Or to sting them like a mosquito and  
inject them with a deadly or disabling toxin 
or even self-replicating nano-machines, or even  
something which might brainwash them or drive them 
nuts? One drone is probably much smaller, cheaper,  
and dumber than a person. By this same logic, one 
such drone is probably vulnerable to even smaller,  
cheaper, and dumber drones 
designed for attacking them. 
 
We discussed before in our Giant Robots & 
Power Armor episode that future soldiers  
might tend to be accompanied by a small swarm of 
robots and drones who were effectively part of  
that soldier’s arsenal and defense, that can be 
micro-sized too. Indeed as we discussed in our  
Force Fields episode, one way to replicate the 
purpose of the personal force fields we see so  
often in science fiction would be to have 
swarms of tiny drones around the person,  
able to attack incoming weapons or just throw 
themselves in front of them to take the hit.
 
Smart Swarming is likely to be critical to using 
such drone swarms. The ability to use drones  
in large quantities lets you minimize the loss 
of human life on your own side. Casualties are  
demoralizing to the civilian populace. Reducing 
casualties means increasing training and improving  
equipment. Increased training increases the cost 
of replacing a dead soldier, as well as the time  
required to do so. Improved equipment is 
more expensive to procure and maintain.  
These costs increase exponentially with 
each new generation of technology.
 
All of that changes with the advent of the drone. 
Folks back home don't care about drone casualties.  
If you think a lot of drones will die on a 
given mission, you can just send more of them.  
This radically changes the engineering 
requirements of unmanned systems when  
compared with their manned equivalents. Manned 
systems such as fighter planes, tanks, and  
submarines need multiple redundant systems, with a 
proportional increase in maintenance requirements.  
Unmanned fighter jets don't need 
ejection seats and life support systems.  
Unmanned tanks don't need very much armor. Since 
most of the size and weight of a tank is armor,  
that means unmanned tanks become small and light. 
Unmanned submarines don't need life support  
systems and their mission duration is no longer 
limited by the amount of food they can carry.
 
A cheaper, unmanned unit might be only 50% as 
effective as state of the art manned units,  
but cost only 25% as much. This would mean that 
overall force strength of an unmanned force  
can be double a manned force for the same price. 
What’s more, with better automation for fighting  
you also presumably have better 
automation for manufacturing too.  
A military drone might be very expensive but 
if it's being built by a manufacturing drone,  
probably much less expensive. And this lets 
you start fielding vast numbers of them.  
Though this raises the issue of how 
you control them and how you fuel them,  
especially for small ones.
Fielding enormous numbers of  
cheaper units consumes huge quantities of 
fuel though. The principle of smart swarming  
suggests replacing those petrochemical 
engines with solar panels and batteries.  
Combat effectiveness decreases, but effectiveness 
per dollar increases even further. Tactics are  
shifted. Solar powered drone swarms with batteries 
make excellent ambush and denial of area forces,  
as they can lie or fly in wait for weeks at a time 
with virtually zero logistical support. Nor should  
we overlook the usefulness of RTGs, radioisotope 
thermal generators, as a power source,  
especially for things with long usage times but 
low power draws, like detection or defense uses.
 
Another solution is the use of fuel efficient 
drone carriers to deliver the drones to the  
battlefield. Drone carriers need not be especially 
well armed or defended as their drones can serve  
that purpose more than adequately. Here too our 
fractalization notion can come in, with drone  
carriers full of controlling software and drones 
that are carriers for yet smaller drones and so  
on, potentially several varieties too, such as 
those focused on a certain type of attack or  
defense, or a purpose like repair or scouting. 
They probably would not be manufacturing on-site  
replacements and resupply though, as we often 
see in video games, it will almost invariably  
be better and easier to always keep your 
hardware production far behind the front line.
 
If a military force has been built 
to handle the massive data influx,  
drone swarms greatly increase the quantity and 
quality of military intelligence as well. 
 
While drone swarms can often ignore attacks 
against individual units, it is critical  
that the design of a drone swarm not make it 
vulnerable to single-attack-many-kill weapons,  
or AOE. Unshielded drone swarms can be knocked 
out by EMPs. Radio controlled swarms can be  
rendered worthless by jamming. Swarms entirely 
dependent on GPS for navigation are vulnerable  
to GPS jamming/hacking. Laser systems can be 
rapidly re-aimed to target numerous small targets,  
and can be quite deadly against unarmored drones.
This is where the "smart" part of smart swarming  
comes in. Drone hardiness vs. 
single-attack-many-kill or AOE  
weapons must be increased as much as possible 
without increasing the dollar cost very much.  
EMP shielding can be very cheap as 
it is mostly a matter of engineering.  
Drones should use GPS when it seems trustworthy, 
but be smart enough to ignore it when not.  
They should be designed with at least rudimentary 
optical and inertial navigation systems to augment  
GPS, or with the ability to fall back out of 
the fight if they encounter such tactics. 
 
Drone swarms should keep themselves highly 
dispersed, to reduce the danger from large  
warheads and rapid laser systems. Use of cover and 
concealment are of further advantage against many  
weapons, especially lasers which have limited 
ability to penetrate light brush or weather.  
Light and cheap reflective and ablative coatings 
can greatly increase the hardiness of drones  
against laser attack. This is also where the 
desire for variety and diversification helps,  
a rock-paper-scissors analogy is an 
oversimplification but conceptually  
you might have 3 or 4 principle attack 
methods and 3 or 4 defense methods,  
and only give each drone one or two of each, thus 
ensuring you always have some drones available  
with the ideal attack and defense combinations.
Integrating your drones in with conventional  
forces will obviously be tricky, but I would 
stress that you are integrating not replacing.  
In many cases you couldn’t afford the risk of 
your operator remotely controlling the drones  
from a bunker ten thousand kilometers 
away, subject to jamming or interference  
along that entire information pipeline, as 
vulnerable as any long supply chain to attack.
 
We also don’t have human-intelligence machines and 
might be rather reluctant to employ them in war,  
compared to something of a more animal level 
of intelligence, in which case a soldier on  
the ground controlling or directing the swarm 
might be needed. You need this smooth operation  
with people anyway since you are likely to 
want to use them near your own population,  
to defend against attacks on 
civilian centers or integrate  
with law enforcement and counter 
espionage and terrorism units.
 
If you are using smart bots to control dumber 
smaller drones, latency might be an issue too.  
Human reaction rates are slow enough that light 
speed lag is irrelevant anywhere on the planet,  
but if your drones are acting and reacting 
to other drones in periods of milliseconds,  
then a drone controller half a planet away 
might be too slow, so you would potentially  
need nearby command and control, potentially 
in the form of Low Earth Orbit Satellites.
 
Speaking of Satellites, they have obviously 
played a growing role in warfare in modern times,  
and will continue to do more of that role in 
the next century, but may also add in the role  
of anti-satellite capabilities becoming more 
prominent as well as the orbital bombardment  
options we talked about a couple weeks back. That 
said, do not expect folks to be running around in  
spacesuits or space fighter jet equivalents in 
this next century. We may need handfuls of elite  
forces ready to deal with hijacked facilities or 
satellites, or to hijack them, but while virtually  
every war humanity will fight in the future will 
involve outer space in some way, the time hasn’t  
yet come where significant physical warfare 
will take place there. Expect nations to begin  
developing this capacity in coming decades, but 
mostly in a theoretical sense, with space-based  
military effort being mostly focused on 
deploying, protecting, or destroying satellites. 
 
Here too the policy of punching over your weight 
comes into play, it only takes a tiny, cheap  
satellite to blow up a big, expensive satellite. 
In general things orbit the Earth at around 8  
kilometers per second, and you can arrange for 
one in a reverse orbit to collide at that speed,  
so an anti-satellite weapon or ASAT can strike 
at 16 kilometers a second or carrying more than  
hundred times the kinetic energy of a rifle bullet 
of the same mass. Meaning if you could imagine  
breaking something by unloading a few magazines 
out of an assault rifle at it, then a single  
bullet sized ASAT would do the same damage. 
You can also attack an ASAT with something even  
smaller than that. However I suspect the critical 
thing to space warfare in the next century  
will be attempts to develop weapons that minimize 
debris, since not only can orbital debris you  
made damage your satellites and facilities 
as well as the enemy’s, they can also damage  
neutral third-parties satellites and facilities, 
potentially including manned or even civilian  
facilities. Since the First Rule of Warfare 
is to avoid making enemies out of friends,  
it is critical any nation wanting to build a 
military presence in space be able to demonstrate  
that capacity is constrained to minimize 
collateral damage. One example might be that  
instead of a simple ASAT that rammed the target, 
you had a drone that could latch onto it and  
shove both down into the atmosphere to burn up, or 
simply cut a wire or burn out a critical chip. 
 
We talk about the future of war being in space, 
but another dark and empty theater of war that  
is in play is the ocean depths. Submarines were 
critical components of the two world wars and  
to the Cold War, and remain very useful for 
sneaking large objects close to an enemy and  
also protecting them from attack. This is one more 
area where drones will be very useful for attack,  
defense, and recon. However we should also 
always remember that War tends to follow people  
and money. Navies are already critical to warfare 
but as we begin seeing more internet trunk lines  
across the ocean floor, more development of 
Seasteading and ocean-based rocket launches,  
and more efforts at artificial island 
construction or colonizing or farming our oceans,  
the need to be able to defend and protect 
them, or attack them, will grow. 
 
That’s maybe the most important thing to 
keep in mind about the Future of Warfare.  
In our Earth 2.0 series we began by looking 
at Seasteading and Colonizing the Ocean,  
but also looked at colonizing the arctic and 
deserts and even underground or in floating  
cities in the sky. So too, the entire notion of 
war in space has to do with us colonizing it.  
Where people go, war is likely to follow, so if 
the next century sees resource disputes in the  
Arctic or Antarctic, or colonies in those places, 
military strategy will need to evolve to focus  
on those places too. If we deploy 
vast power satellite arrays in orbit,  
or if we build kilometer-wide solar shades by the 
thousands to help with climate control, then we  
must be able to protect them, even if just by the 
threat of retaliation against someone else’s. 
 
It’s a sad reality that War is probably not 
going away anytime soon, and is likely to be a  
passenger aboard every colony ship we send out 
from Earth in the century’s to come, but often  
the best way to avoid a war is to prepare for it, 
that is the first rule of warfare after all.
 
 
So it’s time for our Audible Audiobook of the 
Month, and I’m particularly glad to recommend this  
month’s winner as having been written by a member 
of the SFIA family, longtime SFIA editor Jerry  
Guern and his novel “No Moon to Pray To”.
 
“No Moon To Pray To” by our own Jerry Guern  
is a fantasy horror romp set in the era of 
the Crusades, and it’s our Audible AudioBook  
of the Month. I listened to the pre-release and 
thoroughly enjoyed it. There were parts where I  
just couldn’t stop listening, and it's definitely 
been my favorite novel for 2021 so far.
 
 
As mentioned, Jerry is one of our longtime editors 
on SFIA, and he’s cowritten several episodes like  
Space Whales, Void Ecology, Non-Carbon Based Life, 
and most recently Zero-Gravity Civilizations.  
“No Moon To Pray To” brings together everything I 
like about Jerry’s writing style. It’s face-paced,  
nail-biting, intertwined in some truly 
imaginative ways with real history,  
and occasionally rather profound. Some 
months back I encouraged him to try  
recording and uploading his material, 
and it is now available at Audible.
 
Audible has the largest collection of Audiobooks 
out there, indeed it is so large you could hit the  
play button and still be listening to new titles a 
few centuries from now, and as an Audible member,  
you will get (1) credit every month good for 
any title in their entire premium selection—that  
means the latest best-seller, the buzziest 
new release, the hottest celebrity memoir  
or that bucket list title you’ve been meaning to 
pick-up. Those titles are yours to keep forever  
in your Audible library. You will also get 
full access to their popular Plus Catalog.  
It’s filled with thousands and thousands of 
audiobooks, original entertainment, guided  
fitness and meditation, sleep tracks for better 
rest and podcasts—including ad-free versions of  
your favorite shows and exclusive series. All are 
included with your membership so you can download  
and stream all you want—no credits needed.
And you can seamlessly listen to all of those on  
any device, picking up where you left off, and as 
always, new members can try Audible for 30 days,  
for free, just visit Audible dot com slash 
isaac or text isaac to 500-500. 
 
So the last few weeks we’ve been contemplating 
colonizing the stars and warfare, and next week  
we’ll mix the two up in our episode, “Killing 
Stars” coming out on Thursday, March 11th.  
Then we’ll take a look at civilizations living 
without stars that weekend in our mid-month  
Scifi Sundays episode, Exo-Stellar 
Civilizations, on March 14th. 
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,  
and if you’d like to help support future 
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are 
linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media forums 
where you can get updates and chat with others  
about the concepts in the episodes and many other 
futuristic ideas. You can also follow us itunes,  
Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our 
audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
