Hi everyone, I know it’s a Friday not a 
Thursday ,and we’re not doing our Sunday  
Livestream early either. A couple years back 
a lot of channels and creators got together  
to help raise funds and awareness for planting 
trees, that was TeamTrees, and it was a really  
big success planting millions of trees. Now we’re 
trying that effort again today for TeamSeas,  
an effort to clean millions of pounds 
of garbage out of our oceans. 
 
It’s a two pronged attempt to cleanup 
existing garbage islands floating in the sea  
along with catching the stuff as 
it comes down rivers via robots.  
When I got the invite pitch and heard about 
that, I said they had me at Trashing Eat Robots.
 
To launch that effort, a lot of us agreed 
to either do videos on Ocean Cleanup.  
or a similar topic for today, or post 
in support. I wanted to be able to do a  
regular length SFIA video but we simply 
didn’t have the necessary prep time,  
so instead I thought we would do a poll for a 
future episode over on our community tab, and  
you can all vote for an episode we’ll do on the 
topic of helping or sustainably using our seas,  
be it Trash Eating Robots, Ocean 
Farming, or one of the other options.
 
Of course, the point of all these videos about 
cleaning up the oceans coming out today are there  
to convince you that giant floating rafts of 
garbage in our ocean is a problem we should do  
something about. For my part I think that one is 
an easily sell, nobody seems to disagree, its just  
a question of how, and so the TeamSeas effort is 
about partnering up with existing trusted groups,  
like Ocean Conservancy and the Ocean Cleanup, to 
raise 30 million dollars to get 30 million pounds  
of trash out of the ocean. That’s one dollar for 
one pound or about 2 euros per kilogram, and again  
it’s a followup effort to the wildly successful 
TeamTrees, that raised over 23 million dollars  
to plant trees for a dollar a piece. If you’re 
interested in helping out the Teamseas effort,  
just follow the links in this video or 
its description, and hastag #TeamSeas.
 
And don’t forget to pop over to our community 
tab to vote in that episode poll, and of  
course subscribe to the show to make sure you get 
alerts when the winner comes out. There’s nothing  
controversial about garbage in rivers and oceans, 
its just bad, and I hope you’ll look in Teamseas  
and see if it’s a cause you’d like to support, 
and I’ll see you on Sunday for our livestream
 
And as always, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
