Many folks wonder if our civilization will ever 
reach Utopia, and satisfy all our wants and needs,  
but just as many people wonder 
if trying to do so might itself  
bring about the fall of our civilization.
A lot of discussion of the future tends  
to revolve around the notion that technology 
has the potential to bring us into a golden  
age where everyday needs, like hunger, are 
vague memories of the past. This is often  
called a Post-Scarcity Civilization 
and it’s a blanket term for a point  
where a civilization has such abundance 
that many of our problems just go away. 
A few months back I was asked what the future 
would be like if this never came to pass,  
and a poll of the audience said there was a lot of 
interest in this scenario, so I thought we would  
explore it today. Though at the same time, 
a lot of our discussion is going to be how  
this fate isn’t likely, and that post-scarcity 
is where we are headed and sooner than later. 
Now, we need to start by acknowledging 
a problem. There’s the basic concept  
of post-scarcity and there’s the way the 
channel defines it for ease of discussion.  
Technically a post-scarcity civilization is one 
in which there is no scarcity of any resource,  
and even ignoring that we live in a finite 
Universe, we usually view this as impossible,  
as certain things will always be scarce. For 
instance, only a finite number of people could  
have beach front villas in Florida, or own 
Action Comics #1 or an original by Rembrandt.  
Extending this to what it’s possible for any 
individual person to do: how many people can be  
star NFL quarterbacks, or pop stars and so on.
We can be inventive by employing options like  
virtual reality, or even altering folks’ minds to 
not desire to be collectors or to be famous. This  
would be more like a Post-Discontent Society, our 
Dark Mirror version of Post-Scarcity where people  
are simply not discontent even if starving in 
slums, because we’ve brainwashed them or addicted  
them to a drug. Instead though, we opt to redefine 
post-scarcity for discussion on the channel as a  
multi-level affair and one based on common needs 
of humans that are really fulfilled in some way,  
as opposed to simply infinite access to raw 
materials or energy. This we can discuss, and  
the possibility it might not come about, whereas 
the basic post-scarcity of infinite abundance is  
very unlikely to ever come to pass anyway.
We typically use Maslow’s Hierarchy of Needs  
for this purpose as the most well-known example 
listing human needs. Some, like always having  
enough air to breathe to stay alive, are cases 
where we are already post-scarcity. But really,  
for any given need, what people really mean 
when discussing post-scarcity and using it as  
a synonym for Utopia is a feeling of abundance or 
stability of supply, to the point it eliminates  
anxiety about having it for most everyone.
Whether it’s a simple biological need like  
sleep or clean water, or something more 
existential like a feeling of purpose,  
a civilization can be post-scarcity in a given 
want or need, but not in another. Indeed,  
sometimes a civilization can be quite deprived 
in one need while being abundant in another,  
pioneers living in log cabins were wanting for 
many things, but they rarely wanted for a feeling  
of purpose, for instance. Meanwhile, many wealthy 
and educated people have languished in that regard  
while having an abundance of other needs.
Let’s keep that in mind for today, because  
while I feel a post-scarcity civilization is a 
good thing and an achievable place, it is not  
some singular or utopian destination, and the 
future can still be pretty awesome without it,  
especially in every category. After all, I tend 
to feel our world is already pretty awesome and  
there are relatively few places where we are 
post-scarcity, either by geography or category. 
But we should be mindful of those in which we are. 
I pointed out air, which amusingly, probably had  
better quality for breathing centuries ago than 
now, though not inside most actual homes, which  
were frequently heavily-laden with smoke and mold 
spores. There are other more recent ones too, like  
clean drinking water, or access to information. 
If you are hearing me speak right now, either  
in our video or on the podcast version of this 
episode, then it means you have access to more  
information than any living being ever had before 
you, and we are basically post-scarcity there.  
Also, a society, once post-scarcity, is not 
necessarily eternally so. A river might dry up,  
removing previous water abundance for a place, 
a fertile valley might be mismanaged so that it  
no longer produces as much food as it used to, 
or the population might simply have risen. So,  
post-scarcity isn’t necessarily an eternal state 
for some category once reached, the way that  
curing cancer or polio simply removes the problem.
Alternatively I’m not sure a civilization could  
ever be post-scarcity on sleep or free time. I 
remember being deployed to Iraq during the war  
and having multi-month periods where I just never 
had enough time to sleep or relax, and that was  
on the heels of my time in grad school which was 
low on sleep and free time and high on stress too,  
indeed in some ways it was sometimes worse 
than the warzone. I’ve come to value sleep  
and try to make sure I don’t short myself on it 
anymore, and frankly I think I’m much nicer and  
more usefully productive on less time awake 
than I was when sleep deprived constantly.  
But I never really have enough time or 
sleep, not so much I can spend them freely. 
There’s a bit of unsolicited life advice for 
anyone listening, get your rest, but in regard  
to our topic, I’m not sure you could ever really 
have a feeling of abundance in terms of a quantity  
like sleep or free time, and indeed, too much 
free time can equate to boredom. So that’s  
another example of how a total lack of scarcity or 
even just abundance of a given want or need isn’t  
necessarily the benchmark for utopia. We could 
rephrase that as a sufficiency of the trait,  
and again it's why we phrase it – on the show 
anyway – as being measured by people’s anxiety  
about it rather than a specific quantity.
Sleep, or a lack thereof, is on my mind at the  
moment as I write this and get ready to go meet 
the three small children that my wife and I are  
planning to adopt and who will presumably have 
been living with us for a couple months by the  
time this episode airs, and as I’m now recording 
this they’ve already come and stayed with us,  
and I’m grateful they sleep soundly thus far. 
And it also raises the notion of how desirable  
a post-scarcity life is, because we often 
recognize hardship and challenge as being  
character-building. And that is one example 
of how a civilization might be capable of  
being post-scarcity on virtually all fronts but 
intentionally avoid or be intentionally dissuaded  
from doing so in many cases, for fear of creating 
a spoiled and perpetually dissatisfied society. 
I think there’s some validity to that but 
also that’s a bit jingo-istic. I don’t think  
that having access to an abundant supply of warm 
running water fit not just for drinking but long  
showers and baths is going to wreck society. And 
the occasional camping trip or survival course can  
probably teach an appreciation for these things, 
which is good because your ability to be grateful  
for something is enhanced by going without 
it occasionally, and I think life in general  
is a bit nicer with such appreciation in mind 
rather than always taking everything for granted. 
So, there was our quick review of what 
post-scarcity is and some of its more  
obvious limitations and weaknesses, and 
reminders why it's also quite nice. Now,  
let’s proceed to discuss how we get 
there, and how that plan might fail. 
Truth be told, that's not hard to imagine right 
now. As I write this in Early November of 2022,  
nobody feels very post-scarcity after 
Covid-19, inflation, an energy crunch and  
a major war going on in Eastern Europe.
For the duration that I’ve been alive,  
the lifespan of the average human has been 
rising by about 1 year for every six that passed,  
but that has changed in the last few years, 
where it has stopped or maybe dropped a bit.  
I’m pretty sure that hits all Four Horseman of 
the Apocalypse, Famine, Plague, War, and Death,  
and while I’m noted for my optimism about the 
future, I’m guessing the state of affairs won’t  
have changed before this airs in Mid-January, 
except maybe to have gotten a bit worse. 
It's hard times, and yet I do remain 
optimistic about the future in the long  
term and even the mid-term. Nonetheless we 
have some real challenges and the biggest,  
especially in achieving abundance, is probably 
energy. I said when Covid hit that there was a  
good chance that it would be the last true 
big pandemic humanity faced, and I think  
that’s likely true, and I’m hoping the energy 
crunch of this period will be remembered mostly  
as the final hurdle that forced us to buckle 
down and achieve long term energy abundance. 
Which highlights again that hardship can 
sometimes bring benefits, but against that we  
have to remember that the line between hardship, 
challenge, and brutal trauma can be rather blurry  
from a distance. So too, I think it is fairly 
straightforward to show that being post-scarcity  
doesn’t mean an end to challenges. That seems 
especially true in the context of that being less  
a singular state than a bunch of wants and needs 
that a civilization might satisfy on a scale of 1  
through 10, where 10 is maybe an idealized perfect 
state and post-scarcity is more like a 9, and  
something we already experience for information 
access, drinkable water, air to breathe,  
and a few others who are 9’s or maybe 7’s or 8’s, 
and not all are simply material or physical needs.  
Things can also become post-scarcity and then 
unbecome them too, or be strictly local. For  
instance, a much more advanced civilization with 
a colony on the Moon or Mars might still have a  
lot of anxiety about air to breathe simply 
from that proximity to vacuum, even if it  
was perfectly sufficient for daily use with lots 
of redundancies, and even if they were topping  
out several other post-scarcity categories.
And at the same time, doing well in some areas  
makes it easier to do well in others. An abundance 
of energy and education, for instance, is going  
to leave you pretty well-positioned to work on 
other problems. Once more, we’re justifying this  
definition of post-scarcity partially off the 
way it tends to be used to mean utopia anyway,  
so, how abundantly and securely people’s wants and 
needs are met seems a fairly legitimate standard.  
You probably would be able to move the needle up 
in a category without risking much to the others  
while doing so. So it seems pretty hard to 
imagine not doing so, politically as a leader,  
or just at home in a family context as a 
parent, even if on one side you have folks  
worried about spoiling people versus others 
arguing that any improvement that can be made  
should be, whether it “spoils” people or not.
But what really makes us post-scarcity? Well  
I’ve said on previous occasions that the tipping 
points for our civilization would be more abundant  
and long-lasting energy supplies combined with 
superior automation and organization. I separate  
those last two because while computers are great 
for both, the ability to have a robotic factory  
supervised by a couple people that cranks out 
widgets at a rate that used to take a couple  
thousand people is different from one that is 
just very good at making sure we’re not wasteful  
or inefficient in a bunch of tiny ways. Brute 
strength solutions to problems versus smart and  
targeted ones, only you can potentially have both.
A civilization like ours could probably be  
post-scarcity – in a general basic sense – 
simply by cutting down on a lot of our waste  
and mismanagement. You could imagine preventing 
scenarios like placing a student in the wrong  
classroom for them, when better observation and 
data would have put them in a classroom that  
they’d excel in. It’s the difference between 
raw abundance, or brute force, and the smart  
application of force. Our real goal is to have 
both, and that’s where artificial intelligence  
really has the potential to help us out.
To be clear, this is not the classic image  
of humanoid robots with human-like intelligence; 
waiting on us hand and foot. Rather, it’s the  
notion that large amounts of relatively simple and 
diverse narrow AI, can be a massive augmentation  
and force multiplier to a person and to the 
workforce and civilization in general. Critical  
to this notion is that we’re not even discussing 
human level AGI, let alone superhuman, just things  
that might fall into the realm of somewhere 
between beasts of burden and power tools. 
Now, it is entirely possible that in the next 
couple decades we will be able to make human or  
even superhuman AI, but it is a mistake to assume 
a very subhuman AI is going to rapidly mutate into  
something like Skynet or a digital godling. That 
is on the table too, for us to intentionally make,  
but I have problems seeing even its benevolent use 
being desirable. An AI looking to wipe us out or  
tell us what to do is bad, but even a kind one 
that you could think of as a caring Big Brother,  
helping when you need it, and constantly 
watching over you in case you need help is pretty  
creepy even without the Orwellian overtones.
But our options are not an inevitable and binary  
choice of No AI or Super AI, anymore than that’s 
the case with biological life, the options are not  
just inanimate objects or human intelligence.
AI as a concept is a bit of black box to most  
folks, as are computers themselves, and rather 
than going into that in detail in this episode,  
let us instead compare it to a robot vacuum 
cleaner or your dog. Your dog is way smarter  
than that Robot, though not as good at cleaning 
the floor, except for when a tasty thing gets  
dropped in the kitchen or at the table. 
Neither is going to suddenly mutate into  
an invincible killing machine seeking to wipe out 
humanity. Indeed, given that your dog is directly  
descended from gray wolves, which probably 
used to occasionally attack and eat humans  
and still are used in a guard capacity, you’ve 
got more to fear from dogs than dumb robots. 
We’ve all gotten scratched or bitten by our pets 
before, or hurt ourselves with a power tool,  
but while it encourages caution, we don’t 
abandon having pets or power tools. Indeed,  
to stretch the analogy a bit further to 
contemplate human-intelligent AI, we’ve all had to  
deal with toddlers or young kids before too, and 
damage they did to us, themselves, someone else,  
or property. Foresight and management are needed, 
that’s all. There’s zero reason why you would give  
your defense computer the ability to do anything 
other than recommend actions. There’s zero reason  
why you would leave a bunch of automated drones or 
tanks on with full brain power when not actively  
engaged in combat, there’s zero reason why they 
need any capacity for philosophy or resentment,  
and no reason why they should magically acquire 
these, anymore than a worker bee in a hive. 
I emphasized that because I said a moment ago that 
even a modest mix of better and renewable energy  
combined with better production automation and 
better smart logistics is the most obvious path  
to basic post-scarcity for us in the near future. 
If we decide we’re ultra-terrified of robots and  
simple AI, that might be a harder path to reach. 
Tomorrow someone could pull-off a production chain  
for solar panels, from resource extraction 
to installation and connection to a home,  
that managed to make those just 50% cheaper 
per kilowatt hour produced than today. That  
really isn’t much of a leap, at least in 
comparison to the progress already made.  
At that point, you don’t even necessarily need 
electric cars, because we can make hydrocarbons,  
like the kind your car burns and which 
make CO2 and water vapor in the process,  
by just reversing that, by the Sabatier process, 
and this is carbon neutral gasoline at that point. 
All factors included, it takes about 4 times as 
much juice to make a gallon of gasoline as you  
get when burning it, but that only matters when 
there’s a direct connection to cost. If you’ve got  
a 1000 Watt Solar panel that generally produces 
about 5 kilowatt hours a day, then at a 4 to 1  
conversion ratio it can produce a little over a 
gallon of gasoline a month, or 340 gallons over  
25 years of operation. If that cost you a thousand 
bucks to install and maintain over that period,  
well you’re paying 3 bucks a gallon for carbon 
neutral gasoline and it’s at your home. Go a  
bit lower, a hundred bucks for a panel, and now 
you’re filling your car’s tank for a few bucks  
instead. Though In all probability if that were a 
home affair you’d be using the excess energy from  
running your home power grid during peak hours to 
charge batteries for the evening and to make fuel,  
probably for a hybrid car, running on batteries 
and hydrocarbons. Sounds great, and it could be,  
production of methane or gasoline or 
even diesel made cheap, carbon neutral  
and renewable for the next 4 billion years.
Practically speaking though, pumping existing  
oil out of the ground is cheaper than maintaining 
a bunch of solar panels and associated machines  
to produce fuel. I can’t imagine how that could 
actually change either, last I heard it generally  
cost 10 or 12 bucks a barrel to produce oil in 
the middle east, depending on country and other  
details, or about a quarter for a gallon of raw 
crude oil, it’s more than double that in the US,  
with the difference in labor costs and such, but 
automation that improves solar power production  
probably improves oil pumping too. However, 
what it costs to pump the stuff is not what  
it costs to buy the stuff at the gas station, 
obviously, when the cost is scaling up 1000%  
to 3000% on its way from the oil barrel through 
refineries and shipping and taxing to your car. 
So it’s possible to make gasoline from solar 
power cheaper than it is at the pump, right now,  
with only slightly better solar, but at the same 
time I have to assume all those same improvements  
could help existing fossil fuel production and 
more importantly the producers can just cut  
the cost in a number of ways. It’s entirely 
possible that automation might make it only  
cost $5 a barrel to pump, and at that point it’s 
still worth doing if you can only sell it for $6,  
indeed that’s a nice 20% profit margin there.
Why that’s relevant is that I could easily  
imagine prices see-sawing around, and also 
that I do expect us to inevitably pump every  
last drop of readily available hydrocarbons, 
so sequestering technology is still a plus.  
Without jumping into geopolitics, I can 
think of some obvious motivations and  
strategies for screwing with the costs to make the 
development of that much slower and bumpier. So,  
we might see a cool new widget come out that lets 
you make a few gallons of gas a week at home in  
your own personal tank for around what gas costs 
now, then see the price drop on it below that.  
Things like that could apply to a lot of the 
other techs and wants and needs humanity has and,  
in that way, interfering with how these 
methods or technologies develop could be  
seen as preventing or delaying post-scarcity on 
it. A rebuttal would probably be that in the end,  
a price war on ever-cheaper energy is merely 
delaying that, not preventing it, and furthermore  
one could argue that it gives those places that 
are supplying the fuel all of the resources,  
motivation, and time they could reasonably 
need to develop into other economic sectors. 
This episode isn’t about why solar is cool, 
we’ve pitched the same line of reasoning  
about nuclear fission and fusion before too, same 
with batteries or molten salts over artificially  
synthesized chemical fuels. It’s the notion 
that an existing supplier of a want or need  
isn’t really motivated to assist in their own 
replacement and that it honestly isn’t that hard  
to push back at a new technology to make folks 
nervous about it, nuclear being one example,  
and automation and artificial intelligence 
being two others. Such being the case, I could  
see post-scarcity languishing out-of-reach.
Once more we must remember this isn’t just a  
single category, and we specifically say energy 
abundance and better automation makes us basic  
post-scarcity, because it lets us manage so many 
of those basic needs. Maslow’s Hierarchy – which  
has its pros and cons as a model but again works 
for today’s discussion – has a pyramid of needs  
going up from physiological ones, like air, food, 
sleep, and water through to safety needs above  
physiological, then love and belonging needs, like 
friendship, then esteem, then self-actualization. 
Nobody really debates that basic structure 
of needs but some models have more levels and  
move certain things around, like reproduction 
is down in physiological needs while intimacy  
is up in love and belonging. But unlike air and 
water and food, you can go indefinitely without  
personally reproducing whereas lack of intimacy or 
friendship can be way worse on the individual and  
pretty bad even in the relatively short term. We 
are obviously using the framework of the hierarchy  
in our discussion of post-scarcity, those basic 
lower levels still needing to be met, but what  
goes where and gets labeled which; doesn’t 
matter much to us, rather it’s a checklist,  
some of which are more basic and higher priority.
That means a post-scarcity civilization would need  
to provide for those higher-level needs like 
respect and status and love, in order for it to  
truly be post-scarcity, and this is a good place 
to emphasize that such a civilization doesn’t have  
to have all needs to be something state-provided. 
People who might pay a lot of money voluntarily  
to use a dating service whose AI is amazingly 
good at matching you to your soulmate might be  
horrified at the government having a dating 
service, even if it was entirely voluntary. 
As usual on the show, for neutrality’s sake we 
don’t really care where the food on people’s  
table came from nor how they got the friends 
and family sharing it with them, capitalist,  
socialist, communist, anarchist, free citizens or 
super-tyrant, etc, just that we would like that  
abundance and the technology that provides the 
option, or sometimes a facsimile of the option.  
Generally speaking if you’ve got an abundance 
of fuel for the system – be that energy or  
food or robots or all of the above – you’ve very 
well positioned to address many of the others. 
So let’s close by discussing a number 
of non-obvious wants and needs and some  
technological options for satisfying them, as well 
as some potential implications or complications. 
For instance, this show is family friendly so 
we won’t dwell on the uses of virtual reality  
or human-passable androids for satisfying human 
intimacy needs even for those whose appearance  
or personality makes that challenging for them, 
I’m sure everyone can fill in the blanks on that,  
and your mileage may vary from revulsion to humor 
and many points in between. Leaving that specific  
bit aside, virtual reality does give us the 
option to run our own kingdom or be the boss,  
and if it were well-simulated, it might actually 
produce good leaders and team players rather than  
a billion petty tyrants or adolescent fantasies. 
I also expect most folks would find real power  
or leadership terribly disappointing, at least if 
it was realistic. There’s an episode of Rick and  
Morty where they have a sliding realism control on 
a video game and find out how tedious and boring  
setting the realism to high really is, especially 
for exploringing asteroid belts and deep space. 
Virtual reality itself was a technology that 
never lived up to the hype it got in the 1990s,  
though it is finally seeing some real advancement 
more than a generation later, but in between we’ve  
got the internet and smartphone apps and social 
media. Most of us have seen a few jumped levels  
of technology in our lifetimes that have 
been met with fears of abuse or addiction,  
particularly with video games, the internet, 
and social media, and for my own part I think  
those fears were not baseless but also often 
over-hyped, and for some more than others. 
The simple answer then is, we do not know yet 
how VR or some other awesome new technology that  
might help with more social needs might affect 
society in a practical sense, or how it might  
be perceived, which matters just as much. Folks 
might decide that as awesome as online simulated  
worlds are for letting folks experience being 
a comic book hero or world leader or rock star,  
the perceived cost is too high and they 
bust the devices up or even prevent their  
development beyond a certain point. And if 
half your population lives all day in VR  
and the other half doesn’t or mostly doesn’t, 
the latter is in a better position to dictate  
what’s going on in the real world since 
it’s where they’re spending their time. 
VR and simulation is usually the big one for 
satisfying higher needs and my guess is that  
we will achieve a happy medium that permits 
utilizing it in a mostly helpful way, but it's  
also not the only option. And I do like options. 
Before Covid I used to say that one of the things  
I loved about my civilization was that I could 
go to Walmart at 3 in the morning and choose from  
a hundred different types of cereal, and it didn’t 
matter that I would get the same one I always do,  
I had that option and it was my analogy for where 
I thought civilization should be generally aiming  
when it came to needs and services. I find it 
darkly amusing that among all the rough patches  
we’ve all endured in the last few years, the 
end of an abundance of all night big box stores,  
and returning to having operating hours 
more like they were when I was a kid,  
is what offends and bugs me the most.
Space colonization is another of those options  
for people to achieve an outlet for creativity and 
forging new worlds that VR might otherwise solve,  
and I don’t think that one existing 
prevents the other either. Similarly,  
simply being baseline post-scarcity with 
an abundance of food and air and water and  
shelter mostly solves the entire second tier need 
of safety and security of your body, employment,  
resources, family, and property. You’re just 
not really needing to worry that you or your  
family might starve to death next year or live in 
a hovel, but abundance doesn’t remove fears of the  
body declining or growing ill. Having a billion 
dollars won’t save you from cancer, as Steve Jobs  
or Paul Allen or a host of others demonstrate, but 
it does let you fund a lot of R&D for treatment  
and offer a lot better palliative care than 
most humans historically got. Nonetheless  
there’s no guarantee we will get real fixes 
for some categories of potential post-scarcity. 
That’s not simply disease either, which 
science is likely to cure the majority of,  
if not all of, given time, but that desire for 
friendship or talents may never be truly realized  
for all. Here too, we might have artificial 
intelligence on social media to help guide us  
to those most likely to share our interests and 
have complementary personalities to befriend.  
We may get educational technologies that make 
it far easier to learn skills, so that anyone  
can be a virtuoso or master craftsman… though if 
everyone is awesome, some might argue no one is. 
Consider self-esteem, which is itself a trait or 
concept that is hard to define and is disputed  
even among psychologists. While it is about 
ourselves, it tends to be heavily influenced by  
the world around us, and thus might be influenced 
by existence in a virtual world or helping to  
terraform and build some new world far from Earth. 
And many might wonder if the former might be  
inherently less satisfying than the latter. We 
joked earlier about post-discontent societies,  
ones where people lived in slums but felt 
great about it, but that’s specifically  
the notion of some civilization drugging or 
brainwashing its people into submission. We  
discussed that more in its own episode. But 
our dismissal of post-discontent tricks as  
not being true post-scarcity doesn’t really 
address or invalidate the idea of careful and  
expert use of antidepressants for instance, 
or people being taught to rise above the  
strictly material and be more aesthetic.
The line is gray between over-medication  
and healthy use of medication, as is the line 
between teaching and indoctrination. However,  
I think a part of reaching post-scarcity 
is essentially not to cross that line,  
in favor of helping people to stop craving some 
things or do so in a more healthy fashion. Which  
is better, for someone who grew up afraid 
of where their next meals would come from,  
to have a basement full of canned goods and packed 
freezers? Or as a result of a sturdy supply chain,  
for them to have confidence that a much smaller 
personal supply was sufficient, and for that to be  
a justified confidence, rather than a false one?
This is more of the notion expressed in the  
Roddenberry Ideal on display in Star Trek, 
where they also had replicators to make any  
basic need and the fusion reactors to power 
them. Post-scarcity in Trek was often poorly  
written or expressed, but at least as a 
basic concept it held that mankind would  
rise above the selfish and materialistic 
to focus on higher ideals and cooperation,  
and that material abundance would aid this in many 
ways, often by simply preventing children having  
those deprivations or anxieties during their 
formative phases that can develop into excesses. 
And that’s not just the notion of acquiring things 
for things sake, but also maturing to not need  
lots of praise from others or to be the nicest 
dressed or best looking or smartest person in  
the room and so on, and obviously that is one of 
those hard to express and debatable things, since  
most of us approve of healthy ambition and drive, 
and which particular expressions and outlets for  
that we think are okay or even admirable versus 
those we detest is often pretty subjective. 
For instance, I’m obviously very driven and if 
you home-in on what my own biggest ambition is,  
it is to build worlds, but fundamentally merely 
those as the great stages on which civilizations  
may arise and fulfilling and long lives be 
led. I’d imagine many folks, especially in my  
own audience, would nod their head approvingly 
at that goal but it also isn’t exactly humble  
and certainly demands way more resources than 
someone’s whose ambition is to live in a house  
made out of gold or have the most attractive 
body, both of which we might roll our eyes at. 
Generally, the notion of abundance from 
post-scarcity is that such ambitions are  
still okay, go have your solid gold house, 
but there’s obviously lines that can’t be  
crossed and trying to figure out what those 
will be, and who gets to determine that,  
is going to be nearly as big a challenge as 
getting to the abundance state of post-scarcity. 
And the closing thought is that it will also be 
a challenge to maintain post-scarcity, not just  
get it, as we live in a finite universe in space 
and time and resources, we may well find that we  
reach basic post-scarcity in a few more decades 
and golden age things for several centuries as our  
automation allows rapid rise in Kardashev Status 
while our population growth trails way behind.  
So too, as many of these states of post-scarcity 
can be contested both in how it is acceptable or  
genuine to satisfy them, or in the negative 
side effects on civilization of doing so,  
there might be a lot of efforts to knock 
a given bit of post-scarcity down. Indeed,  
I’d imagine one of the most common preoccupations 
in a modestly post-scarcity civilization would be  
talking or arguing over how to improve our score 
in some category or why we need to change how  
we do it or stop doing it or how to ensure we 
can maintain this state longer or more stably. 
One thing we don’t lack at this time is plenty 
of folks debating ways to improve society or  
wreck it, and as we’ve seen today, we’re not 
likely to ever run short on our supply of that,  
whether we’re post-scarcity or not. The 
future will not lack challenges or be boring,  
that I’m pretty confident about. Still, I’d 
much rather we tackle those with plenty of  
resources on hand and be able to enjoy ourselves 
while we’re at it, and I think that’s the future  
we’re likely to see, and its basic beginnings 
might not be too far away, maybe even already  
here in many ways. Things may be hard now, but 
they were far harder in the not-so-distant past,  
and my forecast is that gray skies are gonna 
clear up and even better days are ahead.
So as we saw today, most of the paths to 
a brighter post-scarcity future do rely  
on us becoming ever better with our 
Math, Science, and Computer Science,  
and it is already very important to have those 
skills and will only grow more so as time goes on. 
To navigate the modern world and not 
fall behind, you need STEM skills,  
and our friends over at Brilliant can help you 
get better at everything from personal finance to  
career goals to understanding world-changing tech 
like AI and neural networks. Brilliant’s visual,  
interactive approach is engaging and 
makes STEM concepts actually stick,  
with helpful explanations along the 
way that never leave you guessing. 
Brilliant focuses on interactive and hands-on 
learning, and breaking big important concepts  
down into understandable and interactive pieces, 
like they do in their intro to algebra lessons,  
or intro to probability. The best way to learn 
math, science, and computer science is by  
interactive problem solving. With thousands 
of lessons and more be added each month,  
Brilliant can help you reach your goals. In 
just 15 minutes a day with bite-sized lessons,  
you can master topics that you once thought 
impossible, be it the basics like fractions  
or advanced topics like calculus. Learn the core 
concepts so you can help pioneer new innovations. 
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own pace, 
learn on the go, and learn a little something  
new every day. To get started for free, visit 
brilliant.org/IsaacArthur or click on the link in  
the description, and the first 200 people will get 
20% off Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
So that’s it for today but this weekend we’ll 
have our mid-month scifi Sunday episode,  
examining the possibility we live in 
a hostile galaxy and some of the Fermi  
Paradox solutions discussing that like Dark 
Forest Theory and Berserker Probes. Then next  
week we’ll explore both the Big Crunch 
Cosmological model and the Omega Point,  
along with options for Eternal Intelligence. Then 
in two weeks we’ll be looking at the possibility  
of using asteroids as spaceships, 
both interplanetary and interstellar.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch 
all of SFIA’s episodes early and  
ad free on our streaming service, 
Nebula, at nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
