Many technologies show up with loud proclamations
of how they will change our lives, while others
arrive more quietly, but just as surely revolutionize
the way we live.
Two men wake up at 7 in the morning on August
10th.
The difference is one wakes up in the year
2017 and the other wakes up in 1717.
The latter wakes up chilly, to the sound of
a rooster crowing, from a bed of straw he
shares with lots of bedbugs.
Neither his night shirt nor his bedding is
terribly clean, and he splashes water on his
face from a bowl to help wake up before looking
outside to try to guess what the weather will
be like today.
He, like all of his family and most people
he knows, is a farmer, so the weather matters
a lot to him, and any other news will be a
long time coming, including that his brother,
who lives just a couple towns away, broke
his leg a few days back and passed away from
an infection.
He works from sun up to sundown because he
has little machinery and he would probably
work longer if he had access to something
better than candles to provide light.
Our other man wakes up in 2017 to the sound
of an alarm clock, he is not hot or cold because
his home has central heating.
His pajamas and bedding are quite clean because
he has a washer and dryer.
He is a bit groggy because he can light his
home at the flick of a switch so often stays
up later than he should.
Fortunately he has hot coffee and a hot shower
to help him wake up, and he checks his email
while drinking that coffee and listening to
the news and weather.
He already knows his brother broke his leg
a few days back, even though he lives a long
distance away, and of course he does not die
from an infection, he’s just at home bored
and probably would welcome a phone call.
These are two very different lives.
They are separated by three centuries, a dozen
generations, and a slew of inventions both
major and minor.
Those inventions, major and minor, have altered
our civilization profoundly during that time.
Our topic for today however is not those inventions,
but rather the ones emerging nowadays that
will change our lives once more, many of which
get little notice in the news.
Even those emerging technologies that get
reported with much pomp and hype often bypass
a lot of the simple yet drastic changes they
will bring to how we go about our normal day.
This was a topic picked by a poll of the channels
supporters on Patreon and it’s a great topic,
but one that’s surprisingly hard to discuss.
A survey of technologies that don’t get
talked about a lot, but will change the world
we live in, requires introducing those technologies
and explaining the potential of each.
The trick is that technologies that don’t
get a lot of fanfare don’t get it because
their value and applications are not too obvious.
Fundamentally, technology is about making
our lives better, safer, and more convenient.
To talk about the impact technology will have
on our lives we need to go deeper than just
what the technology does, like how a fusion
reactor makes electricity cheaper and renewable,
an obvious benefit, but also how it alters
our day to day life.
Cheaper electricity is awesome, an energy
source that doesn’t run out or cause environmental
problems is awesome, but it is easy to overlook
all the other benefits that come along with
them.
We once devoted an entire episode to just
that one technology back in the early days
of the channel.
Today we need to cover several such technologies.
So to do this we will walk through a day in
the life of two people, Sam, who lives nowadays
in the year 2017, and Hannah, who lives just
a few generations from now in 2077.
Sam wakes up, hits snooze on the alarm clock,
then wakes up again five minutes later and
grumbles as he gets out of bed.
He gets the coffee maker started, then heads
into the bathroom to shower, shave, and brush
his teeth.
Unlike most of his ancestors, he has all of
his teeth, though some are fillings or caps.
He drinks coffee and has a bowl of cereal,
checks the news, dresses, and plots out his
day.
So Sam gets in his car, and unlike his grandfather,
he can remotely start the car before heading
out so the vehicle is all warmed up when he
gets in.
He stops for gas before getting on the freeway,
and spends maybe five minutes pumping it.
He doesn’t need to speak to anyone though,
it is 2017 not 1987, so he just slips his
debit card into the machine rather than going
inside to wait in line for a cashier.
He doesn’t need to grab another coffee either,
because large thermos cups are cheap and easily
available.
When he gets back in the car he has a phone
message from his boss saying not to come to
the office, everyone is going to a meeting
hall and here is the address.
Sam’s company makes software and he’s
going to go demo that software this morning
to a company in the area.
He’s got it on his laptop and keeps a projector
in the trunk, they’ll tweak the usual presentation
and email it to him with some notes on the
prospective customer.
He doesn’t recognize the address, but that
is what GPS is for.
So he gets on the road and almost rear ends
someone while trying to read those notes,
but arrives at his destination and gives the
presentation; thankfully they seem happy with
the product.
He doesn’t know the area well, but searches
the internet for a good restaurant for lunch;
then heads back to the office, gives his boss
a report on how it went, and they spend some
time strategizing how to close the deal.
It’s been a bit of a stressful day, so he
goes and gets a drink after work, just one
though because he needs to drive.
He then goes to the grocery store and thankfully
he remembered to put his list on his phone
so he doesn’t forget anything.
He heads home, microwaves some dinner, and
settles in to watch some TV and play a video
game to finish unwinding.
His son Ted calls from college and they chat
for awhile, and then Sam heads off to bed.
That was a day in the life of Sam.
Sam’s day is a fairly normal one for modern
times, different from a generation ago in
many ways but similar in many others.
Different from the one his son Ted will live,
but likely similar in many ways too.
It is worth noting that while Sam has access
to virtually all the knowledge of humanity,
he can’t particularly learn it faster than
someone with access to a classic library could.
He, and his son away at school, can access
just about any information near instantaneously,
but other than it being easier to find visual
examples beyond text and a diagram, how he
intakes new information hasn’t changed much
over previous generations, even if his mode
of access has.
Okay, 60 years later, Hannah wakes up, but
she is not groggy so doesn’t hit the snooze
button on her alarm clock because she doesn’t
actually have one.
Unlike her grandfather Sam, or her dad Ted,
she does not own a smartphone either.
She has a supercomputer in her wristwatch,
and some thin contact lenses, and tiny implanted
speaker by her ear that feed her information
instead.
Lots of her friends have no wristwatch or
contact lenses either, just stuff wired into
their brains more directly, but she’s a
bit of traditionalist.
She’s not groggy because every day she eats
a couple of capsules, the same way we might
take a multivitamin or allergy medicine.
They are gel-capsules that dissolve into lots
of tiny pills which in turn can be sent a
signal to release their contents or simply
let them pass through the system unused.
Some of those micro-pills contain things like
melatonin to help her get to sleep or others
to help her wake up.
There’s no alarm clock on the nightstand
next to her bed, instead, a little while before
she wakes up, those medications get triggered
to help her transition comfortably to wakefulness
and her ear-speaker starts talking or playing
music.
The lights in the room turn on too, and grow
brighter.
She doesn’t start the coffeemaker, because
all the smart electronic shadows that follow
her around made a good guess she’d want
some, and some toast, and delivered those
to her nightstand instead.
She doesn’t brush her teeth in favor putting
in something like a mouth guard that she just
bites down on and it goes to work brushing
and flossing in a very precise and guided
way, then relays that data to her dentist’s
computer, which analyzes and collates it to
see if she needs an appointment.
She knows what cavities and fillings are,
because she heard about them in a history
class along with smallpox.
Normally, Hannah would not actually go into
work, because she mostly works from home.
She does need to go in sometimes though, so
she does find it worth the cost to have a
car rather than just summon an automated taxi.
She tells her vehicle to start while getting
dressed, and feels a little chilly as she
steps outside, but her clothing is smart too,
with lots of small machinery and micro-sized
solar panels and batteries and wireless energy
receivers in it, so it instantly starts warming
her up on her walk to the car, which is short
because it drives itself up to her doorstep
and opens the door for her.
She tells it to take her to work, and she
sips some coffee, and reviews her notes and
correspondence while it drives.
She works through lunch and orders whatever
she likes for drone delivery, she doesn’t
even know who she ordered it from, or that
it came from 2 different places that seamlessly
coordinated their delivery to be simultaneous.
After work she goes to a pub and decides to
stick around for a second drink because she
isn’t driving and she does not need to go
to the grocery store.
She just gets a note from her smart house
requesting permission to buy things she’s
low on and asking if she wants anything else.
She scans the list, adds some ice cream to
it, and says yes, all the while chatting with
a random stranger at the bar.
Neither of them ever gave their names, since
they are just used to seeing someone’s name
pop up in their vision whenever they look
at a person’s face and their various electronic
shadows detect the mental equivalent of curiosity.
She heads home and talks to her dad Ted along
the way, he appears to be sitting in the car
with her, with every sight and sound seeming
to come from someone physically there, though
her preferences are set to always give a certain
halo and translucency to such folks so she
doesn’t forget they aren’t actually present.
He’s entirely digital though, her dad Ted
is not there and not sitting, and from his
perspective his daughter is walking alongside
him while plays golf half a planet away.
He remembers when the software for this was
a lot less seamless, and would show a video
window of their face, and when you used to
have to remember to take your phone with you
and had to mess around trying to get charging
cables into the ports.
He hasn’t plugged anything in for a long
time, and Hannah doesn’t even remember doing
so, because for her whole life everything
has just been wireless.
Energy is transmitted to small devices by
magnetic induction, or runs off stored energy
in tiny, high energy density batteries that
charge very quickly, and gets power off micro-sized
solar panels in one’s clothing or by leaching
a little energy off every swing of the arm
or leg.
She doesn’t think about it much but often
it’s a little harder for her to move an
arm or leg when her electronics shadows think
she needs some exercise and divert that extra
energy into the grid, or rent some of the
processors in her clothes or bracelet out
for cloud processing, signal boosting, and
so on.
Hannah works for the same software firm her
father and grandfather did, but she never
carries any equipment around for presentations,
because she rarely does them in person, and
when she does, she can just grab the files
off the cloud and share them right to her
audience, and the interface is so smooth and
mostly thought or gesture controlled that
she can shuffle through dozens of charts or
images in real time and send them, or even
make new ones as needed.
Indeed her audience can usually alter the
parameters of a given chart without even having
to ask her, they just say they want the chart
they’re seeing projected over 5 years not
3, as she showed them, and it does.
When she gets home she has dinner with her
son, who is off at college, but is actually
in the house in the flesh right now, because
he just attends lectures by watching them
and he asks his professor questions by calling
during office hours, which are all day every
day, because dozens of professors around the
planet nominally teach that course, and his
study group for doing homework is likewise
spread all over the planet.
An individual course might be taught by many
different people, and he just finds the lecturer
whose style he prefers and watches those,
but it’s not live, so he needs someone else
to ask questions.
Hannah doesn’t ask him about his grades
because he doesn’t get them, he finishes
a class when he knows the material, be it
a day or two years, and he never takes tests
either because the folks who designed the
course also designed tens of thousands of
questions or other progress monitors, and
those just get injected from time to time
in the course.
When he’s nailing them 9 times out of 10
it moves on to more advanced stuff, or tells
him he has proficiency and that gets recorded
in his file.
Hannah does not need a second mortgage on
her house to pay for his tuition and lodging,
because paying a couple dozen different professors
to prepare an instructional segment on a topic
everyone around the planet can pick and choose
from is a lot cheaper and more cost and time
effective than paying one professor to stand
in a room repeating the same lecture once
a semester to students that may or may not
be receptive to his presentation style, or
have to miss a class and fall behind.
There is no class to fall behind on, just
subjects, and the ability to assess with solid
accuracy how knowledgeable an individual person
is at any time on that subject.
So Hannah doesn’t have much trouble falling
asleep because she isn’t too stressed out
by life, and her personal health monitor can
send a signal to some of the pills left in
her system to dissolve or tell her how much
of something to take if she needs a hand getting
to sleep.
What’s interesting about Sam and Hannah’s
lives is that they both live in a pretty automated
and high tech civilization.
We spend a lot of time on this channel talking
about futures in Hannah’s Era or even centuries
further ahead, and we tend to focus on big
things.
New spaceships, new energy sources, giant
constructs we could build around our own star
or other stars and the ships that will get
you there.
Not today though, for today it does not matter
that Ted was actually playing golf in a rotating
habitat orbiting the Earth, complaining about
how the spin throws off his normal swing.
We care that his golf partner was actually
lying down at home on his bed playing with
him in virtual reality, and that he, Ted,
and Hannah were thousands of kilometers apart,
but all felt like they were in the same environment
chatting, even though they were not in the
same place and quite possibly all saw different
environments.
We don’t care that they have rocket ships
with big fusion powered drives that can get
to Mars in a week, we care about them having
cars they can sleep in, fully relaxed in the
knowledge that it could drive through a blizzard
without a risk of accident and that if one
did somehow happen, a dozen safety systems
would pop on deploying airbags and restraints
before the vehicle even hit the target, and
that if somehow even that wasn’t enough,
an automated ambulance would be on the scene
in moments with robots controlled by experts
hundreds of kilometers away piloting them,
and already knowing from the vehicle monitors
exactly what happened and where all the injuries
were and how severe.
We also don’t particularly care that Hannah’s
son can do classes online, we already have
ever-improving technology allowing that.
We care about the automated interactive aspects
of that, something called Affective Computing,
or computers and systems that can recognize,
interpret, process, or simulate human body
language and affects.
Fundamentally it is this sort of technology
that holds the strongest potential to revolutionize
our lives.
Sure, a student can watch a recorded lecture
and pick from several variations of it by
other people covering that same topic, just
as you can do now on YouTube for instance.
But it is a bigger gamechanger when the system
can actually recognize that you are confused
or distracted and act accordingly, by simply
bringing up a different or expanded presentation.
One that can recognize what sort of voice
tones and manner or accent you respond better
to and suggest speakers based on that.
It can even real-time alter theirs.
Or even perform text-to-speech functions that
don’t pronounce each word mechanically,
but can simulate it like a normal person would
say it, and possibly even produce a simulated
speaker who doesn’t trip all your mental
flags as inhuman and disturbing.
The Uncanny Valley, our tendency to respond
more negatively to things which seem closer
to human than further away, is a big hurdle
to making such simulations, but if you can
get past it, you open the door for books that
don’t just get read aloud by some cold disjointed
voice, but can be real-time performed like
a TV show or interactive virtual environment
without needing actors.
It’s a lot easier to learn the history of
the world when instead of a book or lecture
or even historical TV drama, a person can
land in that environment where the bits they
find boring can be seamlessly detected and
altered, so they remain focused on the important
knowledge while enjoying themselves.
It’s nice to have a test that doesn’t
need to have questions checking your reading
comprehension, because it already knows what
that was from monitoring you while you read,
and even nicer if most text can adapt as you’re
reading it to rephrase the information or
the question to better communicate to you
as an individual.
It’s like the automatic translator that
doesn’t just hear what someone said in another
language and translate it word for word, but
instead can convert all the idioms and expressions
into another language and its own idioms and
expressions.
It will be even cooler if one day we can just
download knowledge and skills into your head,
like in the film the Matrix where they upload
for a few seconds and suddenly that person
knows martial arts.
In the absence of that, while we can only
use our eyes and ears to input data, which
are limited to their format and bandwidth,
being able to maximize those by tailoring
the input to the individual could massively
boost how well and quickly people acquire
knowledge and skills.
Nothing would more powerfully alter our day-to-day
life than the ability to absorb skills and
knowledge quicker than we do now.
Even many of our conveniences come from simply
making a task so easy you don’t have to
invest any time into learning it.
A civilization where everyone is a jack-of-all-trades,
and an expert at a few, is fundamentally different
from ours.
We didn’t focus on cool new power production
methods like fusion today, we focused on ways
to conveniently get power.
Wireless energy transmission by magnetic induction
or energy beaming, smaller and better batteries
and solar panels, or harvesting energy right
from the person.
Leaching just a little energy away from every
motion, maybe even putting devices in the
body that could steal a bit of energy from
your own food to transmit it to devices in
or on you.
I never really said how Hannah’s car operates,
that it is an electric vehicle ultimately
powered by some big fusion reactor somewhere,
because Hannah doesn’t think about it.
She knows the batteries in her vehicle replaced
a combustion engine when batteries finally
got small enough and fast charging enough
to remove the inconvenience of recharging
compared to refueling.
But she just doesn’t think about it anymore
than you or I spend much time thinking about
our light bulbs or light switches, or what
makes our refrigerator cold, even though those
devices changed our lives profoundly.
We’re not too interested in the super-powerful
classic or quantum computer that could simultaneously
play every human being at chess and beat them
all, or even the social media network that
can help you find other people in your area
that enjoy chess.
We’re interested in the hardware and software
that notices you like playing chess, and can
let you know the person you are talking to
does as well, and likes gardening like you
do, but does not share your joy of cooking,
or parachuting off kilometer tall buildings.
Predicting the future of technology is always
a hit and miss game, often in hindsight the
stuff is obvious, but can’t be predicted
in advance, something we call a Black Swan,
and have discussed before.
Some technology and its impact is easy enough
to predict, but what makes them inaccurate
in most cases is all those tiny secondary
advantages and changes and those tend to focus
on human desire and convenience.
It’s not that hard to predict faster computers,
the internet, satellites, or cell phones.
What’s hard to predict is people using those
to post a picture of what they ate for lunch.
Once you do, you can imagine that a lot of
restaurants will advertise online and show
photos of the menu.
It will seem obvious in hindsight that someone
is going to make a piece of software that
can look at that image and make some smart
guesses about its nutritional value and calorie
count.
It will seem obvious in hindsight that as
we get more Affective Computing able to monitor
your reactions, your computer will get better
at showing you bits of stuff on your social
media newsfeed that you’ll enjoy, and that
advertisers will be able to hit you with an
ad showing a picture of pizza with the toppings
you like when you are just getting a little
hungry and haven’t had pizza recently, and
tomorrow you’ll get shown sandwiches instead.
It’s predictable that 3D printers, and fast,
cheap, delivery might put a dent in classic
retail shopping.
It’s predictable that automated vehicles,
not needing expensive drivers, will make it
much cheaper to deliver things or take a taxi,
so that fewer people might own individual
vehicles.
It’s less predictable that these might start
including a casual chat function that notices
two strangers sharing a vehicle are uncomfortable
and bored and can drop an icebreaker so they
can talk to each other.
It’s less predictable that some software
company will make a fortune designing algorithms
for that which can seamlessly drop a targeted
advertisement in there where the automated
driver can say that it noticed you’re hungry
and like Italian food, and there’s a great
bistro just up ahead.
Automated vehicles, wireless energy transmission,
affective computing that can read your moods
or even mental implants that can sync directly
to your thoughts are all technologies that
are emerging and do tend to get a fair amount
of attention in the media.
However, it is very easy for us miss a lot
of those secondary applications that can quietly
sneak in there to revolutionize our lives
just as much as landing on the Moon did, or
going to Mars will.
Next week we will be starting up a new series
looking at just that.
We spent a lot of time recently in the Upward
Bound Series discussing how to get off the
planet, and in the new Outward Bound series,
we’ll be visiting some other planets and
moons and talking about how to get there and
what to do when you arrive, and we’ll start
with Colonizing Mars.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
If you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
And let me give a thanks to folks who support
this channel on Patreon and selected this
topic as the winner for the month.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
