In gold rushes in the past, prospective miners
traveled for months to reach a site.
In the future they might do it again,
because there’s gold in them thar asteroids!
So today we return to the Outward Bound Series
to look at Ceres and the rest of the Asteroid
Belt.
Sort of like when we looked at Colonizing
Jupiter and Saturn, where the planet itself
is not where most of the people live, but
on the smaller objects nearby, our focus today
won’t be entirely on Ceres.
Though with one key difference, as we’ll
see, Ceres is likely to be where folks tend
to live or visit, but not where a lot of the
people actually work.
This is a good point to address earlier on
though.
We always say the asteroid belt, referring
to a swarm of smaller objects, unlike how
we’d refer to Jupiter and its moons.
But in some ways, while Ceres is not central
to the Asteroid Belt the way a planet is to
its moons, it’s better to think of that
whole asteroid belt as focused around Ceres.
There may be millions of asteroids in the
belt, but Ceres makes up about a third of
the mass.
To match its size, you’d need to include
the next dozen biggest asteroids , leaving
the remaining third of the Belt’s Mass to
be distributed among its remaining millions
of members.
Even then, while we always warn people not
think of the Asteroid belt as a dense place
you’d have to dodge around, a lot of the
Belt is composed of Asteroid families, often
centering on a larger asteroid, and some,
like Sylvia, the eighth largest asteroid,
even have moons.
Fairly impressive ones too, from a visual
perspective.
Some small rock a few kilometers across is
fairly impressive when it’s only a few hundred
kilometers away, and from the surface of such
a tiny moon, its parent asteroid would dominate
the sky more than Jupiter does to the Galilean
Moons, and the gravity is so weak you could
jump off and float there.
That weak gravity is a big issue for colonization
too.
Even the biggest ones have escape velocities
so low you could shoot a gun and the bullet
would never land, and a baseball tossed upwards
would take many minutes to land.
On the smaller ones, you’d float off into
space just by trying to take a step.
We’ve talked about enhancing gravity on
larger moons or places like Mars or Mercury
by using large bowl or vase shaped habitat,
which could spin around, combining centrifugal
force with regular gravity, but even on the
largest asteroid, Ceres, such things are fairly
redundant.
A cylinder set on the surface, with its axis
of rotation parallel to gravity, would just
have a slow creep toward the bottom you could
manage with some minor sloping or walls.
One turned perpendicular to gravity would
simply result in gravity feeling a little
higher when your feet were pointing down,
and a little lower when you were upside down.
For that perpendicular version, on Ceres where
gravity is 3% of Earth’s, if you weighed
100 pounds and stood on a scale, you could
watch it slide from 97 to 103 as you spun.
Almost anywhere besides Ceres and those handful
of largest asteroids, you wouldn’t be able
to notice.
It’s a big place in some ways.
Ceres, again, is a full third of the Belt’s
mass, and yet Earth’s Moon is about 80 times
more massive than Ceres, and in turn, the
Earth is about 80 times more massive than
the Moon.
We talk about exploiting the resources of
the Belt, indeed we’ve done a whole episode
on Asteroid Mining, and yet every single asteroid
combined has only 1% of the mass and resources
of Mercury, the place we last visited in the
series and spoke of mining for resources.
So what is the attraction of the belt?
Traditionally in this series we followed a
storyline of a traveler visiting place after
place as we colonized them.
We left the Traveler out in Alpha Centauri,
but let’s join an aspiring asteroid miner
on their way to Ceres, not to be the first
to land and plant a flag, not for great honor
or prestige, but just to make a living.
The half year trip from Earth was long and
uncomfortable, but our ship has finally arrived
at Ceres and will land in Occator, a vast
crater almost a hundred kilometers across,
dotted with dark-tinted domes showing a bit
of green shade and roving tractors, scooping
up ammonia rich clays for nitrogen, and the
other deposits rich in sodium carbonate, magnesium,
and sulfates.
Water ice is quite plentiful on Ceres, as
everyone knows, but as we get on a crawler
with some of our shipmates for the trip from
the landing site to the main base, one of
them points out that what makes Ceres so nice
as a port of call is that it has an awful
lot of what we need for life.
We came out here to do some mining, but he
did not.
He spent all his funds on his ticket and a
box full of seeds and microbial cultures.
He’s renting a whole small dome from Occator
Company, the biggest consortium on Ceres and
the one that runs this crater and base.
He’s going to start growing blueberries,
the first blueberries in the Belt, and selling
them to the hungry miners and base personnel,
who are particularly eager for something fresh.
Food is a big industry on Ceres.
The domes are tinted to keep out more harmful
frequencies and help keep in heat.
This surprises us though, as we are far from
the Sun, surely plants can’t grow here.
But he gestures around, and points out it
isn’t dim at all, even way out at Pluto
the daylight is as bright as a cloudy day
on Earth.
See, light’s a tricky thing and our eyes
don’t really realize that the light of noon-time
Sun is carrying a million times more photons
to our eyes compared to what the Moon does
at night, and a thousand times what we tend
to think of as comfortable indoor lighting.
The asteroid belt is farther from the Sun,
with most of asteroids between twice and thrice
as far away as Earth, but also has no air
interfering with light reaching the ground,
or filtering out the harmful parts of the
spectrum, so lighting in the belt can range
from nearly a quarter what it is at Earth’s
equator to as little as a ten percent in the
outer parts of it.
Our companion tells us that between the dome
filtering and the latitude here at Occator
Crater, the domes get a peak illumination
of 10,000 Lux.
A lux, one lumen per square meter, is how
bright stuff is in the visible range of light,
which is more or less the one plants use,
even though they do best with boosts to red
light.
Very approximately, one Watt per square meter
of visible light is 125 lux, and it’s about
what we find comfortably bright indoor lighting.
Plants fall into four loose lighting types,
low, medium, high, and very high.
They can often live, but be slow growing and
weak, at as little as 10% of their preferred
lighting, so you can grow anything under the
sunlight anywhere in the Belt, even its outer
reaches.
However many hardly need that much light.
Low light plants are 500-2500 Lux, Medium
is 2500-10,000, high is 10-20,000, and very
high is 20-50,000.
Here at Ceres, in the middle belt, any of
the first three categories do just fine, and
the very high category can be accommodated
by just having some LED lights in the Red
range boosting things a bit.
The domes are very insulated to keep heat
in because it’s still quite cold here and
we need to domes warm.
Plants tend to like it warmer than people
too, so every insulation trick has been used
to cut down on the energy needed.
Occator’s a big company, the biggest located
only in the Belt, but still not big and rich
enough to afford a fusion reactor, in these
early days of colonization.
So they use fission and solar, and have big
pipes running around the crater carrying steam
off from the reactors and running back through
when it condenses back to water.
This helps warm the domes.
Some of that power runs mineral processing
and manufacturing, some supplemental red lighting
for the growth domes, some for human comforts,
but a lot is for the “Big Fettling Gun”,
a mass driver stretching around the crater
rim wall that smaller ships can race around
and get some speed up to launch into space.
Racing around that, clutching on to a small
but sturdy rail, they can build up to 1400
meters per second at 4 gees of acceleration
before letting go to sail off around the belt.
We ask a technician why it’s called the
“Big Fettling Gun”.
He replies that fettling is trimming the rough
edges off a piece of metal, or in this case,
a spacecraft.
If the craft is falling apart or things aren’t
strapped down, the crew finds that out the
hard way when they get slung.
That and the abbreviation, BFG, he smirks.
Another of our companions is going to work
on the launcher, and tells us how much fuel
it saves.
Big ships, like the one we came in on, with
their own reactors, don’t use it or need
to, but for small ships or drones it’s a
big deal.
One of our other companions is here to work
in the entertainment industry, and that’s
a big industry here too.
Of course all the TV and virtual reality comes
straight from Earth, other than the Belt News
Network, but there’s a lot of call for recreation.
Tourism from Earth isn’t too common, but
folks spend a lot of time cramped on board
ships, and often come home to Ceres with lots
of money to spend on leave.
Such services vary a lot, from the cheap to
the expensive, the wholesome to the downright
indecent.
If you’ve seen one extraterrestrial entertainment
precinct, you’ve seen them all and we’re
neither much interested in that and nor is
our meager bank balance.
And that is a key point, most of our companions
are planning on living here.
Out of the whole arriving group, we seem to
be the only miner, although even most of the
miners already in the belt live here when
they’re not out prospecting and mining.
One of companions objects, and says she’s
going to be in mining too, just here on Ceres.
But she doesn’t mean mining the dwarf planet
itself, though that’s a common enough occupation.
She runs drones.
Small packages of not much more than some
sensors and guidance.
They fly off, make a close pass on an asteroid,
take some readings and photos, and do a small
course correction to the next one.
The thing about the Belt is that everything
is sort of meandering around on its own trajectory,
and except for the asteroid families that
tend to huddle up a bit, your neighbors are
constantly changing.
Not everything orbits on the same path or
period so it is a big ever-shifting cloud.
If one asteroid gets mined out near Ceres,
another will eventually enter the area too.
She’ll be keeping track of hundreds of drones,
and doing first analysis for signs of a rich
strike.
Our bank account is mighty thin, but we still
make sure to buy her a drink before heading
off to our temporary quarters here.
That, and most areas meant for people, are
deep underground, and we’ll be staying in
a cheap small rotating cylinder block with
marginal gravity and where the floor isn’t
quite lined up with the direction of that
gravity.
It’s minor, but when we spill a glass of
juice we can watch the puddle creep under
our bed.
Standing up in a hurry or moving quickly are
also nauseating experiences as the changes
in perceived gravity are easily picked up
by our inner ear.
We decide that we’ll want to upgrade to
some place nicer as soon as possible.
For the moment our goal is to get on board
a mining ship, and it doesn’t take us long
to find where the crews hang out when on shore
leave.
Unsurprisingly, it is in the less wholesome
and more expensive portions of the station.
The crews are easy to spot because a lot of
them sport precious metals as jewelry.
Out here mining for gold and platinum, apparently
the jewelry shows one is a miner and a successful
one will sport a lot of bling.
We figured a lot of openings would be free,
from folks coming home after making their
fortune, but to our surprise, not so much.
Many inquiries we make are waved aside by
miners trying to unwind after long stints
in space and not wanting to talk business.
Especially the ones from crews who just struck
a big find, and are not yet interested in
looking for the next.
We thought these would have plenty of open
slots, folks heading home, but we start noticing
that when we say home, most think you’re
referring to their place here in Occator,
not Earth.
A ride to Earth takes a long time, costs a
lot of money, and luxuries are getting more
common here, for those who can afford them.
Many see no reason to return to Earth.
Most of the folks on Ceres aren’t miners,
they work in other trades and provide other
services, but miners do seem to be the default
job here, and again are easy to spot by all
the bling they wear.
After a week, we have reached a dangerously
low bank balance.
We finally find a ship’s captain who is
almost willing to bring us on board but declines.
Fortunately for us, our friend from the drone
department is in a celebratory mood from finding
a pair of nice promising strikes, and lets
us know about one she forgot to record, a
smaller one that could be chalked up to a
distraction.
It turns out, this sort of thing is fairly
common here in Occator, and she agrees to
give the captain coordinates for it in exchange
for some reciprocation.
We sigh a bit, disappointed that people are
people everywhere, even here on the hopeful
frontier of humanity, but we’re not going
to complain, it got us a slot on the ship
and a share of the claim.
No pay though, just room and board and a share,
a historical common practice.
We head out, and our ship is a decent-sized
one, home to a dozen crew, of which we are
the most junior and unsurprisingly stuck with
the least fun jobs.
We also assumed spaceships would be a lot
nicer and more high-tech, and the ship we
came out on was a bit of a let-down but the
mining vessel, the good ship Rockhopper, looks
like it was clapped together in someone’s
garage.
One upside about moving around the Belt is
it doesn’t take the cream of the crop to
design, build, or maintain a ship meant for
use only in the Belt.
It doesn’t have or need any fission reactor,
we’ll buy fuel here on Ceres where it’s
made, along with most of our supplies.
But first we have to buy mining rights on
the small metallic asteroid a week’s travel
away.
We will be doing all that through Occator
company, but the rights are actually held
back on Earth.
Some bizarre and labyrinthine treaty that
requires a fee and a share of any spoils that
gets divided up by all the countries back
on Earth.
So we pray to whatever mining gods might be
listening that Rockhopper is stronger than
it looks as we go off, whirling around on
Rockhopper in Occator Crater’s Big Fettling
Gun.
Mercifully, we survive with a few metallic
groans and bits of equipment that haven’t
been properly stowed smacking into the bulkheads,
but we’re off to space.
Quarters are cramped, nothing seems clean,
and the food is all packaged stuff because
the ship is too small to bother with spin-gravity
or its own hydroponics.
The captain says nicer ships have extending
sections that can provide gravity during flights
or when the ship settles into an asteroid
to mine, but not the Rockhopper, which literally
has duct tape holding components together.
But we do get there and shoot a bunch of harpoons
into the asteroid and winch the ship up against
it, inside a nice crater next to our find.
We don’t walk out, because there’s just
no gravity, and because we have our own drones
to fly over and look.
It is a good chunk of minerals, rich in gold,
and when we start going EVA and poking around,
we find there’s tons of it deeper down.
Indeed there’s more than we have fuel to
refine down and send back to Earth directly,
or take on board the ship to fly back.
The captain decides that in order to find
out just how much there is, we’ll do some
mining and refining.
We’re are going to settle in for a while,
and decide to erect a dome over the ship so
we pop up an inflatable dome.
The nice thing about micro-gravity is even
a thin sheet of plastic won’t break under
the weight of whole boulders.
We pressurize that area so we can work without
suits, and get to work.
As an added precaution against micro-meteor
strikes, we cover the plastic in pykrete,
and then cover it more with soil we dig up.
Pykrete is basically frozen water plus some
fibrous material.
It’s sturdy enough to hold air in, and being
opaque makes it hard for anyone to see what
we’ve found.
Pykrete’s handy stuff in space, it’s much
tougher than ice, and while not permanent,
it’s easy to make and lasts more than enough
time for what we need it for.
We have a pod on board and we fuel it up and
send it to Earth on the slowest trajectory.
The captain says it’s already sold.
Not at a great price though, the company buying
is getting a good price because it won’t
get home for years, and it has security and
fraud concerns.
The money is handy though because it can get
a remote cargo pod sent off to us with some
supplies and fuel so we can keep working.
It doesn’t take much fuel to go from the
Belt to Earth’s orbit, especially if you
don’t mind it taking years, and precious
metals on their way are almost as valuable
as ones already in your vaults.
We never do finish though, once the ship is
loaded to capacity we head back.
Same as we sold the gold we’d refined years
before it will get home, the captain sells
the whole asteroid claim, with its documented
mineral wealth, and notes that more undocumented
materials may be there too.
We didn’t get as much as if we worked it
ourselves, but we also don’t have to worry
about guarding it from claim jumpers or outright
pirates.
Stealth may be impossible in space, but that
only applies to the ability to actually hide,
not to someone bribing the folks who watch
claims not to alert us and Occator on Ceres
is not the most honorable place.
Its rivals in other craters or other major
asteroids probably aren’t any better.
Back on Occator Station, we are very wealthy
now.
You might normally go many missions without
finding a good strike, even with probes doing
advanced looks, but all it takes is one good
one to make you phenomenally rich.
Even after the loss from selling most of it
at a fraction of its real value, even after
the bribes and taxes, and even being the junior-most
crewmember with the smallest share, we are
quite rich and can easily afford a nice fast
trip home to Earth.
But the next one leaving isn’t for a few
days and we’ve barely been here a couple
months, only a week on Ceres and several on
the Rockhopper.
We spent months getting out here.
There’s a lot going on here so we just can’t
bring ourselves to leave yet.
No rush, we’ll take another ship back.
We’re getting a bit restless and thinking
about leaving again when we bump into the
captain, who is not going home and in fact
buying a new and nicer ship, to be christened
the Lucky Strike.
He invites us to join the crew with a bigger
share, nicer quarters, and more seniority
and we do, and next thing we know it’s been
a few years and while we’ve never had another
strike like the first one, we’ve done pretty
well down the years and eventually buy our
own ship to captain, which we dub the Rockhopper
2, the original long since sold for scrap
after it finally broke apart during a BFG
sling.
We’ve never gone home to Earth, but Ceres
is home now, and indeed we’ve got a place
there we stay when not out prospecting, we
even bought a share in our friends expanding
blueberry business.
Ceres is growing quite well and more people
come in every day.
What’s interesting is that more and more
folks are just stopping in for a while to
buy supplies and refuel for elsewhere in the
Belt or the long haul to new colonies on Jupiter’s
moons.
We bump into one Traveller en route to Callisto
and after talking to them we start seeing
whole new possibilities for the Belt.
All those asteroids being mined out mostly
leave some sort of infrastructure in place.
Folks move on when the main mineral strike
gets dug out but a lot of folks are increasingly
setting up protracted operations on these.
What’s more, it’s always handy to have
smaller outposts around, and while there’s
a lot of fast money on shipping precious metals
back to Earth, a lot more folks are going
into mining and manufacture of more mundane
stuff, and agriculture.
Many of those old mining sites are getting
small cylinder habs installed in them and
becoming small communities.
They’re close enough to get quick signals
back to Ceres, or even Earth, but they can’t
get a ship to Ceres or one of the other major
asteroid colonies like Vesta fast.
A ship carrying goods, just a remote drone
in many cases, can get supplies to them though,
and Occator is increasingly becoming a company
involved in shipping goods out to those, the
Amazon of the Asteroid Belt.
At first we wonder how long before such things
drop off, but even ignoring that vast supplies
of valuable minerals lie still untouched out
there, we realize that even though the Earth
has thousands of times the mass of the whole
Belt, it actually hasn’t got nearly as much
living area.
So, using our wealth, and our contacts with
other miners, we open a new business, buying
up asteroids with depleted excavated deep
mines.
Folks are bemused.
Why would you buy up depleted claims?
We explain that one little asteroid only a
kilometer across, of which there are nearly
a million, can house a smaller O’Neill Cylinder.
Those, even the smaller versions, can house
tens of thousands of people easily.
With a million such asteroids each supporting
a cylinder habitat inside them each housing
tens of thousands, or tens of billions of
people total, versus seven billion back on
Earth.
Much of the hard work has already been done
for us because the miners subtracted material
from inside the asteroid, mined it out and
without much more work we are now putting
hollow cylinders in it.
We’re not shipping most of that mass anywhere.
We can make a very large cylinder, or network
of cylinders, inside an asteroid that’s
been slowly hollowed out during mining.
All we need to do is dump the spill outside
of it.
A typical kilometer-diameter asteroid contains
around a gigaton, enough raw material for
a full-sized O’Neill Cylinder, the kind
8 kilometers across and 32 kilometers long,
and able to house a million people comfortably,
albeit that cylinder would be thinner than
I’d like, but protected by the walls of
the asteroid from radiation and meteor strikes.
While a majority of asteroids are in this
size range, the majority of the raw materials
in the Belt are not.
You could get a good billion full-sized O’Neill
Cylinders out there each with a million folks.
That’s a Quadrillion people, and that’s
without stretching any comforts or pushing
the envelope on food production.
You don’t have to bring those any closer
to the Sun either, even sunlight can be concentrated
by having mirrors nearby, which would be quite
thin, though you could, bring them either
nearer to Earth or Mars or in-between them.
See that episode, O’Neill Cylinders, for
more discussion on the topic.
Others are discussing other options for the
Belt.
They want to move asteroids, and bring them
or megastructures made from them nearer Earth.
Another idea is to bring Ceres closer to Mars,
much closer than our own Moon is to Earth
but still well above where you’d be keeping
Martian Orbital Infrastructure, even long
space elevators.
That might be pretty, Mars’s own moons being
rather tiny and uninteresting, but more importantly
could be used to generate tidal forces and
maybe get the inner core of Mars spinning
up again for a decent magnetosphere and warm
the place up a bit to release some much needed
gases into the atmosphere.
This is quite a big project compared to our
plans but small compared to many we’ve discussed
on this channel.
As an aside, it would be a bit silly for me
to say it’s hard to move something just
a percent of a percent of Earth’s mass around
when we’ve discussed moving Earth or even
the whole solar system before.
But discussing building big habitats inside
asteroids or moving them large distances brings
up the notion of interstellar travel too.
Any good space station can be made a spaceship
too, and the Belt is a good place to make
spaceships at.
Although more so, since while the Belt is
far from the Sun, a fairly developed asteroid
colony will likely have lasers for pushing
ships around inside the Belt all over the
place, not mention dealing with debris hazards
and meteors, and lasers are a nice way to
give a ship some free speed without the mass
of extra fuel.
We’ll be talking about that more in next
week’s episode as we get into generation
ships, vessels meant for getting us out to
the stars, something we’ll be looking at
a lot in the coming months.
But before we can settle other star systems,
we need to settle our own first, and the Asteroid
Belt is likely to be a big factor, and Ceres
is probably the best focalpoint for doing
that.
For our aspiring asteroid miner on their way
to Ceres, the cheapest way will always be
by the Interplanetary Transport Network, a
series of slow but low energy transfer maneuvers
that are essentially the trade winds and currents
of the solar system.
The key to understanding those is the Hohmann
Transfer Orbit, and if you want to learn more
about that, then I recommend that you check
out Brilliant.org.
You learn about the physics by breaking the
problem down into relevant concepts, thinking
clearly through each part, and then building
it back up to the conclusion.
This approach to problem solving is extremely
crucial for the asteroid miner, as it allows
them to figure out what to do when faced with
novel situations in the mining and O'Neill
Cylinder business.
If you want to learn how to quickly understand
the depths of everything an asteroid miner
would need to know, then go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription.
That's the subscription I've been using to
build up my problem solving skills.
As mentioned, we’ll be discussing Generation
Ships a lot for the next few months and we’ll
be beginning next week with an overview of
the basic topics and talking about the key
aspects of how to manufacture them and why
you might use this approach over some other
approaches for settling the galaxy, along
with looking at some fictional examples of
them, such as our Book of the Month, Arthur
C. Clarke’s classic novel, Rendezvous with
Rama, which is a type of O’Neill cylinder
itself.
The week after that we’ll be teaming up
again with John Michael Godier for a two-part
look at what the galaxy might be like after
we colonized it, if we encountered no aliens
as we colonized the galaxy, or at least no
civilizations that naturally occurred on their
own.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please like
it and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
