Good Afternoon and welcome to an extra edition of 
Scifi Sunday featuring our 4-part Coexistence with  
Aliens series originally recorded and produced for 
Nebula in 2019 and 20, and has never before been  
seen on Youtube or any of our other platforms. As 
channel regulars know, we had our end of the month  
Livestream Q&A scheduled for next weekend, then 
had to reschedule it to this weekend, May 21st,  
so I could co-host the International 
Space Development Conference.
 
However I’ve just had a minor surgery on my 
nose and tongue and as you can probably tell,  
my voice is still recovering and not ready for 
an hour of live Q&A. Fortunately our 4-part  
Coexistence with Alien series has a combined run 
time of just over an hour, so it seemed a great  
replacement, and will cover a number of ways we 
might coexist with aliens, beginning with Alien  
Xenopsychology in part 1, and moving on to look 
at trade, war, and alliance in parts 2, 3, and 4.
 
And without further ado, 
let’s get started!
 
How do you greet an alien visitor and insure  
you don’t create an interstellar 
diplomatic incident, or worse?
 
The Universe is an immense and ancient place, 
filled with billions of trillions of stars,  
many of which may have hosted life and have 
given rise to civilizations. If that’s so,  
they seem a quiet bunch thus far, but presumably 
there would come a time when we’d talk to them  
and interact with them and eventually, 
hopefully, come to coexist with them.  
Of course coexistence is a vague term, it might 
mean ignoring each other or going to war, it might  
mean trade, friendship or alliances, and we’ll 
examine those aspects throughout this series.
 
It’s fun to contemplate meeting and 
getting to know alien civilizations,  
but from a realistic standpoint the 
level of cooperation and friendship,  
and even romantic love that we see in science 
fiction is probably not too realistic and we’ll be  
looking at ‘why not?’ along with how such efforts 
at coexistence might go, from the physiological  
to cosmological, and today the psychological.
It’s easy to look at humanity’s past and the  
meetings of our scattered tribes and use 
them as an analogy, but fundamentally all  
humans have a fairly shared psychology arising 
largely from a near-identical physiology. Yet  
even there we see many differences arising from 
different traditions of each place and time,  
things which do not cross cultural boundaries. 
Unlike most animals, human behavior is far more  
learned and this can give rise to major 
alterations in behavior and life focus.
 
How much different is a mind evolved under an 
alien sun, one that might not even use the same  
core biology? Let’s consider a hypothetical case, 
a species that was nearly the same as us in every  
way, except their biology tended to breakdown, in 
a very short window of time. Everybody died at 72,  
plus or minus a year at most, barring accident 
or illness. Consider the huge impact that would  
tend to have on their view of death. They might 
break their whole lives into very precise periods,  
say 6 life phases of 12 years each, child 
till 12, young adult till 24, and so on,  
get married in your 24th year, never marry anyone 
more than a year older or younger than you since  
you’d be guaranteed to see the one outlive the 
other. They might be ultra-regimented about time  
and calendar and obsessed about not wasting 
time or being late, just from that one minor  
thing. They might abhor any efforts at medicine 
to extend life beyond that, viewing it as cheating  
fate or stealing from future generations. 
All from that one minor difference with us.
 
And it would be beyond peculiar for us to 
meet anyone that like us in mind or body.  
Think how different a civilization would be 
if their children reached physical maturity  
in just 2 or 3 years, more in keeping with other 
mammals of human size. Would such a species be  
very likely to develop concepts like marriage or 
children going to school or close family ties?
 
Something as minor as being monochromatic in 
vision, just seeing the world in black and white,  
or having much larger ears that could rotate 
like a cats to detect sound directions better  
could hugely impact their development 
of language or art or day to day life.  
On the other end of things, we don’t know that 
DNA is the only way to do carbon-based life,  
there are after all more than a dozen other 
amino acids we use besides the 4 in DNA and RNA,  
which uses 4 too, but swaps out thymine for uracil 
and is single stranded rather than double. There  
are also far more amino acids than we use. And 
that’s even assuming you have to use amino acids  
for your biological construction blueprints, 
or that life even needs to be carbon based. 
 
Something silicon based might evolve natural 
semiconductors that served as nerves and  
neurons. They might be small and short-lived 
but think exceedingly fast, experiencing very  
long subjective lifespans of millennia packed 
into mere months. Similarly, humans are in  
many ways a colony organism, we contain as many 
bacteria as human cells in our bodies, and most  
of the latter are simple blood cells. Our other 
cells run on mitochondria as a power source and  
those are basically a symbiotic life form living 
inside us. We could see brains develop from more  
overtly colonial organisms, like a neural network 
composed of insects or microorganisms in a hive  
that simply replicated neurons by their day to day 
motion and actions. Alastair Reynolds contemplates  
such a mind, a glacier as a brain, whose neurons 
are composed of little worms burrowing around  
that glacier, in his short story Glacial.
Such a mind might exist for millennia while  
experiencing only days of time as you and I would 
view it, counting actual days as eyeblinks and  
years as breaths. It would also seem to be without 
any means of controlling the world around it,  
and its senses might be composed only 
of light and temperature changes.
 
So too, day length and year length are big 
factors in how we behave, and many worlds  
with life might be tidally locked to their 
Sun, as we expect for many red dwarf stars,  
the most common type of star. Those would 
experience perpetual light on one side and  
perpetual dark on the other, or have years 
of mere weeks around such small stars or many  
years around brighter and shorter lived stars.
In this respect, the very notion of anything  
approaching human psychology being possessed 
by aliens seems almost ridiculous. And yet,  
for all those differences there are some traits we 
could expect to be very common if not universal. 
 
In the 1995 science fiction novel “The Killing 
Star”, the authors suggest three such rules we’d  
expect to be true of all intelligent aliens:
Rule 1. The Aliens will believe their survival  
is more important than our survival.
Rule 2. Wimps don't become top dogs.
 
Rule 3. Aliens will assume that the 
first two rules apply to us as well.
 
Or to clarify, whether or not they are 
friendly folks who’d give you the shirt  
off their back or so hostile they try 
to wipe out all other life, they will  
still place their own existence above yours, as 
evolution will instill a survival imperative,  
it’s pretty much what it does. It also doesn’t 
produce wimps and they don’t get to be dominant  
over their planet to explore the galaxy beyond 
if they are. They’re not likely to be physically  
fragile but even if they are, they’ll be beyond 
deadly in the overall sense, same as humans are.  
Humans stand at the apex of a 4 billion year 
deep corpse pile, and everything else still  
alive and kicking in the modern era of this 
world is a sophisticated survival machine too.
 
So any aliens we meet are likely to 
be the same as us in this regard,  
very good at surviving and in a way that lets 
them control their world, not just hide, flee,  
or defend from threats but proactively deal 
with them. They will also assume everyone they  
meet out in the galaxy probably will be too. 
Exceptions to that ought to be rare at best,  
an example might be that glacier-mind I 
mentioned or some monoculture world where  
some single algae brain developed across 
the whole planet. Though even that is very  
dubious for becoming intelligent let alone 
technological as there’s no predator-prey  
cycles driving improvements and adaptations to 
adaptations. No biological arms race, as it were,  
pushing you toward higher intelligence.
Also, even if you have such intelligence,  
it doesn’t necessarily result in technology 
or civilizations. Those 3 rules of “The  
Killing Star” can probably be added to with “Any 
technological civilization must possess and value  
curiosity” and “Civilizations can only arise where 
social behavior and cooperation are common”.
 
As we looked at in our Rare Intelligence and 
Rare Technology episodes, it wouldn’t seem very  
plausible you could develop advanced technology 
without critters who were willing and able to  
work together a lot, and who could specialize 
in various tasks. A blacksmith can’t eat coal  
or iron ore and needs to be able to trust his 
neighbors to provide those to him and give or  
trade him food and other things for his work, 
so he can focus on being a good blacksmith. 
 
What’s more, this is likely to also require at 
least some acceptance of different worldviews.  
Our work shapes our thinking on life and our day 
to day approach to life, a farmer and blacksmith  
will inevitably have different outlooks in life 
and need to be able to coexist in spite of those.  
You also can only create and innovate 
with not just a curious mind but a certain  
tolerance of such curious folks playing 
around with new and strange concepts. 
 
You can also only develop civilizations with 
a capacity for long range foresight and a  
willingness to sacrifice for the future, 
to invest effort into planting crops you  
won’t eat for a year or raise apprentices in 
your craft who won’t be skilled for years.
 
Which strongly implies any such civilization is 
going to have concepts like friendship, diplomacy,  
family, self-sacrifice, tolerance, 
curiosity, a value for knowledge,  
and a notion of risk-taking and long-term 
planning. Or close analogies there too. 
 
If you encounter an alien ship, you can 
assume they don’t want to be blown up,  
that they will be curious about 
you, that they will be willing  
to take at least some small risk to 
satisfy their curiosity and so on.  
They’ll be ready to defend themselves and quite 
good at it, but they’ll also have an idea that  
not everyone thinks quite like them and a basic 
willingness to tolerate that, even if it might be  
much less tolerant than we are. There should be 
at least some basic potential for conversation.
 
There may be exceptions, we can almost always 
contrive some scenario that would result in a  
species lacking these traits, but they are likely 
to be the exception not the norm. And again,  
you don’t want to assume this manifests 
itself in a very human way. Their concept  
of tolerance might be so narrow the worst and 
most oppressive orthodoxies of human history  
might call them narrow-minded. They might be 
curious but ultra-cautious compared to us,  
so that every new technology or cultural change 
gets proofed and pondered by committees over  
centuries, or they might be so anarchic that they 
barely hold together as a cohesive civilization,  
or are hyper-aggressive or are aggressive but 
just aren’t very violent by nature to their own.
 
Humans have a reputation among humans as 
being rather cruel compared to animals,  
though I’m never clear why, we aren’t the only 
critters that kill our own, not even vaguely,  
and we do work with other animals, often keeping 
them as pets and effective family members,  
not something too common in the animal kingdom. 
That might be a rarity among aliens too, though  
it might not be, our capacity for doing that, 
keepings cats and dogs around for vermin control  
and others as livestock or work animals was a 
big factor in how our civilization was shaped and  
maybe even in allowing a civilization to emerge.
It is worth noting that we can get along quite  
well with other mammals, many of whom are millions 
of generations removed from us biologically and  
psychologically. An alien is even further removed 
from us biologically, less our kin than a tree  
is or the Ebola Virus, so that may be an even 
bigger gap to cover in coexistence with them,  
but they also might be much closer to us 
psychologically than a cat or dog too,  
just from those shared traits probably necessary 
to become a technological civilization.
 
Of course that might still result in an overall 
massive gap, and also only covers civilizations,  
as opposed to trying to make contact with some 
sentient tree on another world. We also can’t  
assume brain architecture is even vaguely the 
same. We use a species survival tactic of few  
young, and heavy time and resource investment into 
those young, as mammals and especially as humans,  
since it takes decades to create a fully developed 
human in mind and body. A species which was born  
able to survive on its own and simply kept 
growing in size and brain complexity as it  
aged wouldn’t necessarily need anything like a 
family structure or a small number of offspring. 
 
They might be born in packs of thousands of 
eggs and on average only one of them even got  
to human toddler levels. That sort of thing 
might make a species that was very nice to  
adults but viewed newborn children as little 
more than a nuisance. It is worth noting that  
human women are born with several million eggs 
and human men will produce billions of sperm  
over their lifetime, and we generally don’t 
place any value on those as individuals. 
 
Now it probably wouldn’t be hard to convince such 
aliens that casually shooting one of our kids,  
of which we have few, was not a proper 
response if one entered a room causing  
antics and irritating that alien, but that sort 
of thing can have wider effects too. They might  
regard small colonies growing on border worlds 
as fair game and not even get why we objected  
when they burned one to the ground and started 
colonizing it themselves, and be outraged that we  
even sent them a note complaining about it, all 
while being very polite and sincerely friendly  
to us in every other way, freely sharing 
technology and offering favorable trade.
 
It’s hard to even consider what some 
other biologies might produce, you might  
get creatures who had distributed brains around 
their skin and communicated by licking, gnawing,  
or consuming each others brain matter, and ate 
your ambassador then sent you an angry note  
about how unfriendly and uncommunicative 
he was. Or who were more of hive mind,  
maybe even a cross-species one, and 
just didn’t get why you were offended  
they killed some of your explorers or absorbed 
one of your colonies into their collective.
 
We see something like that in Orson Scott Card’s 
classic Ender’s Game novel and the sequels. There  
we get offered various levels of otherness, or 
alien, based off Norse terms. The Utlanning,  
or Otherlander, who would be basically 
be human but of a neighboring place,  
the easiest one to communicate with.
Then we have the Framling, the stranger  
we recognize as human but of another world, or 
perhaps time, like speaking to someone from, say,  
an ancient hunter-gather tribe. Then the first 
true alien, the Raman, someone we consider human  
but of a different species, arguably the way 
most aliens in science fiction are portrayed  
to us as, and would probably include anything 
we’d regard as a technological civilization. 
 
Then the Varelse, the true alien, 
which includes all the animals,  
for with whom no conversation is possible. They 
live, but we cannot guess what purposes or causes  
make them act. They might be intelligent, they 
might be self-aware, but we cannot know it,  
or do not know it yet. That intelligent glacier 
example from earlier might be such a case.  
Card also offers us the Djur, a marauding and 
unreasoning threat, which might be something  
like a self-replicating probe that simply tears 
everything in its path apart for no clear reason.
 
As we continue the series, and try to look at 
major methods of coexistence, from trade to war,  
we’ll try to contemplate how we might deal with 
examples of each for now. For the moment though,  
the big thing to keep in mind is that while 
aliens might overlap with us in many respects,  
like being reasonable and curious, so that 
communication and shared goals may often  
be possible, they will be different. Each such 
species will need a totally different approach  
and often many different ones for the same species 
as they splinter and diverge among the stars.
 
Fundamentally an alien mind 
is exactly that… alien. 
 
In the future we may meet alien civilizations. If 
so, we’ll have a lot of new ideas and challenges  
to ponder, and doubtless one of those 
will be how to make some money off them.
 
In our previous episode in the series, Coexistence 
with Aliens: Xenopsychology, we looked at some of  
the difficulties we might have establishing 
a basic understanding of what motivates an  
alien civilization and of what we might expect to 
have in common with them too. We noted there that  
they’d generally have the same basic biological 
impulses as us and the other sophisticated life  
forms on Earth, such as a desire to survive 
individually or as a species, and that  
they’d have developed some skill at doing so.
We also noted that they’d probably be curious  
by nature and social critters like us, since 
those might be prerequisites for developing a  
technological civilization, but that’s less 
certain and also pretty broad. For them,  
social skills and friendships and family might 
be anything from some insect like hive mind to  
some loose agreement not to murder each other at 
certain times and places designated for mating,  
trade, and storytelling, but to otherwise go 
ahead and fall on each other at the slightest  
sign of weakness or opportunity like normal.
It doesn’t really have to be sane or pleasant by  
our standards, it just has to produce a plausible 
scenario in which a species could be intelligent  
and not go extinct while developing advanced 
technology. They presumably need things from  
each other though and that implies that beyond 
a basic curiosity and social capacity, they  
have to have some concept for trade and exchange.
Which of course is our focus for today.  
First we need to ask what we might actually trade 
or exchange with them. And Second, if their notion  
of exchanging things is going to be even vaguely 
compatible with our concept of trade, or for  
that matter if our current concepts of trade and 
economics will apply to us in the future either.
 
It’s a popular notion, probably best known from 
Star Trek, that in the future we might not have  
money, though I tend to be rather skeptical about 
that and we discussed why in our Post-Scarcity  
series. However, same as we generally don’t pay 
for air or sunlight or buy water or dirt the  
same way we do most widgets, some things might 
be so abundant in the future they just really  
aren’t for sale except in atypical cases. There’s 
some precedent for that, most of us on the older  
side remember when local phone calls were free 
and long distance calls were quite expensive,  
and people had to call collect if they didn’t 
have quarters for the payphone or were borrowing  
someone’s phone because their car broke down and 
they needed to knock on someone’s door and beg to  
make a call. Needless to say those days are gone, 
you just don’t pay for phone calls the same way.
 
So there might be many things like that in 
the future, effectively as free as sunlight.  
Amusingly, sunlight might become something 
you have to buy or rent if we shift over to  
a solar economy, especially a true solar 
economy, a Dyson Sphere or Dyson Swarm,  
a collection of solar panels or space 
habitats that fully englobes a star,  
offering a billion times the energy and 
potential living area that Earth has.  
We often assume this is the ultimate fate of any 
star system colonized by us or another intelligent  
species, and indeed one of the reasons I’m 
often skeptical about us encountering any  
alien civilizations is that nobody seems to be 
building these Dyson Swarms everywhere, as we’d  
tend to expect, and that expectation is what we 
call the Dyson Dilemma of the Fermi Paradox.
 
Such structures take a lot of raw material 
to build too, especially if you want big  
artificial living habitats rather than 
thin solar panels, and acquiring that raw  
material might be a big source of trade in the 
future, potentially even between solar systems.
 
Even if humanity continues to operate using 
money,, that doesn’t mean an alien species  
would. A hive mind doesn’t need money to operate 
anymore than you or I do, when dealing only with  
ourselves. My hand rarely demands payment from 
my brain for services rendered, nor does my brain  
send out bills for consultation fees or analysis 
to my nose, eyes, or ears. All of my parts just  
do their jobs according to their ability and 
take resources according to their needs.
 
So too, a hive mind or similarly networked 
intelligence might not have any notion for trade.  
In Orson Scott Card’s classic Ender’s Game, the 
Buggers innocently did terrible things to humans  
because they didn't comprehend non-hive minds 
and hence didn't understand how their actions,  
such as tearing living people to pieces, would be 
understood. So it’s unlikely the hive would easily  
understand the concept of “others” let alone the 
possibility of exchanging resources with others.  
But it will have a notion of supply and exchange, 
as it knows its components need various things,  
likely often not the same things, and it 
probably knows what investment is too. A  
hive mind that does farming still knows it 
needs to save some seeds to plant next year  
and that if it wants to grow trees for lumber, or 
giant alien mushrooms, it needs to invest effort  
into it and harvest it at the optimal time.
That’s another thing we’d expect would probably  
be universal to intelligent aliens, a concept 
of patience and investment or sacrifice for the  
future, delayed gratification, to reap a bigger 
reward later. They’ll also need some concept of  
risk management, because they’ll have crops 
burned or blown down or diseased or so on. 
 
But still fertilizing its crops 
and feeding its foodstock animals  
might be a hive minds nearest concept to 
trade, and that might not be a basis for  
forming mutually satisfactory trade relations.
If it’s not a hive mind they’re likely to have  
some greater notion of give and take, to form a 
sounder basis of trade. It’s also rather debatable  
if you could ever have a singular linked hive 
mind over a single planet, let alone interstellar  
distances without some means of faster than 
light travel or communication, which would imply  
that other than maybe a few scattered worlds or 
systems where such a hive mind species might have  
developed, everybody moving and shaking around 
the galaxy ought to have a notion of trade. 
 
Of course, that might be rather coercive or 
piratic too. “Give us what we want or we’ll  
beat you up and take it anyway” is a fairly 
time-honored means of exchange in Earth’s  
own history, so we should assume it’s plausible 
in spacefaring civilizations too, and of course  
this series isn’t just interested in space 
faring civilizations, just aliens in general,  
so we might want to be trading with some 
planet-bound hive mind or world of thugs.
 
Especially since trade is pretty ambiguous. For 
such a thug-empire, ‘give us what we want or else’  
is still trade, even if we’d normally call that 
tribute or taxation. If we opened communication  
with such a species and sent them offers of trade, 
we might assume the long delay was them trying to  
figure out our language when it was really just 
them being confused and afraid of some trap,  
wondering why we just sent them an 
inventory of stuff for them to take.
 
This brings us back though to asking what 
kind of stuff they’d actually want. I mean  
if someone comes and raids your village and 
demands you give them everything you’ve got,  
it’s implied they mean everything they consider 
valuable. They’re not really interested in  
hauling back the dirt from your farm fields 
or the air and sunlight hitting those fields.
 
Space travel is not cheap, especially interstellar 
travel, and what would be economical to move  
between stars would vary a lot on not just 
what you value but what you can economically  
transport home. By default your best interstellar 
trade commodity is likely to be information,  
as that can be sent at light speed fairly 
cheaply even over galactic distances.
 
But what sort of information? When we discuss 
interstellar trade between human colonies we  
can take for granted that transmissions would 
include everything from valuable science and  
device schematics to letters from old friends and 
family to arts and entertainment. Aliens might  
have some interest in our art, but they might not, 
and even if they do its likely to be mostly for  
novelty value. Though to be fair, in high-tech 
post-scarcity civilizations, novelty is likely  
to be one of the more precious commodities.
Two roughly technologically equal civilizations  
probably would have a lot of science to share, 
but if they’re not fairly on par, odds are one  
of them wants that science from the other and 
not vice-versa. Ancient Human Civilizations have  
plenty of knowledge we’d value, but their opinions 
on math and science are certainly not among those.  
A lot of technology wouldn’t be very interesting 
either, in terms of day-to-day devices, you don’t  
care about the newest model of smartphone 
if you’re a species that has no eyeballs or  
communicates by directing scented gases at one 
another from any of their various orifices.
 
I personally would not be surprised if 
aliens, or future human civilizations,  
were pretty prone to hoarding and collecting 
like some hyper-intelligent packrat,  
so there could easily be a massive trade in random 
knick-knacks and junk between civilizations. One  
amusing constraint of advanced civilizations under 
known physics is that they mostly are limited by  
getting rid of waste heat of their civilizations 
so they can keep tons of stuff lying around just  
so long as it doesn’t require a lot of power 
and produce a lot waste heat to store it. 
 
Planets might slowly turn into many layers of 
dimly lit catacombs stuffed full of millions  
of years worth of collected antiquities 
because they don’t need to destroy them  
and are kind of attached to them, but 
they might be fine with trading them,  
they just don’t like throwing them in the garbage. 
Same as many a hoarder nowadays might be horrified  
to throw anything out, even a broken flyswatter 
in case they need a spare handle one day,  
but is all too content to sell, trade, loan, 
or gift even valuable things to others.
 
It’s an interesting reversal of the 
piratic or thug approach to trade,  
aliens who aren’t demanding stuff by coercion but 
happily dumping treasures on you just to get them  
out of their attic and basement without feeling 
like they were destroying something precious.  
Humorous notion but not necessarily unrealistic 
either. Many cities are overflowing with historic  
buildings that they can’t bring themselves to 
condemn and knock over, and are often glad when  
someone buys it while agreeing to maintain 
its historic nature or even when some random  
storm or fire knocks the thing over.
Odds are pretty good another common  
trait of advanced civilization will be 
a tendency to build stuff, value it,  
and like to maintain it and feel bad when it gets 
junked. If anything, especially if they are able  
to technologically extend their own lives, there’s 
probably a tendency for civilizations to get more  
obsessed with building projects, grand works or 
art or monuments, and trying to maintain them.  
Throw in potentially high-tech ultra-durable 
materials or self-repairing structures and  
long-colonized regions of the galaxy might start 
looking like some sort of hybrid of a museum,  
yard sale, and trash dump, full of alien traders 
just waiting to unload priceless memorabilia on  
any young new species they think might give it 
a good home and free up some space for them.
 
Of course what each species values, and is able 
to trade, will depend on their psychology and  
technology rather heavily, but some things might 
be fairly universal, especially if everyone’s been  
trading for a while and technology and 
science has gotten fairly evenly spread  
everywhere and stagnated on progress. It 
is after all entirely possible that all the  
major science and mysteries of the Universe 
get solved by each species before they even  
hit the galactic stage or not long after, so that 
there isn’t anything new to discover or invent.
 
Such being the case, there’s presumably 
still a good trade available in information,  
but again they really might not have much interest 
in other species’ art or entertainment or history  
or news and current events. Or they might have 
some but not really enough for major trade.
 
What about manufactured goods? Well especially 
as things like 3D printing improve, you’d not  
expect interstellar trade of manufactured 
goods to have much of a niche. Ditto stuff  
like food or luxury wines or crops, 
they’d be quite capable of replicating  
any planet’s specific lighting and climate, so 
if they wanted Oak or Cherry wood from Earth,  
because they like building from our 
trees rather than giant alien mushrooms,  
they’d just get the botanical data and some 
genetic samples, of that plant and any other  
organisms critical to growing it correctly, 
build a rotating habitat whose interior  
replicated good Earth forestland, and grow their 
own rather than ship lumber across the stars.
 
Of course you could have a luxury market, 
and quite a big one, for ‘authentic goods’,  
but probably not enough to support a major and 
robust interstellar trade network on its own.
 
That mostly just leaves us raw materials. However, 
while science fiction loves to come up with weird  
substances found only here or there, strange 
minerals or elements unique to some planet  
or star system, the Universe, while an awesome 
and huge place, is actually pretty boring and  
monotonous in that regard. While no two systems 
would ever have identical levels of abundance or  
concentration of any given element, or mineral, 
there really wouldn’t be many places that would  
be particularly short of any given raw material, 
and no one would likely have anything unique.
 
However, that doesn’t mean there wouldn’t 
be interstellar trade of raw materials. 
 
While at first stuff like ingots of iron or 
tanks of hydrogen might seem ridiculous things  
to ship between stars, being abundant pretty much 
everywhere, this may still be an area of large  
demand. For any empire into very big projects or 
growing their civilization around their homeworld  
or hub systems, there’s no such thing as enough. 
And even static civilizations might be interested  
in just storing raw materials for the long haul, 
as you can never recycle with perfect efficiency  
and they might be contemplating trying to 
stockpile enough to last for trillions of years,  
or even longer, as we’ve discussed in our 
Civilizations at the End of Time series.
 
It’s impossible to guess what might be 
wanted in trade between civilizations,  
and it would doubtless change from 
civilization to civilization and even  
inside each such civilization as they changed 
with time and had new interests or needs,  
but it does seem like there would probably 
be a desire and understanding of trade and  
exchange for most civilizations, so if we ever 
do run into any alien civilizations, we might  
be able to establish trade. Giving them what 
they want and getting what we want in return.
 
Though of course, they might figure it’s easier 
and cheaper to take it by force. And so might  
we. So we’ll contemplate the notion of going 
to war with aliens in our next episode.
 
Can the enemy of my enemy be an 
alien friend? What if my enemy is  
human? 
We tend  
to think of “coexistence” as peaceful 
coexistence. But there’s no getting around  
that war and conflict are parts of coexisting with 
others. If you invade a neighbor’s territory to  
seize a piece of it, you need a plan for what 
relationship you want to have with them after  
they acknowledge the territory as now yours. 
And if you outright conquer your neighbor,  
now you’re really in the thick of coexisting 
with them. Conflict is also often the driving  
force for separate groups to unify into a 
coalition or nation, either through their  
shared suffering as conquered subjects or their 
teaming up to defend against such an effort.
 
So we can’t ignore the topic when discussing 
how we might interact with aliens should we  
ever meet any. And we need to ask ourselves 
how we’d defend against an alien threat,  
or if we even could, as well as why such 
conflicts might occur and how they’d be fought.
 
If an alien armada showed up on our doorstep 
tomorrow we would be crushed like ants. The sorts  
of energy levels needed to move even a single 
small ship at even fairly slow interstellar speeds  
exceeds those we see in atomic weapons. True 
interstellar vessels that can reach high fractions  
of light speed and carry thousands of crew or 
colonists or soldiers can literally throw their  
garbage out of their ship before slowing down 
and watch it devastate an unprotected planet. 
 
Of course, that’s only in the here and now, 
and while we tend to assume conflicts will be  
pretty one-sided between stellar empires, as one 
would always be older and presumably bigger and  
more high-tech, that’s not necessarily so. While 
such a head start, possibly being on the galactic  
stage millions of years before anyone else, would 
mean you had an overwhelming advantage in numbers,  
that’s only true if you’re not only colonizing 
everything, but staying unified as you do it.  
Outside of science fiction, where 
faster than light travel is ubiquitous,  
we have no reason to think anyone will 
ever crack the light speed barrier. So  
keeping together a cohesive empire of all your 
colonies is a dubious proposition at best, even  
just those around the nearest neighboring stars.
We also shouldn’t assume technology and science  
is just some endless quest, always another 
major and mind-bending new discovery to find  
that itself spawns two more mysteries needing 
to be solved, like some sort of Mystery Hydra  
or fractal with ever-lower levels. It’s poetic to 
say the Universe is a place of infinite wonders,  
but all indications thus far is that it runs 
on fairly set and mundane rules. It’s entirely  
possible most civilizations figure out all 
those physical laws long before journeying out  
from their homeworld in force, and have started 
plateauing out on technological advancement.
 
Assuming that all to be the case, alien 
civilizations might very well discover they  
have parity in both technology and numbers 
in a conflict. Even really big empires,  
very loosely bound together, can really only 
maneuver so many systems worth of forces into  
a combat theater in any useful timeline, so 
that they might be at a stalemate even with a  
single-system empire just because they’re big but 
really slow to move and have a lot of territory  
and borders to cover in all three dimensions.
Which is hardly to say wars would be on even  
footing, just that it likely wouldn’t always be 
a totally one-sided thing, or that there aren’t  
other players in the game who might intervene. 
If you encounter one alien civilization,  
you can’t assume they’re the only ones out there. 
By statistical approximation, if two species pop  
up within a certain distance of each other, then 
in a volume one-hundred times wider, you’d expect  
a million other civilizations to have emerged.
Unless of course the one you met had killed all  
the others already and you’re just meeting the 
front edge of their annihilation and expansion  
wave, but it would be a bit bizarre for us to 
encounter that. After all, in all the billions  
of years it might have originated from, it 
would be improbable to reach us just now,  
during the relatively short phase humans have had 
technology. Particularly considering the galactic  
conquest approach is probably only really 
available to one of the earlier species that  
emerged with that intent, who presumably emerged 
very long ago if millions of civilizations have  
been arising at random since the early days of 
life-viable planets forming. It’s hard to go  
on a genocidal warpath if you’re surrounded on 
all sides by thousands of older civilizations.
 
So odds are there would be a lot of other species 
out there, or splinters of an original species  
that diverged from each other a lot and may 
not share goals anymore. Such being the case,  
you potentially have allies, or at least 
enemies of enemies, who might be willing to  
share technology or even join into alliance with 
you, which will be our topic in the next episode.  
All of which means that if there is a war, 
it’s likely to be either insanely one-sided  
or actually fairly even, or at least close enough 
that fighting is plausible rather than futile.
 
Which raises the question of what you’re fighting 
over and how you’re fighting. We’ve discussed some  
of the basic tactics and challenges, as well as 
weapons, of space warfare in our space warfare  
and futuristic weapons episodes, if you want the 
details. However, it’s important to contemplate  
the kind of scales that would likely be involved. 
If you’re fighting over resources between star  
systems, it means you’re getting low on those 
resources at home, or at least can foresee  
a day when that will happen urgently enough 
that you’re willing to go to war over it. 
 
In science fiction we often see single ships of a 
size with aircraft carriers fighting other ships,  
and nowadays with better and cheaper CGI, we 
might see fleets of hundreds of such vessels  
duking it out. If you’re low on resources though, 
in a solar system, and on a war path, it’s fairly  
plausible you’ve devoted something like 1% of your 
raw materials and production to making ships. 
 
Now even ignoring harvesting metals 
from your own sun via Starlifting,  
where around 99% of the metal will be, we might 
assume just about every system has about Earth’s  
Mass of raw materials lying around available 
for exploitation, and if we assumed the ships  
were made out of iron, well there’s over 
a billion, trillion tons of Iron in Earth  
alone. An aircraft carrier masses about 100,000 
tons, so if you were turning 1% of that billion,  
trillion tons of iron into warships of that 
size, then a system fleet would be composed  
of 100 trillions such ships. Each one of 
which would be quite capable of whacking  
modern Earth all on its own, even without 
much in the way of advanced technology.
 
Automated construction with drones is 
likely something we’ll have fairly soon,  
indeed arguably already do, and it alters the 
usual paradigms of conflicts and colonization,  
since you start getting access to virtually 
infinite manpower and production, limited only  
by your energy supply and raw materials, which is 
your own Sun and everything orbiting it. Normally  
we have problems turning more than a few percent 
of our economy and population to warfighting  
capacity for any sustained period, hence my 
suggesting 1% of resources for ships. But if your  
robots are doing all the building and dying that 
could easily be 99% of your economy, and you might  
be able to sustain the fight for centuries. 
Which is handy, as without faster than light  
travel, that tends to be the minimum timescale 
even for wars with the nearest neighboring star  
system. It also means you don’t necessarily 
have to be around very long as a civilization  
to be armed to the teeth. Humans can double their 
numbers very quickly if we need to, and if we just  
did that at full speed, every generation, say 4 a 
century, then in 32 generations or 800 years, we’d  
already have numbers enough to fill up a Dyson 
Swarm, being a fully Kardashev-2 civilization  
of tens of billions of billions of people, an 
Earth’s worth of people for every person alive  
on Earth now. Amusingly all while our first colony 
ships were barely reaching those stars nearest  
us in our tiny little sphere of the galaxy.
But machines can presumably replicate far faster,  
and a civilization like ours, if we managed 
to get even fairly simple self-replicating  
machines – and I’d be shocked if we finished the 
century out without them – could scale up far,  
far faster. Indeed your limitation is mostly 
heat, as your little machines would generate  
a lot of it while gorging on moons and planets 
to build themselves and other things, and you  
can only do that so fast without producing such 
high temperatures that you’d melt your robots.  
Regardless, it means some new player on the 
galactic stage is probably already able to  
throw billions of warships into a conflict 
before they’ve colonized even one other star.
 
Now you might think you don’t need all those ships 
since you could just send a single tiny one with  
some self-replicators to the fringe of an enemy 
system and build your armada there and then, but  
beyond stealth being very problematic in space, it 
rather ignores that the target system presumably  
has this exact same ability, and you’re on their 
turf, where they already have a pretty big armada,  
control of all the resources, and probably 
have listening devices and outposts all over.
 
Though you might get some bizarre 
conflicts between self-replicating  
machines more akin to viruses and immune systems, 
or computer viruses and cybersecurity systems.
 
There’s also another paradigm-shift massive 
automation offers. For the most part,  
wars have become a bit less common and full-scale 
conflicts even more so because our weapons are  
way more destructive and our civilizations 
way more complicated. In a primitive era,  
you could attack someone, kill them, and take 
their land, which was pretty much the only  
item of value for core production. 
In the more modern era, wars aren’t  
super-profitable because most of the goodies 
are constructs, like factories and manufactured  
goods and digital media and skyscrapers and 
so on, all of which are much more fragile  
than a million acres of farm and forestland. 
Alternatively you also have advanced weapons,  
like nukes or plagues, able to decimate such 
things as forests or farmlands, while utterly  
obliterating those things we especially 
value now, delicate manufactured items and  
the trained workforce able to produce them.
It’s probably a bit cynical to suggest it,  
but our modern era of relative peace, where 
a vastly smaller percentage of the population  
dies from warfare than any other time we know 
of, is probably as much due to modern warfare  
making conquest fairly unprofitable as us growing 
more ethical and enlightened. We do tend to assume  
future civilizations would be more peaceful too, 
for both of those reasons, they’ve gotten wiser  
and they’ve developed way nastier weapons. 
However, again, if you’ve got automated  
construction and most of your fighting is done by 
semi-intelligent machines, you might instead see  
an uptick in warfare. You don’t really care if an 
engagement left half your fleet smashed to molten  
wreckage just so long as you won, because your 
robots will start grabbing that wreckage and the  
enemy’s wreckage and rebuilding from it. Though 
such a repair cycle will always see a lot of loss,  
stuff too scattered or vaporized to easily 
recover and reuse, so you’re not likely to  
be entirely blasé about it either. 
On the other hand, I chose the term  
‘semi-intelligent machines’ with some care, 
as while smarter is better for a battle drone,  
in general, it opens up the door to things like 
machine rebellions, or internal rebellions when  
people start asking how ethical it is to be 
using sentient artificial intelligences to  
do all your dying for you. Though one shouldn’t 
assume most of the elements would be that smart,  
you might have some equivalent of a carrier or 
command and control ship that was the only thing  
in the conflict with real brains, either 
artificial or crewed by regular people,  
though that’s a pretty blurry distinction as we’ve 
often discussed on the show. Such folks might also  
have copies of their minds stored elsewhere, 
as backups, and be less worried about dying.
 
It’s kind of hard to guess what folks would 
be fighting over besides raw materials,  
where it wasn’t just genocide in mind, 
but the usual array of ideological or  
economic motivations would probably still apply, 
modified and adapted to those folks. Weapons-wise,  
you’ve got all sorts of nasty options like 
relativistic kill missiles or Nicoll-Dyson  
Beams on top all sorts of smart weapons, 
self-replicators, digital viruses, and so on. 
 
It also means you probably want all those billions 
or trillions of ships per system as you want to be  
spread throughout that system, even well into 
deep space, to minimize your chance of being  
wiped out in one shot, and also to have all your 
engagements way out at the edge of the system.  
If you’ve got a trillion ships or space fortresses 
scattered around your Oort Cloud, say a mere  
light-month out from your Sun, then each would 
still be a few million kilometers apart from each  
other, rather larger than the Earth-Moon volume, 
which is a lot of space to patrol and watch, and  
they’d be spread out to more like interplanetary 
distances if you were expanding that bubble to  
just be the midway point between neighboring 
stars, the de facto border between systems.
 
This though is our last note for the day, borders. 
Space is mostly empty and while you likely would  
have outposts and colonies tucked into every 
mountain-sized icy rock floating around your  
Oort Cloud, as we discussed in colonizing the Oort 
Cloud, your core system is still going to be the  
tiny little volume composed of everything within 
maybe a light day of your star, itself millions  
of times bigger than the habitable zone of most 
systems and what science fiction usually treats  
as the inhabited region of space. Yet for all that 
it’s bigger, a light day of volume is around a  
billionth the volume of space a system might 
claim if just using the midway point between  
stars as the borders. You want to be scattered out 
there in that bigger volume with your defenses to  
ensure the conflict stays way away from the core 
bubble near the star, but this might be treated  
as something like International Waters, especially 
as stars move relative to each other quite a lot.
 
Such being the case, you might not really see 
much advantage in trying to go for an interstellar  
empire that was a roughly spherical blob, for 
all that it might let you concentrate your forces  
on your edge better and cutdown on lag time, 
because your individual systems are each roughly  
the equivalent of house-sized objects separated 
from their neighbors by many kilometers, where  
the actual habitable zone containing your star and 
Earth-like planets would be in some tiny closet.
 
Of course this all changes if you do have FTL, 
and varies a lot by what type of FTL you have,  
like some wormhole network or more classic 
warp drives or so on, which might result in  
empires that were spread all around inside 
each other and effective neighbors on the  
other side of the galaxy from one another.  
You also probably have most of your actual  
conflicts not with Aliens, but your own folks and 
inside your own system, as odds are most species  
will have a long history of warfare with each 
other, and no special grudge with alien empires.  
Indeed, you might see alliances between alien 
factions even inside internal conflicts,  
like Earth at War with Ganymede around 
Jupiter with allies or mercenaries  
from some alien realm far away. 
But we’ll save that for next time.  
When it comes to why we might go to 
war with Aliens besides outright murder  
or territorial and resource acquisition 
though, the options are almost limitless,  
crazy as it sounds – but keeping in mind some of 
the crazier things we’ve gone to war over – you  
might have a species going around attacking other 
civilizations for punishment for perceived mass  
murder of future inidviduals because they thought 
they were being inefficient with their resources.  
Or because they saw a supernova and took it as 
a fulfilled prophecy demanding they purge the  
galaxy of every creature with iron in their blood 
stream, rather than good and healthy copper, like  
the hated iron demons of their local mythology. 
As we’ve noted before when it comes to aliens,  
it would all depend on their psychology 
and traditions, which will vary from each  
civilization to civilization, and which 
will inevitably be... alien.
 
A wise man gets more use from his enemies than 
a fool from his friends. - Baltasar Gracian
 
We know very little of aliens including whether 
or not they even exist, and yet it is a topic of  
constant speculation in both science and science 
fiction in modern times. We have little to draw  
on but our experiences and history, which do 
not seem to include those from other worlds,  
and yet making friendships and alliances with the 
alien is not exactly a new concept for us either.
 
If history is any judge, an ally is 
far easier to acquire than a friend,  
and they’re not the same thing, much 
as a rival is not necessarily an enemy,  
and indeed it might be impossible to be 
friends with some aliens who may not have  
a true analogy for it in their culture. We focus 
on Alliance today because it means someone you  
have a shared goal or goals you work together 
to achieve. That should be a fairly universal  
concept to any thinking creature who has any 
interdependence with other thinking creatures,  
probably a prerequisite for technology and 
civilization, whereas friendship might not be.
 
It’s not simply our history that informs us 
on this matter, the countless times people  
have traveled to distant lands and met 
strange people with alien ways. Rather,  
each of us is in many respects an island unto 
ourselves and everyone we meet is strange and  
different to us. Much of the rise of civilization 
has been about us learning to better know one  
another and from that hopefully be able to work 
together and form not just alliances of mutual  
benefit but true and enduring friendships. 
However, there’s a lot of personal skill and  
shared culture that helps us do this with humans, 
and it’s far harder to do that if you don’t have  
those, and of course you would not with any 
alien. Such creatures would not even share the  
same basic human neurology with you, or the 
shared biology you have with a cat or dog.
 
And yet, we get on quite well with our pets, who 
share little in common with the human mind beyond  
the basic architecture of a mammalian brain and 
hormones, though the latter dominate our behavior  
a great deal and while an alien would likely 
have some equivalent, it would be incredibly  
unlikely these were the same, unless evolution is 
far more convergent than would seem plausible.
 
But on the basic motivations end, as we’ve 
mentioned in prior episodes, some things we  
would expect to converge, at least for high-tech 
civilizations. A motivation for curiosity,  
personal survival, survival of one species 
or kin or allies, a desire to socialize,  
these we might expect to be quite common.
Whatever their other motivations, ultimately that  
urge for survival will take center-stage. Indeed 
the other motivations probably will tie back to  
it. A species in a very safe and prosperous and 
stable society might be, or at least seem to be,  
fairly unworried about survival as primary 
motive for diplomacy to distant worlds,  
but it will be there in the background. Indeed, 
while their curiosity might be their most obvious  
reason for talking to us, their curiosity will 
also likely have been sharpened by it being such  
a vital advantage in their culture that their 
culture evolved to encourage it as a life focus.
 
Now we have to ask, how do we help 
their survival, or threaten it? 
 
When contemplating alien civilizations there is a 
tendency to assume that there’s a lot of kinship  
there that would make them closer to each other 
than they could ever be to us and vice-versa. Even  
ignoring that most scifi authors tend to write 
up aliens of galaxy-spanning ancient empires as  
more behaviorally and culturally narrow in their 
entirety than your typical modern human nation is,  
let alone our planet, it’s not too realistic to 
assume there is any sort of cultural unity in  
some ancient sprawling galactic civilization 
just because their ancestors, genetically or  
by artifice, happen to derive from the same 
tribe of clever monkeys on some single planet;  
or clever squids or lizards or whichever. 
And clever matters, because first it means  
you can diverge even faster than nature 
allows, with all that augmentation and  
alteration technology and on many worlds 
different form your homeworld. But second,  
because species of this sort should generally 
tend to shift to more abstract and conceptual  
approaches to life over the biological and 
instinctive. When abstract concepts and philosophy  
are dominating your worldview, you might find you 
have way more in common with those who share that  
worldview than those who shared your world 
of origin, especially if you’ve all mutated  
and changed down the millions of years of galactic 
colonization. Indeed there may be extraterrestrial  
and post-biological pressures for evolutionary 
convergence of intelligent minds or societies. 
 
If you share a perspective that science matters 
most, or art is the highest purpose, or that  
commodity trading is the best competition, or so 
on, then you might have more in common with people  
who share that interest and share nothing like 
your own DNA or cultural history. What’s more,  
while we probably shouldn’t assume aliens 
civilization and our own will all inevitably  
converge to some shared, reasoned, and totally 
worked out grand unified theory of ethics or  
ideology, there probably are only a fairly limited 
number of those and you’d expect most to arise in  
some flavor or another in many civilizations.
Take Utilitarianism for instance, the Greatest  
Good for the Greatest Number, and that actions 
should be taken based on what produces the  
most positive outcome. This is not exactly a 
worldview you’d be shocked to see emerge from  
any civilization. The same should be true for 
its nominal opposition philosophy, Deontology,  
the idea that you do your duty because it’s right, 
regardless of the consequences or outcomes. 
 
It would not be surprising if folks subscribing 
to either belief felt they had more in common with  
aliens who shared that view than their own who 
shared the other view. These moral philosophies  
and the many others may take on a lot of flavors 
and be more or less attractive to a given species,  
but odds are they get developed or at least 
contemplated as often as science or math. You  
wouldn’t expect most civilizations to 
not recognize those philosophies even  
if they might regard one as utterly disgusting.
Now of course, the greatest good for the greatest  
number requires knowing what is good and who is 
among that number, and that might vary massively,  
not including another civilization 
among those numbers needing goodness,  
but critically that divergence among colonies 
as they travel out to the stars should have  
made them have to think on what qualifies 
as a person quite a lot, and odds are they  
either get very inclusive or very exclusive, so 
that many beyond their genetic relatives count,  
or many who are their relatives don’t count, but 
probably no unification. Again, outside alliances  
may be less popular but probably not outright off 
the table, and often might be preferable too.
 
Now why ally? Survival, of course. But that 
can mean a lot of things. Alliances against  
an aggressor works, in a war. Alliance to set 
out rules for mutual expansion and resource use,  
sure. These are common enough ideas but maybe 
over-simplified a bit. What is survival to some  
groups of people who might barely know or 
care what world they came from originally?  
What is survival to some nigh-immortal 
creature who has lived millions of years?
 
Strictly theoretically speaking, there should be 
no bar to an individual consciousness continuing  
indefinitely, or a specific civilization doing so. 
But light speed is not your friend for either and  
as we noted last episode, while war may be common 
in the future, galaxy-spanning war really isn’t  
a viable approach. You just can’t maintain a 
cohesive civilization, let alone individual  
identity, over galactic distances. Nor does 
the universe end at the galaxy’s edge. So where  
survival is concerned, for all that you’d probably 
still colonize or bring resources home, and thus  
want to move out from your own system in some 
fashion, ultimately you are fairly limited to your  
own solar system as a cohesive entity, be it a 
single massive Matrioshka Brain or a civilization  
operating under a shared government. 
You might be able to get a bit bigger,  
especially if you’re importing mass and energy 
home to build something like a Dyson Swarm of  
Dyson Swarms or a Birch Planet, but those, even in 
their largest theoretical build before literally  
collapsing under their own mass, are but flyspecks 
in the greater Universe. One way or another you  
can’t take it all, not and remain cohesive, so 
you have to deal with other people, be they of  
alien origin or merely very distant cousins whose 
ancestors once shared a homeworld with yours.
 
Or for that matter were made by those distant 
cousins, life of artificial origin can hardly  
be ignored in this discussion, especially 
if we’re contemplating ultra-long lived  
and powerful entities, such as some 
massive sentient supercomputer.
 
What then, is survival? You can’t wipe everyone 
out, that strategy won’t work at this scale,  
so you have to deal with them regardless. But 
survival in the sense of just getting food and  
not being killed and eaten is less a factor 
for such critters anyway. Doubtless many would  
consider or enact long term pacts with others with 
the same goal of keeping themselves or a copy safe  
in the very long term. So they might want to meet 
other species and ask them to keep a backup copy  
of their mind or for a civilization, some embassy 
and archive that they could repopulate from down  
the road or be remembered by.
For a creature of the mind,  
as we know all too well, survival isn’t 
necessarily about continuing to breathe,  
you have your descendants or other legacy options. 
A writer might be more concerned about their works  
being preserved than their own life and may 
well feel that way even if they had the option  
to indefinitely extend that life. The same should 
be true for an artist or scientist or a parent or  
the founder of some philanthropic or community 
foundation. Legacy makes for a good reason to  
nurture alliances. It’s a type of insurance.
Indeed it might be exactly that. You make  
friends with a few dozen other civilizations 
or post-biological entities who agree to  
archive your work or a copy of your mind or 
a splinter of your species stored in stasis,  
in case the worst happens, and in exchange 
for doing the same and giving that remnant  
resources and space to regrow themselves. 
This is very like a mutual defense treaty,  
another type we might expect to be common. You 
don’t necessarily like your allies, though allies  
can become friends and of course friends are 
preferable as allies all things being equal,  
but you share a common desire. Which again is 
survival but also again, what is survival?
 
In our post-scarcity civilization series, when we 
contemplate existential threats to civilizations  
so advanced that they don’t really need to worry 
about individual survival much, we noted that  
the big one was a sense of purpose. As a culture, 
it’s hard to go on if you don’t have some unifying  
purpose keeping your together, cultures are 
themselves essentially alliances and need shared  
goals. As an individual, well, the most common 
objection I hear to life extension technology is  
that folks would get bored after a few centuries.
I happen to think that’s silly, I couldn’t even  
finish all the books I want to read or visit all 
the places I want to see in a thousand years,  
during which time those places will have 
changed and far more books have been written,  
but you might get bored eventually, as the eons 
rolled by, especially if you’re a post-biological  
entity with a massive and fast mind. Indeed the 
easiest form of super-intelligence to give humans  
would probably be just to replace our neurons 
with electronic devices that did the exact  
same thing only faster, at light speed, thus 
giving us speedy super-intelligence, the same  
brain just running thousands of times faster. 
You might get bored much quicker that way.
 
And there’s the other aspect of purpose, 
the whole meaning of life problem. We  
often envision super-prosperous societies 
collapsing under their own weight as they  
grow lazy and fat and hedonistic, or nihilistic 
and just not believing life had any meaning.
 
In this regard, one of the biggest sources 
of alliance and trade between cultures  
might be philosophy books, self-help 
manuals, and arts and entertainment.
 
But odds are a lot of them 
would seek grand projects,  
and allies can help with that. It might 
be many civilizations decide to build  
huge repositories of history and knowledge and 
art from every world, and serve as archives,  
and ask their neighbors to send their own 
archives to them and store a copy for them too.  
They might get together for massive astronomical 
or scientific efforts, like building a telescope  
array or particle collider across a 
whole galaxy, or even many galaxies. 
 
They might get together to help move 
galaxies so they didn’t fall away from  
each other as the Universe expands, using the 
techniques we discussed in fleet of stars,  
and stockpile resources and hubs to survive 
the growing entropy of a post-stellar era,  
as we looked at in Civilizations at the End 
of Time. They might ally to fight off physical  
enemies of course, but they might ally to fight 
the laws of physics themselves. Turning to unified  
efforts to figure out how to break the light speed 
barrier or the laws of thermodynamics and grinding  
wind of entropy. Or to find some way to reach 
other universes and migrate to those. Indeed,  
you might see civilizations allying 
together not to fight wars inside the  
galaxy or between galaxies, but to invade 
other Universes. Or build other Universes. 
 
So we can see a lot of possible reasons to 
ally together beyond just the classic ones of  
mutual defense against other aliens or general 
friendship or commercial trade. Fundamentally,  
while aliens will be very alien, they will share 
that desire to survive and grow, and that’s a  
pretty good motive to work together and create 
alliances, and hopefully friendships too.
 
So that was the Coexistence with Alien 
series, and yet on topic like Trade,  
there’s still so much more to discuss,in terms 
of whether or not you could realistically be  
trucking food or other bulk cargo between 
planets or solar systems. So I decided to do  
a third short episode on the topic of 
space freighters examining the logistics  
and numbers involved in trying to haul bulk 
cargo around, if that could ever be profitable,  
or event reasonable, and what those ships 
might look like. It’s a popular topic in scifi  
but doesn’t get a lot of serious scientific 
contemplation and the results were actually  
rather surprising as we delved into it.
That’s out now exclusively on Nebula,  
our streaming service, where all our 
content comes out early and ad free,  
and we often have bonus content, from 
extended editions to entire exclusive  
short or even full length episodes, like last 
month’s Colonizing Binary Stars and many more.
 
Next week we’ll be heading back to the general 
notion of Clarketech, super-advanced technologies  
indistinguishable from magic, to contemplate 
all the ways we might warp reality and the  
applications of those as technologies. Then it’s 
into June to look at Colonizing the Kuiper Belt,  
followed by a look at how we can build 
enormously tall and strong structures,  
like Hive Citadels, in Space Towers. Then it 
will be time for our scifi Sunday episode,  
and a return to the Alien Civilization Series, 
for a look at Higher Dimensional Aliens.
 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you want to donate and help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all 
of SFIA’s episodes early and ad free on  
our streaming service, Nebula, along with hours 
of bonus content, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
