Space is big.
Really big.
You just won't believe how vastly hugely mind-bogglingly
big it is.
But as big is the Universe is, that’s just
peanuts compared to the Multiverse.
So today we will be looking at some of the
stranger implications of the notion of the
Many Worlds Interpretation of Quantum Mechanics,
and when it comes to strange, mind-bending,
or ludicrous perspectives on reality, not
many people could beat Douglas Adams, the
late great author of the Hitchhiker’s Guide
to the Galaxy.
This is not an episode about him or that series,
but it is dedicated to him and indeed he’s
probably the person most directly responsible
for my own perspective on this subject, and
since this episode was set to come out on
the anniversary of his untimely death, it
seemed fitting to give him a tribute.
I’m going to take for a given that most
of my audience is already quite familiar with
his work, and if not, I cannot suggest strongly
enough that you become so.
I’d recommend beginning with the original
BBC radio production of the Hitchhiker’s
Guide to the Galaxy, which he later adapted
into the book series.
Those of you already familiar with that show
doubtless recognized our intro music today,
the Eagles’ “Journey of the Sorcerer”,
which served as the intro and outro music
for that show.
It also happens to be my own first exposure
to audiobooks and fiction.
I read tons as a kid but it was all non-fiction
to that point, and that radio show, along
with the books adaptations he narrated himself,
are what got me reading fiction, since there
weren’t many audiobooks at the time so you
often could find only one or two audiobooks
by an author and had to read their other novels.
I didn’t know it at the time but I’d already
been exposed heavily to him from his time
give you a virtually unlimited supply of strange
new places to visit, and he certainly took
his audience to visit many of those worlds
before he left us.
We might as well begin our topic with explaining
how this Many Worlds Interpretation arose
and what it means, and we are going to see
that it has a lot more strange implications
than we usually see when its discussed in
fiction, some of which are arguably rather
dreadful.
Of course to do this we have to discuss Quantum
Mechanics a bit.
Don’t Panic though, while the various interpretations
of Quantum can be quite mind-boggling, they
don’t require much technical knowledge.
At the beginning of the twentieth century
physicists were of the opinion we lived in
a totally mechanistic universe.
The notion at the time was the Universe worked
on strictly mechanistic cause and effect lines,
so with enough computers one could calculate
the future exactly.
It was deemed impossible to perform such calculations,
and even with modern computers it would not
be, but from a philosophical standpoint it
didn’t matter if we could do it or not,
just that everything was predetermined.
Then along comes Quantum, which gives us apparently
random events, throwing that right out the
window.
There are a ton of Interpretations of why
these events are random or random-seeming,
but the two big ones are the Copenhagen Interpretation
and Many Worlds Interpretation.
Copenhagen holds that there is just the one
reality, or at least only one pertinent to
quantum events, and that everything in it
is in a constant state of fluctuation when
not being observed.
Simply put if you flip a coin, it is heads
and tails until you observe it being one or
the other.
Now most of this random chaos is going on
deep down at the atomic scale and tends to
average out, so that most macroscopic events
are still essentially determined in advance,
but they still can bubble up to effect events
bigger than the atomic.
That actual coin might be 99.999% likely to
be heads, but there’s still a finite chance
it is tails until observed, and indeed a small
but non-zero chance it will have turned into
a Jelly Baby.
If any given atom has a chance to decay, transmute,
or move in a random fashion, it stands to
reason there is an even smaller chance that
two of them should do so at about the same
time and place.
Thus it stands to reason a few metal atoms
might turn themselves into some sugar molecules.
There’s an even smaller chance hundreds
might do this, or trillions.
The odds of this occurring are so small they
would be preceded by a decimal point followed
by enough zeros to fill a book, but they are
still not zero.
Now Many Worlds, and most Quantum Interpretations,
hold to the same assumption, that these freakish
improbabilities and random events can occur.
Many Worlds however posits that there are
many different worlds, one for each scenario
to have played out.
People over-simplify this though in terms
of scale, they think “There’s a world
where I skipped lunch today and one where
I did not, one where I became president or
did not”, that sort of thing.
This is not sufficient, and does not fully
cover the options.
These types of alternate realities always
terribly ignore the Butterfly Effect, which
has nothing to do with quantum beyond ensuring
that any quantum event that percolates up
to the macroscopic scale will alter future
history.
We’ll discuss the Butterfly Effect more
when we get to Isaac Asimov’s notion of
Psychohistory this summer though.
The basic result of the Butterfly Effect though
is that even minor events like some guy you
never met deciding not to get a haircut on
Tuesday instead of Friday can avalanche to
affect your life, especially if he did it
a century or two ago, as time magnifies the
effect.
Many folks tend to think this quantum randomness
really does not percolate to the day-to-day
macroscopic level, we shall now demonstrate
that it does.
At the moment, based on channel size, the
number of folks who will be watching this
episode on the day it comes out should be
twenty thousand or so and a good portion of
you will be thinking about your next meal,
while some are eating it now.
For the former, you probably have not yet
selected what to eat and may be prone to suggestions.
I wrote down six, and used Australia National
University’s online quantum number generator,
and it selected a number, one to six, corresponding
to cheeseburgers from those options.
Out of a sample of thousands, we can almost
guarantee a decent number of you will now
decide to have a cheeseburger.
This quantum cheeseburger you or someone else
now eats is definitely a macroscopic event.
This quantum cheeseburger will impact the
rest of your life and human history.
One of you will go to the pub to acquire this
quantum cheeseburger and a pint of beer and
in doing so will meet the gal or guy of your
dreams and having a kid as a result.
The quantum cheeseburger will have fundamentally
altered your destiny.
That randomly selected food option, produced
by quantum chance, has now changed the fate
of the Universe.
And this is what quantum tell us, and to the
best of our knowledge, no computer, not even
a solar system spanning Matrioshka Brain,
could have predicted the emergence of the
Quantum Cheeseburger nor its subsequent impact
on humanity.
Indeed, as my audience is strongly composed
of technophiles, many of you shall further
mess with the notion of determinism at the
macroscopic scale by visiting such a quantum
random number generator and making a decision
based on its outcome.
Under the butterfly effect each of these decisions
will ripple outward and impact everything,
amplifying their effect as time goes on.
Now of course that’s how it plays out in
the Copenhagen Interpretation.
In Many Worlds, the Quantum Cheeseburger exists
in one reality, and the other five options
each have their own, the Quantum Bratwurst,
the Quantum Salad, the Quantum Lasagna, the
Quantum Clam Chowder, and even the Quantum
Chimichanga now exist and are irrevocably
dominating the future history of their alternate
Universes.
But down at the quantum scale these events
occur endlessly, and one must invariably consider
that should Many Worlds be true, then all
possible states exist.
This is like the Library of Babel.
In this hypothetical library every sequence
of letters was written down to fill a book,
much as though an infinite numbers of monkeys
were given typewriters and set to replicate
the works of Shakespeare.
Now if we gave a monkey a keyboard that just
had individual keys, no shifts or mods, one
for all the capital letters and punctuations,
we’ll say 100 keys total, or ten-squared,
we know that any given letter or symbol has
a 1 in 100 chance of being pressed, and the
same for the next digit, so that any two letter
combination has a 1 in 100 times 100, or 1
in 10,000, chance of occurring.
1 in a million for any given 3 symbol combination,
one in a trillion for any 6 symbol combination.
A 22-symbol combination would be 1 in 100^22,
or 10^44, that would be 100 Tredecillion,
a Tredecillion being 10^42.
On a roll of paper wide enough to hold 22
characters a line, and say a centimeter per
line, the full scroll of every 22-character
combination would be some 10^42 meters long.
10 million, billion times longer than the
Observable Universe is wide.
And if we assumed each line and the paper
it was on weighed a gram, it would have a
mass of 10^41 kilograms, about 2% of the mass
of our entire galaxy.
On that immense scroll containing every possible
22-symbol combination of those 100 characters,
somewhere on that will be the phrase “I
Can Has Cheezburger?”
And that’s just 22 characters, just one
more and it would take an entire galactic
mass to make the paper to write them all down.
You would only need 27 characters to need
the entire mass of the Observable Universe
turned into paper to hold all those combinations.
Indeed you’d use all that mass just to have
all the monkeys and typewriters needed to
produce the 22-character code.
Your typical book has somewhere around a million
characters in it, and you’d need 10 to the
2 millionth power of these books to fill this
variation of the Library of Babel, and such
a thing would not fit into a library the size
of this Universe, not even close, even if
we could find the mass to make all those books
and prevent it undergoing gravitational collapse.
It still would not even if the ‘paper’
was one atom thick and inscribed at the atomic
scale.
But somewhere in that Library, among all the
random nonsense, is the script for this episode
and a copy of Hitchhiker’s Guide to the
Galaxy.
Indeed there would be endless trillions of
them that were functionally identical, one
typo here or there, a double space, a meaningless
word change that didn’t impact the story.
That’s with just a million characters.
Now consider that while a book might be just
a million or so characters, your body is composed
of trillions of cells each composed of trillions
of atoms.
As indeed is the quantum cheeseburger.
In a large enough universe, if every particle
is arranged randomly, somewhere in that massive
spread of material is an identical copy of
you, down to every memory you have, along
with many more that are functionally identical,
and some will be holding cheeseburgers and
even ones with bacon on them, which is always
better.
And since these alternate universes need to
include every combination and position of
particles that could possibly have occurred
since the beginning of time we end up with
a number so ridiculously huge that you need
to put exponents on your exponents to write
it down.
Andrei Linde and Vitaly Vanchurin of Stanford
put that value at somewhere around 10 to the
10 to the 77 power.
That is a number so big that if each of them
had their own unique identifier code, a harddrive
just containing all those addresses only would
massively exceed the size of the Universe.
We would say that any scenario that is possible,
no matter how improbable, has to be going
on somewhere, but at this scale for all practical
purposes the impossible will seem to occur.
Not only is there a universe right now where
you flicked on your light switch and a random
chunk of furniture in your house turned into
a bunch of gold ingots, totally coincidentally,
but there’s one that when you flipped it
off and on again, another piece of furniture
did so too.
And on and on, so that even when scientists
came by and repeated the process a thousand
times, it ‘worked’ each time.
Totally coincidentally, in virtually every
other universe it did not, but in one, indeed
in a near countless number of them, it did
work.
So everyone in those universes thinks somehow
this impossible light switch makes gold, even
the most ardent skeptic.
In Many Worlds, there will be ones where the
physical laws will seem different, even if
they are not.
We have no idea if Many Worlds is the correct
interpretation, indeed we tend to think it
is probably impossible to prove or disprove
any of the major interpretations, but of course
it is a very popular one with science fiction
authors.
They like to have it so folks can travel between
these Universes too.
I used to use as an example the old 90’s
TV show Sliders for this, but most of you
will be more familiar with the Portal Gun
from Rick & Morty, which is honestly a much
better show too.
Now we have no idea how you would go about
doing this and I personally think it is impossible,
but at the same time totally possible, and
the same for time travel.
Let me give you an example.
Some mad scientist with a doctorate in quantum
physics creates a box he believes will take
him to any time or reality.
He doesn’t know it, but what it actually
does is vaporize him, he knows about that
part but thinks it just randomizes all his
particles and his pattern is imposed on some
random matter in a different time or Universe.
This doctor gets in the machine and vaporizes
himself, no transport actually happens.
Yet at the same time, so to speak, at some
time and place in the multiverse, random quantum
chances assemble that box and out steps a
clone of the doctor, or one close enough to
make no difference, down to the memories.
Indeed there would be one where those false
memories include having done this hundreds
of time with dozens of companions over the
centuries.
It doesn’t matter that this process is impossible,
he thinks it works, and indeed it may be argued
that it does.
People argue all the time about continuity
of consciousness when it some to scifi transporters
that rip you apart and reassemble you elsewhere
from other matter, or that if we took the
exact image of you and beamed that information
to a super-3D printer light years away where
it reassembled you, or close enough to make
no difference, that what arrived is indeed
you.
If you suddenly wake up on a distant Earth-like
planet far away in space and time, but remembering
this life, even if those memories are fake,
just random quantum assembled data, is that
still you?
If that copy was further away in space than
light could have reached, is that faster than
light travel?
To the people of Zaphod II in Universe 8675309,
who have a warp drive that totally does not
actually work but coincidentally their ships
keep assembling from random matter at the
expected destination and time, it’s going
to be a hard sell to convince them it doesn’t
work.
On this channel we discuss the Fermi Paradox
a lot, the question of where all the aliens
are, and one of the thought streams we follow
on that is the Dyson Dilemma, which essentially
argues that the very presence of the night
sky with visible stars in it, indicates very
strongly that there are no other technological
civilizations within a billion or so light
years of us.
I put that theory together formally a couple
years back, having some time on my hands from
a cold, and decided make a video out of it
while doped up on Nyquil, thus spawning this
channel, and yes that is pretty much how it
happened.
When I did, I set a number of conditions on
the idea that had to be true for it to be
right.
I also stipulated how even a lot of violations
would result in the same outcome, such as
having access to a better power source than
stars.
One of those though was that folks might discover
a way to travel to alternate realities that
was easier than traveling to other stars,
or even other planets.
If Many Worlds is true and one could pick
alternate Universes to travel too, then the
Dyson Dilemma essentially breaks down.
You don’t need to colonize other solar systems
or build massive energy collectors or artificial
habitats around your own sun to form a Dyson
Swarm because you can just step off to a copy
of your own planet where everything is about
the same only an asteroid landed on the tribe
of the first proto-humans, or a plague got
them, or the hypothetical Adam and Eve who
first evolved to what we would call sapience,
never did so.
Now weirdly that’s one of the conditions
of the Dyson Dilemma folks least argue with
me about.
It’s the condition for constant expansion
when you can comfortably do so that seems
to rub folks the wrong way, but occasionally
someone will argue that it isn’t a solid
condition because since those realities are
finite, the ones with a mostly identical Earth
minus people, should fill up eventually and
sooner than later since there should be other
versions of Earth that also developed the
technology to slide between Universes and
will be competing to populate those same empty
versions.
This though is where things get a bit weird,
or get weirder anyway, everything about quantum
is a bit weird.
First we have to decide if they are just transporting
to another reality, their information imposed
on some collections of atoms there, or if
they are actually transferring mass and energy
to that new Universe.
If the latter, we’d not only have to keep
in mind there should now be a huge additional
number of possible forkings in that Universe
since you just added a trillion, trillion
new atoms to it by stepping in, but also that
those realities can effect each other, and
so the number of possible universes arguably
leaps up in a ridiculously huge way, making
running out of them arguably impossible.
Alternatively we would consider the former,
that you are just copying your state to another
reality.
This also makes it impossible to run out of
new spaces.
Whether or not such a machine to genuinely
slide between these Universes could be built,
if these places do exist people will think
they can be built.
Because there is going to be a version of
reality where, much like our Doctor stepping
out the box, both of which just came into
existence, there should be a Universe with
an unpopulated Earth where a copy of you has
just spawned standing there with a bunch of
fake random memories ending with having stepped
into a reality-slider box.
Let’s assume we have a machine that takes
a pattern inside it and copies it onto some
random atoms in another reality.
To keep it simple we copy one iron cube exactly
a million atoms high, wide, and tall to the
exact peak of Mount Everest.
Now there are endless trillions of realities,
all different from ours, where someone did
exactly that same transport to that same location,
producing the exact same result, so only one
reality is needed to satisfy all those Universes,
that transported the iron box there.
So you cannot run out of room if every possible
configuration of reality exists, even if those
are finite, because many of those realities
will be taking an action that results in the
identical outcome.
That’s why it’s a condition breaker on
the Dyson Dilemma, though not the Fermi Paradox,
if all possible scenarios for the Universe
exist then there is one where there’s intelligent
aliens everywhere and one where we are the
only ones.
Now I don’t think such a thing is possible,
indeed I’m not a big fan of Many Worlds,
which has nothing to do with its scientific
merit, I just don’t like what it implies.
It comes back to the whole free will and determinism
thing, I don’t like the idea that there
are trillions of near identical versions of
me each writing this script right now.
I don’t like the idea of thinking of them
as the same person or that only a specific
and exact copy of me down to the subatomic
particles is actually me, since my body is
constantly taking in new particles and memories.
Yet I am, by any sane definition, still the
same person I was when I started writing this
sentence, even though I’ve inhaled trillions
of new oxygen molecules and exhaled trillions
of carbon dioxide particles whose constituent
atoms were part of me earlier today.
Even though I now have memories I didn’t
have ten seconds ago.
Of course I said by ‘any sane definition’,
and when I say that I don’t necessarily
mean the non-sane ones are wrong.
I don’t think it would be possible to remain
sane if someone genuinely, down to the core
of their being, did not believe they had free
will and an identity.
Thus I hang out in the philosophical camp
known as Compatibilism, even if I tend to
think Immanuel Kant probably had a point when
he called that line of thinking ‘a wretched
subterfuge’
But these are the kind of issues we are faced
with when considering the issue of near infinite
improbabilities, and even without Many Worlds
it can still arise in an infinite Universe
or one so large as to encompass all possible
states which might exist in a given Observable
Volume.
People often misinterpret the Big Bang Theory
to say that the whole Universe came from a
point-like object, or a very small one, when
it actually says the chunk we can see presumably
did, that original proto-verse pre-expansion
is thought to be a lot bigger than the bit
we can see now and quite possibly infinite,
so that the proto-Universe started infinite
and our chunk is just a finite part of the
infinite whole which expanded from a finite
part of the original, also infinite whole.
We have no idea about that right now either.
We also have a name for the Doctor or other
folks who sprung out of nowhere with fully
formed bodies and minds, and that’s a Boltzmann
Brain, a topic we will be looking at in detail
this summer.
It doesn’t require Quantum either, just
particles randomly bouncing around forming
a pattern that just happens to be a thinking
life form, and extreme example of what presumably
caused abiogenesis on this planet.
But that’s going to finish us off for today,
like most episodes in this series, you’re
probably coming away with more questions than
answers, and I’d encourage you to look around
the comments section for discussions or come
join us at the Facebook or Reddit Groups,
Science and Futurism with Isaac Arthur, to
discuss those more.
With the channel’s wild growth this last
year, I can’t actually reply to most comments
anymore but I still try to read them all and
reply to as many as I can, fortunately there’s
a lot of other clever folks hanging around
the channel to talk to.
The schedule of episodes for the near-future
is a little undetermined, at least at the
time I’m writing this.
As you may be aware I’m teaming up again
with my friend Fraser Cain of Universe Today
for another episode collaboration, the topic
being resource extraction and utilization
in space, which is going to go all the way
up to disassembling planets, and we’re keeping
the date on that a bit fluid since it’s
hard to work as a team with deadlines.
That topic was picked from among suggestions
by our various patrons on Patreon, actually
quite a few folks suggested that one, and
if you’d like to help support the channel,
you can follow the link to our Patreon account
in the episode description.
For alerts when that episode and other ones
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
And if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button, and share it with others.
Now I’m going to go fix myself a quantum
cheeseburger, until next time,
have a great week!
