This episode is sponsored by Raycon.
We often wonder if in all the billions of
planets in this galaxy, another intelligent
species might have arisen on another world,
but what about the possibility of two arising
on the same one?
A few months back in our Valentine’s Day
episode on Multi-Species Habitats, we examined
the classic science fiction trope of marrying
aliens and having hybrid children with them.
It’s also fairly common in fantasy genres
too, usually half-human, half-elven children
and such.
However, a less common trope in science fiction
is two separate species coming about on the
same planet of origin and not interbreeding
at all.
This is much more common in fantasy though,
and certainly in human mythologies, for presumably
two reasons.
First the action on fantasy tends to be limited
to a single world, so your nominal aliens
have to be from there too, and second and
probably more importantly, these are usually
predicated on one or more deities having directly
created the intelligent species in question,
so we need not be concerned about the seeming
improbability of two separate species both
getting intelligence at roughly the same time.
This is not like us and the Neanderthals,
who are simply another branch of intelligent
hominids we share a common ancestry with,
and indeed with whom we have increasing evidence
of interbreeding, but rather something very
far apart.
It is not hard to imagine some fantasy equivalent
like elves or dwarves as fairly close relatives
who may be only many thousands of years apart
from us genetically, but if we’re talking
lizard people or walking and talking cats
and dogs you’re looking at millions of years
of genetic divergence.
It seems improbable that two divergent lines
separated by millions of years would hit intelligence
at roughly the same time so that one would
not dominate or wipe out the other before
they got smart too.
We’ll be looking at both how improbable
that really is and the various ways it might
happen anyway.
We should note that in many ways, this is
the same question we often deal with regarding
the Fermi Paradox and our galaxy.
Humanity has been around and using fire for
about a million years, and sending objects
and people into space for less than a hundred.
I would be quite surprised if a million years
from now there was a single star in this galaxy
that our genetic or technological descendants
had not yet reached.
So if we assume two million years is about
the average time it takes a newly sapient
species to get civilized and colonize the
galaxy, but this happens rarely enough that
others haven’t already conquered our galaxy,
then it’s highly improbable that two rare
species’ two-million-year epochs would overlap
much.
So two spacefaring species meeting and finding
out they’re anywhere near the same levels
of technological development is as highly
improbable as two species evolving on a single
planet and having roughly the same level of
intelligence.
But it’s not ridiculous, and there are scenarios
in which it’s plausible.
Consider that we’re not talking about two
entirely alien paths of life arising on a
world, just two distant cousins.
Ones sharing the same basic biology, rather
than say a world on which carbon-based and
silicon-based life both arose, though that
might be an interesting discussion for another
time.
I’m not sure what the nearest common ancestor
of dolphins and octopuses is, but it would
be an invertebrate much older and not nearly
as intelligent as either of those critters.
And yet these two very distant cousin species
are in the same general zone of intelligence.
We also have many other smart critters of
distant relation, cats, dogs, elephants, racoons,
and more.
Now there are more levels of intelligence
below human and above average mammals.
The second smartest critters on the planet
after humans are our close relatives chimpanzees
and orangutans, both of which are demonstrably
smarter than all those other cute critters
I just mentioned.
They’re also dumber than other effectively
extinct near-human lines, of which Neanderthal
is but one.
We don’t know how long these various smart
critters have been as smart as they are anymore
than we know what drove humans to high intelligence,
but we can speculate on various causes and
we can also recognize that what caused it
here doesn’t have to be the same as what
caused it elsewhere.
As an example, one of the strongest candidate
theories for why intelligence evolves higher
and higher is as part of a predator-prey cycle.
This is where an improvement in one of them,
like the prey getting faster or smarter, pushes
the predator to get better or smarter if it
wants dinner, and vice-versa, an improvement
in the predator can drive improvements in
the prey to avoid becoming dinner.
The hare gets better at finding places to
hide and the fox gets better at finding them.
It need not be as simple as foxes and hares,
you could have two smart critters who don’t
eat each other, just compete with each other,
who get smarter for that competition for resources.
We can also imagine some predator akin to
a spider in methodology, that is relatively
dumb or weak itself but spins traps and prisons
for its prey and hunts pig, racoon, and monkey
alike.
They get captured in the web-equivalent, but
can think up a way out to escape it, and pigs
are quite clever at escaping pens, or racoons
for getting into containers.
All three smarter creatures are prey to this
dumber critter which has recently and successfully
evolved superior trapping skills, forcing
all three to adapt by getting smarter or to
perish.
We can use spiders not just as an example
of creatures that trap their prey, but because
spiders have a rather novel way of flying,
by spinning a silk strand and floating away
like some upside down kite, that lets them
travel kilometers high and cover over a thousand
kilometers of distance.
So they can migrate continents, whereas a
pig, racoon, or monkey, smart though they
are compared to a spider, have a harder time
crossing continents if the land bridge between
them goes away.
So we could imagine three isolated continents,
isolated to the prey at least, getting simultaneously
preyed on by the same predator.
These bigger smarter critters also relatively
few in number, so in the case of lone member
of that species making it across the sea somehow,
for it to successfully thrive, it needs to
be able to survive in a new environment, find
a cousin it can breed with, successfully do
so, and have that offspring be fertile and
survive.
This is quite an uphill battle, and a land
bridge offers the option of a cohesive pack
or herd of the organism making a crossing,
offering much better odds.
But we know all about land bridges here on
Earth, and they probably aren’t that rare
in galactic planetary layouts, and let’s
start with this simplest case: divergence
of an already smart species by land separation.
We wouldn’t expect them to be that much
different, two or more clades of a species
separated by something like what we had with
the Americas from Africa, Europe, and Asia,
but given that folks often think of elves
or dwarves or such as different species, it's
plausible enough.
We also don’t want to assume evolution is
the same in details and timelines everywhere.
The basic premise yes, but we can’t assume
a given planet is going to have its human-equivalents
having lifetimes, generations, and population
densities anything like ours.
It’s a decent bet life anything like ours
will need similar amounts of space and energy
but there are some big ‘ifs’ in there.
For instance, even though evolution will tend
to push toward optimal machinery, the neuron
nature develops on one world with one set
of chemistry might do the same job for half
the mass and twice as quickly, or even an
order of magnitude better… or worse.
See our episode Non-Carbon Based Life for
some more discussion of alternative chemistries.
We should also keep in mind that cannibalism
is common in nature, and at some point you
have a divergence in a species of one chunk
of it eating the other chunk, becoming predator
and prey, and that can happen many times and
intelligence is no bar on this, nor really
is genetic similarity.
Indeed we cannot take for granted that the
problems we have with diseases passing through
cannibalism would be a universal issue, even
if pathogens were common, a different type
of digestion might remove the issue.
So we can imagine divergence of near humans
akin to elves or dwarves, but we can also
imagine the vampire equivalent, a sub-species
that evolves to a predator-prey relationship.
These near-human cases where the genetic separation
is relatively recent isn’t our main interest
today but they merit some consideration.
And again, while we might assume it would
take a million years to diverge that much,
that’s not necessarily true even on Earth,
let alone alien worlds and species.
For humanity we don’t seem to have diverged
too significantly but even big barriers like
crossing between hemispheres after the ice
age don’t seem to have completely stopped
the occasional exchanges of DNA, ideas, and
goods so that we can’t really make a strong
case for divergence on Earth.
We might hypothesize that instead of humans
reaching the Americas 10-30,000 years ago
some early humanoids got there half a millions
years earlier, and then the ice ages ended,
that those two branches of humanity remaining
might have diverged beyond the point of interbreeding.
We might get something as visually distinct
from humans as the mythological Yeti, while
at the same time it would not be terribly
implausible that they both continued to get
smarter and kept parallel enough that once
reunited by ocean-travel capable technologies
the one who developed it had no special advantage
in understanding or utilizing it than their
cousins, once they’d been introduced to
it.
Same as with us only with more genetic differences
that made interbreeding harder or less desirable.
Emphasis on desirable because you could have
genetic divergence while separated by nothing
more hard to cross than a creek, as opposed
to an ocean.
Bigotry is hardly admirable but also hardly
rare, and probably not rare on other worlds
either.
So too, using that vampire example of earlier,
for all that vampires often appear as romantic
partners in fiction, a divergence caused by
one chunk of a species turning cannibal on
the other and initiating a predator-prey cycle
is not likely to result in a lot of marriages
and happy neighbor relations.
For a given value of the words cannibal and
predator of course.
There are options for symbiotic relationships
there, and we’ve often had groups, classes,
or castes who had fairly predatory attitudes
toward their fellow humans.
Humanity has frequently had class or caste
based systems which were hereditary, and just
because we tended to interbreed a lot even
in those cultures which most staunchly opposed
such mixing, doesn’t mean aliens would.
A given alien race might view mate selection
as more akin to investment advice than a deep
spiritual bond, and adultery or accidental
pregnancies might be essentially unknown.
In a situation like that, where hereditary
castes or classes existed and the culture
could actually make it stick with few to no
incidents of interbreeding for several hundred
generations, you might end up with a civilization
composed of various species who could no longer
interbreed anyway.
I also don’t find it too hard to imagine
a civilization that could make hereditary
castes stick that long and well might have
some other issues with technological stagnation
and innovation so that their march from early
civilization to the stars might take a lot
longer.
Though that’s got a fair amount of human
bias on it too, again a species that genuinely
didn’t put much emotion into mate selection
or career exploration isn’t necessarily
one that doesn’t put emotion into parenting,
friendships, or following any other rigid
societal structure besides a day job.
Though we probably want to remember that a
hypothetical species that was pretty logical
and emotionless, like the Vulcans of Star
Trek, is not the easiest thing to evolve either.
Mate attachment has some valuable properties
in evolution, especially in lifeforms needing
many years to develop, as an extra parent
doubles access to food, protection, caretaking,
and teaching.
Nonetheless we can’t assume any given type
of emotional bond would be universal in presence
or strength.
The genetic caste concept is a fairly common
trope in fiction too, the alien race composed
of very distinct and specialized sub-races
genetically suited to their role, and one
of the more interesting examples of it is
the Moties from the Classic scifi novel “The
Mote in God’s Eye”, which are hyper-specialized
into castes, and maybe more justified in their
case because they have cyclic apocalypses
that keep driving them back to the stone age.
Which is one way something like that could
theoretically happen on Earth I suppose, the
end of the ice ages ended the land bridges,
and the reverse, a melting of the ice caps
and hard core apocalypse that knocked us down
to a handful of isolated surviving bands,
say a few dozen tribes of a couple hundred
folks each scattered across the planet, is
exactly the sort of genetic bottlenecking
that could result in a bunch of massively
divergent clades of humanity.
There’s a lot of scenarios that could result
in one species splitting into two close-cousin
species but this is not really what we mean
by alien.
It’s just your elves and dwarves equivalent,
not your dragons or lizardfolk or other fantasy
examples, which again usually assume a mythological
progenitor being involved.
Which is a scifi option too of course, ancient
aliens transport critters to a planet, from
various alien worlds or laboratory creations,
and they simply can’t interbreed with each
other anymore than trees and robots could
with us or each other.
One could imagine some rather unlikable overlord
race having a lot of such species around that
they’d made incapable of using their technology,
then dying off or leaving, and a million years
later those critters evolved themselves back
up to intelligence or reinvented tech.
That does raise another option though for
two very distinct races to evolve, we often
talk about uplifting animals to be human-smart,
which is obviously one way to get two or more
intelligent races on a planet, but we also
discuss how we might use such technology to
assist a marine species we encountered on
another world.
We’ve often discussed how hard it would
be to get technology on an ocean world for
something like dolphins or whales, even if
they were as smart as us, and if we might
give them technology and assistance if we
found them on another world.
But it doesn’t have to be another world.
We might imagine Earth, if dolphins got a
bit smarter before humanity evolved, where
they were around a million years older with
roughly our intelligence but never developed
technology.
Such a world might have entirely cordial and
cooperative relationships between early humans
and those dolphins, and then when humanity
got around to developing fire based technologies
and growing civilizations, the dolphins just
came along for the ride.
We are often contemplating two races on a
planet being in fierce competition till one
wiped out the other, and that’s certainly
an option, but the land-dwellers and marine
civilization don’t really have many natural
points of conflict, have some good basis for
cooperation and trade, and until you get to
relatively modern technology, no realistic
way to occupy each others territory or pursue
genocide.
For that matter, while we tended to assume
we wiped out most of the other human cousin
species in the Homo Genus, like Neanderthals,
we have better reason to think we just interbred,
and I’m not aware of any documented efforts
in history to wipe out apes, chimpanzees,
etc.
Given many of the nastier moments of human
history, such genocides aren’t hard to imagine
either, but should not be taken as a given
with us let alone myriad aliens.
This land-sea scenario strikes me as reasonably
plausible, where the first species to hit
high intelligence just wasn’t well situated
to achieve technology, and was followed sometime
later by one that could, and again it did
take us around a million years to go from
harnessing fire to using it for even simple
applications like making pottery.
Some marine based civilization might need
far longer to get there if they could at all,
but then seeing us using fire on the seashore,
might easily understand it and suggest applications
for it.
Another scenario is that an event kicks off
a technological race between various intelligent
but non-technological species.
Same as a severe asteroid impact might cause
an earlier intelligent species to be broken
into a handful of surviving and isolated bands
that genetically bottlenecked.
Or instead of a single big strike, we could
have something like a collision of iron-rich
asteroids leave debris in a system that manifested
on the planet as a bunch of meteorite strikes.
So that you had lots of meteoric magnetized
iron available that the curious natives played
with or some natural event that made fires
a lot more common and encouraged the various
smarter species to figure it out and figure
out how to manipulate it.
We also have some potentially weirder scenarios.
Consider some sort of fungal parasite that
infested animals as a way of controlling them,
sounds like pure sci fi but it's actually
something not entirely unknown on Earth.
We have a zombie fungus that infests an ant’s
brains to force it to migrate to a place ideal
for the fungus which then locks the ant in
place there and sprouts from its head.
There are several other types of brain controlling
parasites on Earth and we explored that concept
a bit more in our episode Parasitic Aliens.
However we might imagine a very sophisticated
evolution of that into something like a neural
network of fungi and eventually some sort
of symbiotic rather than parasitic relationship.
Now such a situation might result in a divergence
of the fungi, with certain types specializing
in brain control of birds while others got
mammals or fish, or which specialized to the
point of being able to do only one Family,
or Genus, or even Species.
Such being the case, thinking of this as an
intelligent species of fungus may not be accurate
at this point.
Indeed the fungus might just be a neuron equivalent
to the host organisms of what mitochondria
are to our cellular energy production.
We don’t talk of various animal species
being various subspecies of mitochondria,
even though they are an entirely separate
organism that’s formed a very long-term
and specialized symbiotic relationship with
all of us.
Telling a hundred different intelligent animal
species that they’re really one species
of parasite or symbiote isn’t likely to
make them feel all unified anymore than a
cat and mouse might feel if informed that
they share the same basic mitochondria.
Indeed, it’s not like Darwin’s “On the
Origin of Species” suddenly made us feel
a great kinship to cows, pigs, or chickens.
Nor did it change our general attitude of
good will toward cats, dogs, and horses, which
predates thinking of them as relatives, so
we probably should not assume two intelligent
species could only get along in the primitive
era in cases like our people and dolphins
examples from earlier, where there was no
particular zone for competition.
Needless to say it isn’t hard to imagine
them trying to wipe each other out either,
we just shouldn’t take that as the default
approach, let alone the norm with few to no
exceptions.
Perception is as important as reality when
it comes to behavior, and humans have often
attributed human level intelligence to various
animals and rarely tried to wipe them out.
Human caused extinction of other species has
generally been a product of ignorance or indifference,
not intent, and since we often have attributed
much higher intelligence to various animals
than they apparently have, we shouldn’t
take for granted that if they actually had
it, we would have sought to wipe them out.
Though of course it can certainly happen and
presumably did for a lot of dangerous predators,
lions and wolves for instance have both been
species humans have tried very hard to eliminate
in their environments.
We also don’t really know how the various
intelligence to survival feedbacks worked
in human evolution, you could potentially
have critters who were quite smart but not
well suited for tool use run a parallel case
to the dolphin example.
Your human analogue species invents the technology
and some other smart critters find it easy
enough to use once exposed to it.
Some might be smart enough to use it with
training but not really understand it, following
into some role with the other species paralleling
draft animals like oxen or horses, while in
another setup we might imagine them as smart
but not adapted for a technology, and thus
exchanging their own skills for use of it,
like a tiger dragging in antelope to the clever
monkeys in exchange for them using their nimble
fingers for crafting this or that useful thing.
All in all, I still would expect the likelihood
of two intelligent species evolving on the
same world independently to be fairly small,
but as we saw today, it’s maybe not quite
so improbable as we might assume, especially
given that their evolution to intelligence
might not always be very independent of each
other.
Speaking of long term symbiotic relationships,
one we tend not to have in the average modern
household is goats or sheep for mowing the
lawn, and I’ve generally found lawn and
garden care a great combination of exercise
and quiet time for thought or to listen to
a good audiobook.
However, mowers and a lot of other gear are
quite loud, so it’s nice to have a good
pair of earbuds with noise isolating features,
without dangling wires, and at half the price
of other premium earbuds, I’d recommend
trying out Raycon’s Everyday E25 Earbuds.
They’ve also got a good battery life and
a very compact charging case with its own
battery that can recharge them four times
while you’re on the go, which means they’re
recharging every time I put them back in their
case for safe keeping, even when I’m far
away from any power outlets.
Raycon earbuds give you 6 hours of playtime,
seamless Bluetooth pairing, more bass, and
a more compact design for a comfortable, noise-isolating
fit!
Raycon is disrupting the electronics industry
by designing premium wireless audio for half
the price, without compromise.
They’re doing things differently than other
brands out there—from the way they design
their products to the way they price them,
Raycon prioritizes their customer experience
from start to finish.
The company was co-founded by Ray J. and is
popular with celebrities Snoop Dogg, Melissa
Etheridge, and many others for their comfort,
style, and playtime.
They also come in a range of colors and style,
and Raycon has a 45-day free-return policy.
Whether you’re taking up a new hobby—or
just want to make your day-to-day a little
more comfortable—Raycons are the perfect
way to bring premium audio to everything you
do, and if you’d like to give them a try,
click the link in the description box or go
to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur to get 15% off
your Raycon purchase.
So we’re heading into our SFIA Summer Schedule
and next week we will be looking at potential
giant Manhattan Project-scale research and
development efforts humanity might attempt
in the future, then we’ll have our mid-month
Scifi Sundays episode on Death Rays, before
launching into a new series on our show, Galactic
Domination.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
