This episode is brought to you by Skillshare.
Alone in a dark forest, does the sudden hush
of woodland critters frighten you?
Are you really alone?
There are a pair of fairly common reactions
to any new astronomical phenomena.
The first is to see such an anomaly outside
our current understanding and assume its proof
of alien life.
The second is seeing that anomaly and saying
it is certainly of natural origin and any
suggestion to the contrary is absurd.
Now, neither reaction exists in a vacuum.
Of course, nothing does exist in a vacuum
which is essentially our topic for the day,
in an astronomical context, but also in a
human context, on the discussion of the existence
of aliens, both reactions are from decades
of folks contemplating the topic of the Fermi
Paradox, the seeming contradiction between
the sheer size and age of the Universe and
the apparent absent of any other intelligent
life in it.
Those two reactions I mentioned, ‘this is
aliens’ and ‘this is definitely not aliens’
aren’t really the ground state of either
reaction, and indeed the second is more of
a reaction to the first.
The first is generally initially simple intrigue.
We’ve got something we can’t explain yet,
and we wonder if maybe it’s a sign of something
unnatural and artificial.
Whereas, the other might be regarded as an
exasperated reaction to how often folks jump
to that conclusion even after all the times
it’s turned out otherwise.
Two of the phenomena that most often grab
attention as possibly artificial are the Cosmic
Voids, immense regions of nearly empty space
far larger than any galaxy, and the occasional
stars in our own galaxy which seem to be fading
out or disappearing entirely for a variety
of reasons, with some for reasons we don’t
know.
Since the usual approach of SETI – the Search
for Extraterrestrial Intelligence – is to
hunt for things like radio signals, inhabited
worlds, or other clear signs of life, it can
seem a bit counter-intuitive that we would
look at big empty spaces or missing stars
and say that was a sign of life.
However, this essentially boils down to the
concept of the Kardashev Scale, something
we call the Dyson Dilemma, and a bit of misunderstanding
about both.
The Kardashev Scale is an approach to measurement
of a civilization’s power usage, with astronomical
detection in mind, see our episode on the
Kardashev Scale for further discussion of
what such immense civilizations might be like.
Civilizations are assumed to need energy and
be bound by the Laws of Thermodynamics, meaning
they don’t use energy up, but merely take
energy in, get some work done with it which
transforms it into a higher entropy state
of energy, and emit that as waste heat.
There’s nothing to permit convection or
to conduct heat away in the vacuum of space,
so heat must be dissipated via radiation as
photons of light coming off from the object
instead.
In the case of inhabited planets this would
be expected to be infrared photons of the
wavelengths associated with terrestrial temperature
thermal emissions, or LWIR, long-wavelength
infrared.
Generally those temperatures you’d get when
water is a liquid, not ice or gas, though
the official region for LWIR is -80 to 89
Celsius, or a wavelength of 8 to 15 micrometers.
I wanted to emphasize that because it can
be a bit confusing talking about waste heat
and radiation and infrared.
The visible light our Sun produces, that warms
us and serves as the ultimate engine for all
life on Earth, represents a tiny band our
eyes can see, splitting much larger bands
of radiation, the Infrared and the Ultraviolet,
a skinny little river separating two big nations.
In truth it’s more like the Mississippi
River separating the East and West United
States as the processes associated to making
Infrared and Ultraviolet light are more or
less the same, whereas the other major bands
of photon radiation like X-Ray, Gamma, and
Radio tend to be produced by different physical
processes, like nuclear fission or fusion
in an atom’s core for gamma.
All the light from the Sun originates as Nuclear
Fusion producing energy that gets absorbed
by the gases in the Sun which then re-emit
it as waste heat, just at a much smaller wavelength
than LWIR.
Regardless, while our own Sun produces a lot
of visible light, it actually produces more
infrared than visible light, it’s just a
much more energetic zone of infrared than
LWIR, the Infrared region known as NIR or
Near Infrared, being near the visible light
region of the spectrum.
Generally using light as a power source is
going to result in absorbing photons in shorter
and more energetic wavelengths and re-emitting
them as longer and less energetic photons.
And you do have to re-emit them as your temperature
would keep rising otherwise, till you baked
in your own waste heat, though we’ll discuss
some hypothetical alternatives to that today
too.
In regard to the Kardashev Scale, the notion
is that civilizations use up sunlight to run
themselves, converting that into infrared
light of the wavelengths associated with their
effective ambient temperature, which we generally
assume would be in that LWIR range.
This results in a lot of misconceptions though,
as some will say that a Kardashev-2 civilization
for instance, one which uses up all the light
of its sun, would be invisible.
It’s not, and indeed it isn’t using up
all that light, it’s merely using all that
light and converting it into LWIR wavelengths,
its waste heat.
Incidentally a Kardashev-1 Civilization is
one that uses up all the energy of a planet
and a Kardashev-3 is one that uses all the
sunlight of an entire galaxy.
These are very broad ranges, and only useful
in a SETI astronomical alien-hunting context,
and a Kardashev-2 or K2 civilization – one
using up all its star’s energy – would
be highly variable since our Sun for instance
is much brighter than most stars, some of
which are thousands of times dimmer than our
Sun, while the really big giants can be a
million times brighter than our Sun.
A K2 around the dimmest of red dwarfs and
one around the brightest of Supergiants would
vary as civilizations in scale as much as
a single person in a log cabin to an entire
planetary population.
The Kardashev Scale is very popular for talking
about advanced civilizations and trying to
contrast them – indeed we did an episode
talking about what such civilizations can
do – but as we pointed out there, it really
is an awful system for trying to compare this
or that hypothetical or fictional civilization
to each other, like what the Kardashev designation
for your favorite interstellar empire from
a scifi book or tv series is.
Also, we don’t actually tend to assume they’d
be invisible even in the visual spectrum,
just way dimmer, they might capture every
single visible light photon coming off their
own Sun but they probably would not, and would
probably re-emit more from this or that artificial
source.
The general notion is that they are just way
dimmer and only in the usual spectrum, they
are just as bright as before only the brightness
is in the LWIR range.
Now the means for this capture is generally
assumed to be a Dyson Swarm, a big cloud of
orbiting satellites and constructs around
a star that each absorb and use some light
and emit some waste heat infrared.
This is also known as a Dyson Sphere but since
that term tended to get borrowed and distorted
in science fiction to mean a single solid
spherical shell around a star full of artificial
land on the inside, we tend to stick with
Dyson Swarm instead, and a Dyson around a
star would be characteristic of a K-2 Civilization.
The Kardashev Scale assumes a civilization
would tend to build such things around their
own home star over time, making it slowly
dim in the visual range and brighten in the
infrared, and colonize other stars and eventually
Dyson those up too, eventually getting to
their whole galaxy which would be a K-3 civilization,
one that was invisible visually, or very dim
anyway, but very bright in that LWIR infrared
range.
This is the Dyson Dilemma of the Fermi Paradox
incidentally, since if we assume that civilizations
like to grow, they grow to other planets and
other solar systems, and are operating under
known physical laws, eventually they should
become a K-1, then a K-2, than a K-3, and
in the process dim all those stars down to
non-visible emission.
In the Dyson Dilemma, we don’t look out
at the stars and wonder if they’re inhabited,
instead we wonder why we can even see any
stars at all, since with billions of years
of headstart and billions of billions of stars
to work with, you’d expect them all to have
been turned into Dyson Swarms long ago.
That they haven’t been is a bit of a dilemma,
since it implies some core assumption of science
we make, be it Darwinian Evolution or basic
biological imperatives or the Laws of Thermodynamics
or some other core assumption, is just wrong.
So this is where the Voids and Disappearing
Stars comes in, because if you see a star
getting dimmer over time, or disappearing,
well that’s what you’d expect from a civilization
busy englobing that star.
The slight mistake being made usually is assuming
that a star would actually disappear rather
than just change colors, as it were.
And the massive supervoids in the Universe
would look a lot like a K-3 or even K-3+ civilization
that englobed a vast stretch of space.
Now often that is the end of that consideration
since such voids are not gushing out galaxies
worth of infrared so obviously aren’t trillions
of classic Dyson Swarms surrounding all the
stars in a clump of galaxies, but there’s
also the thought that since that infrared
signature has to do with Heat and Entropy
and the big problem on the mind of any vast
and ancient galactic empire would be how to
manage heat and defeat entropy, that the Infrared
waste glow might be a missing feature on a
huge and ancient empire sprawling over many
galaxies as they would have solved that problem.
Now for my part I don’t really expect anyone
will ever solve the problem of entropy, and
if they did, they really wouldn’t need to
bother with englobing stars anyway, but it
has been suggested you might be able to use
black holes to absorb infrared waste heat,
by simply having a layer of infrared reflective
panels and parabolic dishes that reflected
the LWIR Heat into the black hole.
The thermodynamics of black holes is rather
uncertain currently and they may actually
violate thermodynamics in whole or part.
They probably do not but we can’t actually
rule it out yet.
In any event this wouldn’t likely be a total
solution, allowing you to completely eliminate
energy loss or turn invisible, but it would
make you a lot dimmer and the Cosmic Voids
aren’t actually totally empty of light anyway.
Of course that’s the other issue, the voids
aren’t true voids.
And we might as well say what they are now.
The Universe is not homogenous and evenly
distributed, anymore than our solar system
or galaxy is.
If you zoom out far enough, to what we call
the End of Greatness, it is, but not when
you’re smaller.
The End of Greatness is the scale of the Universe,
a few hundred million light years across,
in which everything is still Unique but more
in the way people or soap bubbles or snowflakes
or trees are unique from each other.
The End of Greatness is essentially the Zoom
out scale at which you’re seeing the Forest
as a green blob.
We do have some things which are that size
or bigger, same as you might have a forest
glade that was clearly visible as empty in
that green blob, but by and large it all looks
like a blob zoomed out to that scale.
I referenced soap bubbles as an analogy though
and as best as we can tell our Universe is
arranged more like soap bubbles, with the
soap film itself being where most of the galaxies
are.
Cosmologists have been working to figure out
why the Universe formed this way since we
noticed this distribution, why we get long
strings, filaments, and walls of galaxies
and big regions of emptiness, but the key
thing is that these regions, these voids,
aren’t empty at all.
They’re just much lower density, same as
if you look at a night-time image of Earth
and you see lots of bright lights at the cities
and major seaboards and rivers where people
tend to congregate but still have lights and
people further away from there.
There are plenty of galaxies and stars in
voids, they’re just far less common.
Indeed you have plenty of stars in the more
mundane intergalactic voids between galaxies
too, just far less than in galaxies, but the
big Cosmic Voids are even more thinly distributed
than that.
Nonetheless they are in there and there’s
no reason a civilization swallowing up whole
galaxies into Dyson Swarms would bypass big
clumps of stars in their expansion and produce
that effect.
Moreover, as we said englobing a star this
way doesn’t make it dimmer, it just switched
the light to Infrared and we can’t see that
with our eyes but our telescopes can and we’d
notice if these voids were freakishly bright
in LWIR wavelengths.
Now as a caveat, while I often say on this
show folks will probably tend to go this Dyson
route with stars and growth, that’s not
really a complete image.
The notion is more that with a star in a solar
system producing all that light and burning
all that fuel, and generally making up at
least 99% of that solar system’s mass, folks
will want to use that star.
They don’t necessarily use it just as a
big power source, they might disassemble it
via Starlifting or slow feed it into artificial
black holes and store all that mass and energy
for far slower release for a longer-lived
civilization.
Indeed, such a slower release would not only
mask the Infrared signature by massively decreasing
it, it’s likely to shift it out of the LWIR
range of light into the Far Infrared, those
wavelengths of light emitted by very cold
objects like Pluto, or even into the Microwave
range.
You can see the Civilizations at the End of
Time episodes Black Hole Farming or Postponing
the Heat Death of the Universe for more details
on why this would be the case and how it functions,
but in a nutshell, a post-biological civilization
– essentially one where everyone has uploaded
their minds to computers – benefits from
running at very cold temperatures, each joule
of energy gives you way more computational
power when you’re running ultra-cold, and
so a vast and ancient empire planning to be
around a long time might have converted over
to this hyper-efficient approach to computation,
thought, and life and as such would probably
show up as only a small glow of Far Infrared
or maybe even Microwave wavelengths, as they
are intentionally going low power, low-temperature,
ultra-efficient and long-lived.
This is what really caught the eye of astronomers
and futurists a couple decades back when the
Supervoids got discovered, because we found
some voids that were far larger than the normal
ones and bigger than that End of Greatness
Scale.
We could not think how they would form naturally,
at the time anyway, and we were simultaneously
getting into serious contemplation of post-biological
existence like mind uploading.
That got a bit garbled and simplified in a
lot of discussions, but essentially it was
that we were seeing a few voids too big to
naturally form in our current understanding
of the Universe and we couldn’t see them
very well.
As an example, you can also detect large objects
and constructs, especially galaxy sized things,
by their gravitational influence on their
neighbors, and we didn’t really have a good
enough picture at the time to see if that
the voids gravitational influence on the areas
around them matched the expected amount from
what stars and galaxies we could see inside
them, plus they weren’t very well mapped
initially to even see a lot of those occasional
galaxies.
Such astronomy is very difficult and we had
only the most limited knowledge of Dark Matter
and Energy at the time so it made it quite
a guessing game with big margins of uncertainty.
As time passed, we could see more such voids
and see them and their galactic neighbors
better, and we also could start seeing how
time passed for these voids.
Astronomy is history, and if I can see something
like a void 12 billion light years away then
I’m seeing a void 12 billion years ago.
Since the Universe is only about a couple
billion years older than that, we’d not
expect to see giant civilizations present
back then making such voids, and we do see
them, only they are smaller.
Now at first that is a positive sign for life,
things which might be artificial and which
get more common or larger over time match
the profile for life as they are growing.
We call this TEA, or the Time-Elapse Argument,
that any phenomena which is more common in
the past or bigger is presumably not an artificial
one since you’d expect a growing civilization
and it’s artificial constructs and signatures
to get bigger and for more examples of them
to pop up in the Universe over time.
And again Astronomy is history, so we can
see the past.
We can find a strange phenomena and look at
all the objects 1-2 billion light years away
of that type and compare them to all the ones
at 2-3 billion light years away, and 3-4 and
4-5 and so on and see if the density is higher,
lower, or the same in the patches nearer us
in space and time.
If it is higher density or size in the regions
closer to us, which is to say more common
as time passed by, then a phenomena would
pass muster with TEA, the Time Elapse Argument,
as a phenomena become bigger or more common
as the Universe aged and life presumably got
more common and had more time to grow intelligent
and engage in interstellar and intergalactic
colonization.
So Quasars, for instance, which are phenomena
that some attributed to intelligent critters
when we first started finding them, don’t
pass muster under TEA because they were more
common in the past.
As we found out with more study, they are
the product of vast amounts of matter falling
into big and hungry black holes at the centers
of galaxies.
Alternatively those big central black holes
found in the centers of many galaxies which
grow over time as they eat more material would
pass muster under TEA, because they are getting
bigger with time.
However, we have a perfectly natural reason
why they do, they’re just eating up matter.
Though they are also likely the sorts of places
you would find major civilizations migrating
to, see our episode Colonizing Black Holes
for why.
Anyway those vast cosmic voids are getting
bigger with time, but we can see the smaller
versions of them as far out as we can see
back in time, pretty much to the dawn of the
Universe, and it wouldn’t be plausible life
could have existed then let alone be out flying
around in spaceships.
We’ve also found a lot more of these massive
voids in the years since we found some of
the particularly anomalous supervoids, such
as the Bootes Void, also known as the Great
Nothing, and we tend to figure these occasional
supervoids just happen to be where two or
more voids expanded into each other.
And yes they are expanding, but they are expanding
at the same rate as everything else in the
Universe is expanding so in this case, while
it meets the condition of the Time-Elapse
Argument, it doesn’t seem to indicate anything
artificial in that expansion.
I should not underplay just how huge and empty
these things are.
As an example, the aforementioned Bootes Supervoid
is over 300 million light years across and
its center is only about twice that far away
from us.
Were we at the center of it, we would literally
not have known of the existence of the rest
of the Universe till less than a century ago
when our telescopes got much better.
Now it isn’t empty, there are galaxies in
there, probably a couple thousand of them
though we’ve only catalogued a handful,
but as an example, your typical Galaxy Filament,
the huge complexes of galactic superclusters
between the voids, and which are about the
same size scale, would generally have tens
or hundreds of thousands of galaxies in it
and are smaller in volume than voids too,
so the voids aren't empty but they are pretty
empty even compared to the space between galaxies
inside galactic clusters, superclusters, galaxy
filaments and walls.
So we can rule out the Voids and Supervoids
as being indicative of life.
They might well have civilizations in them
but the voids themselves are not a telltale
signature of them.
As we learned more about them they didn’t
really seem at odds with our understanding
of the Early Universe, quite to the contrary,
and their expansion is simply mundane universal
expansion, their emptiness merely a mark of
being low density rather than hidden materials
and invisible civilizations.
What about disappearing stars though?
One that might be turning into Dyson Swarms?
Well, first we have to recognize that this
is many different phenomena.
For instance, a star catalogued as having
a brightness, or apparent magnitude of say,
10, back in 1920, a century ago, would be
one you couldn’t see with the naked eye
but was well inside the range of any modest
telescope.
There are billions of such stars and virtually
none have a name other than a catalogue reference.
Someone looking at it now might see one there
with an apparent magnitude of 12 and simply
assume it was a different star, they do move
a bit with time and errors get made in reporting
them.
Indeed a lot of stars get found and recorded
because someone pointed a telescope that way,
saw something, jotted down it’s coordinates
and magnitude, and sent those to an observatory
for confirmation.
If it’s a mundane star, simply put, nobody
cared.
Astronomers and Astrophysicists do not care
about any star that isn’t particularly interesting
because there are so many of them, a report
of one with no interesting properties is as
exciting as finding an oak tree in a national
park.
In theory someone at an observatory looked
there and confirmed all the data was right
but people being people, and astronomy having
a lot of variability and uncertainty, it might
have been a magnitude 12 star originally and
just mistakenly got recorded as a 10 and nobody
cared till someone saw it century later and
thought it anomalous.
Now that’s just a mundane example of human
error or equipment limitations and we’ve
some more mysterious examples of disappearing
stars we’ll get to, but don’t ever underestimate
such errors and their frequency in science.
Someone finds some stars a century back all
near each other in the sky, their estimate
of brightness is a little shaky, a lazy observatory
assistant tasked with the boring task of confirming
them sees they are there and the brightness
is about right, and a century later someone
else sees them, more accurately sees their
brightness a bit lower than originally reported,
and folks say ‘look, a bunch of dimming
stars are in proximity to each other, that
could be a sign of a growing interstellar
civilization dimming those stars by Dyson
Swarm englobement’, even though those stars
are in the same direction but one is a few
hundred light years away and another is a
few thousand, implying any civilization actually
colonizing that region opted to skip millions
of closer candidate stars to do that Dyson
Englobement.
Of course that’s a thing to keep in mind
with Dyson Swarms, if you build such things,
you don’t skip nearer stars, even if they’re
not ideal copies of your native star with
no decently habitable planets to terraform,
unless they’re dangerously unstable or in
a chaotic neighborhood, and maybe not even
then.
A civilization going up the Kardashev Scale
has abandoned planets as a center for life
in favor of alternatives like O’Neill Cylinders
- or for post-biological civilizations, massive
orbiting computer complexes – and while
rare gems of systems with a ideally habitable
planets might be treasured they aren’t skipping
other systems, just prioritizing those gems
a bit.
Also while we usually picture them as growing
blobs of darkness, expanding out from their
homeworld in a rough sphere, that doesn’t
mean that patch of sky goes utterly dark,
even ignoring that it’s actually going infrared
anyway, because a sphere a hundred light years
wide of Dyson Swarmed stars still has stars
out past it or before it that we’d be seeing
still from that direction.
What else causes stars to appear to disappear
though?
Besides observational error that is.
Well we don’t just have astronomer eyeballs
to work with, we often had photographic plates
and we found some where the plate showed a
star brighter than what was there now.
Stars often do vary a bit in brightness over
time and can flare for any number of reasons,
like something smacking into them, nor are
such old plates ultra-reliable for data, but
it’s important to keep scale in mind.
If an event happened on average once every
million years that brightened a star for a
century, then 1 in 10,000 stars, if photographed
at random, would be undergoing that at any
given time, and looked at a century later
would seem freakishly dimmer.
There would be millions of such stars doing
that in our galaxy at any given moment.
Similarly dimming events, like an obscuring
debris cloud, could cause false appearances
of dimming too.
But we do have entire classes of stars like
pulsars, variable stars, or the recently identified
hot subdwarf pulsators that can change brightness
rather largely over time increments, either
irregularly or with high precision timing
of repetition, and of course you could have
both, a star that pulsed in brightness by
10% every month and just happened to have
undergone a dimming or brightening effect
like a collision while we were looking at
it.
The odds of both being the case might be small,
but our galaxy is huge, giving us a sample
size of hundreds of billions for such freak
coincidences to occur.
This is where we approach such anomalies under
the Fermi Paradox by asking why we’d only
see one sign of potential artificial origin,
rather than several.
For instance, you know you’re near a human
city when you have a large light glow at night
time, from all the street and window lights
in that city, it’s a sign of artificial
origin, but you’d also expect to see at
least a couple more such signatures, like
a spike in thermal infrared from all the artificial
heat and energy of that city, or a spike in
radio transmissions, which even if you can’t
decipher them or see a pattern in them because
they’re encrypted or very compressed, still
would be around as a spike in the amount of
transmission.
I don’t need to be able to make out individual
conversations in a crowded room of people
to know folks are talking, there’s a loud
buzz.
So if you find a dimming star, you check it’s
neighbors to see if any of them are dimming,
you check that star and those neighbors for
anomalous amounts of LWIR emission, extra
radio waves, and so on.
Key notion incidentally is that a Dyson Swarm
can be built very fast, especially a simple
solar collector that might be thin sheets
of material constructed and assembled in mere
years by automated robots dissembling a handful
of decent sized asteroids for raw materials,
as we discussed last week in our episode “Let’s
Dismantle the Solar System”, but this still
takes time and effort and long before you’ve
got your Dyson Swarm up to even blocking a
mere 1% of the star’s brightness – and
we could barely notice such a dimming – you
have all the power and energy to launch huge
interstellar colonization fleets.
After all, 1% of our Sun’s energy is still
20 million times the amount of energy Earth
receives from the Sun, which we don’t use
very efficiently either, so such a civilization,
what we’d call a K-1.8 in this case, two
orders of magnitude beneath a full K-2 or
K-2.0 civilization, already dwarfs in power
and scale what we usually see in science fiction
when talking about huge galactic empires of
a million worlds.
If you’ve found one that has dimmed enough
in a century to be noticeable to us as definitely
not a recording error, you’ve found a civilization
with sufficient energy and construction capacity
to have already started that process around
all their neighboring stars their ships could
have reached in that time and done so rather
easily.
Or in short form, if they’re dimming that
quickly, it means they are fast growing and
quite capable of interstellar colonization,
and aren’t even a little interested in subtlety,
so you’d expect to see all the stars near
them begin showing those dimming characteristics.
More importantly, since these dimming stars
are all fairly near us in the galaxy, and
dimming just recently, it would be a freaky
coincidence for there not to be tons more
such civilizations that did that long before
now and that raises the Dyson Dilemma, as
the galaxy should be packed with such rapidly
expanding civilizations… or rather the daughter
colonies of the first civilization in the
galaxy to have started such an expansion a
billion or more years ago before anyone else
had a chance, if there’s anyone out there.
I often get asked about the animations we
use on the episodes and I do make some myself
but many more are done by graphic artists
who volunteer their time on the show or from
stock footage sources, and if you’ve got
some animation or graphics background and
some free time and want to help out, just
drop me a line on the email posted on the
About page for the channel.
If you’re interested in learning how to
do animation or graphic design though, it
can often be kind of intimidating at first
as it often has a steep learning curve, but
there are some great courses on the topic
over at Skillshare, including a series on
making motion graphics from our friends over
at Kurzgesagt in a Nutshell.
As usual for them, they’re excellent at
squeezing important information into quick
but understandable packages, to help you get
started on animating, and there are many more
great animation courses on Skillshare, along
with thousands of other courses on a wide
variety of useful and interesting topics.
Perhaps you’re trying to adjust to working
in a new environment or just looking to pick
up some new skill or hobby, Skillshare has
a course for it, whether you’re a beginner,
a pro, a dabler, or a master, Skillshare has
thousands of classes on a wide variety of
topics from experts to help you learn.
Skillshare is an online learning community
for creatives, where millions come together
to take the next step in their creative journey,
and Members get unlimited access to thousands
of inspiring classes, with hands-on projects
and feedback from a community of millions.
If you’d like to give it a try the first
1000 of my subscribers to click the link in
the description will get a 2 month free trial
of Premium Membership so you can explore your
creativity.
Act now, and start learning, today.
So a common answer to the Fermi Paradox is
that advanced civilization arise a lot but
tend to collapse, and next week we’ll be
taking a look at the popular science fiction
trope of Techno-Barbarians, civilizations
existing in a post-apocalyptic time using
an anachronistic combination of primitive
and advanced technology.
But before that we’ll have our monthly livestream
Q&A, on Sunday, July 26th, 4 pm Eastern US
Time.
Those will finish out for the month of July,
but we’ll be back in August, starting with
a look at Superconductors.
What they are, how they work, and what the
impact of them is and will be if we ever get
ones that work at room temperature.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
