This episode is sponsored by ExpressVPN.
They say space is the final frontier, but
what if it is just the beginning of our explorations
and experimentations, and what if some experiments
require entire galaxies to conduct them?
We often speculate about alien life and alien
civilizations on this show, and we take only
three things for granted about their behavior.
First that they evolved some place where nature
was as cutthroat as our own world, and thus
they are not wimps but rather the product
of eons of survival and adaptation.
That they rose to the top of their world to
dominate it as we have, and that if they made
it out into space they first did so by climbing
to the top a pile of skulls billions of years
deep.
Second, we assume they must have a strong
survival urge to have done this, and thus
care about their own survival more than that
of other civilizations.
This might vary from a deep willingness to
sacrifice for their tribe or hive to utter
personal selfishness, no friend or family
ties, and it might vary from a species that
would risk its own neck to help other species
to one that would go a million light years
out of their way just to incinerate another
species’ home world, but they will care
more about their survival than ours, for instance.
And third, they will assume anyone they encounter
out in the galaxy will be the same, tough
and survival oriented.
Now there is one exception to the above assumptions
and that comes from the influence of technology.
Technology might allow a species to have been
created in a lab that had no survival imperative
or had it lower on its priority list, akin
to Asimov’s 3 Laws of Robotics, that place
self-survival for robots at third place behind
human survival and obeying humans.
Technology also lets you craft environments
that are such paradises that no great skill
at survival is needed, indeed one might run
psychological and biological experiments to
see how life changed if survival pressures
were removed for hundreds of generations,
to answer the concern that too easy a life
might make people weak in form and mind and
character.
However, we’re not interested today in how
technology permits those exceptions to our
three assumptions about alien civilizations,
but rather how it forms a fourth assumption.
Namely that the simple existence of technology
implies a strong trait of curiosity and one
refined enough to perform science.
This is what we will be discussing today,
how a civilization will be approaching the
galaxy if science has become core to its civilization.
One which seeks to explore the galaxy for
curiosity more than colonization or resources.
In the previous two episodes of this series,
Galactic Domination, we looked at those seeking
to control the galaxy, in Empire Eternal,
and to harvest it, in Strip Mining the Galaxy,
and so today we look at the extreme form of
scientific explorations in regard to the galaxy,
turning it into your laboratory.
Now I mentioned how technology can permit
some exceptions, like making a pacifist race
to serve your own, via technology, but I feel
obliged to mention how technology can create
its own exception too.
One of the next scripts on my plate to write
is on Human-Machine Teaming, and it is not
a script but rather a presentation to MIT
Lincoln Labs, that I probably will adapt into
an episode too, but I had gotten to chat with
one of the experts, Robert Seater, on the
topic and something he pointed out was that
in many ways the best technology or best use
of artificial intelligence was in making it
invisible.
Not hidden in the sense of being covert, but
simply so well integrated and silent in function
that it's just a background invisible thing.
The best toaster is not one capable of holding
complex conversations with you, but rather
one that knows what you want and hopefully
before you even ask.
It knows who hit the button on it, and knows
how they like their toast, or better yet,
knows who likes toast when and produces it
ready to go when you enter the kitchen, or
even delivers it to your table.
This is a recurring concept in more and more
devices as we move into smart homes, things
which learn to anticipate our personal wants,
but in the sense of invisibility has long
been true of a lot of software too, the best
features of most programs are those you forget
even exist, you take them for granted.
Indeed, while the squeaky wheel gets the oil,
the ideal machine is the one you forgot even
exists.
With that in mind, we have to seriously contemplate
that technological civilizations might not
be super curious or even terribly intelligent
after a time, because their technology requires
so very little learning or maintenance.
We should not assume this necessarily leads
to them becoming dumber, but it does challenge
whether or not our classic science fiction
assumption of species growing smarter, bigger
of brain, and more intellectual as the eons
roll by is really very valid.
Intelligence is valuable for survival, but
once survival is assured, how does greater
intelligence benefit one?
Not that we should be assuming a singular
course of action, you might have folks in
the same culture who were content to let the
machines glide along invisibly and being indifferent
to how they operate while others opted to
shoot or snort every mind-enhancing cocktail
their science could come up with while jamming
computers into their skulls.
However, in such a society we might have folks
who worried about either extreme case, a total
indifference to technology and a total obsession
with mind-enhancement and technological advancement.
Note that I’m not saying an indifference
to technology would imply an indifference
to intelligence and education incidentally,
just to technology.
Invisible technology might be integrated into
your civilization to the point that it was
like our own natural defenses, like our immune
system or digestion, just omnipresent background
clutter of life, rather than this year’s
new cool gadget.
Such a civilization might be curious what
would happen and opt to run an experiment
to see how worlds colonized with invisible
protective tech fared over the generations.
If little robots and machines were always
in the background protecting you from harm,
catching you when you fell, invisibly padding
a sharp corner when you banged into it, repairing
any wound, copying your mind for restoration
and repair against any brain damage, bringing
sustenance to you and so on, what would that
population be like in a few hundred generations?
Assuming it even had generations, given that
they might be functionally immortal, aging
and injuries repaired, and birth control rates
carefully but covertly handled by the invisible
machines.
Indeed you might take this to such an extreme
that folks did not get hungry or could eat
all they want without getting fat, and it
seems an alien species might want to have
thousands of planets devoted just to minor
iterations in this experiment to see which
led down what path, for good or ill.
There may be iterations of convenience or
ignorance or both which had desired positive
effects.
And before criticizing such a civilization
too much, keep in mind that we do not spend
much time or energy contemplating our heart
beating or lungs breathing or immune system
defending, they are machines that operate
in the background.
We probably should not assume a civilization
which had technologically prevented toe stubbing
was an inherently hedonistic one, whether
by rounding all sharp corners or having padding
in shoes, or smart shoes, or interrupts in
the nervous systems that simply shut off the
pain.
Nor should we assume that one which had conscious
control of heart rate and breathing was somehow
better, especially as we might encounter alien
civilizations which had naturally evolved
to consciously control their heart rate but
not consciously control their excretion processes,
for instance.
Nonetheless it would seem like something we
would want to know the answer to and we balk
at the notion of running thousand-world experiments
on such matters mostly on the ethics of experimenting
on people rather than the notion of systematically
checking out the options.
We get the cheat of knowing that if we colonize
enough worlds we will probably get volunteers
who set up a world with a given set of parameters
out of choice rather than deception or force.
We should not assume another civilization
would have any issue with covert or coercive
experimentation of course, especially given
that we often have not.
We can probably skip mentioning all the times
we have done one or the other in the name
of science, I don’t think anyone listening
is likely to be surprised that we have nor
does one need to be too cynical to think we
will again, or that some other species might
not care at all.
On the flip side, you can run an experiment
on a thousand worlds without coercion, simply
by asking for volunteers, and in many cases
without them needing to be in the dark about
the experiment either.
We probably would not have too hard a time
finding volunteers for colonizing a few hundred
planets where they were told going in that
we were going to alter human aggression levels
up or down for each world by 1-10% and see
what happened after a few centuries.
Indeed the big problem there would be self-selection
bias, as folks who thought aggression and
ambition were vital to human success would
flock to one world while those who thought
it was the root of problems would flock to
another and they would be carrying their personal
philosophies and ideologies with them.
Which would make getting results of the physical
effect of biologically lower or higher aggression
rather hard to sort out.
Doable though, especially with a big enough
sample and a big enough brain, and you’ve
got a whole galaxy to make samples in.
That’s something to keep in mind, experiments
like these with proper control groups could
be tabulated and sorted by a ten year old,
or a very simple AI of the kind we already
have, it is just number crunching around a
fairly simple problem.
A civilization might get a lot of science
done just by having their invisible AI in
the background be authorized to check how
minor alteration in various human instincts
and imperatives affected us.
Quick side note on that though, speaking of
human imperatives and machine imperatives.
I mentioned Asimov’s 3 Laws of Robotics
earlier, prevent harm to humans, do what humans
tell you, and prevent harm to yourself in
that order, and also the implied equivalent
for humans and aliens in terms of natural
selection not producing wimps or folks who
don’t care about surviving.
We should probably emphasize though that when
we say humans have a will to survive or will
to protect their species, that is only true
in a meta sense.
Evolution is really about the notion of self-sustaining
concepts or algorithms, you don’t have some
internal prime directive not to die, you’ve
got a host of reflexes and safeguards which
fire off to prevent something often damaging
or lethal each of which popped up separately
and randomly at some point in our ancestors
existence.
You no more want to survive, biologically,
than your house wants to stay warm or cold,
it is insulated, not programmed to be insulated.
Of course modern thermostats are a lot smarter
about temperature and neither insulation nor
thermostats are evolved traits, they are textbook
examples of intelligent design, but that also
may be an issue out in the stars and where
a big laboratory comes up.
We might need to test new traits and how they
help or hinder in unexpected ways when added
to complex systems – this is the field of
cybernetics incidentally – the term originally
meaning how to analyze and predict changes
to complex systems with feedbacks, and the
notion of modern cyborg or cybernetic organisms
just arose from that, but obviously cyborgs
as a future for humanity is something that’s
very likely to arise too.
Running tests on how cybernetic or genetic
augmentation altered a person’s psychology
or a civilization’s overall behavior is
another one you might need a big lab for.
We also need to be considering what their
core motivation for running experiments is,
because it probably is not their immediate
survival or convenience, not when we’re
talking about a civilization, individual,
or group whose main motive for going out in
the galaxy is science.
The real galaxy is not like Star Trek, where
you are going to find some weird new physical
phenomena every other episode.
The galaxy might turn out to be very interesting
in biological and botanical offerings if life
is common, even non-intelligent life.
Indeed it might be quite interesting geologically
too, but there's not going to be much to interest
physicists in terms of the fundamental laws
of the Universe.
When we start talking about galactic scale
experiments a physicist might want to conduct,
then it isn’t exploring every new system,
it is making some supercollider that is a
ring around the entire galaxy or some telescopic
grid that lets us create an array that wide.
Experiments might include things like trying
to make a Kerr Ring out of a Klemperer Rosette
of Neutron Stars.
Think of several neutron stars carefully pushed
into a circle together, orbiting as a group
to avoid merging, such a collection of dense
mass objects might form a black hole which
had no singularity in its center, or big ball
of burning matter there either, and thus might
be a traversable object coming out in a hypothetical
white hole.
Something like this is buildable, with sufficient
brute force application of energy and matter,
but the galaxy does offer that to us.
For a civilization focused on science, then
each star can power massive computers for
modeling experiments or simulating scenarios
or tabulating experimental data.
Every chunk of matter has its use in building
or powering experiments or fueling the creation
of more scientists.
Now a default civilization like our own is
content to just make scientists as one of
many encouraged and valuable professions among
a host of life choices.
But one focused on just churning out scientific
minds might be engaging in not just wholesale
genetic and cybernetic augmentation, but flat
out cloning or mind uploading and duplication
of brains.
Very approximately, a Matrioshka Brain, a
multi-layered stellar engine that uses all
the power of a star to run computation, would
permit either one massive singular brain of
that scale or the emulation of 10^34 human
brains, or 10 billion, trillion, trillion
Einsteins, and that’s just one single star
like our own.
Some stars offer a million times more power
to calculate with.
You’re presumably trying to create minds
more powerful and clever than Einstein – and
presumably want some diversity of expertise
and method, but imagine what a million Einstein’s
might accomplish if each lived a million years,
then consider that such a Matrioshka Brain,
just one of them, would be able to replicate
those million Einstein’s for a million years
each in just a quintillionth of a second.
In terms of raw processing anyway, given that
a photon of light would not have even covered
a millionth of a meter in that time there’s
probably a limit as to how compressed you
can make a thought occur, regardless of how
many brains you can simultaneously emulate.
If you want to run trillions upon trillions
of people at a time, and probably at a subjective
time rate far faster than normal human timelines,
Matrioshka Brains are a great way to go about
it.
And as an alternative to colonizing a million
planets just to test how slightly varying
levels of aggression or ambition or depression
or hardship effected civilizations, being
able to run those as emulated people on a
Matrioshka Brain might appeal to such scientists.
This is especially true when we consider that
a million worlds, with 10 billion people each,
would only represent one-billionth of one
billionth of the processing power of a single
Matrioshka Brain, powered by a single star,
out of the hundreds of billions of them in
our Galaxy.
The reality is that one of those Matrioshka
Brains is probably capable of simulating an
entire populated Universe of classic planets
to a level of resolution and authenticity
we would have problems detecting if we tried
to, and far beyond what we found comfortable
for living in.
Now we don’t really expect civilizations
to be constrained to those classic planet
colonization models anyway, in favor of Dyson
Swarms and parallel options which let you
comfortably pack billions of times more people
into a solar system than a planet would permit.
However, it would seem like a civilization
very focused on scientific research and trying
to maximize available calculation power might
not be one terribly focused on running culture
simulations on a trillion worlds anyway, but
it probably depends on what they are researching
and we tend to take for granted that they’re
pondering deep physics problems when my own
gut guess as a physicist is that the underlying
rules of the Universe probably are not infinitely
recursive and complex, and indeed probably
are going to turn out to be pretty simple
compared to all the other emergent areas of
science, life, and thought.
They are likely to be spending lots of effort
on Existential Issues, though that’s just
my own guess, and that might well require
vast human experiments.
Or they might be trying to crack entropy or
light speed limitations or time travel.
On that topic though, one issue with human
research is the time factor of getting results,
especially multi-generational ones, and absent
time travel you rather have to be patient
to get results.
In science fiction we’ll sometimes see civilizations
created inside accelerated pockets of spacetime
where things run much faster.
We even see cases where humans live shortened
lives for experimental purposes, like on the
planet Argos in the Stargate SG-1 episode
“Brief Candle” where everyone only lives
100 days.
That particular episode has the experiment
as product of a rather amoral and vicious
creature playing God, literally impersonating
one in this case, and thus is assumed to be
evil but given that the folks in it seem to
grow to full human knowledge and maturity
in well under 100 days, for reasons unknown,
that would seem to have some positive effects
for some applications.
Regardless, one thing you can do with a whole
galactic lab is play with time.
Possibly by unknown methods to speed it up,
if such things exist folks with a galactic
scale of research will doubtless figure them
out, but at a minimum we can slow time around
very massive objects like Black Holes and
thus a civilization could speed everyone else
up, from their perspective, by running their
experiment galaxy wide while hiding themselves
in that slow time field to await results.
Though it would seem easier just to employ
some sort of periodic freezing or stasis to
jump forward in time that way, waking for
a day every century or so.
This is another case where simulation is handy
though, because if you can emulate a human
mind with a certain amount of processing power,
or an entire civilization with a certain amount
of processing power, in a simulated reality,
then you can run that thing a thousand times
faster with a thousand times more processing
power.
Note that we’re assuming proper emulation,
essentially full and total simulation of a
human neuron, not some minimalist or partial
approach, which might work too in many cases.
We’re assuming here there’s no aspect
of humanity that can’t be emulated on a
computer which is a big assumption to be fair.
This doesn’t have to do with whether or
not a civilization can emulate people correctly,
but whether or not it's possible at all, and
that’s something we can’t say yet but
presumably it can be done if there’s no
supernatural aspect of humans like a soul
or so on, and we don’t know from a scientific
perspective if there is or isn’t.
That’s the sort of big question a super-advanced
civilization might expend galaxies worth of
resources trying to answer, or similarly,
if there’s any Universe beyond our Observable
one, be it Multiverses or higher layers of
reality or whatever.
And it raises one final point for consideration
for today, which is the motivation for the
research.
Fundamentally we are asking what a civilization
would be like if it were principally interested
in the galaxy for scientific ends, and much
like with our discussion of hypothetical alien
civilizations, where we ask what a species
might be like that was trying to hide or was
conquest oriented or was making crop circles,
we can do that in regard to scientific focus.
A civilization wanting to seek out every anomaly,
Star Trek style, probably won’t be doing
that in our Galaxy because there won’t be
many anomalies, they’d likely be focused
on trying to find ways to get to other realities
with different physics instead.
One interested in simply modeling human behavior
might be interested in cannibalizing the galaxy
to build lots of petri dish habitats to experiment
on unknowing and unwilling people, or they
might opt to build countless virtual worlds
instead, but they probably aren’t classically
colonizing planets.
Folks trying to build Kerr Ring style wormholes
probably are shepherding or making neutron
stars.
Ones focused on beating entropy probably would
show a footprint that was about minimizing
it presently too, which would see them snuffing
out stars before they could form and burn
their precious hydrogen.
But when it comes to the big existential questions,
those presumably limit what they can do experimentally
too.
Consider, a civilization which thinks it entirely
ethical to use trillions upon trillions of
people like disposable test tubes to conduct
sociological research doesn’t really seem
like one trying to find out how to make folks
happy and fulfilled.
A civilization which does not believe life
has any underlying purpose isn’t out there
building a giant computer to ask what the
purpose of life, the Universe, and everything
really is because they don’t think it has
one.
If you believe it has one, then there’s
good odds you also believe there’s some
non-subjective concepts for right and wrong
and good and evil that you shouldn’t be
breaking for research purposes either.
Taken as a whole, while we often imagine ourselves,
or some ancient and wise alien species, engaged
in million year long experiments across a
whole galaxy, I can’t say I find this a
very probable scenario for a civilization's
main focus for why they wanted to engage in
galactic domination.
Not because you might not go to extreme lengths
to carry out experiments or prevent others
interfering with them, but because I can’t
think of many experiments you would run that
might call for that.
So in today’s episode we contemplated galactic
civilizations using entire worlds for social
experiments and collecting data but that is
not a worry of the distant future.
Right now everything you do on the internet
is getting mined for data, for direct use
or for sale to others.
And while there are tons of conveniences,
there are lots of drawbacks too.
like your internet provider being able to
see all the sites you visit, even in incognito
mode, and selling a log of your activity to
advertisers.
The internet becomes more and more integrated
into our lives in more and more ways every
day.
More of us work on it and do business and
banking on it than ever before, both from
at home and from riskier public wifi spots.
And if you do any of that, you need to be
mindful of your cybersecurity because anyone
with a bit of computer knowledge connected
to that same network can easily hack you.
Using a Virtual Private Network like ExpressVPN
is a critical component of that cybersecurity.
Your data is yours, you should control when,
what, and who it gets shared with, and by
hiding your IP address from website’s you
help cut down on your risk and data exposure.
And ExpressVPN encrypts all your data to keep
you safe from hackers and prying eyes.
[cut] And unlike many VPNs, ExpressVPN does
not slow down your internet, and I found it
incredibly fast and easy to use.
It is also easy to use on all your devices,
including on your router so even your guests
or less computer savvy family members can
be protected.
[cut]
So if you’re like me and believe your online
activity is your business, you can find out
how you can get 3 months free by clicking
the link in the description box below:ExpressVPN.com/isaacarthur
So this wraps us up for today and for July,
but we’ll jump right into August next week
with a look at Embracing Nuclear Power, and
the week after that we’ll look at what the
next space station after the ISS will be,
before we have our mid-month Scifi Sunday
episode: Alien Artifacts & Xenoarcheology,
on August 15th.
Then in three weeks we’ll look at Fusion
Propulsion designs and concepts for Spaceships
before closing the Month out by heading all
the way out to the Edge of the Universe, on
Thursday, August 26th, then we’ll have our
Monthly Livestream Q&A on Sunday, August 29th
at 4 pm Eastern Time.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
You can also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud,
or Spotify to get our audio-only versions
of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
