This episode is brought to you by Raycon.
As ever more jobs can be done with automated  
assistance or even entirely by robots, 
are we approaching a time when most  
people won’t have a job, and if so, 
is that a good thing or bad thing? 
Ever since we first started making labor-saving 
devices, even before the term “robot” started  
appearing in scifi around a century ago, 
people’s opinions have been mixed on whether  
more automation is a good thing or not, 
or if it is going to result in either:  
humanity being reduced to being automatons 
themselves, unable to feed their families because  
they can’t compete with robots, or result in us 
being slaughtered by runaway robots, oppressed by  
a minority with control over robots, or going 
the other direction with us being put into a  
utopia in which everyone is a lazy hedonistic slug 
whose every whim is tended to by robots, or freed  
from drudgery and the fears of basic survival, 
to turn our eyes to grander goals and prizes. 
Today we’re going to discuss these options and 
ask how probable each is and what we can do to  
prevent an option or encourage it, mitigate 
it, or just control it to a good end. And we  
need to start by acknowledging that none of those 
concerns should be casually dismissed as unlikely,  
but nor should we be convinced that they are 
inevitable, or even where they might occur,  
or assume that they can’t be walked back or 
their impact cushioned if they start heading  
in a direction deemed undesirable in some way.
As with a lot of our topics, we won’t be able  
to say definitively that A or B will occur, much 
remains unpredictable and also depends a lot on  
the character of humanity going forward. I tend to 
be more positive about that in general so it makes  
me more optimistic about the future and how we’ll 
handle some of these tests of character, but I am  
for realism, first and foremost, and realistically 
this is a problem for humanity going forward. 
We might as well start with asking if more 
automation is a good thing in and of itself. There  
are obviously a lot of pros to having advanced 
technology, but the major con is the fear that  
it contains the seeds of our own destruction, 
and again, there are several paths for that.  
We might see a small group own everything, 
including ultra-loyal killer robots to do  
their oppressing. Or maybe we create a disloyal 
and hostile super-intelligent machine. Or wreck  
our planet with our weapons or waste, or simply 
poison our character by making life too easy. 
But all of those scenarios have to do with 
misusing that technology or lacking sufficient  
mastery of it, reckless use is the danger, 
rather than technology being inherently bad,  
and that’s why we’re here today, to help 
anticipate and contemplate those problems  
and prepare to avoid or handle them.
Is more automation good? Yes. 
It lets us feed more people with less work, to 
make clothes and houses for them with less work.  
It means we don’t have to decide between pushing 
out an old or sick family member into the winter  
cold or watching the whole family starve. It makes 
it possible for us to have children spend over a  
decade in school and play rather than being out in 
the fields with their parents, plowing and sowing.  
One might argue more time working 
as kids would benefit them too,  
but automation gives us the option and it 
gives us abundance by being a labor amplifier. 
Note that I say labor amplifier rather than 
replacement. Classic scifi was very fixated  
on the idea of a computer of roughly human 
intellect stuffed into a humanoid robot body,  
or an android. Technically that’s a man-shaped 
body, and a female-shaped one is called a gynoid,  
but android is generally considered non-gender 
specific these days. The android needed to be  
human-smart to do most tasks and most importantly, 
to take instructions, something a young child or  
animal can’t, so presumably implies a need for 
a powerful robot brain. As time has rolled on  
and we got better at things, we realized 
that we don’t need a human-smart android,  
that we could explain how to run our vacuum or 
broom too, we just make a dumb-as-dirt dedicated  
robot vacuum instead. And in other things, we take 
the smart human and teach them how to control the  
dumb machine, instead of making a smart machine.
That humanoid robot, in mind and body, can be  
enslaved, and raise that fear of us letting 
ourselves fail ethically again in that way,  
and creating an entire new species of androids 
or genetically engineered people who are obedient  
and disposable. Or not quite obedient enough, and 
cut all our throats in the middle of the night. Or  
replacing us in broad daylight and peacefully, 
with everyone around being fine with it. 
As I was getting ready to write this script, 
I was working on a DIY project with my wife,  
and our youngest brother Caleb was helping, and 
at 15, he’s already 6 foot, broad-shouldered,  
and a workhorse. I was unloading lumber and 
measuring and marking it, he was cutting and  
stacking, and being about to turn 42; I probably 
should not have tried to keep up the pace,  
but I did and today I’m thankful ibuprofen and 
icy-hot exist. I’m hardly alone in having done  
something like that. It's proverbial that 
the leading cause of death and injury in men  
over 40 is forgetting they’re not 20 anymore, and 
subconscious motivations can range from hierarchy  
and status concerns to not being seen as weak, 
and trying to set a good example. We also have  
a fear of being obsolete or being replaced by 
a newer, stronger, smarter, and better-looking  
model. I don’t think most of us would be 
quite as worried about that when the robot  
doesn’t look vaguely human or even act like one.
We do have legitimate reason to fear automation  
and artificial intelligence, but we have lots of 
bad reasons too, and we want to separate those  
out and also make sure not to pursue pathways 
that leverage those fears and bad reasons. So  
the key to avoiding getting slaughtered by 
your own creations is to avoid making them  
mentally capable enough to rebel, we’re not 
really worried about our horses or oxen or  
car engines betraying us. It also fits in with 
minimizing irrational fears of automation too. 
Let’s get to some of those more rational 
fears though, and we’ll contemplate the  
automated society as we examine those.
Automation causes unemployment. 
This is a tricky one because people tend to say 
“That’s not true” but it is completely true. Make  
a widget that lets 5 people do a job that used to 
take 6, and someone is without that sixth job. You  
can also replace an entire piece of production 
or function chain with a machine – no more need  
for human phone operators patching your call 
through or looking up a phone number for you. 
Now, we can add caveats. First, we rarely automate 
an entire process and have no real reason to,  
and for many reasons too, but principally, I’d say 
because it is strategically unwise, be it in war,  
business, or politics, to leave any chain without 
a human mind in it, or its equal or superior,  
because you have competition who will find a 
way to exploit something subhuman and entirely  
automated. A billionaire who decides to totally 
automate his factory and relax with no employees  
to pay, who just rakes in the cash whilst 
relaxing on the beach, is going to wake up  
broke one morning. Someone is going to have 
decided to exploit that lack of supervision  
and lack of active strategy. This is often how 
a family business founded by some workaholic can  
decay in future generations, they’re just not 
as committed to it as grandpa was, so to speak,  
preferring a different career or to idle 
in their wealth or just to focus less on  
the business and more on being with their kids.
Second, when we remove a job, we generally find  
some new ones, and since that automation of the 
previous job made the entire human civilization  
a little more productive overall, that new job 
on average, compared to the old job on average,  
is a bit better pay for a bit less work, or 
more pleasant work, or less monotonous work,  
less dangerous work, or work that doesn’t 
cause subtle damage to the human over time,  
such as repetitive strain injury, deafness, 
back pain, etc, which might be as important  
as if you like your job, and probably factors 
into if you do. Folks who actually like their  
jobs are generally more productive at it 
anyway, but also do not need as much stress  
relief for a job they don’t like and typically 
don’t have as many other issues with life. 
It’s generally our goal to create a world where 
people like their jobs, and are more than able to  
support the basic needs and reasonable comforts 
of themselves and their family by doing them.  
Personally, I have zero interest in producing 
a world where people don’t need to work at all,  
I would not view that as either a desirable or 
plausible objective. Something intelligent has  
to be making sure things get done and proofing 
them against tampering by other intelligences.  
I would not want to be reliant on its good will 
for my continued existence, especially if my  
relationship with it was essentially parasitical, 
which is definitely a conclusion that could be  
reached by a super-intelligent AI whom we had all 
come to trust in and rely on for our continued  
wellbeing. Any drain on its time or resources, 
however small, would count, and only an infinite  
being could indefinitely tolerate moochers, so 
to speak, and our universe appears to be finite.  
I also tend to suspect a prosperous humanity 
with magnificent automation is going to find  
it a lot easier to say no to creating 
intelligent artificial minds as slaves,  
even if the machine is created to like its job. I 
hate to say it this way but sometimes prosperity  
makes it easier to find and afford scruples.
And with all those resources and free time on  
their hands, there are bound to be plenty of 
people who are willing to get militant about  
the matter. Especially given that we only need 
human-level intelligence for a tiny fraction  
of our actual production, so you’re pushing AI 
abolition with a downside of people maybe needing  
to work an hour a week and generally to have 
trained their minds. I really have difficulty  
seeing that push failing, except insofar as I 
doubt it would ever be needed. I think people will  
be very opposed to human-level AI being in any way 
mass-produced for at least some centuries to come. 
In the meantime, you have a hyper-automated 
society already because again, you really  
don’t need much brains for most of what we do, 
not we turn a lot of brains to figuring out the  
specifics of a task, like vacuuming a floor, 
and yet I do expect people to be busy because  
I think brain-requiring tasks are a lot like 
all the new jobs we’ve had from automation,  
things that will just keep emerging as folks 
have more time and mental energy to turn to  
things they couldn’t before. Boredom is 
a thing people tend to experience when  
they have free time and can’t do the things 
they want to be doing, for me, I experience  
that when stuck in a doctor’s waiting room or 
similar, and smart phones help with that a lot.
I’m not really sure what free time with nothing 
to do would actually be like, I always have  
stuff to do, of varying priorities and including 
recreation, and I’m assuming that most people are  
the same. When you’re younger, that sometimes 
isn’t the case, a lot of your options for  
doing things are curtailed by limited resources, 
mobility, and involvement, or if you’ve freshly  
moved to an area, especially pre-internet days, 
when you don’t know anyone, are a little hesitant  
to meet them, and most of your stuff is still 
en route or packed up. Generally as the years  
roll on, you drop roots and pick up interests, 
hobbies, friends, community involvement, and so  
on until you become an accomplished juggler.
You’ve experienced a lot of life and have a  
lot of life going on as a result, and have an 
overflowing list of things you want to get done.  
And I really wouldn’t ever see that changing just 
because you didn’t have a typical job you worked  
9-5 at. People are going to fill their days up 
with stuff, most retirees do so in short order,  
automation just makes it easier to fill it 
up with things of your choosing, and without  
needing to work hard just to keep the lights 
on and heat in your house, and the fridge full. 
I honestly don’t see the 4 hour work week 
though, and more specifically, I don’t see  
the single job concept sticking around. I would 
expect folks to have a few different things they  
did for a living instead of just one, but that 
one is more of a hunch. Truthfully single-task  
jobs never really existed outside of factories 
and were rare there too. My guess is there will  
probably be fewer bosses and supervisors, 
and a lot more automated coordination. 
As an example, one of our goals is presumably 
to make sure there is work for everyone,  
and work that is compatible with their other 
obligations and is emotionally and materially  
rewarding. We think of automation as mostly being 
in terms of factories and we often forget that  
a lot of it is in office and white-collar jobs. 
The first job computers replaced were computers,  
that used to be a human job title. And so much 
of it is about finding the opportunities and  
connecting people to them. We’ll 
see a lot of that moving forward,  
just in this next decade when we start seeing 
all the equivalents of Uber, Grubhub, and AirBnB  
start emerging in different sectors, where people 
mostly work for themselves. Someone is eventually  
going to figure out how to make a daycare and 
babysitting version of those for instance,  
and if they can pull off a good feeling of comfort 
and security for folks involved, its designer is  
going to be a billionaire, and it’s going to add 
a big supplemental income to a lot of households  
while probably reducing cost for others.
I’ve a suspicion that such a comfort  
level might only be achievable if people were 
putting cameras on their kids, but to be honest,  
I would be rather surprised if that didn’t become 
normal inside the next couple decades anyway. As a  
follow-up prediction, much as body cams are 
increasingly the norm for law enforcement,  
expect to see them on teachers, or cameras in the 
classrooms and daycares that parents can access. 
That’s a big chunk of automation too, algorithms 
able to pour through data to either communicate  
a need specifically between two entities – 
I need a ride and this person is the nearest  
available – and to pour through recordings of 
people and pick out important bits. Hypothetical  
abuse or other crimes, but also more mundane stuff 
like watching kids to see what they find boring  
or interesting, to help tailor their personal 
education, or to help find habits we want to  
encourage or discourage early as they form. Also 
something bots are good at, able to sift through  
videos and pictures online to find every mention 
of you, every photo and video, and flag it. 
Since we brought up the privacy concern in all of 
this, I would also speculate that our answer to  
such things is going to be every public platform 
having auto-ID built in to everything, so that you  
are just automatically blurred or redacted from 
any post you didn’t okay, photo, video, or audio,  
and probably any text reference to you too. That’s 
likely to begin as a voluntary thing done by your  
big social media platforms, which circumvents 
someone saying it’s their right to post a photo of  
you. People value their ability to disappear into 
the crowd, and in this case probably literally.  
When contemplating the zebra, one asks why 
it has stripes and folks say camouflage,  
and that’s a head scratcher, given that black 
and white vertical stripes wouldn’t seem good  
camouflage in a prairie, but it is when you’re 
part of a herd full of similar looking critters.  
Folks are a lot more concerned with their ability 
to hide in a crowd than preventing other people  
from being able to do so, this is probably part of 
why we don’t already have cameras on every street  
and house even though it would massively cut down 
on crime. We don’t want other people being able to  
stalk us online and I’d anticipate laws shifting 
where needed, to make that harder and harder. I  
would also bet human content screeners will be a 
continuing and expanding job area. Also folks able  
to hunt for the loopholes and cracks in automated 
systems to prevent others exploiting them. 
Another big worry then, is that many people 
just won’t have work, which is probably a  
legitimate concern. Though some fear this will 
be 99% unemployment and 1% owning everything,  
this doesn’t really seem likely. Again, there’s a 
constant effort involved in maintaining a system,  
static operations are mostly illusionary, 
and even if we assumed 1% owned everything,  
including ultra-loyal robots enforcers, it is very 
hard to imagine that occurring or lasting long. 
Your mileage may vary on that and it would seem 
like a discussion that would be requiring its  
own video and not one I feel much urge to write. 
Instead, I’m more concerned about the bottom 10%  
getting unemployed, then maybe the bottom 11%, 
and so on. I don’t really see that going to 99%  
or 99.9% but even just going to 10% is pretty bad.
There’s a notion about some people just being too  
dumb to join the military, I’ve heard folks 
say no one has lower than an IQ of 85 or 83,  
but I’m not personally aware of any official 
bottom limit or it being done off IQ scores  
rather its own test, but that’s the US military, 
and it is presumably different in other countries.  
I’ve usually heard this in recent years associated 
with a remark by Jordan Peterson, who is Canadian,  
so maybe that’s their rule or maybe the US 
changed it since I got out of the army years back. 
Anyway, its accurate enough. Last I heard, 
about a quarter of US high school graduates,  
and even more among dropouts, could not score 
high enough on the test, mental, not physical,  
and thus get listed as Category IV, which are 
essentially the group that, in good recruiting  
times, are less than 1% of recruits, and those on 
waivers for perceived extenuating circumstances,  
and in bad recruiting times I’ve heard of it as 
high as 1 in 8. The lower those scores, the less  
likely a person will get in and it seriously 
impacts efforts to keep them in or incentivize  
their joining with bonuses. That means something 
like a quarter of young adults are deemed not  
smart enough for military service of any sort, 
and the military is always short of volunteers,  
so it’s not like they’re being snobby.
I want to emphasize that because I  
often hear this example in the context of people 
who are essentially just too dumb to be trained  
to do anything useful for an organization, to the 
point that they’d rather do with fewer people than  
add those folks into the mix. I find the notion 
repellent, but I can’t say it's wrong either,  
I’m given to understand the data on it is 
pretty sturdy, and that there are folks who  
are just useless in any work capacity. I’d 
tend to feel it shows a lack of a creativity  
in seeking work for those folks, but at the 
same time, we have to acknowledge that there  
is a line where its hard to find something 
productive for them to do that’s not chewing  
up more of someone else’s time to create and 
supervise, and that line is probably going to  
be drawn a lot more forgivingly in an automated 
society, but it's also a line that is likely to  
grow higher in a society growing more automated.
At the same time, we don’t want to over-extend  
that military example. Modern militaries 
don’t really need more brains because of all  
the technical roles and equipment, though it does 
certainly help, but rather because they’re looking  
for folks who can make judgements calls and quick 
reactions as modern doctrine tends to emphasize  
small teams and making decisions, we don’t 
line folks up for shield walls or volley fire.  
There is a genuine and at least 
semi-legitimate fear that folks who  
are not mentally and physically fit enough are 
exposing their comrades to increased danger. 
Of course, a lot of companies and a lot 
of jobs require that same reasoning,  
and you also get fears of weak links 
being the ones who mess up cybersecurity,  
or get conned in more traditional ways, or 
don’t understand the rules the company operates  
under and why and thus need to be inclined to 
memorize and follow them even when they don’t  
make sense to them, to just follow orders.
Needless to say, that’s something automation  
is good at too, and so it shifts things into 
asking if it benefits us to keep those folks  
busy productively, even if it has a modest, or 
even negative effect on our overall production.  
To me the answer is ‘almost always yes’ because 
it’s an ethical perspective as much as a practical  
one, I’m not a fan of idle hands and I’m not a fan 
of folks feeling worthless. I don’t really like  
the notion of make-work, to me it shows a lack of 
creativity, but if I had a kid in my household who  
couldn’t seem to be trained to any chores besides 
dishwashing, but they used twice as much water,  
energy, and soap as my dishwashing machine, and 
broke more plates, I’d probably still have them  
do that. And the analogy to civilization as a 
whole is that we tend to believe it's better for  
something to be earned than given, or at least 
striven for. Your mileage may vary on that,  
or on other perceived benefits to society.
The counterargument would tend to be that, instead  
of diverting more productive members of 
society to helping those folks learn to  
do work they could do and supervising them, 
we could just let them do other work, tax it,  
and use it provide a basic subsistence to provide 
for that person’s comfort and care. And we do tend  
to mix and match these too, probably not as 
effectively as we could, but they represent  
your two major ways to deal with unemployment in 
a society where the entry skill level for work  
in demand is above that of which a large portion 
or even a majority of the population is capable. 
They’re not the only two ways, and some 
are not palatable to an ethical person;  
I should think, but need mentioning anyway, that 
you either dispose of those not seen as valuable  
or you just cast them out to the fringes. We 
won’t contemplate those beyond that today,  
beyond saying that there’s also many logical 
and pragmatic reasons why those aren’t great  
plans either, and we have a tragic number 
of historical cases of it being tried. Folks  
don’t like when you kill their weaker family 
members while talking about the greater good,  
especially in a prosperous society, and casting 
them out tends to get you criminal elements which  
cost blood and gold to manage too. Thankfully, 
a highly automated society is prone to plenty,  
and so, such arguments of desperation to 
kill-off or cast-out the weak to save the  
tribe, are unlikely to find purchase. I hope.
I would like to think we could find work for  
anyone which they both enjoyed and which benefited 
society, but even I’m not so optimistic as to  
assume that’s guaranteed or that it would be 
particularly profitable and thus easy to get  
everyone to cooperate in creating. Also, it might 
be that we would need to devote a lot of effort  
and resources to make that happen. Let’s imagine 
for the moment that we could take 100 people who  
would otherwise be unemployed and with a little 
effort, get them employed at something which  
genuinely pays their bills without subsidy by 
the state, but that we would need some full time  
employees to do that. If it only takes 1 or 2, to 
achieve full and excellent matches for all 100,  
that is a great deal and makes for quite a 
profitable company based on finding folks a job. 
If it takes 10, well, now it's getting to be 
a bit more dubious how sound that is but it  
still makes sense. I think we start running 
into hurdles when it takes nearly as many,  
or even more than; to find them that work. And it 
might get to be a bit like the rocket equation,  
where you get increasingly diminishing returns 
in your ratio of fuel to speed. One might imagine  
10% of the population working main production, 
while half the remainder is focused on finding  
ideal and meaningful work for the other half. 
Of course if everyone is living in mansions and  
in a sustainable fashion, because productivity 
is just that high, this might still be fine. 
We need some caveats on this notion though that we 
will slowly put more and more people out of work.  
First, helping folks find their dream 
job that they’re actually well-suited to  
is exactly the sort of data shuffling that 
artificial intelligence tends to excel at,  
so automating our efforts at employment might 
tend to cut down on how many people we need to  
throw at that task while improving results.
Second, the basic needs of humans do not  
actually increase just because production does, 
that’s a false equivalence, we have a slew of  
needs and generally were barely scraping by, and 
while there certainly are frivolous luxuries,  
a lot of things we classify that way are of the 
‘Back in my day we didn’t have X” variety. Well,  
we didn’t have telephones, so someone who 
moved away to school or work or marriage  
couldn’t call mom and dad when they needed advice 
or comfort, I’m not sure that makes it a luxury.  
There are many levels of survival and needs, and 
we should be seeking to address them all better. 
And third, that implies producing more 
things, or more services, but that does  
not mean that the basic level has increased. 
A society where a factory of a thousand people  
has been replaced with 10 folks supervising the 
robots and monitoring the facility, is one that,  
on average, produces 100 times as much as it 
did before. All things being equal, it means  
the farmer either tends 100 times the cropland or 
gets 100 times the produce from their cropland,  
or just that they now only need to spend a few 
hours a month running their small family farm.  
This is not one where people are starving in 
the streets without food, medicine, education,  
etc. It might be one where almost all these 
services are done by volunteering time to help or  
by paying income and property taxes, or production 
taxes, or it might be that some individual’s work  
is very low value, viewed as being less productive 
in a work week than the average person does in a  
work hour, but that normal hour would produce 
basic food and goods for one person anyway. 
I don’t want to imply that each of those 
approaches is equal, I’d imagine one is  
better than the others or way worse, but that’s 
something I’d rather leave as food for thought.  
We also have to remember that many solutions have 
parts that appeal or are disliked for reasons  
that might be separable. What is done privately 
by many groups or by volunteers might make an  
approach okay to those who dislike the notion 
of a big corporation or government doing it,  
while on the flip-side, many who don’t like 
the idea of 1% of the population owning the  
vast majority of wealth often would be fine 
with the government having control or public  
ownership or partial share or stake. 
Many of the solutions might be more or  
less palatable to future generations 
for similar reasons of association. 
For my part, I think we’ll see gradually 
more automation in different sectors,  
and some slowdown as the available labor pool 
increases and it de-incentivizes investing in  
more automation, you might even see a robot tax in 
some places used for training displaced workers,  
or subsidizing welfare or paying Universal 
Basic Income, or UBI, which in a productive  
enough society might only need 1% of the GDP 
to give everyone their basic needs stipend. 
We could even see something like a version of 
crypto-currency that automatically distributed  
1% of every transaction to every single person, 
or something along those lines, as a sort of  
combination of sales tax and non-governmental 
UBI. Those are all just some of the strategies  
folks have suggested, and each has its advocates 
and detractors, usually with some well thought out  
reasoning, so my expectation would be that we 
would see various places try out each of those  
approaches and many more. I welcome everyone to 
discuss and suggest others in the comments on the  
episode or our show forums, though please do it 
with courtesy and thought, not jingo or shouts. 
My hunch then is that since this will all happen 
at different rates in different industries and  
places, we will see it as a fairly gradual thing, 
and I would argue it’s something we’ve been  
experiencing for at least a century now. There 
are risks, murderous AI and tyrants with robot  
armies being just two, but I think the key thing 
is that if we have more time to spare not devoted  
to basic living, it is also time and attention 
we can turn toward handling those problems too. 
As crises go, greater automation is a better one 
to have than most, since it at least ensures you  
have an abundance of resources and minds free 
to come up with the solutions and try them too.
One of the upsides about a future where robots 
are doing most of the work is a lot more free  
time to catch up on everything you want to watch, 
listen, or read. Currently most of us have to get  
that in as time permits and that often means 
in a crowded or moving environment where it's  
really nice to have a quality pair of earbuds 
with noise isolation so you can hear your show,  
your audiobook, your music, or your phone 
calls. And if that’s something you’ve ever  
had problems with, I’d recommend 
trying out Raycon Everyday Earbuds
Their wireless earbuds, headphones, 
and speakers offer premium sound;  
useful features; an almost-custom, comfortable 
fit; and up to 54 hours of battery life. 
Raycon’s Everyday Earbuds have noise isolation 
and optimized gel tips for the perfect in-ear fit,  
so they are comfortable and they will not 
budge or fall out. They’re water resistant,  
I’ve washed my on accident before, and they give 
you high quality audio at half the price of other  
premium audio brands. They’re just all around 
great earbuds in terms of quality, versatility,  
comfort, and cost, and if you’re looking for 
gifts, Raycons are the way to go, and their  
durability makes them great gifts not just for 
your adult friends and family but for kids too. 
Everyone needs a pair of Raycons in their ears: 
whether it’s for listening to music or podcasts,  
like this show or taking work calls. You 
know what everyone doesn’t need? Two little  
white stems hanging out of their ears. 
Luckily, Raycons are sleek and stylish,  
and come in a range of colors to match anyone’s 
style. You can find Raycon in stores now,  
like Kohl’s or Wal-Mart, but let me tell 
you right now: you’re always going to  
get the best deal when you use my special 
link: BUY RAYCON dot com slash isaacarthur. 
Click the link in the description box or go to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur and use code EARLYBF to get 20% off  
sitewide—or save even bigger and get 30% 
off Raycon’s exclusive holiday bundles!  
There will also be different deals coming 
throughout the season and I’ll try to keep  
the description box updated with the 
latest offers—but just so you know,  
you can always go to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur 
to get the best deals available on Raycon!
So today we had a fairly serious and modern day 
topic, plus a major election earlier this week  
in the US, so I thought this weekend we’d 
go from that to our Scifi Sunday episode,  
Stranded on an Alien World, to lighten the mood 
and contemplate how we would survive if left  
on one and we’ll follow four stories of people 
stranded on everything from places much like Earth  
to worlds deader than the most barren desert. And 
two weeks from now we’ll contemplate the exact  
opposite of a dead world, a world which was alive 
itself, as we discuss the Gaia Hypothesis Theory.  
Then we’ll celebrate Thanksgiving with an episode 
on Reasons to be Optimistic about the future. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like to  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social media  
forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
