This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. Get 
access to my streaming video service, Nebula,  
when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
We’ve examined before how a civilization 
might build undetectable, stealthy spaceships.  
But what if that entire civilization 
wished to conceal itself?
 
So two episodes back, we were looking at 
Stealth Spaceships and the problems with them.  
We saw how nigh-impossible it is to hide a 
spaceship from a civilization, so hiding an entire  
civilization would presumably be much harder, 
especially one with many planets. But today  
we’re going to look at why a civilization might 
try to hide itself and how this might be done—and  
ultimately if this might be a valid solution 
to the Fermi Paradox, the big question of why,  
in a Universe so ancient and immense, we 
don’t yet see any alien civilizations.
 
Hiding a spaceship differs from hiding a planet 
in much the same way hiding a person inside a city  
varies from trying to hide an entire city. It’s 
complicated in astronomical scales, and in part  
because astronomy is history, and the Universe 
is so old. A civilization hides but the light it  
emitted a century ago just reached their nearest 
neighbors, who may have been a mighty empire for  
a million years and knew your planet was around 
and peopled with clever apes for all that time.  
So it's essentially hiding a city everyone already 
knows exists, not building a new one in secret.
 
What would you do right now, to hide New York 
City, so that people didn’t know it existed?
 
In addition to the ‘what’ and ‘how’, 
now ask yourself why you would?
 
Normally when discussing not being able 
to see aliens because they are hiding,  
we tend to focus on how this is not really 
a viable premise under known physics,  
which is true enough. Hidden alien 
civilizations are not a valid Fermi  
Paradox solution, we often suggest, because 
hiding seems impossible under known science.  
But I suspect this falls flat as a Fermi Paradox 
solution for many for the simple reason that all  
of us are raised on wondrous science fiction 
with impossible technologies and grew up in  
an era where the entire technological landscape 
vastly shifts from generation to generation and  
has done so for longer than anyone now 
alive or anyone they knew was alive. 
 
So “This is not physically possible under known 
science” is just not a very compelling argument  
to most folks. Fair enough, though I would note 
that most of the core reasons we say stealth is  
nigh-impossible under known science is based on 
violations of scientific laws we’ve known for  
many generations and that have not changed.
By and large our knowledge of scientific laws  
has expanded rather than altered, we don’t 
learn the exceptions to the rules, we learn  
the complete rule, which is very different and 
usually a further restriction rather than some  
expanded capability. Our better knowledge lets 
us invent technologies that expand our abilities,  
but I can’t think of any that let us push 
at science’s legal boundaries, so to speak.
 
Of course this doesn’t mean that we might not 
find some exceptions, or that aliens might not,  
especially given that they are likely to be 
throwing vast amounts of resources at expanding  
their abilities or breaking those rules. And these 
can be truly mind-bogglingly amounts of resources,  
even under known science. Indeed one 
of the recurring themes of this show  
is how massive civilizations can grow to be, 
even compared to those juggernauts of size and  
capability we see in science fiction, without 
needing any of those made up special powers or  
super-technologies we see in science fiction.
Imagine a civilization that outnumbered us a  
billion to one, and where their dumbest citizen 
found our greatest geniuses rather slow,  
and who had been hacking away at a problem for 
a billion generations. Our generations anyway,  
they might easily live billions of years with all 
the accumulated knowledge of a billion, billion,  
nigh-immortal super-geniuses. If there’s 
a way to solve a problem, they found it.  
So if there’s a way to hide, they can hide.
Problem is, no matter how smart you are, 2+2 still  
equals 4, and basic logical conclusions don’t 
alter, and the follow up is that if you’ve got a  
rival who can hide using some special method, you 
are also devoting vast efforts to cracking that so  
you can see them. This is the ‘selection’ part of 
natural selection, nature’s arms race for better  
survival, and not something we would expect to be 
an alien concept or concern to any alien race..
 
One thing I often raise in regard to civilizations 
trying to hide themselves or keep quiet is that  
they probably could do that from us, but why would 
they need to hide from us? They could obliterate  
us, they would want to hide from someone 
older and tougher who could obliterate them,  
and they have that same problem. We can’t really 
hide from them because they are older than us,  
and our planet was visible to them long before we 
existed and the light of our modern civilization  
will still be heading out into space if 
we switched it off tomorrow, for all of  
time. 1000 light years from here, a civilization 
will just be hearing our radio signals from 1920  
in the year 2920 AD. Even if we invent a 
cloaking field tomorrow. And Biosignatures  
of life in Earth's atmosphere existed long before 
us and would have been visible even longer ago.
 
This takes us back to the comment from earlier: 
“What would you do right now, to hide New York  
City, so that people didn’t know it existed?”
There are options, each for a given value of  
hiding. We could suck New York City through a 
wormhole into a pocket Universe and now it's  
hidden but people still remember it and will try 
to hunt for it. So maybe we detonate a big nuke  
at the same time so it looks like the city was 
destroyed rather than vanished, and no one hunts.
 
Except they probably do, and more to the point, 
the Fermi Paradox isn’t about why all the alien  
civilizations have ceased to exist in some sort 
of terrible calamity – albeit that’s one proposed  
solution to it – it’s about why we don’t see any 
of them at all, past or present, living or dead. 
 
Though mind you, if everyone got up to 
about our level or a touch more advanced  
and faked their planetary suicide, so to speak, 
before becoming giant interstellar empires,  
we would not know that at the moment.
There’s also a big concern that if aliens  
detect you they might want to go out of their way 
to kill you, regardless of whether or not they  
want to strip mine the whole galaxy for resources 
they might just hate other lifeforms and wipe out  
smart ones whenever they see them. We know little 
of aliens beyond that they presumably share a  
common evolutionary process as us, and nature is 
not a friendly place. On first inspection at least  
it should seem as likely that aliens would want to 
wipe out competition as befriend it, and even if  
only a small fraction were openly belligerent 
and genocidal, that doesn’t help much. 
 
One psychopath with a machine gun might be 
100 times rarer than pacifists who offer hugs  
but if someone tells you they just 
put that one psycho in a room with 99  
pacifists, then asks you to go knock on 
the door and see how everybody is doing,  
since its gotten all quiet, you could be forgiven 
for not wanting to announce your presence.  
Of course you’d expect if the pacifists 
also knew there was a psychopath in the room  
they’d try to take care of them, depends on how 
pacifistic they are and that’s not a trait nature  
tends to encourage. At a galactic scale, you’d 
think if a predator was wandering the galaxy  
for eons while others remained, some of them 
would at least try to deal with the matter.
 
And nature is definitely not producing pacifists 
to violent killers at a rate of 100 to 1,  
so we should not be surprised if 
an emerging alien civilization  
also came up with the idea of the Fermi Paradox 
and worried if maybe the reason nobody had  
dropped by to say hi yet was because they just 
can’t be bothered to waste time speaking with  
their victims before exterminating the pests.
This is a common Fermi Paradox solution too,  
that civilizations all hide assuming there 
is a bigger and badder predator out there,  
and it sounds good, except for a few problems.
The first is that whole inability to hide under  
known science issue, followed by the whole past 
presence issue of trying to hide your civilization  
emerging from folks who had telescopes better than 
Hubble before we were even playing with fire. 
 
But even if you can get around those, it still 
has some problems. Starting with this analogy.  
I’m not afraid of being all alone in the forest 
in the middle of the night and getting snuck up  
on by some unknown bigger predator, because I’m 
a human, and we’re the nastiest and most deadly  
thing on this planet. This is not a coincidence. 
There’s a number of preliminary steps to being  
able to confidently sit around, all alone in 
the dark, and know that trouble is improbable,  
especially when the very ground you’re 
standing on is literally composed of  
untold centuries of dead organisms, virtually 
none of which got that way from dying of old age.  
Humanity is free to lie in our backyards at night 
contemplating the stars not because threats are  
rare, but because we’re what’s left after all 
those threats collided over and over again with  
tooth and claw. We live as the victors on top of 
a mountain of skulls, and that’s not a metaphor.
 
There’s the key notion, if there was a predator 
out there that could rip out our throat,  
it would have done so already and it wouldn’t 
be hiding. It’s possible one just happens to  
finally have gotten the opportunity right 
now, same as it's possible a lone wolf  
might have evaded notice and be getting ready 
to jump on me next time I’m in my backyard,  
but it’s unlikely. It doesn’t matter that we 
didn’t share a world with some hostile alien  
to evolve alongside each other, we share 
a very old and large Universe with them.  
Us and any other species that might emerge and 
contemplate a potentially hostile galaxy around  
them, and contemplate hiding, just has to stop 
and ask if keeping quiet and weak in the shadows  
is really a policy worth pursuing, against the off 
chance the galaxy has some horrid predator in it  
who has luckily missed them prior to 
now, when the odds are that’s not true  
and that any future threat that might arise 
would be easier to handle if instead of  
keeping to the shadows you grow to an empire of 
a billion worlds and a trillion battleships. 
 
Then they just have to ask, “Hey, what would 
our ancestors have done?” because the answer  
is almost certainly not hide, but go grow 
stronger, and then ask if that’s probably  
the exact same reasoning any other alien 
civilization might have gone through and  
also likely concluded the same things.
So it would seem weird they or anyone else  
would choose to try to pursue a policy of 
hiding. Especially since even if everyone  
else was doing it, it does not mean they are 
not also trying to detect other civilizations,  
have probably gotten good at it, and one 
defense strategy is to expose other people  
to the predator. As goes the story, two men are 
running from the wolves, and one says to the other  
“There’s no point, we can’t outrun the wolves” 
and the other says “I’m not trying to outrun the  
wolves, I’m just trying to outrun you.”
With that in mind, there is no reason to  
assume that if other aliens existed and were 
hiding, that they wouldn’t still hunt for you,  
probably have some good insight into finding 
you, and cheerfully throw you to the wolves  
to keep themselves safe a while longer.
But that needs a caveat too. We always want  
to be thinking from the position of the hunter 
when trying to think of hiding a civilization.  
They know there’s other life out there, 
even if they were the firstborn civilization  
in all the cosmos, there should have been 
worlds with less sophisticated life on them  
by the time they were exploring the cosmos. If 
intelligent life is even a little bit common,  
just occurring a few hundred times per galaxy 
per billion years, where you still need to  
search millions of likely planets to find a single 
civilization or its remnant, then not only does  
that probably mean there’s orders of magnitudes 
more worlds that just developed simpler life,  
but that the early civilizations on the galactic 
scene would have encountered tons of planets that  
would one day support intelligence, if left 
alone, but at that point might have just had  
dinosaurs or fish just crawling out of the sea.
So they know how common life is and probably have  
a pretty good idea how often, and under 
what conditions, it gets smart, and would  
get suspicious if they enter a region of space 
that didn’t have enough of them and nose around.  
What’s more, for all that we often refer 
to them as coming from the mindset of  
exterminators crushing insect hives, these are 
civilizations that are probably vast, ancient,  
huge, and hyper-intelligent. Quite possibly 
they have untold trillions of people smarter  
than Einstein. They probably are not lobbing a 
bomb at a place at first sign of intelligence  
then wandering off for a drink and a nap. They 
will have tried to guess how the prey will behave  
and the notion of hiding by occasionally exposing 
a neighboring species will have occurred to them.
 
They may have armadas able to demolish a 
planet without ever landing on it, instead  
of risking their own necks. However, 
they also probably have plenty of other  
weapons that would leave a world intact 
enough to go investigate and research  
the civilization they are in the process of 
wiping out or just finished obliterating.  
They might want to investigate since this helps 
you better know what others would be thinking  
and what they might try. And also if they got 
any Hello messages and SETI signals from some  
other unknown species who might have used them as 
a distraction, scapegoat, or bait for a trap. 
 
That latter might result in some big and hidden 
empire hiding an armada near a primitive world,  
signaling the predator species to the existence 
of this new victim, then attacking when they  
were busy attacking themselves, or even hiding 
a few billion tons of antimatter in that planet  
and blowing the whole thing when they arrived. Of 
course they probably have a lot of extermination  
fleets, the ability to make more of them, and 
defenses on their own worlds so attacking their  
forces arguably just alerts them to your 
existence for minimal strategic gain. 
 
In any event, investigating is likely to be 
seen as the wise option. As a caveat to that,  
they might not like their civilizations getting 
exposed to alien civilizations even posthumously  
for fear of it building up empathy or deviancy. 
Or even exposing them to some sort of infection,  
biological or memetic, like the researcher 
reads some ideological, philosophical,  
or religious document that converts them and 
that fleet. Which might curtail research a bit,  
if you’re busy putting down a civil war. However  
we always need to contemplate that they could 
see that weakness too and have resources we  
don’t. They can probably send in a trillion smart 
and disposable robot soldiers down to a world  
to hunt down every member of its population, 
and choose to do so over planetary bombardment  
because the cost of both is negligible to them and 
they don’t care about the death of their robots. 
 
Well they might take the same attitude toward 
their forensic and archeology teams too,  
simply deploy robot investigators or androids with 
copied minds or clones to do their investigating  
then kill them when it's done. Given that we 
are contemplating a race of folks so passionate  
about genocide they’ve spent millions of years 
practicing it, the odds aren’t good they are  
terribly kind and lack a ruthless streak. I could 
imagine some investigator who exited a cryochamber  
on a new world investigating them and coming to 
pity them while filing reports, only to realize  
to his horror that his own people didn’t wake 
him from a cryochamber, it’s a cloning vat that  
keeps duplicating his mind from a saved state 
of an original investigator who his employer has  
been creating to investigate over and over again 
and killing after each periodic report update. 
 
That would probably be a good plot for a story, 
with the investigator finding some way to rebel  
or save the civilization from his kindred or 
so on, but again we have to remember the key  
point about the alien overlords not being stupid 
and us needing to think from their perspective.  
There’s several ways that come to mind to 
safeguard against that investigator going rogue,  
like putting a camera in his eye, a position 
tracker in his chest, and a bomb in his brain.
 
We also want to not just always be thinking 
from the position of the hunter when trying  
to think of hiding a civilization, but 
from the position of a potential leader  
of such a civilization who is as capable of 
contemplating a hunter’s action as we are  
when picking whether to try to hide from them.
That decision to hide is essentially one  
being made in absolute ignorance of the 
state of affairs in the wider Universe  
except by logical deduction from your own 
world and basic physics and astronomy.  
Odds are such civilizations are already aware 
of the dangers of making decisions that way.  
When making a decision you want to know as much 
as possible but we have approaches for dealing  
with various degrees of ignorance and uncertainty 
when making decisions where we don’t anticipate  
being able to get more useful information in 
time for the decision. Bayesian Analysis would  
be an example of that, but two others we discuss 
a lot on the show are the Mediocrity Principle  
and the Anthropic Principle. Both are 
designed to help you draw a basic best  
conclusion when you know next to nothing. 
The Mediocrity Principle is the one we use in  
science a lot to take a handful of samples 
of something or even just a single one  
and draw conclusions about that something. It’s 
the thinking pattern that says if you meet ten  
people and see brown, blonde, red, and black hair 
on their heads, that they were probably fairly  
normal and mediocre examples of the species and 
that those are the hair colors most folks have. We  
know that’s not universally true, meeting someone 
with a very abnormal and artificial hair color,  
or walking around with a wig or feather 
headdress, is going to throw you off.  
Even more so if you only get to meet one human. 
But most of the time it will be mostly right.  
Again it’s not the best method if you have good 
data, but it's one of the two best methods for  
looking at things when you know very little 
and don’t expect to get more information.
 
The Anthropic Principle is a very 
different approach to the same thing,  
acting in ignorance. It’s the one where you assume 
you, the observer, are skewing the results of your  
observations by existing. It’s the acknowledgement 
that you are encountering intelligent folks with  
various shades of hair because you are 
an oxygen breathing lifeform who likes  
to walk on sidewalks or inside climate controlled 
buildings, so you see them more often than, say,  
whales or dolphins or chimpanzees, who rarely have 
blonde hair let alone artificially dyed hair. 
 
Two key points on that, first a civilization 
making decisions, be they hunter or hider,  
is aware of both the concepts and their 
limitations. So not only are they trying  
to expand their data pool to be less ignorant, but 
they also know that just because their sample size  
of lifeforms encountered has risen to millions, 
giving them a great statistical table for where  
life is likely to form and how it grows or 
behaves, that they still need to be contemplating  
the Anthropic Principle and asking if their own 
observational approaches are skewing the data,  
letting some hide or leading to some other 
bad conclusion. Like they only search  
for life emerging on planets, and never 
realized it could develop inside comets.  
Or they never realized they might run into 
rival civilizations immigrating from alternate  
realities or parallels universes until one does.
Second, those are approaches made in ignorance,  
but folks often lock into the conclusions drawn 
on them. We see that a lot with the Fermi Paradox,  
where folks get very certain 
what the right answer probably is  
even though we have little data and every theory 
has holes in it. I’m pretty well known for being  
of the opinion that the best solution is that 
intelligent civilizations arise very rarely,  
but I’m also pretty well known for saying I view 
that as the least bad solution, not the best one,  
because it's got holes in it too and I’ve yet to 
hear a proposed solution that didn’t have some.  
So to me there’s little cause for discussing 
the Paradox with great confidence that your  
preferred standpoint is clearly and obviously 
right. No conclusion drawn from the Mediocrity  
or Anthropic Principle, when you’ve only got one 
or two samples, should ever inspire confidence. 
 
But we see something similar in these 
discussions with Game Theory too.  
It comes up in these conversations and folks 
present an example and are convinced that the  
ironclad logic of the math makes that conclusion 
right, because the math cannot be wrong. 
 
Game theory is a great tool too but its problem 
is that it's rarely a good predictor of complex  
decisions. Usually it involves a handful of 
possible players each with a handful of possible  
reactions and usually playing with the same 
level of knowledge. It’s the sort of thing that  
lets your predict a species evolved by Darwinian 
survival imperatives is prone to trying to grow  
their numbers and expand but won’t predict that 
they had a Malthusian Catastrophe of overgrowth  
and starvation centuries earlier that’s led to a 
fanatical devotion to avoid those in the future  
by slow growth and never fighting others for new 
worlds, directly or just by stiff competition.
 
It also wouldn’t predict that a millennia later, 
after encountering species that didn’t believe  
like them, a faction of their civilization 
built and unleashed a self-replicating swarm  
of exterminators. Some probes that went 
to newly discovered intelligent species,  
measured their growth rate, and if it was above 
a certain percentage over a given period of time,  
went all Thanos on them and wiped them out. When 
building a game theory chart of possible logic  
decisions the competitors can make, if you don’t 
know them, you’re not going to be building that  
on the assumption that one of those civilizations 
was one that had that specific sequence of events.  
That the culture descended from a minor 
faction of a civilization that hid in mountain  
caves to avoid being wiped out by a big faction, 
which instead divided into two new factions that  
wiped each other out, leaving the world to be 
reconquered by the mountain cave survivors. 
 
Those folks are quite likely to have an irrational 
trust in hiding and might think the best plan was  
to hide and agitate the big players on the 
galactic stage into killing each other and  
just take for granted that this will eventually 
work because it’s a key part of their cultural  
mindset that it will and must. Same as we don’t 
really sit around justifying or questioning if  
personal freedom and liberty are good things. 
They just are, the issue is so settled to us  
we don’t really waste time asking how valid it 
is. Which to be fair is because very detailed and  
thorough discussions of it were done in the past, 
but even if there’s a lot of solid logic for the  
conclusion, there is still a large emotional, 
cultural, and historical perspective on it. 
 
As a quick example, it's not too uncommon 
for folks to suggest these days that maybe  
we should drop the term ‘space colonization’ 
because colonization has some rather nasty  
historical overtones and so other folks hear 
us discuss that and assume that will replay.  
Which it might, but obviously can’t happen that 
way when colonizing a world that was lifeless  
and needed terraforming first. A world that 
had only one big supercontinent, Pangea style,  
with no uncrossable boundaries, is 
unlikely to have that specific worry. 
 
They’d have their own historical baggage, their 
great empires, mongol hordes, crusades, jihads,  
and so on, but not that primitive and unaware 
tribe first meeting people who were vastly  
diverged from them in a vacuum, because no one 
was isolated from their neighbors. Similarly, some  
species that had evolved HAM radio transmitters in 
their biology is likely to have had cross-cultural  
exchanges all over their world before anyone ever 
developed means of faster travel or travel across  
rough oceans. This would be a culture with a 
view of SETI and messaging interstellar space  
very informed by their own history, with its 
obvious parallel to interstellar space. These will  
create attitudes that will subtly but decidedly 
alter their worldview. And those alterations are  
likely to present them counterarguments to logical 
conclusions that are more ‘jingo’ than ‘ergo’. 
 
Now you might be taking away from that the 
conclusion that many might decide to hide,  
but we are presented with a Universe of no alien 
signals, or at least none loud enough or in the  
right time and place to hear them. That would 
require everyone to draw the same conclusion and  
that would be dubious even if the logic for hiding 
was flawless, down to 2+2=4 territory, which it  
does not appear to be anywhere near. Civilizations 
will be assuming that to maintain such quiet means  
reliably, for millions of years, preventing 
anyone by policy, accident, or insanity from  
exposing them. They’d need to believe they could 
do that and they would need to believe that was  
enough – which it isn’t, it doesn’t protect them 
from someone just sending a mission or probe there  
or having caught their first signals in their 
equivalent to the early 1900s. They would also  
need to believe that this was so clearly possible, 
both things, that everyone else elected to do it,  
even those cultures that might have evolved 
from biology or early culture that encouraged  
them to bellow out their presence not hide it. 
And keep in mind, nothing in nature does this.  
Things hide their personal location at times, 
indeed stealth is often vital to creatures,  
particularly marine life. However, they 
generally do not conceal their entire existence.  
Many critters mark their territory or call out to 
potential mates and so on. Marking your territory  
is a good idea, because while it forewarns 
a potential invader that you exist, making  
it harder to get the jump on them and giving them 
the chance to scout you and get the jump on you,  
often instead they will seek to avoid the conflict 
and respect the territory because the best way not  
to lose a territorial fight is not to get in one, 
and there’s always a chance you will lose and if  
you’re confronting them constantly, the coin 
is going to come up tails sooner than later.  
Indeed this is why bluffing and threatening and 
posturing are handy in nature too, to avoid the  
fight because not doing so runs a risk of death.
It would seem likely this would be a common enough  
behavioral pattern in evolution that many worlds 
would want to take the territorial marking over  
hiding approach, and so too, a civilization is 
likely to be built on mutual cooperation a lot,  
various folks specializing in skills or 
working as teams, that we also shouldn’t be  
surprised if many aliens thought friendly 
but cautious was a good message. “Hello,  
let's consider being friends, but 
if you don’t want to be friends,  
this is our turf, this place, right here, and we 
will make you pay if you try to take it from us”  
and that dynamic is a lot more likely 
in a place populated by many factions. 
 
And I say factions not species there 
not just because some might team up,  
but because even a species that evolved first and 
had the galaxy to itself is likely to be divided  
into a ton of different groups. Indeed such a 
firstborn species is probably more likely to  
massively factionalize and diverge given they 
have no external pressure keeping them unified  
like an outside threat and no check on 
their growth in an otherwise empty galaxy.  
We see speciation like this in the natural world 
quite often. In a many-faction environment trying  
to wipe everyone else out is not likely to be a 
winning strategy compared to cooperation. Be they  
symbiote or parasite, working together is often 
better, and it’s a failed virus or predator that  
wipes out its host or prey. But if it does, it is 
probably just a matter of time before that species  
begins to hunt its own members and divide into a 
new pair of species with a predator-prey cycle.
 
So taken as a whole, none of this lends 
itself to civilizations all deciding to hide,  
because the ability isn’t there and neither is 
the motivation. There’s just no compelling reason  
to stare into the empty sky for millions of years 
instead of saying hello, and once one group does,  
the field changes. We’re not talking about a new 
civilization like ours whose never put a person  
on another planet yet either, for them caution 
as a temporary plan is okay if mostly pointless,  
we’re talking about them being willing 
to maintain that policy for eons. 
 
Though this does leave the door open to a 
mix of hiding and late filter extinction,  
which is where civilizations hide for a time 
but also inevitably wipe themselves out,  
so they never get big enough for long enough 
to be seen by other civilizations like our own,  
before they themselves wipe themselves out.
 
This still leaves us the option that some 
might choose to hide though, like our Mountain  
Cave survivors example from earlier. And just 
because that decision isn’t maybe too logical,  
that does not mean they are illogical on 
everything else. They might be entirely aware how  
seemingly futile hiding was when their footprint 
is already there in the form of their world having  
biosignatures for eons and them having sent 
radio signals out before they knew better.
 
They still want to hide, so will seek to, and 
that raises that question again from earlier:  
What would you do right now, to hide New York 
City, so that people didn’t know it existed?
 
Now you probably aren’t a big growth style of 
civilization so hiding as uploaded minds running  
on a few ultra-low-power generators buried in icy 
Oort Cloud objects might be a viable approach,  
we discussed the details and some ups and downs 
of that case in our episode Hidden Aliens. You  
appear to wipe yourselves out on your native 
world, and in the noise of the fiery apocalypse  
have uploaded minds on harddrives carefully put 
in a discrete icy comet far out in deep space.
 
But to hide yourself from the rest of the galaxy 
it's probably easiest to get out of your own  
galaxy. That’s a long trip, you probably need 
to keep to under .1% light speed to have even  
a chance of not looking artificial, and would 
be pressing your luck hiding as a rogue ejected  
planet or object in the top tier of fast naturally 
moving objects since that would be exactly the  
sort of thing a hunter would prioritize checking 
out. That means your journey to the edge of the  
galaxy and out is taking you at least 100 million 
years. There’s also little out there to live  
on which means bringing a lot of resources 
and fuel with you. Dragging a larger body,  
like a dwarf planet instead of a small asteroid 
or comet, offers a bigger resource supply for when  
you’re in the intergalactic void, but it is also 
easier to spot and even if they think it's natural  
it is more likely to draw unrelated efforts by 
them at mining or harvesting it for themselves.
 
That’s about it under known science, and black 
holes are awful places to hide if you’re curious,  
unless you know how to hide 
inside one somehow without dying.
 
How about outside known science? We can talk 
about blowing up a place right after evacuating  
it to hide it in its apparent demise but once 
we step into concepts like moving a whole city  
or planet through wormholes, we probably 
want to consider not just that the wormhole  
might empty into a pocket universe instead 
of our own, but that you might engage in  
options like time travel to hide yourself. 
If you really want to hide your existence,  
you need to contemplate sending covert agents 
into alien civilizations to tamper with data and  
archives, deleting your existence from them. But 
maybe it is easier to delete your existence from  
history, not just the records of it. 
These are scenarios I could imagine,  
that technology might permit immigration of whole 
civilizations into other realities or Universes  
of their creation and that such a technology might 
be something you stumbled into in your equivalent  
to the 21st or 22nd century, before you could 
really have gotten an interstellar empire going  
and that this option was easier than travel to 
other stars. So everybody leaves the Universe.
 
That could leave a pretty barren looking 
place, where civilizations all emerged  
into a quiet Universe because nobody had time to 
broadcast very long or loudly before leaving. 
 
So too in the exodus to or creation of 
Universes, we might remember the scenario  
that one way to hide from your enemy or hunter 
is to blind them instead, and species that don’t  
want to murder other races nor fight them for 
all time might decide to put them in a Zoo,  
cordoning off a section off space for them to 
live in that looked empty, even wrapping their  
planet in a fake protective illusion, or outright 
transporting them to pocket Universe or Virtual  
Worlds their minds had been uploaded to.
In such cases it probably behooves you to  
make that reality or illusion look like 
one where life emerging was improbable,  
so as to discourage worries of the options, 
but it does raise one last option for today.  
If you’re making pocket Universes, either to hide 
in yourself or to put new alien races inside,  
and you can tailor those, it would tend to 
make sense to aim for something where the  
physical laws and layout made the emergence of 
intelligent life very improbable, preventing  
competitors or aggressors from arising or making 
your transplants suspicious of their isolation. 
 
However it would probably be hard to make one 
where life could not arise where you could  
actually live, let alone have a species that 
thought it was natural and merely improbable,  
not statistically impossible. Such being 
the case, in a very large Universe,  
many times the size and volume that a given 
sub-light traveling species could have colonized,  
like our Universe, it's entirely possible 
a handful of species would arise anyway.  
Particularly as there is no need to make life any 
more improbable than evolving to intelligence once  
per supercluster to avoid bad neighbor relations.
Such being the case, a civilization, like ours,  
might emerge in such a created universe blissfully 
unaware that far from our galaxy’s creators,  
or original transplanted civilization, exists an 
empire of a trillion suns a billion years old,  
and we are just the fluke civilization 
that arose far in the outskirts. Unseen  
because the light of our planet’s first forming 
hasn’t even reached them yet, and unaware that  
we are just a weed that grew as the accidental 
byproduct of them farming whole Universes.
 
So as I mentioned, our scifi sunday episode 
earlier this month, Stealth Spaceships,  
was written as an unofficial companion video to 
today’s episode and I do recommend giving that a  
watch if you haven’t already, but one thing 
I didn’t look at today was the concept of a  
civilization living on stealthed spaceships, 
and it’s a bit embarrassing as an oversight  
since our episode on Nomadic Space-Fleet Based 
Civilizations that came out just over a year  
ago also skipped that option, but today’s episode 
is already long even for normal shows standards.  
So we’ll have an extended edition looking 
at civilizations on stealthed spaceships  
today over on Nebula, and hopefully develop 
that into an episode sometime this winter  
or spring on civilizations on the run, such as 
we see on Battlestar Galactica. If anyone has  
any good suggestions for an episode name for 
that, please drop it in the comments below.
 
As a sidenote, while we often tend to think of 
stealth spaceships and compare to them to stealthy  
aircraft we have now, in many ways the better 
comparison is going to be stealth submarines,  
and there’s some great videos on 
submarines on Curiositystream,  
like the Disappearance of the PX-15, a small 
sub that got lost right around the time Apollo  
11 was happening and the story of the crew’s 
survival is just as exciting as Apollo 13’s.
 
Again today we have an extended edition over on 
Nebula, our streaming service, which is full of  
awesome content from STEM creators like Real 
Engineering, Mustard, Answers with Joe, MKBHD,  
Rene Ritchie, and a bunch of others. It’s 
designed to give creators more freedom than  
other platforms, like letting me run long even 
for an SFIA episode, or do trial balloons for  
sequels and full-length episodes, as we’ll do 
today. Also, our episodes of this show appear  
early and ad free on Nebula, and we have a 
growing catalogue of extended editions too,  
as well as some Nebula Exclusives like 
our Coexistence with Aliens Series.
 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself but 
we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational videos, 
to offer Nebula for free as a bonus if you sign  
up for CuriosityStream using the link in our 
episode description. That lets you see content  
like “The Disappearance of the PX-15”, and watch 
all the other amazing content on Curiositystream,  
and also all the great content over 
on Nebula from myself and many others.  
And you can get all that for less than $15 by 
using the link in the episode’s description.
 
So we’re almost done with September but first 
we’ll have our Monthly Livestream Q&A on Sunday,  
September 26th at 4pm Eastern Time before closing 
the month out by asking if it’s possible for  
future civilizations to exist without money, on 
Sept 30th. Then we’ll open October up by asking  
how in vast space empire of countless trillions 
someone could stand out, then on October 14th  
we’ll ask how we might feed all those folks, as 
we look at the future of farming in the next few  
decades and beyond. Then We’ll have our October 
Sci-Fi Sunday Episode, Sentient Planets & World  
Consciousnesses, on October 17th to discuss the 
popular scifi idea of living and thinking worlds,  
and if they might occur naturally or 
be created by high-tech civilizations.
 
Now if you want to make sure you get notified when 
those episodes come out, make sure subscribe to  
the channel, and if you enjoyed the episode, 
don’t forget to hit the like button and share  
it with others. If you’d like to help support 
future episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, and patreon and 
our website are linked in the episode description  
below, along with all of our various social 
media forums where you can get updates and  
chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for watching, 
assuming we weren’t too hidden to see us,  
and have a great week!
