This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
In the Grim darkness of the Far Future, there
will be only bureaucracy.
A few years back we took a look at alien First
Contact scenarios and we came up with 9 scenarios
those might fall into, though fundamentally
you’ve got three basic forms that can take.
They come to us, we come to them, or we bump
into each other out there.
Today we’ll be focused on that first one,
and specifically where they’re trying to
contact us, as opposed to us simply noticing
they exist, as would be the case with picking
up some signal not intended for us or some
trace of their existence.
This doesn’t mean they’re necessarily
landing in full view of the public with some
saucer that disgorges little green men.
Indeed as we’ll see today, that’s not
a very likely first contact scenario, and
if they did land, we’d likely expect the
ship to disgorge something that looked quite
human, as in many cases that would be the
most logical thing to do.
But we can’t simply ask what the most logical
means of first contact is, because there isn’t
one.
Rather any given first contact would depend
on what the motivations of those doing the
contact was.
As an example, a hostile species that simply
wanted us dead would likely make contact with
what we call a RKM, Relativistic Kill Missile,
or rather a volley of thousands of them hammering
Earth so hard and fast that the contact would
last mere moments and take the form of bright
expanding shockwaves - Game Over.
Not the most illuminating of first contact
scenarios for learning about an advanced civilization,
although I suppose in a literal sense it actually
is due to the sheer amount of light and radiation
involved.
On the other extreme, first contact might
come in the form of a radio signal in plain
English saying “Greeting humans of Earth.
This message comes to you in peace Tune into
Frequency X for an overview of basic Galactic
information and detailed instructions on creating
a Galactic Internet link so you can access
information files in high-bandwidth.
Welcome to the Galactic Community.”
Which would certainly be a nice message to
receive, assuming it’s on the level, honest
and without any particular malicious or mischievous
motivation.
But wouldn’t it immediately require asking,
“Why today?
Why a century after we had radio?
And why by radio anyway?”
Anytime we get contacted we’d have to ask
“what has changed?”, assuming they knew
of our existence prior to contact and the
message was meant exclusively for us, as opposed
to us discovering a civilization far away
because our telescopes got better.
Though that could be an example itself, if
they are reluctant to contact primitive worlds,
but keep an eye on them, they might see such
telescopes getting built and say “Well,
they’re going to detect us soon, best do
it on our own terms”.
You might think it ethical to leave young
civilizations alone to develop without your
interference, but once they have the technology
to explore space, they’re going to bump
into the wider galactic community, and pragmatism
says you’d best go say hello soon, before
they randomly bump into who-knows-what and
panic.
That’s exactly what the pragmatic Vulcans
did when humans first developed warp in Star
Trek: First Contact, and becomes Starfleet’s
basic policy eventually.
So that’s an example of a way that development
on our side could drive first contact, but
changing circumstances on contactors’ side
could also be the reason.
Some interstellar empire that nominally controlled
the space Earth was in changed policies or
ceded control of that territory for some reason.
Now folks can contact or visit Earth who were
previously unwilling or forbidden to, and
it has nothing to do with anything humanity
has been up to.
As another example, if some neighboring third
civilization is getting aggressive, you might
make contact earlier than ideal to give the
natives a chance to prepare, perhaps even
lend them a hand in the form of military hardware
or a team of lawyers.
And for that matter, it might be one’s own
aggressive civilization they’d want to give
the natives a fighting chance against.
Which is another thing to remember on this:
you are pretty much never going to be dealing
with just one isolated group, Humanity and
Civilization X.
While it’s quite possible, even without
faster than light travel, for a single species
to colonize out from its homeworld to cover
the entire galaxy, it would be rather peculiar
for them to have done so on such a recent
timeline to our own emergence.
It’s being fairly conservative to say that
astronomical conditions would have permitted
civilizations to arise only in the last billion
years, and galactic colonization timelines
shouldn’t take more than a percent of that
time, ten million years - so why now?
The odds of only two such species, them and
us, arising in that same period but nobody
else doing so in that billion year period
would be 1 in 10,000 and frankly even such
‘good’ odds rely on assuming life couldn’t
have arisen much earlier, which it almost
certainly could have, and that civilizations
not only never get faster than light travel
but colonize quite slowly even by subluminal
methods, and that we only need to contemplate
our own galaxy.
Of course they might be way older, and just
been sitting around, but that raises some
other concerns.
First, why they sat around watching Earth
so long, many millions of years, and second,
how they managed to stay “They”.
Even ignoring the isolation worlds have from
each other at interstellar distances, by assuming
faster than light travel, they’re not likely
to be homogenous anymore.
It’s very dubious to assume a species that’s
been spread out over not only tens of thousands
of light years of space but tens of millions
of years of time is anything like a cohesive
civilization.
Just living apart all that time around alien
suns, with no shared external threat to keep
them unified, is going to make them more divergent
from their kindred on other worlds than we
are from any other mammal, and that’s ignoring
all the high-tech options on the table like
genetic engineering, cybernetics, uplifting,
and mind uploading, which should only hasten
divergence.
And so, even if in the beginning there was
just one great alien civilization out there,
there would soon be many.
Such being the case, anything they might do
in regard to us has to be seen through the
lens of them worrying what their neighbors
or rivals might think.
After all, they might have whole armadas of
ships that could single-handedly obliterate
Earth, but so do their neighbors and rivals.
They always have to ask what the response
would be, even to non-hostile acts like showing
up with open arms and free technology.
It’s conceivable that all the alien factions
would be fairly peaceful and friendly but
frown on gaining allies and converts by what
they might view as bribery, potentially upsetting
the status quo.
We looked at that scenario a bit in Invasive
Aliens some months back.
Alternatively they might be all guided by
some grand ideal.
It’s not super unlikely that ethics tend
to converge to certain core and universal
principles and if they did, then it doesn’t
matter if you can maintain cohesive galactic
empire or not.
For instance, all life on Earth shares a survival
impulse, it’s rather inevitable under Darwin
and we’d expect that to be Universal, and
most ethical ideals can trace some connection
to our various biological impulses plus various
reasoning, or rationalizing.
I think it would be quite a jump to assume
every species out there believed in life,
liberty, and the pursuit of happiness but
maybe not a huge one.
More to the point, if societies tend to get
more rational over time it’s plausible they
might converge to some shared ethics, particularly
if they tended only to arise from species
that placed great value on curiosity and community
bonds, both of which would seem almost prerequisites
for technologically advanced civilizations.
Problem is, if they do, it’s kind of hard
to imagine they wouldn’t want to just show
up on Earth and share those, or why they’d
think Earth in the year 2020 AD was better
suited to it than it was in 2020 BC.
Oh, they might figure we’d have an easier
time absorbing those principles now than then,
but someone is bound to point out that 4040
years, 102 human generations, is a very long
time to wait for better conditions to save
a little work.
Humans are basically the same now as then
in terms of mind and body, so if it took a
few extra generations to get the job done
then, it would still get done way earlier,
by starting way earlier.
On contemplation, probably even earlier since
it’s likely to be way easier to convert
relatively primitive cultures to your life
philosophy.
I dislike using analogies that imply primitive
cultures are like children compared to more
advanced ones, but it applies to some degree.
More to the point, regardless of whether it’s
easier to teach a 5 year old or a 10 year
old basic ethics, you still start with the
5 year old because you don’t want them stumbling
around hurting themselves or others any longer
than is necessary.
So if they’ve got a Grand Ideal, you’d
need a reason why they aren’t sharing it
as early as they find plausible.
The exception being if that Grand Ideal is
non-interference, but you wouldn’t expect
the lone, primary Grand Ideal of a civilization
to be about minor civilizations on their fringes,
anymore than the various major nations of
nowadays focus their principles on what they
should do in regard to this or that uncontacted
tribe.
They might think it important but it wouldn’t
be the centerpiece of their culture.
Even in Star Trek, it’s the prime directive
of their peacetime exploration group, Starfleet,
not the Federation itself.
It’s also not a policy that works great
unless everyone is on board.
In the Trek Universe there is the Federation
and there are a lot of other empires who do
not follow that policy.
So it gets handwaved away why the Romulans
or Ferengi for instance haven’t just gone
and contacted everybody the Federation hasn’t.
In a case like that, if not everyone is on
board, then your Prime Directive has to be
modified to not just not contacting primitive
worlds but guarding them or threatening your
other neighbors who may contact them.
That does offer one decently plausible scenario.
Any species that has gone on the galactic
stage first might have felt terribly lonely
and fascinated by various simple alien life
they encountered.
Say they discovered a thousand worlds throughout
the galaxy that hosted some native life with
a decent chance of producing a sapient species
sometime reasonably soon on galactic timelines,
perhaps a million years.
They might quarantine the space of say five
hundred light years around each such world,
both to help ensure isolation and to be a
gift to that species when and if they achieve
spaceflight.
That’s quite a gift too, such volume is
generally going to contain around a million
stars.
Though not super generous on galactic scales
since it’s not even a percent of the galaxy’s
available systems.
If they tell any species that shows up to
keep their grubby hands out of those protected
spheres, or else, they probably won’t have
to work hard to keep that as an accepted policy.
Fight all you want over any remaining worlds,
assuming we haven’t claimed them ourselves,
but keep away from those tiny bubbles.
And to anyone operating on the galactic stage
that is a tiny bubble even if it contains
a million suns.
Of course all such things are relative, and
if we’re going to contemplate Elder Civilizations
who operate on multi-million year timelines
and multi-billion star neighborhoods, creating
large protected bubbles, one could argue something
like our expanding Universe might be an intentional
way of creating pockets of isolation.
You see such a world appear, with basic life
on it, and slap dark energy generators around
to effectively isolate it from everyone else
by creating a massive expanding sphere of
emptiness around them.
Pretty over the top and I don’t think it
fits the observed facts about dark matter
and energy too well, but it’s good to remember
that when dealing with massive and ancient
civilizations the scale of efforts can be
mind-bogglingly huge even before factoring
in any ultra-advanced technologies that might
break known physical laws.
So too, since it’s unlikely any civilization
that’s managed to be around for millions
let alone billions of years is terribly focused
on biology as a necessary component of life,
you might dump civilizations into effective
pocket universes to keep them safe, be they
ones you made by Clarketech or simply virtual
worlds you’ve uploaded their brains to.
Key notion there is that a principle of non-interference,
or the Zoo Hypothesis, is plausible enough
as a reason we seem to be alone, but there
are so many problems with the way we usually
see in science fiction, and so many more pragmatically
effective ways.
As we said, timing on first contact is going
to be about either principles, pragmatism,
or current events – their current events,
not ours.
When it comes to principles, the only one
that really fits the bill for waiting to contact
folks till they’ve reached some cultural
or technological level is non-interference.
So principles don’t fit too well as they
have probably got better options that are
more likely to work for keeping us safely
quarantined.
Such being the case, if we get a Hello signal
or a ship landing on Earth, it’s not likely
to actually originate from what we think of
as our galaxy anyway, which is likely to be
an illusion, or a bubble entirely gifted to
us.
The notion someone might grant a whole galaxy
or Observable Universe to someone might seem
rather ridiculous but everything’s relative,
and channel regulars already know just how
ambitious we can be even without any super-advanced
technologies.
If you accept things like faster than light
travel as possible, for instance, you have
to consider dealing with species that not
only don’t come from our galaxy but don’t
come from our Observable Universe.
For all we know the whole Grand Shebang is
a trillion, trillion galaxies or more and
somebody happened across Earth a billion years
ago, liked what they saw, and threw a giant
dark energy generator back in time to isolate
our otherwise empty galactic supercluster
from interference or shoved the whole supercluster
through a mega-wormhole into some new pocket
Universe.
You make first contact when that species,
us in this case, figures out how to notice
that or look outside it.
If they do contact you via signal or ship
though, they might go for that classic science
fiction approach of landing a ship in Central
Park and asking to be taken to our leader
just to make us feel more comfortable, part
of why I’d half-expect the ship to disgorge
humans rather than little green men.
You probably can arrange to have your ambassador
not only look like but actually be whatever
species you are visiting, rather than shock
them with how you look and behave.
Indeed, there’s a pretty good chance that
rather than being from species of billions
of little green men who colonized part of
the galaxy, the galactic community is actually
billions of Matrioshka Brains, giant megaminds
each powered by their own sun and running
computational power in excess of a trillion,
trillion human brains each.
Since a Matrioshka Brain is a type of Dyson
Sphere, you’d expect to be able to see such
a community, or rather not see them since
anyone of those megaminds could pack brain
uploads of every human who ever lived into
a tiny closet of vast computational castles,
there is no reason to assume you and I are
actually seeing the real galaxy when we look
up at that sky anyway.
That’s another key concept too, if you’re
getting contacted by aliens then you should
expect you’re dealing with something that’s
at least on the Kardashev-2 scale.
See that episode for details about how mind-boggling
powerful such civilizations are even if they’re
running with more or less modern human technology,
but short form, they outnumber you so massively
that they’d literally have more anthropologists
than you have people.
Indeed just a single K-2 civilization around
one lone star ought to be able to devote the
equivalent of an entire University to studying
each and every single star in the galaxy while
funding it about as much as we fund modern
anthropology.
That means they know us better than we know
ourselves when they pop out of their ship
or send a signal to us saying hello.
If their goal is to traumatize us the least,
than they are going to have a good idea how
to do that.
Needless to say, if they have some other goals,
they are just as well-equipped to do that
too.
Heck they probably know us so well, and have
so advanced their own capabilities for neurology
and psychology, that they could likely just
brainwash us or deliver such a well-polished
salespitch that we’d be jumping for joy
at whatever they offered, even if it was mass
enlistment to serve as cannon fodder in some
war of theirs, or as prey in their hunt, or
as their dinner entree.
I’m never quite sure why science fiction
likes to suggest aliens might want us for
food, particularly since they could presumably
mass clone synthetic human meat from a few
samples of our DNA, but I suspect if that
was their agenda they wouldn’t need to do
it at gunpoint or even by deception.
They could probably feed us such a load of
tripe that we’d be jumping for the chance
to be rendered as tripe.
You always have to ask, for any proposed alien
motivation, if there’s a way easier way
to achieve the apparent goal.
I can’t imagine why they’d want to put
humans on the menu at galactic diners, beyond
there presumably being a market for exotic
meats.
It would seem fairly likely many civilizations
would have taboos and an aversion to cannibalism
or it’s alien equivalent, but even if not,
they ought to be able to just grow meat anyway
and even if they prefer meat that was hunted
or slaughtered from something that had been
sapient.
I doubt that would be a universal taste, meaning
you’ve got to worry what your neighbors
will do when they find out, again see the
Invasive Aliens episode for discussion of
that issue.
How about pragmatism as a reason for saying
hello now, not ten thousand years ago?
Well, speaking of restaurants with exotic
menu options, they might have companies that
franchise a lot and want to setup shop on
Earth.
Plenty of folks would pay good money to try
alien cuisine, be it food or drink, after
all as we noted in Parasitic Aliens, it’s
likely to be good stuff, Alien Beer is to
die for.
You might be wondering what we’d pay with,
being rather primitive, but trade is very
adaptable and inventive, and this is an example
of when pragmatism could apply.
The more advanced a civilization gets, at
least if human history is a good measure,
the more exotic and abstract its tastes, both
literally for food and in many other things
too.
They might have services to offer that you
need to be fairly high-tech to desire or appreciate,
same as you can’t sell video games to cavemen,
and there might be local rules about excessively
priming the pump.
No landing among Neolithic tribes and bootstrapping
their technology until they can desire and
afford smartphones, no getting them to sign
over entire mineral-rich asteroids they don’t
even know exist in exchange for a ten-year
subscription to Galactinet, and so on.
We may also have finally started producing
a large quantity of something they value,
which is likely to be something artistic or
creative.
They might find our video games or movies
very interesting, and think they could be
adapted as big sellers with more advanced
production techniques, and so to the surprise
of everyone in Hollywood whose been making
films about them landing on Earth for years,
they might go land right in Hollywood and
say “Take me to your Producer”
As a whole, any given pragmatism-based scenario
always has to say what the goal is and why
we just meet it now, or in the near future,
for it to work.
It’s great if it’s the principle of non-interference
and they know you’re within spitting distance
technologically of being able to spot them
with new telescopes.
Or if you know they’re going to figure out
how to use and listen to some faster-than-light
communications network you have.
It also works if you’re not really into
non-interference but just don’t care much
about other civilizations culturally and are
nice enough not to steal homeworlds, but suddenly
have a motive.
For instance if rules or customs of galactic
conflicts forbid establishing military or
trade outposts on worlds or in their system
if the native species tells you to get out,
but now they’re out in space and you need
to ask for a contract for basing rights.
Then they find out you’ve been using Mars
as a spy outpost for a million years and kick
you out.
Or demand back rent.
But that takes us to our third option, besides
principles or pragmatism, current events in
the galaxy, or at least the stellar neighborhood.
Things change, and a galactic map is likely
to have very fluid lines for things like borders
or regulations or trade and defense treaties.
Earth might have been under the shadow of
some empire for 10,000 years who just lost
this bit of space or it seceded to become
a new realm of its own, or suddenly they need
to buildup outposts in our area and they want
our permission or cooperation.
Possibly out of ethical interests, or a long
time fondness for us who they’ve been quietly
protecting, or possibly to keep their other
neighbors neutral or on their side in whatever
conflict was brewing, if they might look ill
upon setting such outposts up without our
genuine permission.
Or it might be something that’s a bit of
a current events for us too, like a dwarf
planet or rogue black hole headed our way,
and they don’t think its practical to try
to do that without us knowing or even helping.
“We need to disassemble Mercury to make
a giant cannon to blow up this dwarf planet
headed your way” is probably the sort of
thing you aren’t going to even try to do
covertly.
Of course if they offer to do that, you probably
want to try to make sure that’s all the
cannon is planned for, rather than, say, being
a big gun for blowing up their neighbors and
you to serve as the fall guys when their armada
show up in our solar system to inquire about
what happened and what your funeral customs
are.
I always tend to assume alien civilizations
are courteous like that.
Probably true too, you likely can’t make
a civilization without concepts like diplomacy
and courtesy, especially really advanced ones
where offensive firepower is wildly disproportionate
to defenses.
That’s one more pragmatic reason for contact,
not saying hello when you know they’re about
to find out you exist soon anyway, but doing
so before they make some horrible, self-destructive
weapon or technology.
By default we just assume any weapon we might
make in the near future would be no threat
to them, but that’s a big assumption.
It could be a lot of civilizations destroy
themselves early on with Suicide Pact Technologies,
like we discussed in Late Filters last month,
and they show up before you do hoping to prevent
that.
Indeed you might have a galaxy devoid of any
ancient civilizations because this happened
very frequently and only recently did anyone
manage to avoid killing themselves and now
they try to pay their good luck forward by
intervening.
On the other hand, we never want to get in
the habit of assuming technology always just
keeps getting better and better over time.
It might be that technology snowball’s very
fast and a 22nd century Earth can create just
as good a self-replicating sentient galaxy
devastating super weapon as anyone else can.
I generally roll my eyes at science fiction
that suggests aliens stay away from us because
we’re hyper-aggressive, or only visit because
they need to enlist us in their cause for
having that trait, because I tend to figure
anything that crawls its way up Darwin’s
4 billion year deep corpse pile is going to
pretty aggressive too, so that even if they
are nice guys now they weren’t always and
wouldn’t likely scorn us for that trait
but rather offer us a hand getting out of
it or just figure we’ll outgrow it.
On the other hand, it could be they feel obliged
to race in whenever they find a species at
about our level knowing we’re getting pretty
close to being able to build superweapons
that are superweapons as far as they’re
concerned too.
Though this, like so many other options, always
leaves that big question as to “why now?”,
what changed with us or with them that makes
it better to say hello now and not a century
ago, or ten thousand years ago?
Not a lot of good answers that I’ve heard,
and again why I tend to assume there’s no
galactic community yet and if there’s ever
to be one, we’ll have to build it ourselves,
but the good news is, looking at means, motive,
and opportunity, if there is anybody out there
with particularly nasty intent, they could
so easily have already taken action that we
can probably conclude they either don’t
exist or are held in check for some reason
and one which hopefully will keep applying
for centuries to come.
There is one dark mirror version of the Prime
Directives of non-interference.
Civilizations might have rules about not contacting
primitive civilizations, but it might be that
it’s the galactic equivalent of fair play,
and once civilization hit a certain ‘age’
they’re expected to fend for themselves
against galactic threats, be it natural disasters
like asteroids or alien armadas or abusive
trade partners and scam artists.
You get out there and start colonizing your
local planets and mining your asteroids and
they expect you to deal with stuff like asteroid
impacts on your own.
Or for that matter, they might come land their
ships after you’ve started mining asteroids
for space gold and present you a bill for
past protection services.
“Welcome to the Galactic Community, you
owe us 4 billion years of back taxes”, and
suddenly the hostile armada of homicidal alien
robots doesn’t sound that bad in comparison.
While taxes and bureaucracy are likely to
be a feature of any civilization, trade is
probably going to be the true cornerstone
of any interstellar civilization, be it with
your own colonies or alien empires, and whether
that’s in raw materials or luxury goods
or simply data and information.
We’ll be taking an expanded look at the
notion of Trade with Aliens in our second
installment of our new Nebula-Exclusive series:
Coexistence with Aliens, which is out now.
Nebula, our new subscription streaming service,
was made as a way for education-focused independent
creators to try out new content that might
not work too well on Youtube, and can be put
on Nebula exclusively, though I’ll also
still be using it for previews and early releases
too.
And if you’d like to get free access to
it, it does come as a free bonus with a subscription
to Curiositystream, which also has thousands
of amazing documentaries you can watch, on
top of the Nebula-exclusive content like our
Coexistence with Aliens series from myself
and many other creators like CGP Grey, Minute
Physics, and Wendover.
A year of Curiosity Stream is just $19.99,
and it gets you access thousands of documentaries,
as well as complimentary access to Nebula
for as long as you're a subscriber, and use
the link in this episode’s description,
curiositystream.com/isaacarthur.
Quite a few episodes coming up to finish 2019
out, starting next week with Accessing Earth’s
Core, where we’ll look at how we might go
about drilling all the way to the Earth’s
center and why we might do that.
We’ll follow that up with a Bonus Episode
on Paranoid Aliens, and the Thursday after
that we’ll take a look at Space Pirates,
and see if this classic scifi concept might
become a reality in the future.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to support the channel,
you can visit our website to donate, or just
share the video with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
