This episode is sponsored by Skillshare
To quote Douglas Adams, “I may not have
gone where I intended to go, but I think I
have ended up where I needed to be.”
When it comes to traveling the galaxy in the
future,
this might be the normal order of business.
This episode will be coming out a few days
before Douglas Adams’ birthday, the late
great author of the famous Hitchhiker’s
Guide to the Galaxy and also our book of the
month, or series for the month, as we’ll
be discussing his works throughout March.
I don’t think there’s any series I’ve
read, or rather re-read and listened to as
much as the Hitchhiker’s Guide, and it’s
a great example of how humor and satire in
science fiction often get more bits right
than even very sober and hard science fiction
works.
As we’re going to see today, there’s a
decent chance that in the future, if you want
to travel to other worlds, you’re likely
to have to hitchhike to get there.
We’ve a lot of concepts to cover, so you
might want to grab a drink, a snack … and
a towel...
This topic had a bit of a strange birth.
Someone was asking if I’d discuss Oumuamua,
that peculiar asteroid from another solar
system that’s been in the news a lot this
last year.
That’s a fairly common request and I’ve
always declined because we don’t really
do focused astronomy or current events here,
there are a lot of other great channels that
have discussed it.
We might give it a detailed discussion down
the road if Project Lyra or some equivalent
does get launched to check Oumuamua out more
closely.
Of course the interest is mostly in me discussing
it as a possible spaceship but channel regulars
already know what I’m going to say… that
it isn’t one.
But it stuck in my head because we were discussing
panspermia recently, the notion that life
might originate out in space and land here,
and there’s the option that it could travel
the galaxy by hitchhiking on board asteroids
like Oumuamua.
These things kind of meander around the galaxy,
and it's inevitable someone would wonder if
we might hitchhike on them too.
Now, unfortunately, they move way too slow
to be viable.
We can already design better interstellar
ships than that.
You also don’t hollow an asteroid out to
make a ship, you smelt it down and make a
bigger, better, and task-designed ship instead.
Same as you can hollow out a tree as a canoe
but would do better to cut it up for lumber
to make a real ship.
But such an asteroid might be a way for someone
to send a time capsule to a distant place
or even freeze themselves and hide inside
if they got abandoned in some distant empty
place where no ship would be likely to pass
by, and who can’t really stop to pick you
up anyway.
This got me to thinking about how most people
would actually go about traveling in the distant
future and I realized that we almost always
discuss interstellar spaceships either in
a colonial or military capacity.
We don’t too often discuss regular people
just getting on board a ship to visit a distant
star system that’s already colonized with
a big and ancient civilization already established
there.
And partially it’s because you might not
see too many journeys of that sort.
To quote Adams again, “Space is Big, really
big.
You just won't believe how vastly, hugely,
mind-bogglingly big it is”.
If you want to get anywhere in any sane timeline,
you need to go fast, and as fast as you can
safely go and afford in terms of fuel, because
while speed costs, so does time.
Even if you don’t care about how long it
takes to arrive, perhaps because you’re
frozen, lots of stuff can break and even an
automated repair system is going to be expending
material during the trip.
So you go fast.
Now when we talk about traveling between stars
here on SFIA we usually are talking about
giant colony ships, which can expend any amount
of energy they need to arrive because any
given star system is constantly evaporating
away far more mass and energy than even a
very big ship would expend getting there.
They can easily send back a repayment of those
resources many times over again, using the
slow, cheap way, since their home solar system
will have huge supplies that they might want
replenished but would be in no rush to receive
them.
This, rather than a post-scarcity economy,
is the excuse for giant and fast ships.
Uninhabited star systems are not just storing,
but losing, vast amounts of potential resources
every second they are left uninhabited.
Your typical star blows through more energy
every second than it would take to run our
entire planetary economy for millennia.
That’s wasted energy, sacrificed to entropy
and the eternal void.
Such space-faring civilizations are likely
to be unbelievably wealthy, to us, but they’re
not without scarcity.
They have a finite amount of matter and energy
to work with, an ever dwindling pool, and
they will know exactly how much of each it
takes to support a person.
The energy budgets needed to move someone
to another solar system are millions of times
what it would take to support them for a year.
I want to emphasize, they probably do have
the resources, but they might be kinda touchy
about people engaging in really exorbitant
expenditures.
That doesn’t matter for colony ships, because
again they do have those resources and they
are spending them essentially as an investment.
So while I doubt many places would actually
ban recreational travel between stars, it’s
fairly likely in many places it would carry
a bit of a pariah status, like if some restaurant
tried to use books or currency to fuel their
grills.
That’s legal but it’s not some place you
want to be taking a grinning selfie at and
posting to your facebook.
Everything’s relative but wasteful behavior
is rarely encouraged and ultra-wasteful behavior
isn’t likely to be encouraged.
It’s hard to guess on a future civilization
of course, they might be obsessed with efficiency
or indifferent to massive wasteful expenditures,
or simply not view recreational travel that
way.
As one example, folks leaving a system represent
a serious legal pain for any properties they
leave behind, as those essentially go into
limbo for decades or centuries, so they might
have a rule that if you immigrate you have
to transfer or liquidate those.
Similarly it makes something like an absentee
ballot for an election or a consulate for
dealing with citizens who get in trouble light
years away virtually impossible, since your
home country might not even exist when you
arrive.
So they might restrict two-way trips that
are seen as recreational just to encourage
folks to formally immigrate and avoid light-lag
induced bureaucratic nightmares.
However, while I’m spoiling everyone’s
childhood dreams of traveling the stars, I
should note that there’s another even bigger
reason this might get discouraged or banned.
There is no such thing as an unarmed spaceship,
especially an interstellar one, as even a
fairly modestly sized personal one is basically
a giant nuclear arsenal.
Even a single ship no bigger than a truck
moving at 95% of light speed carries several
thousand megaton nukes worth of energy.
So civilizations might be very touchy about
privately owned starships.
That’s another reason why bigger is better
for ships too, it’s a lot easier to track,
regulate, and blow up a handful of larger
ships with a vetted and licensed crew than
millions of tiny ones.
You might be able to easily purchase your
own personal spaceship in the future, but
they might not let you fly it anywhere near
another solar system.
Attached to that, as long as light speed limits
us, interstellar empires would at best be
loose confederacies of a handful of systems,
not sprawling galactic ones.
Odds are very good even individual solar systems
would be broken into hundreds if not millions
of nations.
Each system is likely to have its own specific
regulations on entering, especially at relativistic
speeds, and have all sorts of security and
customs issues that differ from neighboring
systems.
Again, giant ships have an edge here, especially
ones that tend to have a circuit they run,
and would be hard to charter to just make
a flight of potentially many centuries to
the destination of your choosing.
Even if we assume most systems have ultra-efficient
laser highway systems to their neighbors,
this merely reduces rather than eliminates
these problems, and such highways are more
likely to be akin to railroads, for big equipment
where controlled ships shuttle down, not lots
of tiny personal ships.
All of which starts adding up to a picture
that says visiting other populated systems
is something you either do on a great big
passenger liner where you’re probably frozen
for the duration and might be waiting months
for the next flight, maybe frozen in a warehouse,
or you’re doing it by hitching a ride on
a ship that doesn’t specialize in passenger
movement and is not going all that far.
You aren’t traveling from here to Ursa Minor
in one stop, not the way a dedicated colony
ship might, you’re jumping from star to
star, zig-zagging your way out, probably spending
months or even years kicking around that system
before a ship comes by that’s headed the
right way and will let you hitch a ride or
buy a ticket or work your way out.
More like a sparse hub-and-spoke system like
the airlines use, just with more, and longer,
layovers and very few flights.
And you probably won’t buy a ticket either,
commerce and currency between stars is not
likely to handle small transactions too well,
with each destination quite possibly using
a different local currency and with decades
of delay on any banking transaction.
Consider the practical problems too, if you’re
some company who owns a bunch of freighters,
you probably have those insured, and do not
want the liability issues involved from one
lone random stranger on your ship sightseeing
the galaxy, not on your ship potentially carrying
megatons of ultra-valuable goods around.
Another reason why freezing passengers might
be the norm.
I suspect almost every ship would have a lot
of passengers on board, but they might be
rather unofficial cargo.
Hard to say of course, some place like Earth,
or the Sol System anyway, all dyson swarmed
up at the center of an emerging galactic sprawl,
might easily have millions of giant spaceships
carrying trillions of people in and out of
the system every single day with easy to book
travel to all neighboring systems out to a
hundred light years.
While another region might be inhabited by
various fairly hostile and xenophobic civilizations
and that can change quick too.
Remember voyages to even your closest neighbors
might be decades long, a lot can change in
that time.
A utopian democracy might have switched into
a genocidal dictatorship or vice-versa since
you booked passage there.
They might not have some nice, cheap, efficient
laser highway to their neighbors either, or
be confiscating any ships that arrived for
seizure.
And if you are planning to cross the whole
galaxy, you’re talking about potentially
spending a million years jumping from system
to system thousands of times, needing to book
new passage each time.
Needing to scope out your next couple destinations
and gamble against the most recent information
from them.
Let’s imagine for the moment you were on
the crew of one of the Gardener Ships we sometimes
discuss on the channel, great big generation
ships that pop from world to world, moving
ever further from Earth, settling each one
in turn.
Let’s say you traveled with them all the
way out to the galactic rim.
We’ll even use our example from Intergalactic
Colonization, the ship Unity, that had arrived
in the Terminus System and was prepping for
the big journey to Andromeda.
You’ve decided to go home.
All the way back to Earth, 30,000 light years
away, and as I recall from the episode, a
place you’d left 200,000 years ago, with
thousands of colonies setup along the way.
Now you’re ready to head home.
There’s a fantasy series called the Black
Company by Glen Cook, very good series by
the way, about this mercenary company that’s
been around for centuries and keep records
– the Annals – of its members and exploits.
Since they usually are not very popular for
a couple generations in any area they’ve
been working at, they tend to drift over time
to new spots and had wandered a very long
way from their origins, which have descended
into myth and legend.
At one point in the series they decide to
go home, but all they’ve got is a name,
for a place that’s on a continent they don’t
even have maps for, sort of like trying to
travel down to Cape Horn from Norway in the
10th century.
No maps, cities along the way changing names
or getting moved or destroyed, and languages
changing too.
So they decide to just backtrack, figuring
at each stop along the way they’d have a
better chance of pinning down their next destination
from a combination of their own annals and
local history.
Needless to say they often don’t get a terribly
warm reception at most of their destinations,
they are called the Black Company for a reason,
though at one place they’re regarded as
near mythological founders or heroes too.
Our hitchhiker coming home from the Terminus
system has things a bit easier, he is very
likely to be regarded as a heroic founder
and records ought to be better.
Earlier on at least, there ought to be people
who still remember him even, we are obviously
assuming a lot of life extension options for
this trip, though alternatively he might have
made his trips on ice or be a descendant of
the original colonists too.
Quite possibly all three, but we’ll assume
this particular Traveler actually left Earth
personally and has been awake most or all
of the time.
These were colonies, bare bones places when
he left, so even the newest ones he first
reaches are going to be quite changed, but
after the first few dozen stops, he might
find they’ve entirely renamed worlds as
they’ve shifted from a handful of small
villages on a mostly empty and barren planet
to sprawling Ecumenoplises or interplanetary
nations.
He makes one stop and finds out that locally,
after a rough patch settling in, the colonial
government had blamed his ship for their hard
times by not giving them enough support setting
up, and he’s not greeted as a fun news item
but like a criminal or villain returning to
the scene of the crime.
He might decide he’s better off detouring
off that direct route, but he’s likely to
keep returning to it for nostalgia, even if
he sometimes has to bypass places that have
turned nasty.
Every time he stops he gets big updates on
what’s going on, and all the changes.
He probably needs some Hitchhiker’s Guide
to the Galaxy and it’s probably about as
reliable and thorough as reviews of resorts
and travel destinations are nowadays.
Full of tons of old and outdated entries on
tangential stuff, rants about customer service,
complaints about how the local customs officials
confiscated their contraband, and reviews
about bars and restaurants that closed down
centuries before you arrived.
Even for those first few destinations, it
would be like someone who lived in Constantinople
jumping to Cromwell-era London then over to
colonial America than back to Victorian-era
London then to modern Istanbul.
And that’s only going to get worse with
each progressive step.
I suspect he’d opt to travel with circuit
freighter crews volunteering his skills and
experience and staying awake just so he could
be getting live updates as they approached
each new system and have folks to interact
with who were used to this sort of leapfrogging
through time and space.
In that regard it would be very easy to imagine
a lot of sub-cultures emerging around these
sorts of space crews, probably nothing even
vaguely homogenous across a whole galaxy,
but with decently standardized customs and
behaviors at least in each local pocket.
They would be very likely to have some currency
the various captains all agreed to use among
each other, even if just to rendezvous outside
a system and exchange goods to avoid tariffs
- something like quality liquors or other
barter items.
They would be very likely to favor travelers
who’d been on ships a lot and be more open
to having them hitch a ride if they couldn’t
pay, since any time one of them left their
ship they’d be stranded way out away from
their home too.
They probably would have some sort of guidebook
or wiki they all maintained separately and
shared around so as to avoid each system whitewashing
its own entries.
And it is very unlikely our traveler can pay,
I mean even assuming he’s been drawing some
salary from Earth for all those thousands
of years, which seems very unlikely, there’s
just not likely to be any sort of standardized
currency and even some agreed on interstellar
trade currency is likely to only exist in
a small region of space.
You’d probably be swapping currencies at
every destination, taking a hit on each, and
maybe gambling on wiring it ahead to your
next destination at light speed to some bank
hoping it will receive it and guard it and
add compound interest onto it.
How many times can you do that before something
goes dreadfully wrong?
Like the bank goes under or gets embezzled
or the planet it is on gets bombed?
Or you just stop using money, many folks figure
we’d live in a moneyless society in the
future, which might be quite a utopia, or
not, but even if it is, it might be rather
inconvenient for you, since that presumably
means you need to get authorized for your
next trip, and space travel is never going
to be casually cheap.
That system might be super-rich but very frugal,
wanting to save all its resources to allow
more people to live in comfort for more time,
and frown on what they might view as horrendously
extravagant travel.
It’s not very likely you could carry some
sort of commodity currency with you either,
even assuming there was something universally
valuable and compact and consistent in value.
You’ve got information, but that’s the
fastest and easiest thing to ship around the
stars, it moves at light speed and will always
arrive ahead of you, making yours old and
outdated when you arrive.
The good news is that it’s probably a very
prosperous galaxy all around.
You’re not likely to show up any place where
folks are starving and eating rats, though
you might wander into some place that’s
turned into a dystopian wasteland.
Odds are the ship, which will be picking signals
up as it approaches, won’t stop there anyway
if that’s the case.
So whatever the current economic state and
system is, you probably can work, beg, borrow,
or steal enough to keep yourself going and
maybe book passage to another spot.
You could also end up at a given destination
for centuries at a time, either no ships want
to go there or you’ve just taken a shine
to it and want to pause in your journey for
a while.
Maybe start a family, heck, considering the
Gardener Ship model assumes constant regeneration
of the colonist pool by having kids, if you’re
backtracking your path you might be bumping
into your descendants on each stop.
Go on long enough and the majority of that
planet might be descended from you, but with
life extension on the table, you might easily
visit a world you helped colonize ten thousand
years ago and be able to stay with your actual
son or daughter who stuck around there originally.
Indeed, an awful lot of these Gardener Ships
might abandon their original mission in favor
of shuttling along sections of space they
colonized, where the cultures are likely to
be a bit more similar and where they’ve
always got old friends and relatives, very
old friends and relatives, who they can visit
or turn to if there’s a problem.
If radical life extension is in play in the
future, as it very likely will be, odds are
most colonies will still have most of their
original colonists kicking around for a long
time, as a small minority as more people are
born, but probably a very influential minority.
We can’t really guess how the life of a
galactic hitchhiker would go, I suspect we
will have a lot of them, and they’d need
to be very adaptable.
Futuristic societies are probably not going
to need a lot of workers on ships or at spaceports,
not with lots of automation around, but if
that’s so it implies they’re not really
in need of payment and restrictions on easy
space travel just reflect a core of frugality,
or security concerns, again moving stuff through
interstellar space uses obscene amounts of
energy you can use for other things and which
will always be a finite quantity.
Unless someone invents some perpetual motion
machine or other bit of Clarketech, our topic
for next week, and they might be very stingy
if they’re preparing for something like
a post-stellar civilization like those we
discussed in Civilizations at the End of Time,
which we’ll be revisiting in two weeks.
I suspect it will always be handy to have
valuable skills and personal stories to tell,
as it is now.
I never did the hitchhiker approach myself.
I traveled a lot when I was stationed in Germany,
jumping on trains and staying at random hostels,
but those were always short trips while on
leave and the nice thing about being a young
soldier with no family is you tend to have
a decent amount of spending money.
Still it was always handy to have some skills
and stories, and for a lot of the folks I
bumped into on those trips, who’d been doing
it for months or even years and didn’t have
some trust fund to draw on, those were fairly
vital to their ability to keep at their travels.
Easier than in the past of course, traveling
bards or minstrels or craftsman often received
rather cold receptions, being viewed as troublemakers
or thieves, and of course many were, and I’d
imagine it will get easier in the future,
or less overtly dangerous at least, but I
suspect hitchhiking the galaxy will be a rather
exciting experience, and not always in a good
way.
So it’s definitely good to be prepared,
have a good guide, and of course, always bring
a towel.
As we noted today, it’s good to have skills
if you’re traveling, whether it’s the
world or the galaxy, and the practical ones
are often hard to learn from a book.
If you’re interested in expanding your repertoire
of skills, check out Skillshare, an online
learning community with over 20,000 classes
covering everything from practical daily skills
to things like programming, writing, or science.
A Premium Membership gives you unlimited access
to high quality classes on must-know topics,
so you can improve your skills, unlock new
opportunities, and do the work you love.
Join the millions of students already learning
on Skillshare today with a special offer just
for my listeners: Get 2 months of Skillshare
for free.
To sign up, visit the link in the description
and the first 500 visitors get 2 months of
unlimited access to over 20,000 classes for
free.
Act now for this special offer, and start
learning today.
We usually limit ourselves to discussing technology
that’s strictly inside known physics, even
if we often push the bounds of belief in terms
of the sheer scale of many of our topics.
Next week though we’ll be examining hypothetical
technologies which may operate under different
physical laws.
Tech so advanced it is indistinguishable from
magic, what we call Clarketech.
The week after that, we’ll return to the
Civilizations at the End of Time series for
Dying Stars.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please like
it and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Great Week!
