This episode is brought to you by Brilliant!
One day we hope to journey to new worlds,
but once we are there, 
how will we travel around them?
So a few months back, one of our newer editors,
Jason Snyder, pointed out that while we spend
a lot of time talking about how to travel
to other worlds beyond our own, we generally
don’t spend much time talking about how
we actually travel around those places once
there, and at my suggestion, he submitted
an excellent outline that served as the basis
for today’s script.
Our chance to see how folks in the future
might make their way around their distant
homes.
This was also about the same time my wife
and I started taking flight lessons, and like
a lot of folks, I often enjoy the journey
to places as much as the destination.
Those long trips in the car, chatting with
a friend or listening to an audiobook and
seeing the scenery are some of the most pleasant
and relaxing times, all at the same time,
flying through the air can be exhilarating.
Of course many planets have no air and while
they might one day have roads, they don’t
now.
So we’ll be focusing on different techniques
and circumstances, whether it's traveling
in a vacuum or by blimp on Venus or subglacial
bullet trains or complex tether and orbital
ring systems.
We’ll approach it by looking at unique challenges
and opportunities on each world, beginning
with Mercury, then we’ll move out, world
to world until we get to to the Kuiper Belt
and Pluto and it’s ‘Acheron River’,
then we’ll finish with a discussion of a
few other systems which might end up on Earth,
like power-beamed hypersonic craft and orbital
ring networks.
Each moon or planet we can go to has different
characteristics that ultimately define how
we can travel around there; and Mercury is
a great example of that.
Mercury is an airless rock with gravity parallel
to Mars, 38% of Earth normal, which may be
enough to allow habitation there without any
serious fears of health problems from low
gravity.
Mercury is a place of extremes, as close as
it is to the Sun, you wouldn’t expect there
to be darkness, but the planet is in a 3:2
Orbital Resonance, meaning it spins on its
axis 3 times for every two times it orbits
the Sun, giving it a day of 59 Earth Days
and a year of 88 earth days.
This is not its day length though, in the
sense of how long the sun is or isn’t in
the sky, because the orbit is nearly as fast
as the rotation, causing it to take 176 days
for Mercury to go from Sunrise to Sunrise.
In other words, Mercury’s Daytime lasts
one Mercury Year, and its night is just as
long.
So the Sun will rise on Mercury only twice
in 2022, only twice in 2023, and so on, though
this period is slightly less than half an
Earth Year.
Furthermore, Mercury has a highly elliptical
orbit.
Earth doesn't orbit the Sun as a circle, but
our elliptical path is nearly circular, so
much so that even though Earth is at its closest
to the Sun in January, the increased light
has little effect on it being winter in the
North Hemisphere.
Not so with Mercury, it’s highly elliptical
orbit is thought to be a major factor in why
it is in a 3:2 Orbital Resonance not a 1:1
or Tidally locked, like Earth’s Moon is
to Earth and virtually every moon is to its
planet, and also likely as most inner planets
will be to their own suns in other solar systems.
And as a result we can really only talk about
Mercury’s weather in two Mercury-year cycles,
362 Earth days, because for a given piece
of the surface, its winter one year, will
be much hotter or colder than the previous
year.
The nights are deadly cold once the planet
radiates its heat away, the days murderously
hot.
You could travel near the day-night terminator
to mitigate that as the Sun moved across the
sky, far larger than in Earth’s sky, and
you could basically walk and keep up with
this slow motion sunset and twilight.
However the noon time temperatures would be
pretty extreme even for robots and electronics,
and this episode isn’t about unmanned travel
anyway, so you either need to be out at night
or maybe twilight, or walk around with a large
reflective umbrella.
In our episode Colonizing Mercury we suggested
Mushroom Habitats, places where the habitat
was raised on insulated stilts above the ground
and kept in the shadow of a large and movable
reflective umbrella.
We also suggested mobile mining platforms,
huge miners, refineries, and villages on wheels
moving with the Sun, slowly, possibly with
giant solar masts overhead, staying where
they could use the Sun near the Horizon for
power.
A person lost on Mercury when the Sun rises
or sets has little choice but to dig in to
the darkest crater they can find and wait
for rescue.
That might come in the form of a spaceship,
but not a plane or helicopter.
Your only option for slow moving craft, rather
than orbital ones, is either something padding
along the ground on wheels, tracks or legs,
or some tether hanging from an orbital ring
or skyhook, neither of which is easy to redivert.
We can’t rule those out as options though.
In the absence of an atmosphere, a strong
enough skyhook rotavator might be able to
snag someone.
See our Upward Bound series for more on Skyhooks,
and our Outward Bound Series for episodes
like Colonizing Mercury, Colonizing Venus,
and many more we’ll revisit today.
Similarly, we can’t rule out fairly precisely
targeted shells being fired from artillery
pieces to provide a rescue pod of some sort,
fired from far away, over the horizon.
With a crater or big enough umbrella, with
a power supply, solar or nuclear, and with
a tent-equivalent, able to put you up on stilts
and run a big radiator system, survival might
be an option even if rescue was days or even
weeks away.
It’s all about how much food you have and
how good your air and water recycling in your
suit or tent is.
Power might be nuclear or it might be a solar
panel on a long telescoping rod, able to reach
above a crater wall.
You might be able to recharge a vehicle in
a crater, then race to catch back up with
the day-night terminator, do it again, and
so on, migrating with the twilight around
the planet.
As for ground vehicles, wheels and tracks
certainly are options but Mercury is a place
where legs, bipedal or more of spider-chassis,
is a real option for vehicles too.
Legs with feet that aren’t thermally conductive
let you walk around a hot landscape, while
a lack of oxygen means hauling around a giant
umbrella over your head for shade is viable,
there’s no air resistance.
Both robotic and manned vehicles are possible,
even under the bright noon sun, and this might
be anything from a fast insulated vehicle
on very sturdy wheels, to something like an
exoskeleton of stilt legs and an umbrella
over the head.
Mercury is one of many examples of places
where point-to-point travel is likely to be
by rail, and probably underground.
Though we should note that in the absence
of air and strong gravity, it would often
be easier to build a surface rail under reflective
shades and solar panels than an actual underground
tunnel.
That lack of air though probably encourages
you to put a thick cover above to protect
the rail from micrometeors.
So too, even though Mercury seems like an
ideal place for solar, we shouldn’t ignore
options like nuclear power.
Given that Mercury is burned by a Sun ten
times as bright as Earth, and without any
deadly radiation filtered out by an atmosphere,
options for radioactive power supplies for
during the 88 day darkness don’t really
seem so bad.
When it comes to analogies for desert travel,
there’s no place like Mercury when it comes
to similarities.
The day is hot and the nights cold, they’re
just a couple hundred times longer, there
is no water, and here, there is not even air.
Keep to shadows and craters, and remember
that on Mercury, the Sun hates you more than
it does vampires.
Moving out to Venus, here it shares a similarity
with Mercury in that it is deadly hot and
has a freakishly long day.
Venus spins slowly and spins backward, we
theorize it might have been hit by something
big in the past to cause that.
The year is normal enough, it takes 225 days
to orbit the Sun, or 16 Venutian days is about
1 Earth decade, but the ‘day’ is 243 of
ours, longer than its year, at least in terms
of completing a rotation, with the Sun rising
in the west, not the east.
The real day is about 117 Earth days between
two sunrises, still a very long time, and
that’s a very long sunrise, almost two hours
for every minute of Sun movement we’d normally
see here in our sky.
You can’t see that sunrise from the surface
of Venus.
The atmosphere is too thick, making Earth
look practically airless in comparison, plus
your eyeballs would have melted, along with
the rest of you.
Venus is not a place of extremes like Mercury,
it’s just hot.
Most colonization efforts for Venus, focus
either on building floating cities far up
in the sky and moving around by gliders, planes,
or blimps, such as we looked at in Colonizing
Venus, or involve a distant future where Venus
is placed under solar shades, like we looked
at in Winter on Venus.
Now we can hypothesize big superinsulated
vehicles trudging across Venus’s surface,
employing virtually unimaginable efforts at
cooling, run on fission power or dumped down
a superconducting orbital tether.
However, for today we’ll focus on Air travel,
as Venus is one of only 8 places in our solar
system where there is an atmosphere where
flight is plausible, and 4 of those are gas
giants.
You also have frigid Titan, Earth itself,
and the thin but flight-viable Red Planet
with its dust storms.
On Venus, the atmosphere finally drops to
a pressure similar to Earth’s surface pressure,
at about 50 kilometers up, about 30 miles,
some distance above the clouds, made of sulfuric
acid.
Here we could fill balloons with an Earthlike
Air mix of nitrogen and oxygen and it would
float just fine because the atmosphere of
Venus is principally carbon dioxide, which
is heavier than air, allowing it to float
like helium does here on Earth, and Helium
works even better as a lifting gas on venus.
Personal homes might easily be a blimp that
had a turbine on it pushing it to keep up
with the Sun, which creeps across the world
at literal walking speed even down at the
Equator.
Up closer to the poles, where the sunlight
would be more Earth-like in intensity, the
speed of day is even slower, so a house blimp
roofed with solar panels should have no problem
keeping up with the light.
Now you could hang glide, especially if you
had some engine and some solar panels on that
glider, to make it a powered aircraft, but
there is still some sulfuric acid up there,
albeit rather diminished.
So there is a need for either a protective
suit or for you to be inside an aircraft,
and you would need an air supply, but all
of this should be far less bulky than a normal
spacesuit.
Now you can just dump a plane off the side
of a blimp and expect it to get to a decent
speed as it fell, it's a long way down, but
landing is another matter, so you might see
planes limited to places where they had long
blimp runways or could inflate one temporarily.
So long as your ship can handle the rising
temperature and pressure as you descend, you
can dip below to gain speed, and both parachutes
and inflatable lighter-than air sections are
options, allowing submarine-like travel deeper
under the sky, or for a plane to slow and
stop midair by just becoming a blimp.
This could also be a great place for a helicopter
too, to limit the need for runways to land
on, or a VTOL craft, though Venus’s gravity
is 90% of Earth Normal, so flight is not that
much easier.
We might see some interesting airship hybrids
too, such as the Heli-Stat which is something
of a helicopter and blimp hybrid.
And nitrogen and oxygen gas are far more abundant
than helium, and far easier to keep from leaking
through your ship’s skin making them better
options.
On Earth, planes tend to be ‘wet wing’,
which means the wing is a fuel tank itself,
rather than containing one, and they might
be on venus too but we might see buoyant wings
instead, though slightly compressed oxygen
serving as your fuel oxidizer might be used
too.
Of course we have some material limits as
well.
You probably do not want to use aluminum fuselages
or airframes, aluminum reacts with sulfuric
acid.
Glass and polycarbonate are pretty resistant
to sulfuric acid and there’s plenty of reasonably
lightweight materials we might build planes
out of there.
Venus definitely has some better options for
traveling around, so long as you don’t mind
air travel.
If you do, Venus is not for you, and unlike
on Earth, where we say it isn’t the fall
that kills you, it's the sudden stop, on Venus
it is the fall that kills you.
Indeed, due to the thicker air and lower gravity,
the terminal velocity is about 40 kilometers
per hour or 25 miles per hour, so the only
reason the landing would kill you would be
because you landed in the proverbial, and
literal, frying pan.
It would take you over an hour to fall, and
while you’d likely be dead long before you
hit, a rescue might be possible for several
minutes, for any rescuers - brave humans or
robots - willing to make the dive to get you.
Your emergency measure though, might be an
acid-proof balloon connected to your air tank,
able to inflate and float you up to safer
regions.
Any such deep-dive planes are likely to better
resemble a submarine than a plane, thick-hulled
blimps or powered aircraft.
Venus is likely to be a place where many types
of aircraft dreamed-up on Earth are viable…
Just don’t fall out of them.
We will come back to Earth and the Moon at
the End, for now let’s skip past it out
to Mars…
On the Red Planet, airplanes are possible
but there’s very little air and it's not
oxygen, so you can’t really run an air breathing
engine there and you need higher speeds to
achieve lift.
This dwarfs the advantage of the lower gravity.
You’ve got little sunlight, which is already
too diffuse on Earth to really be used for
powering flight, and unless we find hidden
pockets of Martian Coal or Oil leftover from
some life that may have existed there long
ago, we’re out of luck on fossil fuels.
Though we have found trace amounts of methane,
whose origins are still rather mysterious,
and we may find pockets of it we could exploit.
Nonetheless, Jets on Mars don’t seem as
viable as on Earth.
I suspect major air travel there would be
in the form of something like a SCRAM-Jet
powered by microwave energy being beamed in
from orbitals or ground sources.
We discussed this technique more in our Upward
Bound episode on Beam-Powered Spacecraft.
And given that we discussed that as a real
option for people on Earth to own hypersonic
personal spaceplanes for getting to space
or around Earth, I could easily imagine them
getting perfected here and deployed on Mars
too.
Space-Based Solar Power - which gets around
weather and duststorm issues, as well as nighttime,
generally involves beaming the energy down
as microwaves, so having it able to target
aircraft with already existing assets, powering
bases below seems a potentially good way to
allow many distant small communities to operate
and interact without necessarily needing nuclear-powered
houses or rovers or planes.
Of course, that’s also an option, we use
plenty of nuclear on Mars and it’s got some
big advantages.
Problem is, when it comes to vehicles, nuclear
fission reactors are not terribly mobile or
safe for layman users - truth be told, neither
is a normal combustion engine but there is
a bit of difference between one of those,
and nuclear car engines.
As we get out to Mars and places further from
the Sun, methods of beaming power or using
nuclear, become more important for vehicles.
Otherwise you’ve got fuel cells or batteries,
all needing to be recharged.
RTGs, radioisotope thermal generators, while
stupidly simple, very durable, and very long-lasting,
really are not very power dense.
The MMRTG used on Martian rovers like Curiosity
and Perseverance has a 110 Watt output, and
at 45 kilograms, that’s a power density
of 2.8 Watts per kilogram.
That’s less than even fairly old and sturdily-built
solar panels, though it works at night and
in duststorms, and on Mars where the Sun is
weaker.
Nonetheless MMRTGs, while excellently reliable
power supplies, needing no refueling for many
years, still make the engine on your lawnmower
or chainsaw look like beefy powerhouses, and
weigh more than either.
In conjunction with batteries, you could have
a RTG powered rover, and more so on lower
gravity worlds, but its only real advantage
over solar is that you can travel during the
day and charge at night, whereas you could
carry foldable solar panels on your rover
and put them out to recharge it in the day,
and travel at night instead.
I would expect, honestly, to see a combo of
both.
Also there are isotopes that give off more
power from less mass, in exchange for shorter
service lives, than the plutonium isotope
in the MMRTG.
These rovers probably need to be fairly bulky
too, they need insulation and maybe even an
airlock, so the idea of running them on RTGs
and batteries seems more like how you would
run a short distance ATV for inspecting your
perimeter or carrying some equipment and people
to an outpost, with the assumption the RTG
is recharging the battery between use.
A Nuclear-fission powered landship seem more
probable, running on some very miniaturized
and reliable fission reactor to roll over
the terrain.
These could be down in the size range of a
large RV or one of those behemoth super-tanks
like Landkreuzer P. 1500 Monster or the Char
2C.
In an environment with little air, requiring
a pressurized hull, and lower gravity, super
heavy tanks might be more useful than we found
them after their relatively cool-looking but
lackluster battlefield performances of World
War 1 and 2.
Another cool thing about a landship big enough
for its own nuclear reactor is that it can
serve as recharger for other vehicles, rovers
or pickets that accompany it, or by direct
plug into electric powered trailers and haulers
that move with it, either hitched or just
having a connecting power cable some distance
away.
That allows each to maneuver around the Martian
terrain, or to form a long chain behind a
good pathfinder.
Which might be the vanguard scout or something
with a big bulldozer on the front of it.
There are no roads or train tracks on Mars
yet, and so too on Mars you don’t have to
go over bodies of water, like on Earth, and
you can’t get stuck in the mud because the
surface water for mud is just not there.
You do have to be somewhat careful about sand
traps, but that should be easy enough to figure
out.
A limiting factor on size is, if you want
to get around quickly, you are going to need
to clear paths for these landships to get
around.
The bigger the path you need, the more work
you need to do to clear that path.
So then you start thinking about how big of
a vehicle you need.
A small modular nuclear reactor is still kind
of big, especially with all of the shielding
you need around it.
To carry humans, you need both radiation shielding
around the vehicle as well as a pressure vessel
and thermal insulation to make it nice and
cozy inside and an environment where crews
can operate for extended periods.
Eventually - long before we see open air I’d
think - we would see trains on Mars or even
highways with recharging stations for electric
battery powered engines.
Generally these will be things that come after
Mars is home to tens of millions of people
or more.
Both work great there, electric trains or
electric cars on highways lined with solar
panel powered charging stations or long superconducting
cables from nuclear plants back in civilization.
But in the early days, I could easily imagine
lots of small dune-buggy style rovers or immense
nuclear landships crawling along the horizon
and through the dust storms, and they do seem
strangely appropriate to the Red Planet.
Now as we move out to the asteroid belt and
Gas Giants, a few major paradigm shifts happen.
First, while solar power is still viable even
out past Saturn, it's getting very weak and
starts requiring amplification, such as big
cheap reflective parabolic dishes focussed
on small panels or solar thermal generators.
So nuclear options become much more important,
and to be honest I really can't see fusion
power ever getting tiny.
It's sort of the nature of fusion that bigger
is better.
Of course as of this episode’s writing there’s
no functioning fusion reactors of any size
smaller than stars, so it's premature to rule
out personal vehicle-sized fusion reactors.
If you get them, then any place you can find
something to use a propellant, which can literally
be anything you can vaporize, gas, ice, rock,
or whichever, you can run a personal vehicle
that’s essentially the classic awesome scifi
spaceship able to act like some best-of-all-worlds
shuttle, spaceplane, plane, helicopter, boat,
etc.
In the absence of that, as we head out deeper,
you’ve got nuclear, you’ve got batteries,
and you’ve got power-beaming, and that’s
not exhaustive.
We have some other variants such as sending
someone a stream of fuel particles or oxygen,
which might also be magnetically caught and
slowed down to provide power.
How you charge those batteries can vary, and
I should also note that in a lot of applications
there is nothing preventing you from dragging
along a long power-cable either.
Indeed, long cable umbilicals would probably
be common, connecting a human and their fellow
crewmembers or various drone assistants to
the bigger vehicle they traveled in, allowing
smaller batteries or air and water tanks in
a personal suit.
You would still have those as a backup if
your cord got severed and in case you needed
to go a ways away from your vehicle or camp.
So too, you might have specialized drones
that came along with you, carrying extra battery
power or air, or guns to protect you from
the Yeti living in the Ice Caves of Callisto.
Now this requires a big caveat because the
problem in the inner system was a lack of
fossil fuels and that there was no oxygen
to burn.
In the outer system, methane, the most basic
of hydrocarbons, is all over the place, and
so is oxygen, in the form of rock or ice.
This doesn’t make for a good primary power
source, but it works just fine as a portable
power source being created by bigger powerplants
at your base, extracting oxygen and methane,
or regular hydrogen for that matter, from
the local environment to be used as a portable
fuel.
So a big dunebuggy with oxygen tanks for breathing
and burning, and tanks of methane, can definitely
roll around the low gravity moons of Jupiter,
and all that low gravity makes it much easier
to armor up your hull for radiation protection
and to keep your air and heat inside.
Indeed your radiation shielding is likely
to be made of your fuel and oxidizer.
As I mentioned earlier, many planes on Earth
are wet-wing, meaning the wing is just a big
fuel tank shaped as an airfoil.
For spacecraft, or surface craft on airless
moons soaked in solar radiation, expect the
hull plating to be of that same dual-purpose
design, hollow compartments full of your effectively
radiation-proof consumables, which help protect
you from radiation now too.
For that matter, not every environment out
there is airless vacuum.
Europa has long been suspected of having subsurface
oceans deep below the ice, and we suspect
that might be true of other moons, such as
Callisto and Triton.
And of course Saturn’s aptly named largest
moon, Titan, has an atmosphere thicker than
Earth’s and seas below, they just aren’t
made of breathable air or liquid water.
Personal Submarines or bigger subs are options
in these places and indeed would work better
than on Earth, as the pressure is far slower
rising with depth on low gravity worlds.
It is also likely there are caverns and lavatube
systems in any number of asteroids, icy moons,
and Kuiper Belt Objects.
These are far more easily shored up in low
gravity, potentially with ice or some concrete
equivalent we might figure out.
We also may get way better at drilling caverns,
or simply melting them.
There’s a lot of icy moons and asteroids
deeper out in space with kilometers thick
ice sheets.
Not to mention all those dwarf planets.
The handful in the asteroid belt, Ceres, Vesta,
and a few others depending on where you draw
the line on size, likely have underground
tubes and caverns which would be of great
interest to us.
All those other dwarf planets, from Pluto
to the dozen or more others at last count,
all the way out to FarOut and FarFarOut, are
likely to be shot full of underground liquid
or gas pockets, and would be easy to melt
tunnels through to.
Needless to say, in none of these deep sea
or underground caverns are you getting solar
power or beamed power, you either run it down
cables or you bring it in by battery or by
fuel and oxidizer.
Of course you might be using vehicles inside
underground chambers you’ve pressurized.
That could be a bit tricky to do, but some
chamber deep inside an asteroid or moon or
comet might make a very nice home, or area
to build a home in.
Given how low the gravity is in such places
-even Pluto’s gravity is only 6% of Earths
and most have far lower gravity than even
Pluto - a pressurized area permits flight
by personal rocketpack or wings.
Such a rocket pack might simply be dry ice
vaporizing, not some dangerous combustion.
I should also note that low gravity allows
interesting connection paths too.
For instance, while scifi regularly shows
asteroids ridiculously close together compared
to how it is in reality, it's relatively easy
to move them together and bind them with cables
and tethers.
You could cram dozens of small asteroids together,
connected by tethers or even tubes people
could walk, swim, or fly through.
This potentially allows an archipelago-like
community to form of various asteroid habitats,
not to mention their various space stations
and spaceships, manufacturies and solar panels.
Indeed as we saw in our episode Colonizing
Pluto, this can be made at a grand scale.
Pluto and its largest Moon, Charon, happen
to be in a double tidal lock, so that both
keep the same face showing to each other as
they orbit.
They are also very nearly circular in that
orbit, so it is possible to build a space
elevator stretching right from Pluto to Charon,
and indeed it's easier than building one to
space from Earth.
In that episode, we pointed out that it might
get very large, potentially including rotating
habitats along its length or even being one
itself, and in that episode, we named it the
Acheron River.
Now as we often note on this show, science
fiction has given us a bit of Planetary Chauvinism,
as we always seem to see humans colonizing
large planets - even when there’s barely
one small city of them there - and skipping
all the minor planets - of which there are
around a million in our solar system alone
- and also skipping the option for building
artificial space habitats like O’Neill Cylinders,
which we anticipate being as easy to build
as to terraform an equivalent amount of planet.
I feel like we would be remiss not to mention
how you would navigate around these.
Now we already mentioned how you could have
tethers running directly between them, or
even pressurized walkways, possibly even fairly
thick trunks rotating to provide some gravity.
Also in the absence of real gravity, and air,
you can own a personal spaceship, able to
jump a few thousand kilometers between some
close asteroid or cylinder habitats that should
be no more difficult to manufacture or operate
than a car or land rover.
You might even use solar sails, or laser assisted
ones from your hab, to sail around habitats,
or even around inside some as many may be
hollow and even without air.
Inside them though, we have some other options.
Big Cylinder habitats with centrifugal force
acting as their gravity, have low gravity
centers, and are likely to have tethers run
down from these to the ground below.
For that matter, cylinder habitats aren’t
limited to the ground and axis, they can have
multiple levels inside or partial levels in
the forms of platforms along those tethers,
and the gravity would be lower on these.
Indeed I would not be surprised if a lot of
cylinder habitats had skyscrapers that rose
all the way to the central axis like spokes
on a wheel and had a long axis structure running
out to external space ports.
You might have a tether in each town, or even
house, that you could ride up to the axis
and some form of train there.
On these cylinder habitats we can have all
the regular roads and planes of Earth too,
but on long megastructures, many of which
can run thousands or even millions of kilometers
in length, vacuum trains on the external hull
is an option allowing speeds of thousands
of kilometers per hour, or even tens of thousands.
Megastructures and habitats are not limited
to spin-gravity either, low or no-grav habitats
permit skyships, jetpacks, using combustion
or pressurized gas, artificial or cybernetic
wings, and many more.
And of course many people may be traveling
digitally, moving around their world remotely
via drones or androids, or even inside digital
worlds and virtual realities.
Now last month in our episode Moon: Mega City,
we talked about ways you could use deep tunnels
cut through the cores of planets or even skimming
their crusts to drop people or cargo through
to distant locations for zero energy.
Needless to say, that’s easy on a planetoid
with no molten core, but long tunnels taking
advantage of vacuums and gravity may be very
common features of travel around other worlds.
On the other hand we might be better to assume
an energy-rich civilization.
This one, a fusion powered one, likely sees
huge numbers of gas refineries in the atmospheres
of gas giants, floating there.
Or seeming to float there in some cases, such
as the Neptunian Chainsaw we looked at in
Colonizing Neptune, a huge orbital ring bucket
excavator complete with hanging chandelier
cities.
Such structures rely on active support, power
hungry methods of mega-engineering relying
on energy abundance or superconducting materials,
and they give us the option for towers that
rise up over skyscrapers like skyscrapers
do over regular houses, reaching right into
space, or huge non-rotating ‘orbital rings’
hanging right over a world, connected to it
by tethers that cable cars from many cities
in its footprint could use to reach it, and
from it, any other ring it intersects and
any city in either’s footprint.
This allows rapid access to any place on a
world or in its orbit, and represents the
ultimate in planetary transport infrastructure,
indeed you can even build planets out of them.
On the flip side of all of that, I should
note that walking is likely to always be an
option too, and in theory you could walk to
anyplace on a planet if it had a complete
orbital ring and spacetower network, though
that is a lot of flights of stairs to climb.
Such methods can be extended in extreme cases
to allow a direct walk between planets, though
given that its millions of miles, it would
be your distant descendants reaching them.
Also before we close out, we probably shouldn’t
rule out the possibility of even better transport
methods around a planet, like teleportation
or gates between planets appearing as windows
or closets in homes.
However, those are topics for another time,
for now, even though we have seen many cool
options that we might use to travel around
worlds in the future, all we know about traveling
to other worlds for now is that first we have
to get there.
And to paraphrase the first man to ever set
foot on another world’s famous first comment,
we may need to do that; one small step at
a time.
So today’s episode featured a lot of concepts
for traveling around worlds and traveling
to them and one critical concept to all of
those is the importance of math and science.
Problem is, for a lot of folks, learning math
was a chore as a kid, not a fun experience,
and they don’t really want to invest time
into learning more math especially if it feels
like it might be time wasted, making little
progress.
Maybe that’s someone you know, maybe that’s
you, but if you’re looking for a way to
learn math faster, better, and while actually
having fun, let me recommend Brilliant.
Brilliant is an interactive STEM-learning
platform that helps you to truly understand
concepts in math, science, and computer science
by guiding you through engaging, hands-on
courses.
And if you feel stuck, Brilliant provides
in-depth explanations to break down the material
for you even more.
For instance, Brilliant’s new Everyday Math
course takes you through foundational subjects
with their trademark interactivity.
A lot of people have struggled with fractions,
but when you approach them in a visual way,
they make a lot more sense.
With Brilliant, you will be presented bite-sized
pieces that you can learn at your own pace
when and where you want.
To get started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
or click on the link in the description, and
the first 200 people will get 20% off Brilliant's
annual premium subscription.
So we’re done for today but not for the
month, as we still have our Livestream Q&A
coming up this weekend, Sunday April 24th
at 4 pm Eastern Time, then we’ll close the
month out with look at the concept of a Technological
Singularity, an artificial intelligence of
stunning capability appearing seemingly overnight,
and ask if that outcome is inevitable.
After that we’ll spring into May, to examine
the idea of alien intelligences that are so
ancient and advanced they are seemingly godlike.
Then we’ll ask about how we might get some
air travel on Mars by giving it an atmosphere
it can keep, and that means we need to Make
a Magnetosphere for Mars.
Now if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe
to the Channel and hit the notifications bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below.
You can also join in the conversation on any
of our social media forums, find our audio-only
versions of the show, or donate to support
future episodes, and all those options and
more are listed in the links in the episode
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
