So you are at a Base on the Moon when you
get the phone call from back home on Earth
saying there’s been a disaster and no new
supplies will be arriving anymore.
What do you do?
Today we are going to be discussing Life Support,
how we keep people alive in places we didn’t
evolve to survive in.
Space is a pitiless place that is full of
stuff that will kill us and devoid of the
stuff we need to live.
Science Fiction makes a lot of mistakes about
what can kill you in space, how quickly it
can do it, and how hard or easy a given risk
is to deal with.
But it tends to get the overall concept correct.
Space will kill you.
To survive in space we need to consider everything
a person needs to live, and we can rank those
in order of urgency, but there are two we
will skip which are also the most important
resources in any survival situation.
Which is knowledge and the will to survive.
The former seems kind of obvious and the latter
a bit jingoistic, but there is a reason why
just about every manual and guide on survival
stick these in bold and repeat them over and
over again.
During an immediate life and death situation
our reflexive urge to survive does just fine,
and its knowledge and practice using it that
tends to fail us, people stumble around not
sure what to do.
But in extended circumstances it is often
that desire to live that gets degraded.
We’ve all seen that happen to folks and
while it is a bit sugary sweet to say a good
pep talk and a hot bowl of chicken noodle
soup will magically fix everything, the psychological
aspect of survival is a very real.
If folks give up the game is over, and they
often do so before they’ve exhausted all
the options even if they think they have.
It’s also infectious, causing those around
you to give up too, even if they might have
seen a solution you missed.
“Never give up, never surrender”, is not
just jingo, because while you are still looking
for solutions there is at least a chance you
might find one.
There is a myth that goes around that astronauts
used to be given suicide pills in case they
were faced with a hopeless situation.
It is a myth by the way, something like that
would be quite counterproductive due to its
demoralizing effect.
Also, somewhat redundant anyway.
It is by definition usually very easy to get
yourself dead in life and death situations,
so packing specialized equipment for that
contingency seems kind of superfluous.
Not the best approach when you are running
out air either, since a corpse doesn’t suddenly
become a chemically inert piece of furniture
no longer consuming or emitting gases.
Many of those are quite toxic, or at least
distracting, in an unventilated space.
This of course brings up our first and most
urgent life support concern, which is air.
During the course of a day a person will inhale
oxygen and exhale about a kilogram of carbon
dioxide.
Carbon dioxide being molecular oxygen plus
a carbon atom, if you are exhaling a kilogram
of it you used up about 730 grams of oxygen
doing so.
The amount you need of course varies by person
and what activities they are up to, but this
is mostly about how many calories you are
burning.
There’s another myth that you shouldn’t
do much talking when there’s limited air
because it will use it up even faster, and
it is technically true since speaking does
burn more calories than not speaking, but
the difference is minimal.
As a rule what raises your heart rate uses
more oxygen and vice-versa.
Running out of oxygen is generally not the
immediate problem where air is concerned either.
It’s that carbon dioxide filling up the
volume.
Let’s assume for the moment I am in a room
2.5 meters high by 8 by 5.
Or 8 feet high, and 26 by 16 feet wide, for
an even volume of 100 cubic meters.
A cubic meter being 1000 liters, it has 100,000
liters of volume.
Volume and mass are not the same thing, so
for instance oxygen takes up 21% of that volume,
21,000 liters, but is 23% of the mass, most
of the rest being nitrogen which is lighter
than oxygen.
The density of air varies a lot with temperature
and altitude but at room temperature is about
1.2 kilograms a cubic meter, so our room holds
120 kilograms of air and 23% of that is oxygen,
28 kilograms.
Or 38 days of oxygen for a person.
Incidentally you will often see this figure
given as about 550 liters of oxygen per day
instead, but 38 x 550 is about 21,000, and
as I mentioned a moment ago, that’s how
much oxygen there was by volume.
You can get yourself tripped up sometimes
though when people are talking about percentages
by mass and by volume.
Now you will not survive for 38 days in that
room, even if you could get rid of the carbon
dioxide that will start poisoning you pretty
soon, because once that oxygen gets down to
about half that concentration you will have
problems breathing it, and various negative
side effects will kick in making you nauseous,
lethargic, unconscious, and eventually dead.
If you could shrink that room it would help
extend your life.
The air is mostly nitrogen so it would get
harder to compress and eventually that nitrogen
would get concentrated enough to cause issues
too.
Of course humans don’t need nitrogen, and
can survive at a lower pressure with just
oxygen, so we often only partially pressurize
spacesuits because all spacesuits leak and
everything leaks slower at lower pressure.
Before we get to carbon dioxide we should
talk about two common science fiction myths
in this regard, how long before the air runs
out and how fast air gets sucked out through
a hole.
Let me dispose of the second one first, if
you poke a hole in the side of a spaceship
about the size of your finger, about a square
centimeter, you will lose about a kilogram
of air a minute.
If you stuck your thumb over that you would
plug that leak and it will not rip your thumb
off let alone drag you through the hole like
a sausage grinder.
The air loss will slow as the pressure drops
but you won’t pass out till it gets at least
under half an atmosphere and in that 100 cubic
meter room we just discussed that would take
an hour.
It’s also very easy to find leaks, especially
in zero-gravity.
Leakage rates loosely go with the area of
the leak, twice the area, twice the leakage.
Even if you put your fist through the hull
you should have a few minutes to do something
about it and random objects flying into the
hole would help to partially plug it too.
That’s the major reason we use partial pressure
in space suits and use only oxygen, not nitrogen.
Again all spacesuits leak a little bit, typically
through the joints, and lowering the pressuring
in them slows that a lot, particularly since
those tend to be the kind of leaks that get
bigger when being pushed at by more pressure,
furthering increasing the leakage rate higher
pressure causes.
In regard to the first of the two myths, running
out of air, the air supplies in an Apollo
era space capsule were pretty tight, because
there wasn’t much space, so it gave rise
to some bad ideas.
Your typical science fiction spaceship tends
to be a lot roomier.
Nevertheless when power runs out or life support
fails the crew often seem on the ragged edge
of death in hours, or even mere moments.
This is just wrong.
Someone once made a nice table of the volumes
of various famous spaceships in science fiction,
and came up with a volume for the USS Enterprise-D,
of just under 6 million cubic meters.
That’s the one Picard captained, not James
T. Kirk.
Ignoring any reserves of air they would presumably
have that would be 1,656,000 kilograms of
oxygen, or about 2.3 million days worth of
supply, 6200 years, for one person.
It had a crew of a thousand so that would
be 6.2 years, and at least a couple years
before oxygen deprivation would be an issue
even if they did nothing.
Of course carbon dioxide gets to be a trickier
issue, that can start causing problems even
before you get to 1% by mass.
A thousand people will exhale a thousand kilograms
of carbon dioxide a day so they’d hit 1%
carbon dioxide, by mass, in just 72 days.
Again not really a time critical problem.
Once it hits these concentrations the side
effects will begin to impair your ability
to get things done too.
Headaches, dizziness, and irritability get
common and don’t help you think of solutions
to your problem.
All of this gets steadily worse as the concentration
rise till it eventually kills you somewhere
above 10%, by mass, about 7% by volume.
So it isn’t an urgent issue on the classic
big capital ship we seen in science fiction.
Even on the International Space Station, which
is not noted for its abundant elbow room,
at 900 cubic meters of volume for 6 people,
it isn’t that urgent.
You have about two months of oxygen.
However you only have about two days before
the Carbon Dioxide would start causing problems
and maybe a week before it got too severe
for them to operate.
Death would arrive probably inside another
week.
Obviously the ISS has ways of scrubbing carbon
dioxide from the air, and indeed there are
many options available to us, but let’s
do our hypothetical scenario on a base in
Shackleton Crater on the Moon instead, one
of the places often think about constructing
such a base.
Now as mentioned, there are tons of ways to
get carbon dioxide out of your air, we developed
many for space travel and submarines and we’ve
learned even more in trying to deal with carbon
dioxide in our own atmosphere.
These typically fall into two major types,
regenerative and non-regenerative.
The latter typically involves some chemical
compound that is expended during the process,
often using up about an equal mass of that
material to the carbon dioxide it removed,
which at a kilogram per person per day can
mount up pretty fast.
Where it is the non-regenerative kind, say
Calcium Oxide or Quicklime, you are using
that up to remove carbon dioxide, as it absorbs
the CO2 and becomes Calcium Carbonate, that
stuff shells are made out of, and is then
done.
If you begin with say 56 kilograms of calcium
oxide you will end with 100 kilograms of calcium
carbonate, having absorbed 44 kilograms of
carbon dioxide.
Just 44 days worth for one person.
We’d much rather not be left with 100 kilograms
of useless calcium carbonate, so we’d prefer
some way to sieve through the air and remove
the carbon dioxide, to just dump it out an
airlock, or to just turn that carbon dioxide
back into oxygen.
That’s the usual notion behind a regenerative
scrubber, it either captures the CO2 in some
form you can use or toss out and which leaves
the scrubber material unchanged afterwards,
or does one better and produces oxygen again
by removing the C from the CO2.
Plants of course do just that, they suck in
carbon dioxide and emit oxygen.
We can also eat plants so it’s a great option,
but it takes up a lot of space, time, and
energy to grow plants.
Often the energy to remove carbon dioxide
that way is a lot higher than alternatives
too.
It’s very hard to separate carbon dioxide
into oxygen again, it’s not the path of
least resistance, and the various good techniques
for doing that efficiently tend to be a bit
on the bulky side.
Carbon sequestration when done at the large
scale can do as good as a couple hundred kilowatt
hours per ton of CO2, which would convert
into about 720,000 Joules per kilogram, or
about 8 watts per person.
We’ve also seen some interesting research
recently into breaking it up with ultraviolet
light, and potentially using nanoparticles
in tandem with Ultraviolet to convert carbon
dioxide into oxygen and methane.
In any event, that would mean you could convert
your CO2 back into oxygen in a spacesuit using
a solar panel small enough to comfortably
fit on your air tanks, which would be very
handy.
In an ideal case a spacesuit would be able
to scrub that CO2 indefinitely with a power
source, and also extract oxygen from water
or even oxides in rocks.
As we’ll see in a bit, that’s not too
energy intensive of a process, but trying
to get such processes down to the small scale
without losing tons of efficiency can be tricky,
especially miniaturizing it to the degree
necessary for a space suit.
But it does give us a decent scale for our
hypothetical Moonbase, 8 watts of power generation
for CO2 scrubbing per person, under optimal
scenarios.
Over there in Shackleton Crater we have the
advantage, as we discussed in the Moonbase
Concepts episode, of spots along the rim of
the crater that are almost perpetual lit,
making solar power a nice option, though fission
is also an option.
Down in the crater we believe there to be
an abundance of water ice available too, and
you can get oxygen out of ice for around 30
Million joules a kilogram.
The moon is also about half oxygen by mass,
even though it is mostly tied up in oxides,
but you can pull oxygen out of rock if you
need to.
The energy needs to do this are pretty high,
usually on an order of around 100 Million
joules per kilogram of oxygen, which would
be more like 1000 watts per person, compared
to about 10 watts that scrubbing carbon dioxide
took per person.
So it’s a good way to get oxygen to begin
with but it’s clearly better to recycle
it.
It cheaper to get oxygen out water, more like
300 Watts per person, but water is a lot less
common on the moon than rock and you might
want to do other things with it.
I keep mentioning these wattages because energy
is always your ultimate bottleneck, and a
lot of times people just assume using plants
for recycling is going to be better.
That’s only ever true because you can also
eat those plants, and you need to grow them
anyway if you don’t want to starve.
Of course that’s not all there is to air.
Indeed air has moisture in it and regulating
humidity can be an issue in keeping good health,
especially where plants are concerned.
But most of air is actually nitrogen and while
humans don’t use it to breathe, our plants
do.
That’s a serious issue, because plants are
always the preferred long term means of recycling
air since it takes less plants to recycle
a person’s air than it does to feed them.
If you need those plants to eat, you might
as well let them do your recycling too, waste
not want not.
There seems to be very little nitrogen on
the moon, and Mars not much better.
We’re not actually sure how little there
is but it certainly is not abundant.
Concentrations are low, on an order of a percent
of a percent of lunar regolith.
It’s not tricky to bake that out, but it
is energy intensive.
To a degree that’s okay because you can
probably get it out as a byproduct of all
the smelting you’d have to do to get the
construction material to make greenhouse domes
there if you decide to grow food.
Moving on to water we’ll find this is actually
one of our easier issues.
In our base in Shackleton Crater we expect
to find a lot of ice mixed in with the regolith
there and we can just cart that inside and
melt it and filter it.
Many places in the outer solar system are
super-abundant in ice.
Unfortunately in the inner solar system not
only is it rarer, but so is hydrogen.
You can find oxygen everywhere, and of course
the single biggest concentration of hydrogen
is in the inner solar system but that’s
in the Sun, and getting at that is fairly
difficult.
If you’ve got hydrogen and oxygen you can
make water, unfortunately most places that
don’t already have water don’t have much
hydrogen either.
So generally you either have plenty or you
have none.
Getting it into drinkable format is a bit
tricky, as is recycling it.
You can of course evaporate water out of any
mixture of seawater or mud or human byproducts
but that’s quite energy intensive, typically
on an order of hundred times more so than
options like reverse osmosis.
But water, the keystone of life and what most
of your body is made of, is actually one of
the easier parts of our life support problem.
Energy needs generally run on an order of
1000 joules per liter of water treated, though
it can be a lot higher depending on circumstances,
but if we assumed you needed around 100 liters
a day then this would be a power need of about
1 watt, a lot less than what would be needed
to heat that water for a shower for instance.
NASA has invested enormous energy into recycling
sweat and urine, and has gotten very good
at it.
Less so solid waste, and that usually mostly
goes overboard.
I have folks frequently ask me about debris
in orbit as a hazard and it is something we
will get to in the not too distant future
in an episode with the working title of Space
Trash, but yes there is a lot of shit in orbit
and yes a lot of it is literally that.
Needless to say you’d want to recycle that
too if you were planning on agriculture on
your moonbase.
It’s actually a bit harder in space as opposed
to on the moon, there’s less gravity there
than on Earth but there is some, and so on
ISS we actually have a keg that spins around
to provide centrifugal force to simulate gravity
to help remove contaminants from water when
we’re filtering it.
Gravity, even in small amounts, helps to ensure
dust and water settle out of the air and make
sure a lot of biological mechanisms function
properly.
We do not know the real long term effects
of low-gravity, or even zero gravity all that
well.
We’ve had people up on the ISS for months
at a time and been able to study that but
we’ve never landed anyone on Mars with its
38% of normal gravity and the Apollo missions
only spent a few days each on the Moon with
its 16% gravity, and that was in between long
zero gravity durations.
So we have only educated guesses about how
long you could live on either place before
suffering health issues.
I’ve spoken before many a time about using
centrifugal force to simulate gravity, called
spin-gravity, or even combining it with local
gravity where there isn’t enough, so I don’t
want to spend too much time on it now.
The short form is you take a big cylinder
and spin it around and the walls of that cylinder
become the floor.
Folks occasionally ask me if I’m over-simplifying
how easy or functional this is and assume
that if it were that easy and effective we’d
do it on the ISS.
There’s a flaw in that reasoning, the main
purpose of the ISS is scientific and the major
feature it offers us that we can’t do down
here on Earth way cheaper is a lack of gravity,
so putting it on the ISS would be counter-productive,
especially since one of those things we study
up there is the health effects of zero-gravity
on people.
But spin-gravity offers us some problems.
The one we most often consider on this channel,
because we mostly contemplate huge structures,
is that spinning something around places it
under a lot of force, equivalent to what a
suspension bridge of equal length to the cylinder’s
circumference would experience on Earth.
On the other side of the size issue, if you
go too small then you have folks experiencing
a significantly different force on their feet
than their head.
On Earth gravity is just a bit weaker [oops: stronger] on your feet than your head when standing up,
but the difference is so small only our finest instruments could detect it.
Standing on the walls of a cylinder 5 meters
in radius, if the gravity is normal at the
ground it’s about 40% lower at your head.
We can assume that would be pretty nauseating.
In case it isn’t, the whole thing is spinning
around at 13 RPM, about once every four seconds,
which will probably succeed in nauseating
you if the difference in gravity didn’t,
that’s faster than the typical Tilt-a-Whirl
they have at amusement parks and festivals.
From our experience with such things, and
more scientific if less fun versions, we know
people can handle about 2 RPM, one rotation
every thirty seconds, without feeling nauseous,
and that most should be able to adapt to a
bit more.
Unfortunately to achieve one gravity at 2
RPM means your cylinder needs a radius of
224 meters, which is a circumference of 1400
meters.
Plenty of living space but bigger than we
normally envision space station or ships,
though on this channel we routinely discuss
ones that would have closets bigger than that.
However centrifugal force goes with square
of those RPMs and linear with the radius,
so if we wanted to simulate Mars’ or the
Moon’s gravity, 38% and 16% of Earth’s,
the necessary radius of our cylinder would
drop to 38% or 16% respectively, or 85 and
36 meters.
Alternatively if we upped the RPMs from 2
to 4, our radius for normal gravity would
drop to just a quarter, 55 meters.
Kick it up to 6 RPM, which we’ve decent
reason to believe most folks could adapt to
after a while, and it drops to just 25 meters
radius.
It’s also entirely possible half-gravity
is fine, maybe even less, again we have zero
experimental data on how much gravity is okay,
just that none is not.
If you wanted to simulate Martian gravity
on a ship on the way there, to get everyone
used to it, and you found they could handle
6 RPM, then a 10 meter diameter is all you
need.
It also doesn’t have to be a cylinder, or
even a ring, spin two pods attached by a beam
or tether, and they could have spin-gravity
in the pods.
You do have to worry about wobble on such
things, but it’s not too huge an issue,
we can use counter-spinning sections, gyros,
and so forth.
Now as I said, and have spoken of in some
other episodes, you can slope a floor, using
a bowl shape, and spin that to combine local
gravity and spin gravity.
Often when I’ve spoken of this, since it
has usually been in passing, I’ve implied
it’s a fairly shallow bowl.
But in practice it would be more like a buried
cylinder with a slight curve adjusting its
angle with the weakening spin gravity to keep
down pointed at the wall.
On Mars it would be a deep bowl, on the Moon
more like a very deep vase.
You don’t have to bury it under the ground
but it’s a good way to protect from micrometeors
and the view is never good from inside any
rotating habitat smaller than planet-sized,
since your windows would be in the floor and
the stars would spin around a couple times
a minute.
Excavation is also very easy in low gravity
and you can pile tons of material on top of
something that isn’t all that structurally
strong.
We discussed this concept more in the Rotating
Habitats episode, but it is worth noting that
the windows would be on the floor and wouldn’t
make for a good view since you are spinning
around a couple times a minute or more, so
you probably wouldn’t have a lot of windows.
This brings up lighting and temperature, our
next two topics.
So far our energy needs have stayed pretty
mild, well under the normal electric use of
the typical citizen of an industrialized nation.
However, when it comes to keeping things warm
and bright your energy bill can shoot up quickly.
Just doing lighting for one person to see
by is cheap enough, modern LED lights are
durable and low-powered, and even a 10 watt
bulb provides comfortable lighting, but when
we start talking about lighting up large sections
of hydroponics that changes.
We’ve discussed that in the past a few times
too, and I usually place 2000 Watts as the
bare minimum energy supply for lighting enough
plants to feed a person and I tend to assume
everything has been optimized.
Not just lighting done only in those wavelengths
and luminosities needed by those plants, but
also temperature, humidity, CO2, etc.
Of course the sun provides free sunlight but
using that isn’t always a good idea even
when it is an option.
Temperature though turns out not to be as
bad as you might expect if you live in a cold
climate, are used to an expensive winter heating
bill, and are thinking space is freezing cold.
In space heat can only escape or enter an
object by radiation, shining light on it or
the infrared radiation it emits based on its
temperature.
That’s the effect of vacuum, and even on
the moon a lot of things would be clad in
a vacuum same as any vacuum flask, the Thermos
being the best known of these.
But these are not insulated just by a vacuum
cutting off convection and conduction.
That wouldn’t keep something warm for long.
Rather the inside of the outer layer is made
to reflect infrared light back into the inner
vessel, cutting off even that means of emitting
energy.
This is something we usually bypass mentioning
in most of the space-based constructs we discuss
on this channel because we are typically trying
to get rid of heat as fast as possible, since
we tend to be generating tons of it.
But when you’re not, that inner layer helps
a lot because even if you are only emitting
heat by radiating it, not via conduction or
convection, you can radiate it away pretty
quickly.
Heat radiation is entirely based on how hot
the object is and how much surface area it
has, and a man in a space suit has about 2
square meters of surface area and is radiating
about 500 Watts per square meter at human
body temperatures.
That’s 1000 Watts you are emitting by default,
the equivalent to burning 21,000 calories
a day, so anything you can do to cut that
down in terms of insulation is a good idea.
Of course in a spacesuit near Earth, or on
the Moon, when you are exposed to sunlight
you can overheat very quickly instead.
Particularly if you were wearing black instead
of a nice reflective white.
The same applies to dome or habitats, properly
insulated they don’t need much heating,
especially if sunlight is coming in and you
have a ton of thermal mass available.
Which you would on the Moon or Mars if you
don’t mind digging down a ways where temperature
won’t fluctuate as much.
Day length is about the same on Mars as on
Earth, but the Moon’s day is a month long
and you really need to factor that into considerations
for staying cool in the day and warm in the
night, and burying yourself helps with that
and with protection from meteors and radiation
too.
That’s one reason why artificial light,
or light bounced in through mirror and lens
assemblies, is better than the classic glass
dome.
We talked about that more in Moonbase Concepts,
mirrors and parabolic dishes, especially ones
that are just polished metal, are cheaper
and harder to damage than a glass dome so
you stick them around the thing you want lit,
and let the light come in through the windows
instead.
You can also use that reflective surface to
filter out any frequencies you don’t want,
or want less of, like infrared or ultraviolet,
or even green if you have a hydroponics area
you have to worry about overheating, since
green light does little for plants.
The other nice things about the moon as opposed
to a space station is that we do have the
option of cooling with conduction or convection,
as well as warming.
All that lunar regolith around and below you
can be used to dump waste heat or to help
warm the installation during the night.
It’s a lot easier to dig pipes for that
purpose there too, again from lower gravity.
So lighting and temperature can be pretty
cheap, or very energy expensive, depending
on circumstances.
We’ve got three more things I want to touch
on briefly before we close out.
Construction, Communication, and Manufacturing.
Communication is another one of those no-brainers,
but it certainly helps to have stockpile of
information on-site in case they go down.
Manuals are not the same as having a crack
team of experts on any field available to
help on short notice though.
It’s also your sanity lifeline home, so
you can talk to friends and family, but again
this needs little detailing and is a no-brainer.
It becomes a much bigger issue as you get
further from Earth and time lags of minutes
or even hours can come into play and also
require transmitters than use significant
amounts of power.
As to Construction and manufacturing, the
biggest cost and hurdle to doing a moonbase
or giant space station is the cost of getting
material and equipment there.
Anything you can manufacture on site, or in-situ,
saves tons of money and of course anything
you need to live is ideally something you
should be able to make on site.
In space you need to bring in all your material,
so most of the time it makes more sense to
make stuff here and ship it up to space.
But even there some manufacturing ability
is very useful, and you can save a lot of
mass if you don’t need 50 spare parts and
a lot of specialty tools because you can 3D
print them on the spot if they’re needed
and maybe even recycle that mass when they’re
done.
But simple 3D printing, and even the ability
to make construction material for buildings
out of local regolith, isn’t really enough.
Taking that hydroponics example for instance,
you need to be able to make machines to bake
you air out of and to smelt that regolith
to make steel or aluminum and glass and solar
panels and wiring.
You need to be able to make trays and piping
for the plants either out of metal or plastic
and if the latter you probably need vats of
algae to make your plastics and so on.
Needless to say anything which can miniaturize
or automate manufacturing with that degree
of intricacy helps us out enormously.
I think that is where we will stop for today.
We could do, and probably will do, whole episodes
going into more in depth looks just at in-situ
resource exploitation, but that would take
at least an episode and is probably better
discussed in terms of each place we would
do that at, as the options are different for
Venus and Mars and Titan and so on.
There’s a number of books that have been
written over the years about surviving on
the Moon, my friend Bob Goddard wrote one
titled ‘Mother Moon’ not long back, and
it begins right where we started, with a lunar
colony struggling for survival when supplies
stop coming from Earth though it ends in a
very different place.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
