This episode is sponsored by Raycon.
 
Our oceans are a mysterious place, full 
of strange life bordering on the Alien,  
but what would alien life be like that 
evolved on an Oceanic Planet?
 
In some ways our oceans, especially their depths, 
are almost an alien world, which is ironic, since  
most of Earth’s surface is oceans and life on 
land is the relative newcomer. There are also some  
truly strange critters in the deep sea and some 
so strange it’s been speculated they were alien,  
and not always as a joke or by a crackpot. 
Last year we also did an episode about life on  
low-gravity worlds, and folks have often asked 
for a follow-up, life on high-gravity worlds,  
and we will do that episode but something I often 
point out is that there is a very good chance  
most earth-like worlds with significantly higher 
gravity might be entirely covered in oceans,  
and this might be the majority of 
naturally habitable worlds in the  
Universe for reasons I’ll get to in a bit. 
It’s also a recurring theme in our discussion of  
aliens, that we might find countless worlds with 
highly intelligent life but locked beneath oceans,  
unable to invent technology where fire doesn’t 
exist, therefore evolving no more intelligence  
than an Earth dolphin or octopus, and who might 
be stuck on those worlds unless uplifted by  
some other civilization who is impressed by 
their brains and so brings them technology  
or introduces physiological changes to 
help them with inventing technology.
 
So I thought today we would ask ourselves 
what oceanic aliens might be like,  
what their pathway to civilization might be like, 
what extra technologies they might need, and what  
their pathway to the stars is. We’ll also explore 
the possibility that much as life once migrated to  
land from the oceans, it might migrate back to the 
sea too, as indeed it already has in some cases..
 
Okay, so what did I mean about Oceanic 
Planets being more common. Well, first off,  
water is disgustingly common in this universe. 
Oxygen is the third most common element in the  
universe (after hydrogen and helium) and it’s 
so reactive that it’s almost always bound to  
another element. It’s abundance and reactivity 
is why oxygen is the most abundant atom in rock.  
As an example, oxygen is 46% of 
the atoms in the Earth’s crust.  
Since hydrogen is vastly more abundant in 
the universe than all rock-forming elements,  
you can expect a significant amount of available 
oxygen to be bound to it in the form of water. 
 
Closer to a sun, it is harder for 
hydrogen and helium to stick around,  
and they tend to be blown away, so you can 
expect to find a lot less water there. 
 
The stronger the solar wind the faster those 
light elements blow away. Solar wind varies  
by how close you are to a star but also by the 
star’s type. On the other side of the equation,  
the more mass a planet has, and the more magnetic 
field it has, and so the more protection from  
stellar wind it has, and hence the harder it 
is for hydrogen and helium to be blown away.  
A planet’s surface area controls how much solar 
wind it is getting and how thick a given amount  
of air or water is going to cover it, but it is 
not linearly proportional to the planet’s mass or  
radius. A planet twice as wide, but with the same 
density, would have eight times the mass but only  
quadruple the surface area. So if it started with 
8 times the water of Earth and spread over only 4  
times the area, it would be twice as deep. 
What’s more, it has more gravity and should  
hold onto its hydrogen much better than Earth did. 
So it’s plausible most worlds bigger than Earth,  
but otherwise identical, have much deeper 
oceans. Incidentally they will likely have a  
thicker atmosphere too, for the same reasons. The 
oceans on Earth average a few kilometers in depth,  
if they were just one kilometer 
deeper, there’d be very little land.
 
There’s a lot of assumptions in there, for 
one thing Earth’s ocean might have come later  
via comet bombardment after the moon formation 
event, which would likely have removed all our  
lighter elements like hydrogen and helium, given 
that the event is assumed to have ripped our  
entire crust off and thrown it into the orbit, 
with much falling back down, some flying off,  
and some forming the moon. Proto-planet 
collisions are probably decently common so  
Earth might not be an outlier in that regard, 
and how much cometary matter we get hit with  
is likely to be dependent on tons of variables to 
the point of being fairly unique to each system.
 
All in all though, most things I can think of that 
would tend to factor into a planet retaining water  
are helped out by being more massive. So too, 
being farther from your Sun helps and water  
ice becomes absurdly common once you get into 
the outer regions of the main solar system.  
Earth doesn’t have much water, strange though 
that sounds, as our oceans mass just 0.02%  
of what Earth does. Alternatively it makes up 
a sizable fraction of a lot of the moons of the  
various gas giants, and our Kuiper Belt contains 
more water than the Earth, even though it only  
masses a couple percent of what Earth does. 
The Oort Cloud beyond that may well contain  
several entire Earth-masses worth of water.
Now that isn’t necessarily all frozen either,  
despite being far from the Sun, and gives 
us another large class of Oceanic planets.  
While there may be many worlds 
like Earth with open air water,  
for each of these there will be many more where 
the oceans are trapped beneath a layer of ice.
 
It is a peculiar property of water that its solid 
form, ice, is less dense than its liquid form,  
and thus floats on top of it. This is true 
for most types of ice anyway, some exotic  
forms like Ice IX are denser than water. Liquid 
water that’s not under pressure will boil away,  
even at cold temperatures. But ice floating on top 
of it forms a protective blanket that both keeps  
the water under pressure and separates it from 
vacuum on worlds that lack an atmosphere. So we  
expect to find many worlds, planets or moons, with 
subsurface oceans beneath thick sheets of ice, and  
we have a few in our solar system at least, the 
most well-known being Jupiter’s moon Europa.
 
This variety of ocean world is going to be very 
common, as you are pretty limited on open air  
water worlds to those of the right mass and 
location to have them, whereas the presence  
of liquid water on a gas giant’s moon or a dwarf 
planet is not too dependent on distance from the  
Sun. Indeed, a large moon around a gas giant could 
also have surface oceans much farther from their  
Sun than a planet could, due to tidal heating. 
So there we have our core cases, worlds with  
little to no surface land, be they planets 
or moons, and worlds with a surface of ice.  
Lots of subtypes in there too, as a world might 
have shallow oceans all around, what we call an  
Epipelagic World where the Sunlight reaches the 
ocean bottom in most cases, or the reverse side,  
what we call an Abyssopelagic World, one where 
the seafloor never rises to within kilometers  
of the ocean surface. You could also have 
undersea continents too, islands and landmasses  
that manage to reach near the surface in some 
places, but with vast dark gulfs in between.  
In all cases, for photosynthesis to develop there 
would need to be at least a few places where life  
could get sunlight and nutrients. Without the 
molecular oxygen provided by photosynthesis,  
life on these planets would not just have the 
hurdle of inventing technology without fire,  
but would likely be unable to 
form large and complex life.
 
That hardly rules out life, even fairly diverse 
and plentiful life, but it would not be an ideal  
case for building big and complex food chains. 
Running on tidal heating or geothermal energy,  
a species either needs to be far more efficient 
with its biological processes than we are or  
have far fewer middlemen in its food chain than 
larger animals often have. Something that grazed  
on whatever plants grew around oceanic thermal 
vents, or squatted on them and grew directly,  
perhaps like some squid-mushroom hybrid that 
latched on to a vent and drank from it.
 
Or engaged in very low-draw energy cycles 
bordering on hibernation, drifting about burning  
very little energy till it could catch something 
or find a new patch to graze on. A lightless  
world, either because the water is many kilometers 
deep or because kilometers of ice block the light,  
is one where biology is likely to move slowly. 
Of course the Universe is old, so slow might not  
matter, and a world of plentiful light but 
no option for fire might have intelligent  
critters like whales and dolphins existing 
for millions of years without inventing fire  
for technology but they might well be afforded 
those millions of years to get smarter too.
 
We often think of civilizations as being on some 
sort of timeline, but that mostly has to do with  
technology and specifically technologies that let 
you eat up your resources or damage yourselves.  
A proto-civilization without technology 
can just keep evolving smarter and smarter  
so long as they gain some other advantage to their 
survival from having their big brains. That’s  
potentially problematic in low-energy ecologies 
though, because brains are very expensive and  
need to pay off or they go away. Once you’ve got 
technology that is a good investment but you need  
most of that brain first. However, we’re still 
sporting a very similar model on our shoulders  
to what our ancestors had when they were 
playing around with bits of flint and tinder,  
so it had to be valuable to them too.
Also it should be pointed out that a good  
portion of the ‘smart’ animals are seagoing. 
While intelligence is not especially closely  
correlated with absolute brain size, the title of 
biggest brain on Earth goes to the sperm whale.  
Whales and dolphins are renowned for their 
intelligence, and after mammals and birds, the  
octopus is often considered one of the brightest. 
Though we should note that mammals and birds all  
had land-based ancestors, they and the octopus 
and some other weird ocean life are good reminders  
that brain architecture can vary wildly too. 
The squid for instance has a donut shaped brain,  
and much of the brains of octopuses seem to 
be distributed throughout their tentacles,  
whereas the leech has 32 brains, though 
they are not clever in part nor tandem.
 
Even the low-energy biosphere issue of 
sunless environments isn’t necessarily  
a bar on big brains, spiders have very large 
brains proportional to their mass, some being  
fully 80% of their body mass, and they spend most 
of their time waiting for prey to come to them.  
There are aquatic spiders, like the diving bell 
spider too, and the basic strategy of the web  
works as well in water as land. That might be a 
very good approach for something living in a low  
energy environment. Indeed the Sea Squirt begins 
life with a brain in its mobile, tadpole-like  
larvae state but then plants itself somewhere and 
absorbs its brain, eyes, and spine as it anchors  
itself in place for the rest of its existence.
Which makes sense, again brains are not cheap  
and if you are not mobile then they wouldn’t 
seem to serve much purpose, but there may be a  
lot of in-betweens, and we definitely shouldn’t 
assume nature is divided into stationary plants  
and mobile animals, flora and fauna, off this 
planet of ours, since it isn’t even neatly  
divided that way on this planet. Add in alien 
geology and things might change even more.
 
As an example, for frozen moon worlds, much as we 
have life forms that live in the dark mud of the  
ocean bottom, you could have life forms clinging 
to the bottom of those ice sheets. Those could  
be rather mineral rich too, or have pockets of 
gases float up to them and cling. You could have  
upside down frozen ecologies on those. You could 
also have pockets of gas and liquid inside those  
kilometer thick surface ice sheets, potential 
oases for life, and we do have life-bearing lakes  
buried kilometers under the ice in Antarctica. 
It is also pretty likely an oceanic planet would  
have polar regions where ice might accumulate, 
same as our north pole, and there is quite a lot  
of ecology built around those islands made of ice 
not rock. It is also not too hard to imagine some  
organism that melts tunnels through the ice and 
those might tend to remain full of gas. Some sort  
of worm or slug eating tunnels through the ice and 
creating ecosystems behind them in the new space.
 
Indeed you might have organisms slowly 
evolve to create very thin greenhouses  
near the top of the ice by leaving only a tiny 
thin layer of ice that light could get through.  
Done right they could even create small domes and 
polished ice that acted as a system of mirrors and  
lenses, much like some of the structures we’ve 
contemplated building on sun-weak moons and  
asteroids to create oases under domes, or long 
light filled tunnels bouncing the light around.  
But that would no longer be oceanic life so 
we’ll save it for another day, same as surface  
life that might evolve a thick skin to walk 
around on those airless moons’ icy surfaces.
 
So we’ve not only got scenarios for alien 
civilizations of smart whales and fish, but also  
less appealing, alien super-spiders and squid.
So there’s a pleasant notion in science fiction,  
giant brained squid, spiders, and 
slugs flying through the galaxy.  
So how did they get spaceships? Well it wouldn’t 
be as hard for the sub-surface oceanic life,  
again they’d probably have options for living 
in air pockets in the ice and percolating up  
to the surface even, and getting off a moon 
is relative child’s play as rocketry goes.  
Plus you’d tend to have a lot of other 
nearby moons to prod you onto colonization,  
given that our four gas giants each have at 
least a dozen moons and Jupiter has many dozens.  
Fuel is also not an issue, they are quite 
likely to have pockets of methane in that ice,  
which is a decent rocket fuel. Methane is not 
only created by many biological processes but  
naturally occurs from inorganic processes 
too, indeed it’s very abundant on Titan,  
Saturn’s enormous satellite, and we suspect there 
may be subsurface liquid water on Titan too,  
beneath its rather dense atmosphere. 
Methane pockets might be decently common in  
underwater caverns too. When we start talking 
about life in water developing technology  
we either need some substitute for fire or some 
plausible way they could have places fire could  
work and they could be there. Remember, 
just because we might have some underwater  
cavern with a pocket of oxygen in it that some 
combustible matter floated into like driftwood  
does not mean someone just figured out fire from 
it. Waterlogged material doesn’t catch fire easily  
and the humidity would be pretty high in an 
underwater cavern too, making fire tricky.
 
Humidity is presumably not an issue in an ice 
cavern and there’s an obvious motive to want  
fire when in one, but damp material washing into 
one or getting dragged in would get frozen over,  
and for that matter rocks you might light a fire 
with are likely to be eroded smooth in most cases  
and might be hard to make sparks with. It is 
doable but it is real iffy if they could discover  
it. Maybe if they were holding their breath, so 
to speak, while mining with flint tools in a cave  
with an oxygen and methane pocket in it. Though 
you have to survive your pyrotechnic discovery,  
we do have such explosions in our own mines. 
There are also some options like electricity  
or oceanic lava vents as alternatives to 
combustible materials. We examined some  
of these scenarios more in our Technology 
without Fire episode a couple years back.
 
But we should remember that many technical 
problems associated with being underwater, they  
can be solved simply by creating gas chambers. 
We ourselves live under a sea of air, and there  
were quite a few chemistry experiments we couldn’t 
run and things we couldn’t invent until we learned  
to pump air out of small chambers and do certain 
tasks in vacuum. In fact, aquatic scientists and  
engineers will probably learn about gas chambers 
a lot sooner than we came to understand vacuum,  
because they’ll encounter plenty of situations in 
nature where gas was trapped in a cavern or such,  
whereas vacuum was something humans had to 
create before we could do experiments in it.
 
One thing we can say though is that once they 
have technology, they will probably keep it,  
even if in some cases they have to rediscover 
it, same as us. One advantage of a big brain is  
realizing when something is useful. There is 
a good chance they’d be smarter than us too,  
if there is an evolutionary mechanism that 
tends to favor intelligence, they might just  
keep getting smarter and smarter till they figure 
out technology regardless of the hurdles, even  
if their average person is smarter than Einstein 
before they figure out how to make steam engines.  
Makes that notion of giant-brained squids and 
spiders a bit more plausible and horrifying. We  
can build technology that would work in water, so 
we have to assume once they get the ball rolling  
and are smart enough that they could too and 
would, even if they had to spend a billion  
years going from the aquatic equivalent 
of clever monkeys to rocket scientists.
 
Those from surface ocean worlds are a bit 
disadvantaged on early spaceflight. The subsurface  
ocean icy moons have it easier than us by far, due 
to the low gravity, but Surface ocean worlds are  
quite likely to have higher gravity and thicker 
atmospheres than us, and while there is a lot to  
be said about sea-based rockets, especially some 
of our jumbo designs like the Sea Dragon Super  
Heavy Lift Rocket design, I would not envy anyone 
trying to get a space agency running in the sea  
let alone doing initial rocket experiments. 
Fundamentally though even planets with  
significantly higher gravity and thicker 
atmospheres than our own can be escaped with  
modern rocket technology, and space colonization 
relies on the assumption that there are much  
better ways and such technologies would develop 
from a deep understanding of universal physical  
laws, they probably do not absolutely require a 
progressive process of improving chemical rockets  
to figure out. Indeed an oceanic civilization 
has some advantages with nuclear power,  
and for that matter such non-rocket launch 
approaches like mass drivers and space guns  
have some advantages when you can start 
them down the tubes deep under water.
 
One problem they do have is that their ship has 
to be a pressure vessel able to handle water at  
whatever pressure they’re used to, which might 
be more than one atmosphere, and water is heavy,  
several hundred times heavier than air, and 
might require much stronger spaceship hulls too.  
As an upside, a spacesuit designed to keep 
liquid water in it rather than air would tend  
to self-seal from minor punctures icing over, 
and making something water-tight is far easier  
than airtight. On the downside, especially 
for a creature used to swimming not walking,  
trying to move around in a spacesuit full 
of water on some airless moon like ours,  
lower gravity or not, is going to be very hard. 
We often envision uplifted dolphins having some  
sort of robotic exoskeleton to use for feet and 
hands, and they might well need something like  
that to move around their moon. Oceanic life 
might be much more resistant to g-forces too,  
and able to accelerate much faster 
in their spaceships as a result.
 
Space habitats are also potentially problematic. 
We can achieve gravity by rotating, such as the  
O’Neill Cylinder Habitats we often discuss 
on the show. They can too, but it will be  
much harder. Hopefully they can handle low 
or no-gravity better than land life might,  
because trying to create a large 1-g 
rotating habitat full of water is very hard.  
If they’re used to shallow lakes, it's probably 
okay, but if they are naturally used to living  
under high pressure they will need a very 
thick layer of water in those cylinders and  
the stress would be enormous compared to what we 
usually envision for space habitat landscapes.  
They might tend to very small cylinder habitats 
as a result. They will likely need gravity though,  
our experiments with fish in space are limited 
but the Medaka fish we brought up to the space  
station - those are the transparent ones whose 
insides you can see which is convenient for  
research - lost bone mass much faster than 
humans did in zero-gravity. Zero-gravity and  
microgravity are quite rough on life, land or sea 
based, and we’ll talk about that more next week.
 
Barring all those issues we just mentioned, 
once they’re in space aquatic aliens have  
no other disadvantages. Their ships have 
to be more massive, but that’s really only  
the habitation drum and we tend to assume 
that’s not the majority of a ship anyway.  
They might find space-living more comfortable too. 
We often make fun of how often science fiction  
writers treat space like it was the ocean, but it 
is more ocean-like in many ways than land-like,  
so they might be more psychologically suited 
to space than us. Might have an easier time  
terraforming or settling too, given that 
finding worlds with liquid water ought to  
be easier than finding worlds with land and oxygen 
rich atmospheres. Their domes might be underwater  
vessels or floating rafts instead, and might need 
water purifiers instead of air scrubbers, but that  
is in many ways easier to do than building 
domes on radiation-scoured airless rocks. 
 
In fact, some Earth animals would have tremendous 
advantages over humans when it comes to space  
colonization. The African catfish is able 
to aestivate, which is just like hibernating  
but in warm weather, for up to four years in a 
tiny, air-filled capsule encased in dried mud.  
Once rains return and soften the mud, it 
returns to full activity. It’s capable of  
breathing air or water, and thus would not have 
a problem with a humid, air-filled spaceship.  
Brine shrimp are the animals famously once sold 
as “sea monkeys” in the backs of comic books,  
that came in the mail in little packages 
you just poured into salt water.  
 
That was only possible because they can survive 
complete desiccation for years and return to  
full health once rehydrated. And conveniently they 
can also survive extended periods without oxygen.  
Tardigrades, or water bears, are another example 
of extremely tough organisms from the sea that  
might do well in extreme environments to allow 
life to make the leap to a new and seemingly  
inhospitable niche, potentially including the 
near airless and radiation saturated surfaces  
of icy moons with subsurface oceans. This 
toughness is not something we see in larger  
Earth life, so it might not be possible 
for larger and more complex organisms. 
 
While the technological paths would be harder, 
they do enjoy some biological options that  
might be easier. Ocean world aliens would almost 
certainly have very good hearing, for instance.  
Water is much less transparent to light than the 
Earth’s atmosphere. Vision is heavily favored for  
land animals because it allows you to see for many 
kilometers, but even in extremely clear waters one  
can seldom see clearly beyond 100 meters. Below 
4000 meters, so little light penetrates that  
sunlight is essentially useless. There would be 
even less light available under kilometers of ice.  
In such situations echolocation 
can be very useful, but it also  
comes with some significant drawbacks. 
For one thing, sending out a echolocation  
“ping” reveals your location at least twice as 
far as your detection radius. For another, the  
farther you want to see, the more energy you must 
expend in your pings. But there are advantages  
too. Echolocation allows you to see through most 
objects as if they were translucent. If an alien  
with echolocation looked at us, they would see 
our skin, but they would also see our bones,  
lungs, and beating heart. It also might be very 
handy for finding air pockets and caverns, which  
might allow fire, but also might be good places 
to hide. One could imagine a species adapting  
to be amphibious simply as a means of entering 
a safe place other organisms couldn’t reach.
 
Another non-visual sense commonly used by sea 
animals is electroreception. This allows sharks  
and some other fish to sense the electromagnetic 
fields produced by other living things.  
Electromagnetic fields are pretty critical 
to technology too, and if you’re naturally  
able to sense and work with them, you might make 
rapid progress with electricity and magnetism.
 
All in all, their biggest challenge 
is just getting to that technological  
avalanche point of focusing 
on real science and industry,  
which we didn’t really do ourselves till a 
few centuries ago, and if they get there in  
the deep blue sea then they should be able 
to get anywhere in the skies above too,  
as easily as we could. It might take them millions 
of more years to go from smart to spacefaring,  
but the Universe is many billions of years old, 
so what’s an extra million years here or there?
 
One last thing to consider is that the Oceanic 
aliens, be they big spiders or squid or mermaids,  
might be more plentiful in the Universe because 
there’s probably so many more such worlds out  
there to spawn them. However we also might find an 
abundance of water worlds, surface or subsurface,  
makes many human colonies on them opt to become 
oceanic themselves. Mermaids might end up as a  
branch off Homo Sapiens and a fairly common one if 
such Oceanic Planets are abundant in the galaxy.
 
We’ll get to our schedule and announcements in 
a moment, but first, a lot of us have had to  
adjust recently to increasingly mobile offices 
and conducting business over the phone or via a  
phone app for conferences, and if you’ve used 
many bluetooth headsets or earbuds, you know  
how distracting and troubling dangling wires and 
stems can be, and how important noise-isolating  
features and good battery life can be. 
If you’re looking for a good pair of  
earbuds with noise isolating features, and 
at half the price of other premium earbuds,  
I’d recommend trying out Raycon’s Everyday E25 
Earbuds. Personally I love them for the snug,  
discreet, noise-isolating fit that lets me listen 
to audiobooks even in a noisy crowd, or when I  
need to listen in on a conference call while 
taking care of other things. Plus they’ve got  
a good battery life and a very compact charging 
case with its own battery that can recharge  
them four times while you’re on the go. Raycon 
earbuds give you 6 hours of playtime, seamless  
Bluetooth pairing, more bass, and a more compact 
design for a comfortable, noise-isolating fit!
 
Raycon is disrupting the electronics industry 
by designing premium wireless audio for half the  
price, without compromise. They’re doing things 
differently than other brands out there—from the  
way they design their products to the way they 
price them, Raycon prioritizes their customer  
experience from start to finish. The company 
was co-founded by folks like Ray J., Snoop Dogg,  
Melissa Etheridge, and others with comfort, style, 
and playtime in mind, with a range of colors  
and style, and Raycon has a 45-day free-return 
policy. Whether you’re taking up a new hobby—or  
just want to make your day-to-day a little more 
comfortable—Raycons are the perfect way to bring  
premium audio to everything you do, and if you’d 
like to give them a try, click the link in the  
description box or go to buyraycon.com/isaacarthur 
to get 15% off your Raycon purchase.
 
So we had a last minute change of schedule and 
will be switching our last episode of January  
and first episode of February around. I’ve 
been wanting to talk more about colonizing  
those stars we tend not to think of as prime 
candidates for planets, and that ended up  
expanding into a four part series that we will be 
beginning next week with, Colonizing Red Dwarfs,  
and which we will continue in February and 
March with the episodes Colonizing Giant Stars,  
Killing Stars, and Exo-Stellar Civilizations. 
We were planning to close the Month of January  
out with Zero-Gravity Civilizations but instead 
we will open the Month of February up with that,  
and move on to look at Hypothetical Dark Matter 
Technologies the week after. We are still not  
done with January though, and again we will look 
at Colonizing Red Dwarfs next week, then close  
the month out with our monthly livestream Q&A 
on Sunday, January 31st, 4 pm Eastern Time.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,  
and if you’d like to help support future 
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,  
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are 
linked in the episode description below,  
along with all of our various social media forums 
where you can get updates and chat with others  
about the concepts in the episodes and many other 
futuristic ideas. You can also follow us iTunes,  
Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our 
audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
