Our world is ancient, but the Universe is far 
older. What were those first planets like,  
and how soon can life emerge on new ones?
About 1 second after the Big Bang the  
conditions of the Universe were so hot and dense 
they surpassed a supernova, and in under a minute  
virtually every particle of hydrogen, helium, 
deuterium, and lithium that now exists was formed.  
Things grew less dense and cooler after that, and 
by 400,000 years after the Big Bang conditions had  
settled down to what the surface of a dimmer star 
would be like. It’s ironic that folks think we  
have problems recreating fusion in the lab because 
we’re trying to replicate the innards of stars,  
but we’re not, fusion of any given particle 
in the core of a typical star is the sort  
of thing that happens less often than once 
in a billion years. People might envision  
a house-sized fusion reactor replicating our 
sun’s interior with 100 tons of stellar core  
matter inside as some powerful juggernaut but it 
would only be able to run a few light bulbs off  
the fusion energy it was producing, albeit 
it would run them for billions of years. 
No, to generate useful power from fusion you need 
to replicate the conditions inside a dying star,  
and those are the conditions that forged 
the matter planets are made of and those  
conditions lasted only a few brief 
moments after the beginning of time. 
Had the Universe expanded a bit faster than that 
there’d probably be little helium still and no  
lithium, had it expanded much slower than that 
then we would probably have a universe without  
any hydrogen to fuel stars and possibly 
just a lot of iron and nickel floating  
around until it turned into black holes.
There might have been some different story  
where conditions after that first minute left 
us a modest fraction of heavier elements that  
would have permitted those first stars to 
have rocky planets around them. There may be  
realities in which those planets formed even 
as the first stars were born. But instead,  
we had to wait for many generations of 
the shorter-lived and bigger stars to  
live and violently die for those conditions 
to arise. And indeed, for the corpse stars,  
those stellar remnants like white dwarfs 
and neutron stars, to collide together,  
as much of the heavier matter in the Universe is 
not birthed by a large star going supernova but  
from the violent ends of white dwarfs absorbing 
matter or neutron stars merging with neighbors. 
Today we are going to discuss those first 
planets and also what young planets born  
later in the Universe are like. When could 
the first planet able to support life have  
formed and how young can a planet be for 
us to successfully settle and terraform it? 
It’s a big problem spanning billions of 
years. We won’t need that long to explain it,  
but we’ll still be here for a bit. 
So settle in, grab a drink and snack,  
hit those like and subscribe buttons, and let’s 
journey to the time of Primordial Planets. 
Nowadays we discover new exoplanets every day, 
but in truth we still know little about them,  
and most of the ones we discover are enormous 
giants or right by their sun or often both. Huge  
gas giants don’t interest us much when we’re 
considering how rocky planets form, as while  
newer gas giants often have several rocky planets 
worth of heavy matter in their centers, you only  
get those exposed for life if they are so close to 
their sun that it can strip the massive atmosphere  
off and leave you that remnant. We call those 
Chthonian planets and the name derives from the  
idea of an infernal underworld and these are 
going to be no more habitable than Mercury is. 
But you might be wondering if Mercury ever did 
have an atmosphere and that’s a good place to  
begin. When a star forms it does so from a local 
cloud of gas and the temperature of that gas is  
quite important. Space is not cold like folks 
tend to think and it used to be a lot hotter,  
and we still have nebulae and gas clouds that 
can be as hot as a million Kelvin. Even hydrogen  
particles of just a few thousand kelvin are moving 
thousands of meters per second and at a millions  
it’s more than an order of magnitude higher. 
So they are not getting captured easily by  
gravity as a star tries to form. Formation happens 
better in cooler and denser regions, often ones  
recently hit by the shockwave of a supernova.
Molecular clouds are these cooler and denser  
regions we get stars forming in and they 
make up less than a percent of the galaxy’s  
volume and are mostly packed in from 11,000 to 
24,000 light years from the galactic center,  
we are a bit further out, 26 or 27,000 light years 
from the center. As a star forms in these we get  
other clumps of matter too, and the heavier 
elements will clump easier as they move slower  
at the same temperature. Gas speed generally rises 
with the square root of temperature and drops with  
the square root of mass, so a molecule a hundred 
time heavier than a random hydrogen particle is  
moving at a tenth the speed, meaning it’s a lot 
easier for it to clump into things rather than  
bouncing off or evading the rising tug of gravity.
Stars form from a cloud that has a certain makeup,  
almost entirely that same hydrogen and helium that 
formed in the first minute after the Big Bang,  
but when our Sun formed about 9 billion years 
after the Big Bang it was a bit under 2% heavier  
matter by mass. Those particles are all heavier 
elements so they actually only make up about 0.1%  
of the Sun’s atoms by number, and similarly, 9 
out of 10 atoms in the Sun are hydrogen but only  
about 7-tenths of the Sun’s mass is hydrogen and 
that’s been the approximate ratio since that first  
minute of the Universe. All the heavier stuff 
is a tiny fraction compared to that primordial  
hydrogen and helium and more than half of that 
remainder are oxygen and carbon atoms with Neon,  
Iron, and Nitrogen as distant runner ups.
All these elements heavier than hydrogen and  
helium are referred to as metals in astronomical 
terms and we can roughly gauge a star's age by  
its metallicity, the percentage of it composed 
of anything heavier than helium. Metallicity  
of a given star or nebula is not a precise 
measure of age by any means, as it reflects the  
local activity of dying stars and stellar remnant 
collisions and that is not going to be homogenous  
throughout a galaxy or between galaxies either.
Stars were originally categorized as Population  
1 and 2, where our Sun is a 1 and population 
1 can include stars with a metallicity only  
a tenth of our own up to those with a few 
times more. Population 2 was anything with  
a lower metallicity than that, less than 
tenth of our own down to only a thousandth,  
and these are older stars and thus also mostly 
stars less massive than our own that can live  
many billions of years. In early astronomy when 
we were first figuring this out we mostly only  
saw stars bigger than our own and thus called it 
a yellow dwarf but we later found about 95% of  
all current stars were less massive than our Sun 
and virtually none of these stars has died yet. 
This effects metallicity in terms of composition 
too, as while we usually treat it as a raw value  
or even estimate it off the ratio of iron 
or magnesium we see in a star’s spectrum,  
certain elements like carbon and nitrogen 
are formed mostly in the deaths of lower  
mass stars that do not go supernova. Ones that 
form white dwarfs after a red giant phase. Stars  
that go supernova typically live 100 million 
years or less, whereas no white dwarf could  
be younger than that, and the majority of iron 
and nickel is from exploding white dwarfs which  
absorbed matter off a less massive and longer 
lived binary partner, a Type 1a Supernova,  
whereas magnesium is only made in quantity 
in supernova of big stars, type 2 Supernova,  
and so is oxygen and phosphorus. That’s where some 
of our nickel and iron comes from too and some of  
our carbon and nitrogen, but most of that carbon 
and nitrogen is from smaller stars blowing matter  
off as they head toward being white dwarfs.
These ratios matter because our very first  
planets probably formed alongside the very 
first stars, the hypothetical Population  
3 stars with essentially no metallicity, and 
these planets wouldn’t have had them either,  
but as those built up we get higher ratios of 
metals and greater chances of large rocky planets  
forming but elements like carbon and nitrogen 
– which are pretty critical to life, are going  
to be at a lower ratio in those oldest planets 
because most of the stars that would produce them  
took a lot longer to die and do that. That ratio 
of heavy elements is probably going to matter and  
while metallicity of stars and the nebula planets 
develop from rises overall with time, it isn’t  
constant across galaxies and the ratio of the 
elements it’s made from is not constant either. 
But rocky planets will form even when the 
protoplanetary disc it's forming from is  
fairly low on metallicity. As mentioned, Hydrogen 
and helium are generally moving much faster than  
other particles and won’t clump as easily so 
we can’t assume the smaller planets formed with  
the same ratio as that star did, but it is very 
likely early-stage rocky planets all had a thick  
atmosphere of hydrogen and helium themselves. 
Likely even more so in the more distant past when  
those metallicity rates were lower. Once that 
star ignites, a lot of the remaining hydrogen  
is going to be blown away from that solar system, 
both whatever is just floating around and whatever  
is around smaller planets as it just doesn’t mass 
very much and it will be getting hit by solar wind  
coming off that sun, which are mostly hydrogen 
atoms that by definition have to be moving fast  
enough to escape the solar system themselves.
Some hydrogen lingers as it bonds to heavier  
atoms, like oxygen to make water, nitrogen 
to make ammonia, and carbon to make methane,  
and heavier molecules too. Indeed, those three 
molecules tend to be very common deeper out in  
the solar system and form the majority of 
Trans-Neptunian and cometary matter. Helium  
and Neon are also very common but don’t form 
molecular bonds and tend to fly away. Argon  
doesn’t form bonds either but is heavier 
and lingers, it’s just not terribly common. 
How soon was that possible? Well, realistically 
only a population 2 star could have hosted a  
planet. About the most a population 3 star would 
have is one thousandth its mass as metals and  
that’s the high end, the earliest would have been 
even lower. Now that’s more than enough matter  
for a planet but the issue is that it’s likely 
to have been the rough makeup of that initial  
planetary body itself too. Jupiter’s makeup 
is fairly close to our Sun’s and so is Saturn,  
while Uranus and Neptune, being smaller ice 
giants, still are mostly hydrogen andhelium  
but have a much higher ratio of those other 
secondary but abundant elements like oxygen,  
carbon, and nitrogen. Strip any of those down of 
their hydrogen and helium and you’ve got a rocky  
planet, but we believe the core metal core 
of Uranus is only around Half Earth’s Mass,  
with Neptune maybe at 1.2 Earth’s Mass, 
and Saturn and Jupiter both much bigger. 
What this basically tells us though is that 
anything big enough to have an Earth-mass of  
rocky materials while in a system with a tenth 
or much less of the metallicity of our own Sun  
is likely to be in at least that Saturn mass 
range and likely higher, and it would be a big  
stretch to get that massive atmosphere stripped 
off in any place where a habitable planet would  
be left over. I could imagine it in a case 
where you had a trinary system with two close  
binaries with one being a star that might be 4-8 
times the mass of our sun and another smaller,  
and a third star out at least several AU 
away, in a loose orbit of the other two. 
The bigger one goes red giant, shucks 
off its outer layer, goes white dwarf,  
sucks matter off its partner and goes Type 
1a Supernova, leaving a fairly metal rich  
system and possibly stripping a lot of 
hydrogen off some gas giant orbiting  
our other outer star. Something like that 
isn’t super likely but isn’t strange either,  
and in a universe of billions of billions of stars 
probably has happened billions of times already. 
So that’s one way you might get 
a rocky planet fairly early,  
after that we don’t see any population 1 stars 
till about 10 billion years ago, about twice our  
Sun’s age and these are all on the low side of 
metallicity themselves, in that zone of being  
a tenth of the metallicity of our sun or a bit 
higher. We have a lot of stripping, migration,  
or ejection methods that could plausibly result 
in something like Neptune being stripped down to  
a rocky planet, so that I would be willing to 
say primordial Earth-like planets should have  
existed as early as 10 billion years ago if not 
sooner. Let me caveat that by saying a lot of  
those methods for permitting a low metallicity 
system to produce a big rocky planet are also  
not situations or events I’d think of as being 
great situations for life to try to exist in. 
For conceptual purposes, we might find that 
Earth-like rocky planets formed a hundredth  
as often 10 billions years ago as 5 billion, when 
our sun formed, and were also 1% as likely to be  
plausibly long-term habitable at their location, 
and so we have only a ten-thousandth as many life  
bearing planets popping up 10 billion years 
ago as 5 billion years. But if only one in  
ten thousand systems produced such a planet 
5 billion years ago, that means only one in  
a hundred million did 10 billion years ago. That 
doesn’t sound like many, but that still means  
at least a thousand in this galaxy alone. Places 
where life might have flowered to be building its  
own spaceship before Earth had even begun forming. 
And again, we do have potential scenarios like a  
population 2 star managing to get a rocky planet 
by seeing a very large gas giant get stripped  
down and maybe even in the first billion 
years of the Universe, though I’d not give  
it great odds even at the Supercluster Scale.
Gas giants can form anywhere as they have so  
much mass, but those volatiles and icy bodies 
are limited to the outer system further out,  
beyond what we call the frostline which is at 
the edge or past our own asteroid belt and here  
you get bodies mostly composed of those ices as 
they are simply far more common. Oxygen, Carbon,  
and Nitrogen are very abundant and hydrogen far 
more so, hence their simple molecules of water,  
methane, and ammonia will dominate the makeup of 
most bodies out past here. Rocky objects in this  
region can be moons that are captured asteroids 
from closer in-system or expended comets or a  
tidally wracked moon like Io near Jupiter that 
just blew material off, and we can imagine an  
Io like Moon, or one a bit bigger, as a potential 
primordial planet, or primordial moon, as they’d  
make a decent candidate for life to emerge on.
Our default assumption is that a primordial  
planet life would emerge on has enough 
size to retain an atmosphere for billions  
of years while close enough to its sun to 
get light for photosynthesis and liquid  
water on its surface. This also suggests an 
iron-rich molten core helping to generate  
a protective magnetosphere around a planet.
However, I think one can make a good case that  
a body with a thick ice crust over an ocean, 
such as another of Jupiter’s moons, Europa,  
is thought to have, might make just as plausible 
a place for life to begin. There is no firm  
consensus on the local conditions where life began 
or where it did but the leading candidate for some  
time is deep sea thermal vents and there’s no 
sunlight there and you would have those on any  
large icy Moon orbiting close to a gas giant. 
Other candidates are tidal pools, which was the  
earlier lead candidate and probably give us a bit 
of an institutional bias to look for planets with  
surface ocean and land, though those are better 
candidates to hunt for complex life, ecosystems,  
and technological civilizations I think.
Cometary bodies themselves have generally  
been a distant third or fourth candidate for the 
origin of life and if true that really shifts  
the dynamic on where life emerges. This isn’t an 
episode on Panspermia and cometary seeding though,  
it's on Primordial Planets, but our main 
interest here is as place life can emerge at. 
It is also worth noting that stars begin dimmer 
and brighten as they age, our Sun would have been  
about 70% of its current brightness on Primordial 
Earth. This gives us a bit of a problem,  
called the Faint Young Sun Paradox, since 
Earth shouldn’t have had enough sunlight for  
surface oceans then but seems to have had them 
anyway, but we will return to that in a moment. 
Let’s instead take a moment to consider a large 
moon around a gas giant out at a distance from  
its Sun that gets lighting similar in brightness 
to what reaches Mars. It starts as a frozen moon  
maybe the size of Mars or even bigger and 
with subsurface oceans stirred up by tidal  
forces from its parent gas giant planet and its 
seafloor has lots of nice volcanic thermal vents  
spewing out the appropriate cocktail for life.
Life begins there and as the Sun warms up that  
ice layer melts from a mix of brighter sun 
and rising volcanic land masses breaking the  
crust and spewing black ash all over the surface, 
changing it from light-reflective clean white ice  
to heat-absorbing black. Those new landmasses and 
ash-covered icebergs start giving life down on the  
seafloor an avenue to crawl up to the surface 
and get sunlight and evolve photosynthesis. 
Now to me that’s not particularly more or 
less likely to be the origin of our first  
life-bearing planet than an Earth-duplicate is, 
but we need to be mindful that Earth is not the  
planet it used to be either, so we shouldn’t 
lock ourselves into thinking of modern Earth  
as the place to go hunting for life. We also need 
to keep in mind that coincidences often correlate. 
Whatever might end up as the normal case for where 
life tends to emerge, that might be the conditions  
on Planet 1 as well, but it might be that the 
first life-bearing planet was a freak anomaly  
not just in how early life arose there but in its 
conditions. It also isn’t a good idea to assume  
that it’s the first-place life got to technology 
at either or that life is still there. We could  
have an awful lot of tidally wracked ice balls out 
there where life began earlier and where it never  
got much of anywhere because conditions didn’t 
allow for much of an ecosystem and wasn’t robust  
enough to survive conditions and climate change.
And we need to be mindful that conditions really  
do change. We think Earth is in its third 
atmosphere at this point, with the first likely  
being heavy on hydrogen and helium though likely 
also rich in water vapor, ammonia, and methane. We  
believe that it got blown away in the collision 
of proto-Earth with some smaller planet, which  
stripped off that atmosphere and from the debris 
remaining the moon is thought to have formed. 
Amusingly the idea that Earth and the Moon 
used to be a single body dates back to late  
19th century and was a suggestion by George 
Darwin, an astronomer and geologist with a  
heavy interest in the early Earth which 
is probably not surprising since he was  
the son of Charles Darwin. He thought the Moon 
might have been spun off by centrifugal forces,  
what was dubbed fission theory, and technically 
that would be correct in a more explosive sort  
of context. Fission Theory is usually deemed 
highly unlikely nowadays but I encountered it a  
lot more as a little kid studying astronomy 
in the mid-1980s and mostly from my library's  
collection of outdated kid’s astronomy texts, many 
written in the 1950s. But we knew even then that  
the Moon’s orbit was expanding and it used to be 
closer to Earth, so assuming it used to be even  
closer wasn’t exactly unreasonable. The Moon was 
also still volcanically active till just over a  
billion years ago, more than twice the time since 
life crawled out of the oceans here on Earth. 
Maybe a hundred millions years after the 
solar system began, all this settled down,  
assuming it is correct which we shouldn’t take 
for granted, Earth began acquiring its second  
atmosphere from a mix of volcanic gasses and 
asteroid and comet collisions. There’s a ton  
of debate still about the composition of this 
2nd atmosphere, we just know it had very little  
free oxygen. Emphasis on free because the oceans 
and the very rock we live on are mostly oxygen.  
It loves bonding to other atoms so random oxygen 
floating around as a pair of oxygen atoms forming  
a gaseous molecule is prone to being absorbed by 
something, oxidizing it, and thus can’t linger  
in the air unless the ground is so saturated with 
oxidized materials there’s no place for it to go. 
Around 2 billion years ago oxygen was finally 
plentiful in the atmosphere, it had grown slowly  
over eons, and this is the origin of the modern 
atmosphere and it is basically half the planet’s  
age and we do not expect an oxygen-rich atmosphere 
to last more than a billion or so more years. As  
mentioned the Sun keeps warming up and getting 
stronger and ripping atmospheres off even faster. 
Which takes us back to the Faint Young Sun 
Paradox, and asks why we definitely had lots  
of surface water by 4 billion years back, 
and possibly even 4.4 billion years ago. 
Part of that is that the planet was still very 
hot. Things gain speed as they fall and when they  
collide and merge all that energy gets released 
as heat. During planetary formation that energy is  
huge and to give a conceptual scale, think about 
all the heat and flame in a rocket launch and  
remember that is being used to speed something up 
to give the kinetic energy or escape velocity to  
get away from Earth, and anything falling down has 
to gain that same speed and energy as it falls. 
We also had a lot more uranium back then too 
and it’s been decaying and warming the planet,  
though at an ever decreasing rate. The planet was 
molten hot for a long time after that collision  
that formed the Moon and wasn’t cold when 
that happened either. Remember most of the  
planet is still hotter than boiling water, 
just our thin crust isn’t, and the core of  
Earth is hotter than the surface of the Sun.
That’s a lot of heat and several thousand  
kilometers of rock and mantle is a lot of 
insulation. But it doesn’t quite add up  
and that’s part of the problem with determining 
atmospheric composition for that era. Some gasses  
aren’t gasses at some temperatures, or like water 
vapor, can exist in higher concentration at higher  
temperatures, others insulate better. Some, like 
carbon dioxide, only have a gas and solid form,  
unless the pressure is several times what our 
current atmosphere is, in which case you can have  
carbon dioxide lakes. All these options alter 
the heat loss rates of our planet and are hard  
to determine from 4-billion-year-old evidence 
that has repeatedly been blown up by volcanoes  
and asteroid impacts during that time when 
not being eroded by the far stronger erosive  
conditions of early Earth. So geologists 
and physicists can be forgiven for not  
having a clear consensus on the matter yet.
As another example, ammonia is a pretty  
good greenhouse gas and as mentioned it is 
very common in the Universe being made of  
the mutually abundant elements of hydrogen 
and nitrogen. But it also does not do well  
when exposed to sunlight, particularly ultraviolet 
light. Hotter stars produce a lot more ultraviolet  
so it was suggested by Carl Sagan and George 
Mullen that maybe that ammonia was around and  
keeping the planet warmer and as the sun kept 
on shining and brightening it slowly turned  
that ammonia into regular nitrogen gas – which 
is the majority of our modern atmosphere – and  
hydrogen which would either have bonded to oxygen 
to make more water or blown away into space. They  
also suggested a non-specific photochemical 
haze could have better protected that ammonia.  
The numbers didn’t seem to work out on this, we 
wouldn’t have expected them to remain in quantity  
more than maybe ten million years, and so the 
theory was for a time dismissed but the others  
have more recently argued that photochemical 
protection might have been possible after all. 
Now this goes back to the experiments by Stanly 
Miller in the 1950s where he was showing amino  
acids could form if you put electricity through a 
mixture heavy in ammonia and methane, and you’ve  
probably heard how the Miller experiments are 
thought to have been wrong for the origin of  
life as it was shown the atmosphere couldn’t 
have that mix but again we’re not really so  
sure about that either. We also don’t know 
that we need methane and ammonia around,  
and that in the absence of free oxygen we 
might have got the same results simply from  
an atmosphere heavy in nitrogen and carbon 
which could come from molecular nitrogen and  
carbon dioxide as easily as ammonia and methane.
Lots of unknowns about that primordial period,  
and while we are getting close to good enough 
to look at the atmospheres of exoplanets and  
probably will find some young and earth-sized 
planets in the next couple decades to examine,  
it would be a pretty big jump to assume those 
paralleled how things were on Earth even  
in fairly close matches of that planet 
to Earth and both having similar suns. 
Incidentally, this is the moment in writing this 
script back in December where I paused my typing  
to head into court for my adoption hearing 
for my three children, Kristofer, Isabella,  
and Geometry, four months before this will 
air, but it seemed a good footnote to include,  
and I just got back from there and having cake 
and ice cream with my newly formalized family. 
It’s also a decent excuse for a segue to the 
idea of us visiting and claiming new worlds,  
and specifically brand-new worlds that still 
have the fresh car smell on them. Admittedly  
they probably reek of ammonia and methane so 
not really a car you’d want to drive. First,  
we should probably assume nearly half of the 
Earth-clones are going to be in this territory  
given that we had over two billion years before 
we got an oxygen atmosphere and don’t expect it  
to last more than another billion or so years. I’m 
not sure I’d call Earth still ‘primordial’ at the  
2-billion-year mark though. But most stars will 
have planets and I would guess somewhere between  
1% to 10% of new star systems are going to have 
a rocky planet of something in the Earth-mass  
range that’s somewhere in the habitable zone 
of its star and has a basic atmosphere there. 
The atmospheres of these worlds will 
vary immensely in composition but we  
would most expect to see a high concentration 
of hydrogen and helium still ebbing off or  
be in a phase heavy in those hydrogen-abundant 
molecules of water vapor, ammonia, and methane,  
or shifting to molecular nitrogen and carbon 
monoxide and dioxide. There’s about 6-7 new  
stars born in this galaxy every year and all with 
high metallicities though most of those are red  
or orange dwarfs, and different conditions 
may tend to exist around these dimmer stars  
with different spectrums and where tidal locking 
off habitable zone planets might be more common. 
But each is likely to be highly prized as they 
emerge into a future settled galaxy. This is a  
gold mine for terraforming purposes and the 
question becomes if the planet is still hot  
enough on the surface that you need to utilize 
methods for cooling it for a couple centuries  
like we discussed in Winter on Venus or if 
it has any real surface yet as it might be  
very volcanic and have very deep oceans.
Potentially not just water oceans either,  
bigger and colder planets might have seas of 
ammonia or carbon dioxide. But these will be  
very good candidates for terraforming anyway 
and that solar system is likely to have a lot of  
bigger minor planets and dwarfs still around. Our 
solar system likely had a lot more planets before  
they merged, got captured as moons, ejected 
from the solar system, or eaten by the Sun  
and would have been an enormously rich prize 
for a developing interplanetary civilization  
less interested in terraforming one planet than 
creating a large spacefaring local civilization. 
Or not so local, as these young systems typically 
come in tightly packed clusters. New stars also  
tend to form most densely near the core too 
which is way away from us. Alternatively,  
around a thousandth of the stars in this galaxy 
are 10 million years old or younger and around 1%  
on an order of 100 million years old, so you 
won’t have to search far to find primordial  
planets. They’re not evenly distributed 
as stars tend to form in bubbles and stick  
together for quite a while, slowly dissipating 
from their packs as they orbit the galaxy and  
get perturbed when intersecting other systems.
You wouldn’t expect to find a lone young system  
but several dozen to a few thousand in an 
open cluster and often you’re going to have  
them pretty tightly packed while waiting for some 
of the bigger stars to go supernova. The Hyades  
Cluster is close, about 150 light years away and 
is a roughly spherical blob with a core radius of  
about 10 light years and containing hundreds 
of stars, though many of those stars are in  
larger tidal radius where stars can peel off 
to go their own way easier or the halo radius  
where they are already escaping the cluster.
At 625 million years of age it's not a very  
young cluster but it would also be past the age 
of Type 2 supernovae, though Type 1a Supernovae  
are very plausible still as we know of at least 
17 white dwarfs in there and 4 are confirmed  
binaries. Supernovae can be devastating inside 
a radius of 30 or so light years and clusters  
in that size range can easily get zapped by 
multiple type 2 supernovae then some type 1a  
supernovae before they scatter into a wider area 
and it is quite likely many primordial atmospheres  
get wrecked by those events, maybe even ours 
way back. Which might help set the stage for  
future atmospheres that are more life friendly 
too. I mentioned we’re on iteration 3 of our own  
atmosphere but that is more like the minimum 
number and back when our solar system was in  
a cluster it might have gotten whacked repeatedly.
Hyades is the closest open cluster to us but it's  
also close in the sky to the Pleiades, which is 
a bit over 400 light years away and is closer  
to a hundred million years old, so very rich 
with primordial planets but also where lots  
of young giants live, like the Seven Sisters, 
and they’re visible to the naked eye and its  
youngest and brightest member, Alcyone, is 
still a hundred million years old and not  
big enough to go supernova so this is another 
potential hub for some thousand-system star  
empire within a light decade of a diameter. We’ll 
talk about that more at the end of the month in  
Multi-Planetary Empires but these clusters are 
likely to be hubs of interstellar civilizations  
and the Hyades cluster is likely to end up 
as the closest rival to Earth for status as  
the core of a future sprawling civilization 
making its way out into the wider galaxy. And  
Pleiades would be an even richer strike, being 
bigger and younger. Clusters younger than this,  
like the Orion Nebula or Orion Trapezium 
Cluster, or Pi Puppis Cluster, would still be  
in their window for supernovae and represent 
an additional complication for settlement. 
This is generally what we mean by 
supernovae being a Fermi Paradox filter,  
they can happen to older planets passing near 
some other young star intersecting paths and  
that could cause a mass extinction event 
and temporarily damage the atmosphere of  
a planet but wouldn’t wipe all life out unless 
it was improbably close. Mostly it's that early  
era when everything is packed in tight and you 
still have the young big stars or white dwarfs  
with binary partners close to everyone else.
I could imagine civilizations going into open  
clusters early in the game and using starlifting 
or Shkadov thrusters or some of the other methods  
we’ve discussed to choke off potential supernova 
of any type or just boot the dying star out of the  
cluster as big heavy stars are the fastest and 
easiest to move with any of the stellar engines  
types we’ve discussed in episodes like Fleet of 
Stars or the Megastructure Compendium. As we noted  
in our recent episode on statites, that’s not 
high tech, you can disassemble a couple of larger  
asteroids into materials able to reflect photons 
or ionized particles and get that star moving. 
So even young clusters aren’t hard-nos for 
settlement. They are frequently going to have  
lots of red giants in them, which we’ve discussed 
before as an option for slowing very high-speed  
spaceships that get sent out by pushing beams 
and need a free way to slow down. Also those  
tight groupings of stars are going to offer 
some options for slowing down just by being  
compact and as you get nearer you are likely to 
be able to detect some black hole, if it has one,  
that you can slow down around too. Hence these 
might be your first places colonized in any region  
of a galaxy since you might be able to plausibly 
send spaceships toward them at a high fraction  
of light speed and slow them down, letting ships 
reach them tens or even hundreds of thousands of  
years before spaceships leap-frogging their way 
out system-by-system from Earth might arrive. 
A lone spaceship reaching one might have 
time to grow a civilization of a million  
worlds before it encountered the leading edge 
of the main expansion sphere out from Earth. 
In this way, primordial planets might become 
the homes to young empires out among the stars.
So welcome to March here on SFIA, and we have 8 
episodes this month, and we’ll get the upcoming  
schedule in just a moment but this is actually our 
second episode for the month and every month we  
release an episode Exclusively on Nebula on the 
first, and this month’s episode Crystal Aliens,  
follows up on our discussions of ammonia-based 
and silicon-based lifeforms from late last year  
where we look at where and how crystals might 
serve as a building block for life and look at  
5 different hypothetical planets where it emerged 
using different evolutionary paths and mechanics. 
And again, Crystal Aliens is out now exclusively 
on Nebula, our streaming service, where you can  
also see every regular episode of SFIA a few 
days early and ad free, as well as our other  
bonus content, including extended editions of 
many episodes, and more Nebula Exclusives like  
last month’s episode Topopolis: The Eternal River, 
January’s Giant Space Monsters, December’s episode  
The Fermi Paradox: Hermit Shoplifter Hypothesis, 
Ultra-Relativistic Spaceships, Dark Stars at the  
Beginning of Time, Life As An Asteroid Miner, 
Nomadic Miners on the Moon, Space Freighters,  
Retrocausality, Orch Or & Free Will, and more.
Nebula has tons of great content from an  
ever-growing community of creators. Using 
my link and discount it’s available now for  
just over $2.50 a month, less than the price of 
the drink or snack you might have been enjoying  
during the episode.
When you sign  
up at my link, https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur 
and use my code, isaacarthur, you not only get  
access to all of the great stuff Nebula offers, 
like Crystal Aliens, you’ll also be directly  
supporting this show. Again, to see SFIA early, 
ad free, and with all the exclusive bonus content,  
go to https://go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur
This Thursday, March 7th we’ll continue  
our discussion of terraforming from last month's 
episode on Terraforming the Moon by asking if and  
when terraforming in general is ethical, and 
what sorts of challenges future civilizations  
will face in deciding whether or not a planet 
should be terraformed and to what degree. After  
that we’ll travel toward Mars to look not at the 
Red Planet, but instead at its two tiny moons,  
Phobos and Deimos, and ask why and how we 
could settle them. Then it will be time for  
our sci-fi sunday episode, Automated Justice, 
for a 50-minute deep dive on the role of AI  
in our courts and justice system. Then we’ll 
return to the Fermi paradox on March 21st to  
discuss that evolutionary jump from the simple to 
complex, and if that might be the solution to the  
big question of where all the alien life is. Then 
we’ll finish our discussion of last month on black  
holes by deep diving kugelblitz black holes 
and using them for power generation, before  
finishing out the month, with a bonus scif sunday 
episode on the 31st, Multi-Planetary empires. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you’d like to donate or help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s 
episodes early and ad free on our streaming  
service, Nebula, along with hours of bonus content 
like Crystal Aliens, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
