Many millennia from now we may have journeyed
out to colonize billions and billions of planets
in our galaxy, but every journey has to start
somewhere.
Today we will look at how near-term space
colonization and development is shaping-up
and what the current hurdles to it are.
I think that to have a realistic view, we
need to see those hurdles for what they are
and also see space for what it is.
Those of us in the pro-space camp are sometimes
prone to seeing space in the near-term with
rose-colored glasses because we know how awesome
space in the long term can be...
Worlds without end.
And we’ll cover many of those worlds later,
after we cover some of the current hurdles
to space, and as we look at colonization in
Orbit, on the Moon, Mars, The Asteroid Belt,
Venus, and Jupiter.
Some topics are too big for the episode, so
next week we will look at Living in Space,
to ask both what the hurdles are to living
in space and what it might be like.
Also we’ll be doing a poll at the end of
today’s episode on our Youtube Community
Page, to see which topic from today we’d
most prefer to see get expanded into its own
episode.
The one undeniable thing about space is that
it is big, and there’s always more to discuss.
But in order to see a realistic path forward
we need to acknowledge some of the things
space isn’t, or at least isn’t for many
generations.
For instance, we often say we shouldn’t
keep all of our eggs in one basket, and need
to put some eggs into some other baskets,
that is; get humanity out to other worlds
so we don’t get wiped out, but while true
that it’s not really that much of a safeguard.
If humanity wrecks Earth, there’s no new
planet to flee to.
Even a previously M-class but now bombed-out
and nuked wreck of a planet is always going
to be easier to fix than it would be to terraform
some other world.
Some little outpost of a hundred people on
the Moon isn’t going to save humanity if
our atmosphere gets ruined by pollution or
a supernova or gamma ray burst, and dying
stars as a large and proximate danger are
an overhyped threat anyway.
If we make some killer AI, it’s just as
capable of chasing down our colonies and just
as likely to be formed on one, where the colonists
lack the resources to control it as well,
then come home here for a visit.
Indeed, realistically, our colonies and distant
mutant children or cousins raised on alien
planets far from Earth are a lot more likely
to be threats to us than some natural catastrophe.
More planets and more people mean more minds
working to solve problems and more redundancy
of civilization in general but when settling
new worlds, it’s not an across-the-board
miracle solution either.
In the long term it makes sense, on million
year timelines you do have to worry about
dangerous dying stars, or stellar remnants
crossing our path, or dinosaur-killer-scale
asteroids, but no threat of doom either near
or on the horizon, and of our own making is
ever truly eliminated by us being spacefaring.
Where Humanity is concerned, we are our own
biggest near-term threat and we export ourselves,
and our troublemaking, Pandora’s Box-opening
ways to any colony we form.
If we can’t make ourselves work over millions
of years, or even just centuries, adding more
planets to the mix isn’t likely to be that
big a gamechanger to our survivability.
And even for those rare astronomical threats,
having more planets is merely beneficial,
not necessary.
We probably do not need a huge space presence
of hundreds of settlements to protect Earth
from an incoming asteroid.
You need a very impressive radar grid and
tracking system, and some delivery system
for the nuke, laser, or thrust module you
would use to blow that asteroid up or redirect
it.
It is statistically improbable an asteroid
of any dangerous size, let alone an extinction-scale
one, would hit us in the next century, and
odds are such a detection and deflection platform
would be a lot better and cheaper by then.
However, the big difference is that in a future
where we have lots of space development, that
asteroid isn’t a potential cataclysm costing
billions a year to monitor for and defend
against, instead, it’s a jackpot for space
developers.
Free raw materials approaching Earth orbit
to be used to fuel more construction and development
there.
This is generally going to be true of a lot
of potential reasons for developing space,
it’s very handy to have but expensive to
get, and not necessarily worth the initial
investment.
For a bit of context, you don’t tell early
pioneers in the US to build a freeway along
the Oregon Trail.
Big long continent-spanning multi-lane paved
roads like Route 90 or 20 came later, as did
the railroads.
Built too soon and you would devastate the
development effort with the high cost and
bad reputation of being wasteful of investor
funds or public money.
As well as tying later funds up in marginal
projects or those deemed too big to fail.
One of our biggest problems with getting to
space is the cost per flight, or per pound
or kilogram gotten into orbit, and while that’s
come down a lot in this last decade it is
still high.
It takes a lot of fuel to get to orbit, but
ironically, as huge and costly as that is,
it is only a small portion of the cost.
Most of it is in the cost of building the
rocket that fuel goes into, which historically,
has often been single-use, and even reusable
ones tend to need costly overhaul and maintenance,
far in excess of the fuel cost per trip, and
have made far fewer trips between repair than
a car or airplane do.
If you built a Boeing 747 for a single flight
and then scrapped it after every flight and
built a new 747 for the next flight, flying
would be way too expensive.
The same is true with rockets, historically
we threw away the rocket after every flight
because it was considered too bulky and complex
to attempt a recovery.
Even with the Space Shuttle, it was so expensive
to get the recoverable parts back into working
order after every flight, we couldn't save
anything by refurbishing parts of the Space
Shuttle and other parts like that big external
tank just burned up in the atmosphere.
Thankfully we seem to be getting close on
the fully reusable rocket.
For a long time this was considered a pipe
dream.
The mighty Saturn V for example managed to
get something like 2.5% of its starting mass
into LEO and went from a huge, 10m-wide flying
skyscraper down to a cramped, stripped-to-the-bone
2 person pod in order to briefly land two
people on the Moon, from which they had to
quickly hurry off before their non-renewable
supplies ran out.
After the Saturn V rocket was scrapped, for
a long time we moved on to even less efficient
rockets, something Elon Musk in particular
lamented about in his heyday and pointed to
a big reason why he helped form SpaceX.
They have done a great job improving reusability
and the road forward to cheaper and more reusable
rockets is definitely an uphill and bumpy
one, but it does seem transversable, and who
knows, perhaps in the future we will design
and perfect a fully 3d-printed reusable rocket
with no assembly required.
We’re discussing capabilities for getting
to space, and having the energy, resources,
and funding are vital to that but there’s
also the need for political & bureaucratic
concerns.
This isn’t an easy handwave either.
For instance, we were just talking about rocket
costs and a lot of that is regulatory burdens.
Call it legitimate safety measures or bureaucratic
red tape, and that can be pretty debatable
and subjective depending on the specific rule
and oversight, but it adds cost and time to
everything and isn’t easily brushed aside,
nor do we necessarily want to brush it aside.
There’s no clear bad guy or enemy or political
faction to point at and blame for it either,
or funding for space in general.
By and large space is very popular politically,
and with the populace in general, even if
individual programs might be more mixed.
I don’t think there’s any major faction
of any major government that wouldn’t love
to have a moon base if they could be offered
one with a reasonable price tag and a reasonable
certainty of it happening for that cost and
timeline.
Problem is, while I love NASA, their track
record of keeping to budgets and timelines
is, well, not one to brag about even by government
standards.
And speaking from anecdotal observation, they
don’t seem to be good at pitching space
development projects as attractive in the
same way they tend to be good at pitching
telescopes.
It does beg the question if NASA is really
the optimal institution for Space Development,
and this is something a lot of folks at NASA
are dubious about too, from anecdotal experience.
Space is huge, it’s much bigger than Earth
let alone any nation on Earth and yet most
nations use a large spectrum of departments
or ministries to operate their country.
We already see this happening with the American
Space Force, the recognition that there is
a need to approach space militarily and that
NASA neither wants nor needs that role, and
no existing branch of the military was ideally
suited for it and thus it had to be created.
Incidentally this doesn’t imply any bad
actors or someone to blame.
When it comes to NASA, it isn’t just the
astronauts who have the right stuff.
What happens is focus shifts back to the main
goal of the body though.
Put the Army in charge of the space program
and we’d tend to favor programs that gave
us better space-based ground surveillance
satellites, give the air force or navy funds
to develop a spaceplane and they are going
to subconsciously move those funds toward
hypersonic fighters or bomber craft, as opposed
to space defense paradigms.
It’s institutional.
And any of them are going to prefer a focus
toward things like anti-satellite programs
or asteroid defense; over making rocket fuel
or money in general.
Give NASA ten billion dollars to make a moon
base and they’re going to set up a telescope
there, which honestly has very little to do
with profit and industry, unless you make
and sell telescopes.
Private companies involved in this don't necessarily
fix the problem either.
The ones with huge resources able to handle
space development are generally so big they
have the same sort of risk-averse behaviors
government departments and governments in
general have.
That does have advantages, I don’t think
most of us truly want our main sources of
law, infrastructure, and industry to be prone
to erratic and risky behavior, and they tend
to have a known mission and stick to it with
bloody-minded stubbornness.
And you probably need something like that
when tackling mega-projects like building
a highway system or administering many types
of policies to millions day in and day out
for decades.
So, one can make the case that what you need
is the equivalent body of the department of
commerce or infrastructure or transportation,
but for space.
And eventually an agency for every space version
of our groundside departments and ministries
and bureaus, but not yet; nobody wants 50
different space-centric agencies right now,
and instead you just do what normally organically
happens, make a blanket group that occasionally
undergoes mitosis or spits out a sub-department
that needs to be its own thing, like the Army
did for the Army Air Corp back in the day
to make the Air Force and later happened with
the Space Force.
We’ll just call it the Space Development
Agency for the moment but figure on this idea
getting more and more life in the next decade
or so then ending up as a reality in the decade
after that.
If we, meaning the US, don’t have one by
2050 I’d be shocked, unless it was specifically
an international or multi-national group,
which has its own advantages and pitfalls
of course.
Note that I’m only talking about an agency
with some real oomph, not a feel-good shell
with no real resources, authority or attraction
to talent.
Short on the heels of that you will need to
contemplate how we actually govern space settlements,
and that doesn’t necessarily translate to
new countries.
The idea of some colony of a thousand Martians
under a dome being a sovereign nation is popular
in sci-fi but probably would not be the norm
for successful colonies.
Interstellar colonies need to be independent
from Day 1, but that’s further ahead.
Settlements in this solar system have very
little signal lag.
Old-school, messages traveled with people,
so your colony several weeks aways by foot,
hoof, or ship really wasn’t in much contact
and often didn’t benefit from the relationship
or didn’t feel they did.
That dynamic is likely to be different in
a digital age.
A colony on even distant Pluto, or in the
Kuiper Belt, is only 4-6 hours of signal time
away, and prior to the last century, that
was the lag time for communicating with your
nearest neighboring towns and we certainly
had functional and centrally operated nations
with bigger communication time lags than that
during those eras.
That’s email time not phone time, and it
does mean you need some local executive or
viceroy with emergency powers, but there’s
nothing stopping a colony on Pluto, let alone
Mars or the Asteroid Belt, from simply being
a state or even a county or township.
Which would fit in better with the population
numbers.
It’s unlikely any universal model would
apply but while early colonies are likely
to be under the direct administration of their
main government, like congress does for DC
or small territories, it is also likely that
as they become more numerous or common they
would be looking to leave that mixed blessing
behind in favor of being either part of some
existing state or province or forming up with
a handful of other colonies to either be a
new state or province, or a new small nation.
Just as much as the air they need to make
so they can breathe, a colony is going to
need a smooth administrative and bureaucratic
landscape, citizens and business investors
will want that, and existing governments can
potentially provide that – you don’t really
have the manpower for your own Supreme Court
or FBI or Treasury.
We also don’t necessarily want to encourage
too much independence or isolationism in emerging
colonies.
As fond as I am of the American Pioneer era,
it certainly had its nastier moments and a
lot of those and parallel examples of history
come from corrupt viceroys and thuggish local
robber barons or ranchers who own half of
everything and think they’re above the law.
Or some outbreak of Salem Witch Trials or
tinpot dictators who think they are the law
and keep busts of Robespierre and Saint-Just
in their office.
Or some brutal religious cult whose leader
seems to need dozens of teenage wives.
Or a mining town whose workers are essentially
used as a corporate asset and kept in ignorance
and debt slavery.
Homeworld bureaucrats and regulations can
also make your life beyond difficult even
without bringing war or embargo into play.
In that regard it might be more like radiation
you manage as opposed to the air you breathe,
but it’s a vital part of a successful space
colonization and needs to be part of any space
development plan.
And I’m just guessing “We want to build
our own new nation” is not a good opening
line if you’re looking for government funding.
And while I think private space enterprises
have an ever-growing role in space and we’re
reaching a point where they’ll be the majority
of it sooner than not, that time isn’t here
yet and also isn’t the same as total government
involvement.
You also need to be contemplating multinational
situations and problems like who is actually
entitled to grant you the right to mine an
asteroid or build a dome on the Moon or build
some huge power collector or sunshade in orbit
and visible to the naked eye by everyone down
here.
And that seems a good place to transition
from hurdles we’ll encounter to places we’ll
go, as what we do in orbit of Earth is likely
to dominate all our other space ventures for
a long time.
Longer than folks might think too, as it’s
not just going to be the gateway to space,
once we have some settlements on other worlds,
but probably the lion’s share of space settlements
and enterprises until the population in space
exceeds that on Earth.
And indeed it is likely to be the largest
single chunk of the human population off Earth
for millennia to come.
That’s not a near term concept and one we
explored more in our episode CisLunar & Lagrange
Point Colonization, but in the near term it’s
where most of your satellites are and virtually
all your microgravity experiments or manufacturing
and space hotels.
You might ask how much space colonization
can really be supported on space hotels but
remember that in the US alone, as of 2023,
there are almost 170,000 hotels and on any
given day, on average, 9 million people staying
in them.
It’s a multi-trillion dollar industry and
one only likely to grow in a hopefully evermore
prosperous society in the US and worldwide.
Just as an example, if we got to the point
where a trip to space might cost the equivalent
of 10-20 thousand modern dollars or euros,
it would be very plausible that around 10%
of the population would make the trip once
in their lifetime and worldwide at current
population and lifetime that would be about
10 million people a year and 100 billion plus
of annual revenue.
That’s hardly a tiny economic sector.
But we may also see entire manufacturing chains
move to low orbit.
There are things you can do with crystal growth
in microgravity that hold the potential to
revolutionize computers or other material
sciences, and that’s a sector where the
products are already far more costly than
their weight in gold and thus could be profitable
even if you had to fly the materials up rather
than source them from the moon or some asteroid.
The critical component of orbital space development
though is being able to get most of your bulk
fuel and raw materials from some place other
than Earth.
That may rapidly change if we get some technology
like Mass Drivers, Orbital Rings, Space Elevators,
or Tethered Rings working, see our Upward
Bound Series for deep dives on each of those.
If those work out though, it is likely to
be cheaper to get things to orbit from Earth
than from the lower gravity well of the Moon
or an asteroid, all of which are hundreds
of thousands to hundreds of millions of miles
away, not hundreds, as Earth is to low orbit.
Devices like that seem inevitable to me, but
they’re inevitable the way railroads and
freeways are, and may not emerge in the next
century, though I’d love to be wrong about
that and it changes everything if they become
easy to build and the investment gets made.
In the near term, to make space happen it
would seem we need to find a way to get the
bulk of our material off the Moon, where a
lack of air and low gravity make that easier.
A couple months back we delved into mining
and refining on the Moon in detail but the
critical idea is that even if we can’t find
water buried on the moon in ice or other formats,
it has tons of metals and tons of oxygen,
which gets released when making those metals.
Virtually every rocket fuel we use also uses
oxygen to burn itself and that’s usually
the majority of the mass involved.
So even if you can’t get water or hydrogen
off the moon, you can instantly get most of
your rocket’s mass by filling it with the
oxygen you get from the Moon while turning
local regolith into the bulk metals or silicon
that you need for building orbital facilities,
spaceships, domes, habitats, solar collectors,
mirrors, or shades.
That means you can carry molecular hydrogen
or maybe methane into orbit and use that and
your moon oxygen for running spaceships around
orbital space or to other planets.
We also have a lot of non-rocket methods of
moving around orbit, from ion drives to electrodynamic
tethering or various runway-style launch systems
like orbital rings.
Down the road you can get ice and hydrogen
cheaply, if slowly, from the outer system,
as we discussed in our recent episode on Comet
Mining.
So, if you run out of moon ice or it doesn’t
have any, you can get it from Earth or other
sources while still enjoying the huge savings
in oxygen and bulk raw materials from the
Moon.
Other substances like Helium-3 might be turn
out to be useful too, though if you get an
aneutronic fusion reactor working that uses
Helium-3, I think you rapidly shift to getting
it from better sources in the outer system,
see our episode Colonizing Neptune, and while
it’s valuable for other uses besides possible
fusion, I’m not sure there’s be a big
enough market for it or a big enough supply
on the moon to make that a good industry,
but every little bit matters for overall space
development.
That overall lunar develpment process probably
needs to either be nuclear powered or as pilot
solar projects, as the sun sets on the Moon
for a couple weeks at a time.
Longer term, the Moon is likely to be mass
producing all sorts of mirrors, shades, and
power collectors for orbital use and can presumably
use some of those for its own.
In the meantime, this could be an industrial
effort of literally millions of people involved
in mining, refining, processing, manufacturing,
and shipping all this raw material… and
they might live on the Moon too.
Though we need to be mindful that at just
over a light-second away, the Moon is a great
candidate for robotics, remote control, telepresence,
and limited AI.
So it could be a future of thriving and heavily
populated settlements on the Moon, or it could
be a relative handful of people who cycle
in to repair robots, handle weird and unexpected
problems, and make sure all is well.
See our episode Lunar Space Elevators for
more discussion of getting material off the
moon once you refine it.
Mars doesn’t have that robot problem, in
the remote or telepresence sense.
Obviously the only thing we have ever sent
to the Red Planet is robots and the Moon will
probably hold the unique status of being the
only body ever walked on by a human before
some robot visited it.
We can usefully control operations on Mars
remotely, but it isn’t easy with the signal-lag,
so we either need to get better AI – which
we probably will – or send manned expeditions
there.
In the short term, much of what we do with
Mars will be determined by the contents of
our Moon and the Red Planet’s own two tiny
little excuses for moons, Phobos and Deimos.
If they are found to have ice on them, then
our first voyage to Mars should be to those
Moons instead, to set up the fuel refining
process we have mastered on our own Moon.
Barring that, we could still get oxygen there,
using those metal processing methods, and
Mars itself definitely does have ice so getting
the hydrogen for our fuel is much easier if
Phobos and Deimos lack it.
We can also send fuel from the Moon cheaper
than from Earth.
Being able to go to Mars in a big way, complete
with setting up a radiation-shielded base
in one of those two moons and deploying some
communication satellites in orbit of Mars,
makes settlement of Mars from the outset much
more plausible.
This would help circumvent some long period
between the first manned-mission and actual
settlement, like with the Moon, and it has
been over 50 years since we’ve visited Luna.
However, I am not optimistic about Mars being
humanity’s future.
It has the ability to be colonized and terraformed,
we’ve examined and discussed that in detail
in other episodes like Colonizing Mars and
Springtime on Mars.
Nonetheless it offers few reasons for anyone
to migrate there.
Mars is not going to be shipping anything
of value home to Earth, or the Moon.
I have difficulty seeing it ever being a net
positive in trade, which means it would not
be fast to develop beyond science outposts.
Given time it would grow, it has no shortage
of raw materials, but so do many other places
with even less gravity.
The classic sci-fi image of Mars as Earth’s
near-equal and holding a higher status among
humanity’s space colonies just doesn’t
seem warranted, anymore than thinking that
McMurdo station in Antarctica will one day
rival the great cities or nations of other
continents.
Nonetheless, Mars fascinates us and will be
colonized sooner than not, and I suspect we’ll
see dedicated tourists travel there on large
and slow Aldrin Cyclers with a decade or two
of the space hotel industry in orbit reaching
1000 or more annual tourists.
Mars has a lot of attractions to visit, from
the tallest mountains in all known creation
to canyons so immense and long they make the
grand canyon look like a ditch.
But I can’t see people rushing to make it
their home or wanting to bring their spouse
and kids.
The big advantage Mars has compared to the
Asteroids or Moons of Jupiter, which we’ll
get to in a bit, is that you can do domes
and feel real if iminished gravity and maybe
turn the red planet blue, green, and white
one day.
However, when it comes to places we could
terraform that way, Venus has the edge.
We used to think Venus was a paradise world
till we found out those beautiful clouds on
it were made of acid and the surface was hotter
than an oven.
Venus turned out not to be a place of paradise
but more like a suburb of Hell, and so it
fell off the map and gave Mars prominence
as Earth 2.0 But as we discussed in Winter
on Venus, cooling and terraforming that planet
isn’t particularly more time consuming and
difficult than Mars.
Indeed, it is probably much easier and offers
a planet that is far more Earth-like.
In the meantime, Venus offers lots of science
options and tourism too, hang gliding the
blimp outposts of Venus is bound to be attractive
to many tourists and it’s a shorter and
faster trip to Venus than Mars.
You wouldn’t fall to your death if something
went wrong either, normal breathing air floats
on Venus and your ‘parachute’ could just
be your air tank popping into a balloon to
hover you till some drone came by to bring
you back.
Venus is also attractive for Atmospheric Mining,
particularly of nitrogen, which is rare in
the inner system off Earth, but it means it
has an export of clear value, and it also
has a hyperabundant power supply in the form
of solar panels, which could easily be made
into solar blimp balloons which instead float
high in the atmosphere.
Jupiter is another place we’re interested
in for atmospheric mining, and of a different
variety, but we’ll save that discussion
for our episode on Atmospheric Mining next
month, on September 21st, 2023.
In the meantime our main interest in Jupiter
is actually in its many moons and associated
asteroids.
Radiation near Jupiter is an issue but most
of our interest in those moons is deep down
on them, as we think Europa and maybe Callisto
have subsurface oceans.
And you only need maybe a meter of dirt or
ice to shield you comfortably from the radiation
around Jupiter.
We don’t need it for sunlight, Jupiter is
far from the Sun, so the surface matters little.
But those moons have low gravity but also
are rich in volatiles and water ice.
The gravity on each of them is similar to
our own Moon, time will tell if that’s comfortable
for humans or needs to be augmented with spin-gravity
habitats, and the answer to that might determine
if the moon is Earth’s preeminent colony
or a giant robotic factory.
The same is true of the Moons of Jupiter except
that they are a candidate for native life,
and we will want to explore them.
Should we find life there, or on Mars or anywhere
else in the solar system, the dynamics for
settlement shift a lot.
Lots of science to be done there, and also
lots of concerns about damaging that ecosystem.
To me, the first established trade line to
the Moons of Jupiter and the first settlement
on those has always represented the stepping
stone where we’ve gone from dreaming of
space development to truly doing it.
Space isn’t just pilot programs, research,
and distant future dreams, it has become a
reality at this point, even if it’s still
very early days.
The same applies to ventures to Saturn or
its moon Titan, a critical threshold has definitely
been reached by this stage.
Indeed you could argue that threshold has
been reached by the time you get to the asteroid
belt, but that can be confusing with our penultimate
topic for the day, asteroids, as we often
talk about them being vital to early space
development, more so than Mars or Venus and
maybe even the Moon, and while the Belt has
lots of them, there are thousands that qualify
as near Earth Asteroids and which represent
the best options for early asteroid usage.
They are easier to reach for probes and mining
efforts.
Many are small enough they could be moved
and turned into space habitats in high-orbit
of Earth or turned into Aldrin Cyclers to
the belt or other planets, allowing cheap
and radiation-proof slow boats to those places.
Many could be outfitted with solar kilns and
simple electromagnetic mass drivers or space
guns to fire ingots of metal into Earth orbit
for construction and use that momentum and
oxygen byproduct to push themselves into a
stable position at a Lagrange point or as
an Aldrin Cycler.
Indeed if we needed to, we could potentially
shove one to the Earth-Sun L1 Lagrange Point
and detonate it to create a thin cloud blocking
some of the light hitting Earth for a time,
as a quick and dirty alternative to putting
solar shades there.
This to me represents the final big kickstarter
for real space development, as these sorts
of asteroids are, in a way, much easier to
terraform than planets.
Indeed the term terraforming was coined in
the sci-fi short story Collision Orbit by
Jack Williamson in 1942 in reference to an
asteroid someone was making livable with artificial
gravity.
We don’t have sci-fi style artificial gravity
but we can produce it by spin, and it would
be very easy to nest a spinning ring or cylinder
habitat into a crater or mine shaft on an
asteroid or comet and cover it over with thin
layer or regolith or ice to protect it from
collisions or attack.
Those rotating habitats can have 24-hour days
and normal earth-like lighting and gravity.
In my mind that makes them much more attractive
to settlers, who have a readymade industry
on that asteroid to fuel the economy – be
it mining or space farming or being a space
hotel or aldrin cycler or tending to a local
collection off solar rafts beaming power home
or to space ships and facilities.
Of course, space might get pretty crowded
during development, especially in orbit of
Earth, and if you’re doing things like blowing
up asteroids.
This sets off the concern of space debris
and our last topic for today, and one I suspect
needs its own episode.
It’s also more tempting since I finally
took audience advice and watched the anime
Planetes which has some interesting explorations
of space debris clearance.
Space debris has the problem that in orbit
any little bit of debris can hit something
else and eject far more debris from that impact,
which can cause a chain reaction up there
without air slowing the debris down.
This may be the pollution issue of the future,
with vast efforts directed at limiting and
controlling it, or it may be something like
the smog that orbital habitats and ships just
dwell in, with thicker armor, which many would
need to have anyway to attract settlers.
No one wants to live in something separated
by the vacuum by a thin layer of tinfoil,
give me battleship thick hulls instead.
There are a lot of options for potentially
handling space debris and we’ll need to
come up with some good ones before we can
truly develop space.
But this episode has already run long, and
I thought since we had a few topics that we
had to discuss briefly but deserved more time,
we would do a poll of those on our Youtube
Community Tab Page to vote on which of those
subtopics we should do a focused episode on.
Those are: Clearing Space Debris, Near Earth
Asteroid Development, Space Regulation, and
Settling Mars: Phobos and Deimos.
I think all of those might turn out to be
very important to near term space colonization,
but you can collectively choose which topic
we’ll discuss next, and in the meantime,
one nice thing about talking about near term
space colonization is that the front end of
that wave is just years away now, not some
distant idea of scifi.
Our future is in space, and that future isn’t
that far off anymore.
So before we get to our upcoming schedule
I wanted to give everyone an update on the
New Horizons petitions that we discussed two
weeks back in Comet Mining.
That is to save that spacecraft so it can
keep properly exploring the Kuiper Belt out
past Pluto, for the low cost of a few million
more dollars rather than waiting decades to
get another billion-dollar probe out there.
Rumor on the grapevine is that it is having
the desired effect, so thank you everyone
who signed that.
I think we should keep the inertia up, so
if you haven’t signed that petition already,
please help us save the New Horizons Spacecraft,
by signing the petition linked in the episode
description, so it can keep helping us explore
New Horizons.
Once we explore new Horizons it will be time
to settle them, and so next week we’ll be
continuing today’s topic with a discussion
of Living in Space, and the week after that,
the topic of Interplanetary Infrastructure.
After that it will be time for Scifi Sunday
again on September 17th to celebrate SFIA’s
9th birthday with the Fermi Paradox: Fallen
Empires.
Then on the 21st we’ll talk about how we
can mine atmospheres like those on Venus or
Titan, or even Gas Giants and Stars.
We’ll close out the month with our Livestream
Q&A on Sunday, September 24th, and then on
the 28th we will have an exploration of what
traveling the galaxy as an adventurer or lone
wanderer will be like in Have Space Suit - Will
Travel.
If you’re impatient for that next episode,
you can get caught up on recent episodes,
like Comet Mining, and get all the details
on why saving New Horizons matters.
And don’t forget to vote in our poll today
to see what topics of Near Term Space Colonization
we should make episodes about in the future.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
.
