This episode is brought to you by Skillshare.
Many people have contemplated that the purpose
of mankind is to continue the spread of life
throughout the cosmos.
But how exactly would the Earth, our garden
of life, spread its seed?
So today we will be closing out our fourth
year here at Science & Futurism with Isaac
Arthur, and I am your host, Isaac Arthur.
One of the themes we’ve looked at since
the beginning of the show has been how even
just a single planet hosting intelligent life
can rapidly – at least on astronomical timelines
– seed an entire galaxy with life and I
thought that would be an excellent topic to
discuss as we head into the New Year.
Now, this episode is part of the Generation
Ships series but like the last one, Sleeper
Ships, is more about alternative approaches.
We’ll actually be covering two of them,
Seed Ships and Data Ships, as well as some
hybrid versions and also some unexpected uses
they might have.
We usually assume that faster than light travel,
FTL, is not possible in these episodes, or
at least not something we’ll discover for
a very long time, so that ships often take
more than a lifetime to arrive at their destination,
and that permits us five different approaches.
The first three are the Methuselah Ship, one
on which the crew has access to life extension,
the Sleeper Ship, where we freeze everyone
till they arrive, and the classic generation
ship, necessarily huge vessels able to move
lots of living, breathing people and their
descendants and an entire ecosystem.
Our other two types, which are our focus for
today, are the Seed Ship and the Data Ship.
We have an additional type, the Gardener Ship,
which we’ll discuss next time in the series
but which is not distinct in method but rather
in purpose.
It colonizes worlds in sequence, and we’ll
see some parallel examples today, where you
are not necessarily colonizing new worlds
at all.
But what is a Seed Ship?
What is a Data Ship?
Last episode, in the Santa Claus Machine,
we took a look at various types of replication
technology, essentially any machine able to
replicate itself and presumably do an additional
task; a mining machine that could make other
mining machines, for example.
However that might not require much intelligence
or complexity because it’s quite simple,
ones sent to other solar systems presumably
need better automation.
A seed ship is a relatively small ship carrying
samples of frozen embryos or DNA and the necessary
equipment to terraform a planet, or more likely
just the templates for such equipment, as
any machinery able to terraform a planet would
dwarf even the largest generation ships we’ve
discussed thus far.
Note that this is still true even if the terraforming
agent were something biological, like some
genetically engineered terraforming microbes,
the total biomass necessary to affect an entire
planet would be huge, but you only need a
small initial sample for the journey as they
will replicate.
Needless to say we’d like to be able to
use self-replicating machines for this too,
but the key thing to a seed ship is not its
size but rather its purpose.
It arrives and terraforms a planet so that
when colonists arrive they can just move in,
not spend centuries terraforming it themselves.
It’s an ideal combination with a Sleeper
Ship, since those colonists can just be frozen
on Earth and unfrozen on a new world already
covered in life, not endure century long voyages
followed by centuries of terraforming.
This could be a tiny ship carrying a lot of
self-replicating machines or some massive
factory ship that arrives with all its gear
ready to go.
We get an example of giant terraforming seed
ships run by an artificial intelligence in
the Stargate SG-1 episode, “Scorched Earth”,
which is a good reminder that any such vessel
needs to have a fairly sophisticated intelligence
on board not just for the complex process
of terraforming, but making sure you don’t
do it to an already inhabited world.
It could be unmanned and run by an AI, or
it could have a team of engineers who operate
it.
Those engineers might be training their descendants
to do the job or be very long lived or be
frozen for the trip.
They might pack up when done and move to the
next world to be terraformed, akin to the
Gardener Ship approach.
But the usual assumption is that it is automated
and small, using sophisticated AI and self-replicating
technology.
Which raises a point.
We don’t actually need frozen samples of
anything, DNA can be printed, every organism
follows a relatively simple schematic that
can be encoded and printed, typically one
consisting of a lot less data than would be
needed to make a video briefly explaining
what it was.
In early discussions of generation ships we
didn’t even know what DNA was and data storage
was about the same weight and bulk as a normal
paper book.
As we learned more and got denser data storage,
it was inevitable someone would ask why we’d
even need frozen samples, especially considering
DNA can be easily data-compressed, you don’t
need 10,000 full copies of human DNA to send
10,000 samples, just the variations between
each, which are comparatively few, and indeed
overlap massively with most other mammals
and even with plants.
A freezer containing DNA or even frozen embryos
need not be very large to carry a sample of
every single member of a species, but you
barely need any extra room for genetic diversity
of a species when it’s only the data, and
only the relevant differences.
Now there is a lot more to brewing up life
than printing a bit of DNA.
Your DNA does not have all the information
needed to make you.
Your mitochondria and microbiome, for instance,
have their own separate DNA, but more importantly
you are not just your DNA but your memories.
A newborn human left to themselves, even given
food & shelter, is not going to turn out very
well, and humans are hardly unique in this,
albeit we’re one of the the least instinctive
species.
As we saw in Exporting Earth, many species
need social continuity and learned behavior.
This raises a problem for a typical seed ship,
be it using frozen samples or digital ones.
It needs to be able to raise those first organisms.
I also said that the idea of a Seed Ship is
to prepare the way for human colonists who
arrive later, but they need not be arriving
on a ship, obviously if you can grow and raise
animals who need nurturing and learning, it
implies you might be able to grow and raise
people too.
But you need to be as smart as a person to
raise a person, or at least close to it, and
this brings us into Data Ships.
Many folks feel the future of humanity, or
at least of people, is not biological or even
necessarily physical.
That some or all people in the future will
be digital consciousnesses, uploaded or artificial
minds.
Also, a point we often raise on this channel
is that any unmanned probe smart enough to
do any of these things is not actually unmanned,
it has to have an intelligence on board parallel
to or exceeding a human, and possessed of
a fair amount of adaptability of thought if
it’s going to be operating far from home.
So your Seed Ship might make use of uploaded
minds to raise the organisms it grows while
terraforming.
So let me correct the standard definition
of a Data Ship.
A Data Ship is not necessarily an unmanned
ship containing all the data needed to make
machines and organisms to colonize a planet;
to the contrary it is almost inevitably a
manned ship.
Either it’s carrying one or more AI sophisticated
enough that it probably deserves to be called
a person, or it is carrying actual human minds
in digital form, and either form might be
a Methuselah Ship or a Sleeper Ship, just
depending on if those digital minds are awake
or asleep for the trip.
It could also serve as a Gate Ship, a type
we sometimes see in science fiction that has
wormholes or similar, that makes the long
voyage to a place, and opens up a portal home,
through which colonists can instantly step
through.
Without faster than light travel, but with
data ships, we can achieve something similar,
where copies of minds are beamed at light
speed to their destination.
Time passes but from your perspective you
left Earth and awoke in a cloned or android
body an instant later.
Time can be frozen on the data ship too, in
the sleeper ship role of stored minds, but
can be subject to damage or degradation.
Of course a beamed signal could be degraded,
or pirated, someone could sneak a receiver
in the way that captures transmitted minds.
That’s a concern for stored minds on von
Neumann Probes too, if they keep replicating
and sending out new copies ever further, they
are almost bound to eventually bump into something
that’s likely to be intelligent and curious,
the Universe is a big place and neither it
or such an expansion swarm stop at the Galactic
Rim.
Such stored minds could make excellent ambassadors
to alien civilizations but could also make
excellent victims if they’re not too ethical.
They can after all, go the friendly route
and chat while running a second copy of such
a mind that they’re applying the digital
thumbscrews to simultaneously and in secret.
They don’t need too much justification for
paranoia either, a terraforming machine endlessly
going to world after world, including yours,
can make you pretty dubious and worried about
its creator’s true motives.
Note also that if it is planning to terraform
a planet – which is not necessarily a given
since a digital civilization might want to
make worlds rich in hard drives and processors
not flora and fauna – it would also be carrying
digitized minds of any animals that were not
totally instinctive in behavior.
Why raise a bunch of elephants yourself when
you can stick a digitized elephant into a
robotic elephant to do the job instead?
And again this is all assuming the intent
is to terraform a planet; a data ship might
be planning to colonize a system as a giant
Matrioshka Brain, a Dyson Swarm devoted to
computing and simulating.
Even a seed ship might not be planning on
terraforming, but instead be aiming to get
the basic infrastructure in place for when
the colonists arrive.
Basic mineral extraction and power production,
a Stellaser to slow the incoming colonial
fleet down, various space habitats for them
to use as homes when they arrive, and so on.
Needless to say, since data can be stored
very small and potentially at the atomic level,
Data Ships are often seen as better because
they’re so small.
Ditto Seed Ships if they still contain that
basic machinery for self-replication at their
destination, generally what we call a von
Neumann Probe.
The ship is tiny, and arrives and replicates
itself, both to colonize that destination
system and to send copies off to other systems.
It’s a small ship and you technically only
need to build just one, though you’d probably
build several and launch them in different
directions.
This requires two big caveats right away though.
First, you wouldn’t actually build several
back home, you’d build one and target it
at the first random asteroid in your own system,
and given their implied size is often microscopic,
or certainly no bigger than modern spaceships,
you could crank out enough from a single asteroid
to hit every star system in the galaxy.
There are two problems with that, first, you
could also just tell it to make a bunch of
huge spaceships instead, as we mentioned last
episode, in any civilization with self-replicating
machines, it’s sophistication not size that
matters.
On astronomical timelines, a bunch of self-replicators
breeding themselves up to sufficient numbers
to turn an asteroid into a giant space ark,
or thousands of them, is trivial compared
to journey length.
Indeed a tiny data ship might take quite some
time to fully build just because of the data
transfer.
Just because some tiny wafer might be able
to hold a trillion, trillion bytes of data
does not mean it can be loaded with them in
the blink of an eye - you’d probably incinerate
it trying to do so.
The second caveat is that these are assumed
to be ultra-tiny and fast, but that’s highly
exaggerated.
Ship speed is entirely dependent on ship drive
type, not ship size.
Indeed with most hypothetical interstellar
drives concepts, like using H-bombs for propellant,
fusion reactors, or kugelblitz black holes,
the drive needs to be big to work, and often
grows more efficient scaled up.
There’s no point in going small.
Things using reflective sails to be sped up
or slowed down by a pushing laser also need
to be quite big, the bigger the sail, the
easier it is to focus a beam on and for longer.
Even for something like antimatter, it’s
containment and drive system is unlikely to
be tiny and will benefit from a larger scale.
Fuel might scale linearly, but in terms of
your dry mass in terms of ship components
versus payload, bigger is better.
So counter-intuitively, we’d expect bigger
ships to be faster than smaller ones, at least
in terms of maximum speed.
Acceleration is another matter, big ships
will be more limited in this regard and anything
organic will be more so, compared to something
mechanical or digital.
As we’ve discussed before, acceleration
rates are pretty irrelevant for interstellar
travel, the journey length is just so long
that you hit your maximum speed fairly early
on whether you’re pushing acceleration rates
that would turn a human into a gooey pancake
or ones so small they’d barely feel them.
We should also not forget the other size limitation,
which is shielding.
The faster you go, the more stuff you run
into in any given moment, the more damage
it does, and the smaller your window for detection,
evasion, deflection, or vaporization of such
debris.
So you need increasingly thicker armor and
shielding, and if you get to really high speeds,
you need to keep your engine on and burning
fuel just to compensate for the drag you’ll
be experiencing.
For the most part this shielding is free,
since you can usually use it at your destination.
For biological life, it might be water or
ice, it might be your fuel for a fusion drive,
or it might be raw material to seed your self-replicating
machines.
But you still have to have it and it still
needs to be dumb matter, because it is going
to get hammered too hard to hold complex patterns
like DNA or data.
This armor and shielding is a set thickness
too, it goes up if you make the ship wider,
but not longer.
Some thumb drive sized Data Ship still needs
a meter of armor in front of it.
Actually more since it’s particularly radiation
sensitive, when you’re storing data at the
atomic or molecular level, there’s no redundancy
for each bit, a gamma ray hitting a book isn’t
erasing a letter when it strikes, it’s just
very tiny compared to that letter.
This isn’t to say this isn’t a good method,
you absolutely can colonize a galaxy faster
with von Neumann Probes such as the Seed or
Data Ships than via more classic generation
ships or sleeper ships.
Just not a lot faster, especially if the folks
building those generation ships have that
same self-replicative technology.
For the former, someone plants a von Neumann
Probe in an Asteroid and tells it to make
many copies of itself, and a few days or weeks
later thousands or millions of ships the size
of trucks – again it needs meters of shielding
– erupt forth and accelerate as fast as
they can till they hit their maximum speed.
Another person plants a seed for classic generation
ships and they erupt a little later ready
for boarding and accelerate a little slower
and all fly off to their destinations, probably
every star system within a few hundred light
years.
The Data Ships probably get to shave a couple
years off their journey time tops, which isn’t
much for journey that could easily last millennia.
Even if we assumed successive waves that stopped
every hundred light years to slow down, replicate,
and speed back up, and that a von Neumann
Probe only needed a week stop-over while the
Generation Ship needed an entire decade, that
still means only a thousand stops on a hundred
thousand light year journey, about 10,000
years saved, which isn’t very much considering
that even if they are going near light speed
that’s 100,000 years for von Neumann Probes
and 110,000 for the Generation Ships.
If the maximum speed is a tenth the speed
of light though, that’s a million year expedition,
against which an extra ten-thousand is trivial.
And of course even a million years is pretty
short in astronomical timelines.
If we assumed our galaxy was a middle-aged
person, every million years would just be
a day in their lifetime thus far, shaving
off ten thousand years is shaving off about
15 minutes.
So it’s not about advantage, just preference.
You might be thinking that if it’s a race,
whoever arrives first, be it by a single foot
fall or a kilometer wins, but keep in mind
that in a footrace the guy in second place
isn’t allowed to run up to you with a baseball
bat and clobber you and take your trophy.
You’re only ahead of them because they grew
a bigger ship and accelerated it slower and
decelerate it slower.
They don’t have to do all three of those
and as we always remind people here, there
is no such thing as an unarmed spaceship.
Any von Neumann Probe still has to slow down
to make use of a system.
A relativistic kill missile, RKM, does not
have to slow down, and indeed can burn its
fuel to speed up even more.
It’s going to catch you before you arrive
and can build defenses or backup copies, because
it does not need to slow down.
Various rival factions looking to colonize
space don’t have to be friendly, but their
methods do have to be tolerable.
Even assuming you can keep it a secret you’re
going to colonize the whole galaxy and leave
none for anyone else, they’ll chase you
down, there’s no stealth in space, especially
when accelerating out of systems at full thrust.
But you couldn’t keep it a secret, because
no one is going to be casual about just deploying
self-replicators somewhere in the solar system,
to build whatever, because you could be building
whatever.
After all, if you send out a fleet of colonizers,
your main civilization is still on Earth,
where everybody can gang up on you for retribution,
so it makes more sense to attack them first
with some replicated swarm of drone warships
that you turn into colony vessels afterwards,
and now you can take your sweet time to colonize
the galaxy.
Diplomacy does not exist because people are
nice and friendly, it exists because we often
aren’t, and hyper-fast, recklessly aggressive
colonization is likely to be interpreted as
a hostile act, especially if denying possible
territory to others is seen as your primary
goal and motivation.
Barring the first few colonies to get our
eggs out of one basket and prove we can, odds
are each world colonized after that will be
done with its own specific motives, and those
impact which colony ship type you use a lot.
An ideological or religious group that believes
in a more primitive existence is likely to
still be fine employing technology to colonize
a world to achieve that goal, but is unlikely
to want to use the digital route if they can
use a more classic generation ship instead.
So you use the approach that suits your needs
and tastes, obviously if you are an entirely
digital civilization you use data ships, if
not then you probably won’t, or at least
limit how you use them.
Those will often be restricted or influenced
by your ideology, motives, and goals for a
colony mission.
And it should be assumed that many colony
missions will represent a less mainstream
viewpoint, leaving your home system behind
is a very big step often most easily taken
if you feel your views are not compatible
with the place you live, folks who are happy
at home are less likely to go on long journeys.
This brings up the inevitable Fermi Paradox
issues though, about if anyone would colonize
the galaxy in the first place and we can point
to all these and show how easy it probably
would be.
You don’t really need to turn your entire
civilization into a workforce dedicated for
generations to assembling your colonial assets,
you just need some volunteers to go on the
ships.
Except with Data Ships and even Seed Ships,
you don’t even need that.
You can just send copies of people out to
do the job or AI’s you create from scratch,
and while I can’t imagine we’d be short
of volunteers to go, they don’t actually
have to go, just send a copy.
They don’t even have to do that since you
can send your von Neumann Probes off to bring
material home, something that wouldn’t require
anything approaching a human level intelligence,
just the capabilities of something you might
develop for mining precious metals from our
own asteroids.
A relatively tiny ship that arrives at an
asteroid, unpacks, makes the mining machinery
and return cargo vessels.
It doesn’t even need to be able to build
more of itself, a handy protection against
mutation and various grey goo scenarios.
So long as the cost for the initial packet
to be sent is significantly less than the
value of the raw materials returned, who cares
if your mining probe can only kick out a few
hundred system mining machines before it breaks
down?
And if they all break a couple decades later
after extracting and sending home a few megatons
of raw materials each?
You just send more.
As to what we’d do with all that mass, you
can actually pack thousands of solar masses
around our own sun easily enough, or even
build one of those Birch Planets we discussed
in Mega-Earths, whose maximum size restriction
was slightly in excess of an entire galaxy’s
mass.
So even if you are a stay at home civilization
it doesn’t mean you aren’t harvesting
the whole galaxy, or even many of them, so
that you can have a bigger or longer lasting
civilization at home.
So fundamentally this all comes down to preferences
and available technology, if you can do it
you probably will, but what method would you
use?
We can’t say but we can say it probably
wouldn’t be any of our five basic types
in and of themselves.
The Methuselah Ship, the Sleeper Ship, the
Generation Ship, the Seed Ship, and the Data
Ship all have individual advantages and downsides,
some of those downsides are more of a matter
of taste and preference, but you’d likely
use combinations or hybrids of each.
Let’s take an example.
I am biological and want to stay more or less
that way, I would rather a digital copy of
me existed as a backup than cease to exist
in our world, but my preference would be to
have my life extended and keep my augmentations
in that regard minimal.
Tastes vary and there’s no real objective
justification for that preference but it seems
to be a common one among the audience here,
probably the biggest faction though it comes
in many flavors.
So for us the Methuselah Ship is the default
method, but a lot of folks might find the
trip boring and want to spend it on ice, making
it a Methuselah/Sleeper hybrid, for those
who don’t, many would probably opt to have
a family during the trip, making it a Generation
Ship too.
Of course most of us would be fine with being
accompanied by those more cybernetically inclined
than ourselves, or full on digital.
Indeed it’s often thought folks would tend
to transition that way over time, slowly adding
more augmentation and eventually shrugging
and just going into an uploaded digital form,
or something happens to their original body
and their digital backup gets woken up and
decides it’s happy as is and will just remote
control an android when it needs to be in
the real world or talks to its grandchildren
when they log into their various virtual bodies.
Indeed, this is a very handy approach for
population control on generation ships, if
folks are expected to go on ice or digitize
as they get older to make more room for younger
people, both in a physical and social sense.
And of course, if I’m making a really long
journey, I might appreciate not having to
spend centuries getting the basic colonial
infrastructure and terraforming done in the
first place.
You probably already have probes, which can
arrive sooner since they need not slow down,
doing flybys on a system, you might use seed
ships as a vanguard, leaving ahead of you,
accelerating and decelerating faster, and
giving you a jump start on some of your colonizing.
Depending on how trustworthy your AI is, or
sophisticated it is, you can let it get further
ahead or stay as a pretty close vanguard,
just arriving a few years early to gather
raw materials and survey the system in detail.
As we mentioned in Exodus Fleet, a good approach
to slowing your colonial fleet down is to
have a smaller vanguard arrive ahead to build
a Stellaser to slow your fleet.
In the process of scaling that up it might
be setting up automated mines and factories,
and once the Stellaser is done, it can turn
to other matters.
This approach is also handy since you can
now use it for sending ships right back home
again or to neighboring colonies being established,
or to push your colonial fleet back up to
speed if part of it is moving on to colonize
a new system.
Remember the big advantage of these kinds
of ships isn’t their maximum speed, it’s
the lag time spent speeding up, slowing down,
and pausing in system to gather resources
and replicate, so they’re handy as a vanguard
as they can get there ahead of you and can
cut your own time in system down if your colonial
fleet is just dropping off a portion of its
people and gear, which can be replaced by
breeding and manufacturing from newly acquired
raw materials while en route to the next destination.
This approach is our sixth type of colonial
ship, the Gardener Ship, and isn’t part
of our core five because it’s a hybrid,
and it varies in purpose from the classic
colony ship that just goes from point A to
point B and stops.
It will be our topic for the next time in
the series.
There is one last use for Seed Ships if you
don’t want them manned by people.
Your goal for a new system might be to re-create
an early era for instance, a planet-sized
Jurassic Park, or to mine it remotely and
send the goods home, without worry that a
budding colony there might go independent
and stop sending resources home or tack on
some fees.
Or you might do it to seed it with basic life
compatible to that planet and see what emerges
down the road, a sort of intentional cosmic
Panspermia, a concept we’ll look at more
next month.
Such a ship need not necessarily have a very
sophisticated AI on board either, especially
for the automated mining route, where you
probably want it rather on the stupid side
compared to a human, smart enough to do the
job but not to spread to new solar systems
or evolve intelligence and a rival civilization
or machine rebellion.
That is still a very sophisticated AI compared
to what we have now, but we do have AI now
and they are getting quite sophisticated and
useful.
If you’re interested in learning more about
those AI and maybe programming them yourself,
making a career of it, then you might want
to check out some of the courses on artificial
intelligence, machine learning, and neural
networks at Skillshare.
They are an online community with over 20,000
courses on everything from technical topics
like AI to fun or practical ones like cooking
or business skills.
So if you want to improve your skills, unlock
new opportunities, and do the work you love,
you can get a Premium Membership and have
unlimited access to classes on those topics
and many more.
Join the millions of students already learning
on Skillshare today with a special offer just
for my listeners: Get 2 months of Skillshare
for free.
To sign up, go to S-K-L-dot-S-H slash Isaac5.
Again, go to S-K-L-dot-S-H slash Isaac5 to
get 2 months of unlimited access to over 20,000
classes for free.
Act now for this special offer, and start
learning today.
So this wraps us up for the year, we will
be skipping our livestream this month in deference
to New Year’s, but we’ll be coming back
strong next year to explore more about virtual
worlds, simulations, and the Fermi Paradox.
The week after that we’ll look at colonizing
new star systems not by journeying to them,
but by creating them instead, in Making Suns.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, you can support
the channel on Patreon or like and share the
episode with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a Happy New Year!
