This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
They say in space no one can hear you snore…
of course they also can’t hear you firing
doomsday devices at their planets when you
wake up to find your galaxy 
has been colonized by upstart apes while slept.
So today we are returning to the Alien Civilizations
series to explore the concept of civilizations
which spend a lot of time asleep or hibernating.
This is one of the more common explanations
we see for the Fermi Paradox in science fiction,
as it explains a galaxy which is full of some
ancient alien menace, but in such a way that
we can somehow also exist to get in a fight
with them.
What you would normally expect is for them
to have crushed us before we ever discovered
fire, let alone rocketry.
If on the other hand they go dormant for millennia
at a time, waking sporadically, this works
better and also better matches with our current
observations of the galaxy, which is to say,
it seems to be fairly empty of enormous and
powerful alien civilizations.
We can see examples of this scenario everywhere
from games Like Mass Effect, with the Reapers,
the ancient Shadows and Vorlons of the science
fiction show Babylon 5, or the Inhibitors
from the novel Revelation Space, as well as
any number of other examples.
Indeed it’s a fairly central concept of
the Cosmic Horror genre of fiction pioneered
by folks like H.P.
Lovecraft which often has these Sleeping Giants
waiting to wake up and eat us.
However, it's not simply a Fermi Paradox explanation
from Science Fiction but one with a lot of
science fact potentially supporting it, as
we considered in the episode on Sleeping Giants.
Today we’ll revisit that concept to look
at a few of the common hibernating and sleeping
alien themes, asking why a civilization might
pursue such a strategy, and what their civilization
might look like as a result.
As is usual for the Alien Civilization series
we’ll try to keep things fairly light-hearted
while trying to stay in the realm of known
or plausible science, though what known science
currently tells us about hibernation is that
it is a very risky strategy, pursued in nature
only as a desperate gambit or necessary tactic
for survival, and never a preference.
I think that’s something we’ll want to
keep in mind for today, because on the one
hand science and technology should permit
a civilization to avoid a lot of the normal
risk of hibernation – dying while you do
it or being too weak to get back in the game
– but on the other hand it doesn’t entirely
avoid all those problems, many of which simply
have a variant on what we see in nature that
plays a similar role on the galactic stage.
Most noticeably that those who go to sleep
will lose their territory to either arising
alien civilizations or simply elements of
their own civilization which opted not to
sleep or woke early or returned from exile
or similar.
We always want to ask why some civilization
or entity has chosen to hibernate, and if
it’s a survival strategy, what their alternatives
would be and how they would handle or detour
around those hibernation problems.
And we mostly mean lost opportunities or vulnerability
to other civilizations or factions of their
own civilization, not something like dying
while you sleep.
We don’t actually know what the risks of
technological hibernation like being frozen
are yet but they should be manageable, like
how the radioisotopes in your own body might
give you radiation poisoning if you stay frozen
for more than a thousand years.
Consider, the sleeping predator alien we often
see in stories is a play against our fears
of the predator slumbering in its cave, emerging
to get us, but most of the time this would
not seem a logical strategy.
Why go to sleep and leave the galaxy to grow
new civilizations only to wake up and purge
them occasionally?
To keep the galaxy to yourself?
Why not just colonize every planet then?
There are a few reasons this might not work.
For instance, there may only be a handful
of you and you might like it that way.
Your ‘civilization’ might only be a few
million dark souls who each live in their
own private Universes and only collect what
resources they need when they need them.
They don’t really need much but they want
no competition and they tolerate each other,
only occasionally stirring from their personal
throne world or virtual empire inside a computer
to wipe out any new competitors.
If I’m some ancient civilization devoted
to keeping the galaxy clear of threatening
civilizations, it would seem safest to simply
sterilize every planet every few million years,
or even disassemble them for their raw materials.
It wouldn’t seem to be a good idea to just
leave the galaxy be and emerge periodically
to cleanse or harvest it, as we see for the
Reapers of Mass Effect, or the Shadows of
Babylon 5, where they essentially wake up
every so many thousands of years to kill off
new civilizations while leaving primitive
ones and their precursors around.
Two caveats.
First, if you are a billion year old empire
controlling the galaxy, no civilization that’s
only had space travel for a few millennia
really represents any more threat to you than
one that’s recently discovered how to work
bronze and iron.
Your tech is either genuinely maxed with nothing
new to discover, or millions of years ahead
of theirs, or both.
If it's maxed out and just a few centuries
ahead of ours now – which may be the case,
we really might have unlocked all of physics
in a few more centuries – then that just
means it’s a technologically-even playing
field and you’ve a massive developmental
and strategic headstart.
Which is a reminder that while a technological
edge might help you, equal technological levels
doesn’t mean equal forces.
A team of NFL linebackers and a team of 8
year olds playing little league might have
equal technology, equally nice smartphones,
indeed there’s a good chance the 8 year
old’s are more tech savvy, but we all know
what’s happening if their two teams are
lined up when the ball gets snapped and it
ain’t gonna be pretty and no heroic escapades
are changing that outcome.
Second caveat, while implied to be evil or
at least utterly ruthless to the point of
seemingly insane inefficiency, each of these
purge events is really very tiny.
Given the timelines of those civilizations
and extermination intervals, thousands of
years versus presumably at least hundreds
of millions for them to emerge from either
new worlds or brutally pulverized old worlds,
these exterminations are presumably affecting
about 1 in a million worlds that developed
life independently during any given purge
and maybe a hundred times that in their various
small seedling colonies.
It’s a humbling reminder that an empire
of even a million worlds, like the juggernauts
of the best known space operas, is really
a flyspeck on the galactic stage of over a
trillion worlds.
Even more so when compared against the sorts
of juggernauts we contemplate with full Kardashev-2
civilizations around stars, not barely inhabited
single worlds.
This approach also rather ignores all the
galaxies beyond ours too, where civilizations
presumably arose and continue to grow who
are unlikely to have some prior arrangement
with your old and sleepy realm of monsters.
Some extra-galactic invaders coming from some
Kardashev-3 civilization are probably going
to mop the floor with a quiet hibernating
empire that’s left their galactic resources
essentially untouched, and are not likely
to be stirred to compassion on their behalf,
assuming they aren’t worse.
Of course while I often point out the various
flaws in a given Fermi Paradox theory that’s
essentially ignoring the super-majority of
the Universe outside our tiny little galaxy,
we probably should acknowledge that there’s
a good chance our entire Universe is a tiny
closet in the sum total of reality.
It might not be our galaxy such hibernating
civilizations reap and sow, it might be our
whole Universe and they might be reaping it
for data or entertainment, or regular old
power like the Goobleboxes generating power
in the Microverse inside Rick’s spaceship
engine in Rick and Morty.
If you’ve seen that episode its a pretty
good example of how futile fighting the layer
above you in some hierarchical universe set
up can be.
We essentially look around at our galaxy and
the apparent absence of K3 civilizations in
neighboring galaxies and say either aliens
don’t exist or they clearly aren’t interested
in using all the resources in their galaxy.
Problem is, that scenario is very dependent
on not only our known science but the implied
goals and strategic objectives we would anticipate
aliens having based on that science.
As an example, if I’ve got very good self-replicating
machines, I don’t need to cannibalize the
galaxy to secure its resources for myself
so other emerging aliens don’t get the chance.
I can just wait for any local species to get
on the stage in their tiny little corner of
the galaxy, completely content that my little
machines could, if necessary, cannibalize
every solar system within a hundred light
years or so of their home world with mere
decades’ notice.
I don’t need to Dyson Swarm them all, because
I can do so selectively at need and realistically
I won’t ever need to.
It takes only a tiny fraction of that level
of capacity to throw an armada consisting
of a billion warships at some emerging civilization,
each capable of obliterating an entire world
on its own and each containing a billion murderbots
if I want to invade instead.
Just because some civilization might get some
vanguard left to watch them, it doesn’t
mean they have any chance of going toe-to-toe
with my ancient galactic empire anymore than
someone successfully mugging an unexpecting
Cub Scout is going to be able to go toe-to-toe
with the combined might of NATO.
And such an empire is probably not going to
feel a need to mine out their own galaxy against
that contingency anymore than we sit around
worrying that we need to extract all the iron
from the ocean floor in case dolphins or squid
suddenly get intelligent and might one day
build an invasion force against us land-dwellers.
And again, that’s just in the context of
known science and in-galaxy threats.
It doesn’t pertain to some empire that manufactures
Universes, simulated or generated, and occasionally
harvests or stomps on them, or just unplugs
them.
The Cosmic Horror genre of Lovecraft and Cthulu
tends to contemplate those kinds of entities,
critters so old they were driven mad by it
long before our Universe ever popped into
existence, and against which there simply
is no hope of victory.
When dealing with the folks whose computer
hard drive your Universe is stored on, or
who have that kind of godlike power, your
technology isn’t helping much when they
can simply say it doesn’t work that way
now, because they’ve turned off gravity.
Your defense armada means nothing to them
because they decided the section of space
it was in no longer had stable atoms, or simply
deleted the fleet, or simply deleted your
tendency to disobedience.
We shouldn’t be ruling out that such hibernating
entities aren’t hanging around the cold
space of our galaxy, they might not even be
hanging around in our time, or our Universe.
They might be multiverse invaders or who knows.
We also shouldn’t assume they are hibernating
from their own perspective.
We’ll come back to the notion of slow subjective
time in a bit but if they are some group of
ancient narcissistic godlings, the survivors
or conquerors of their own species or many
other such species who just live in their
personal utopia surrounded by their individual
followers, worshippers, slaves, and cattle,
monsters in loose coalition of non-aggression
with each other and to wipe out new rivals,
then they may be – with justification - utterly
confident they can wipe out any new actors
on the stage and only stir out of their personal
paradise when it’s finally necessary, or
challenging enough to be slightly amusing.
They may feel they have all the resources
they ever realistically need already and they
just don’t want to share the Olympian Heights
with any new threats or pretenders.
That said, it's still a stretch to assume
they just leave folks lying around, or leave
resources lying around, since they clearly
have the ability to easily manage either.
Of course they might not care, they may have
access to better options for resources than
mining a galaxy, like wormholes into other
Universes that provide them an unending supply
of resources and energy.
On the other hand they might be hibernating
and acting rarely because like most old and
decadent empires what really worries them
are internal threats and rebellion, not flyspeck
primitive tribes on the edge of their irrelevant
border.
Or in other words, if I send a fleet off to
spend thousands of years colonizing and fortifying
and building up to handle emerging primitive
empires, I have to worry they might lose their
focus or interest in that job, and become
interested in coming back to the capitol with
those forces.
Or that all those millennia of divergence
will not just make them lose their goals but
become alien in nature not just motivations.
Some multi-million year periodic purge requiring
a million independent expeditions all lying
around in wait for emerging alien threats
is a great way to make alien threats.
Realistically they represent a much bigger
danger to your civilization, especially given
that your civilization is presumably composed
of ruthless genocidal fanatics and your fleets
tasked with carrying that out are probably
not your moderates.
Sticking everyone on ice so they wake every
few thousand years to check their sector out
or when triggered by something like a radio
signal is a good way to let that force remain
essentially the same as millions of years
roll by.
This is much worse in the case of simulated
or created Universes – a difference which
is mostly semantic – as they might be using
whole Universes as their Petri Dishes or models
and presumably have to utilise fast-forwarding
or hibernating to observe the results.
Of course from their perspective even some
primitive species having hit the galaxy – or
a galaxy - unchecked for over a million years
and risen to K3 civilization status is hardly
some personal threat needing pruning or rebooting.
To you, they are still just a bunch of ants
you can crush under your boot at whim.
Now we’ve covered the reason why the ancient
juggernauts might arise to smash us or other
upstart civilizations and even why some barely
unified collection of Cthulu-esque entities
might band together to wipe folks out.
We have also previously examined the notion
of civilizations or lone entities like planetary
hive minds that may want to suppress other
civilizations developing but have no interest
in personal expansion beyond their little
pocket of the galaxy.
The hive mind might not be capable of operating
outside of a set region because of the light
lag issue.
The civilization afraid of spawning children
around new stars who may become mutant alien
threats may want to avoid anyone, including
themselves, colonizing the galaxy.
And as we have discussed often in our Civilizations
at the End of Time series, many civilizations
may go post-biological and essentially run
themselves as computers, which have their
theoretical limits of efficiency based on
temperature, such that a civilization running
at half the temperature can calculate twice
as much with the same energy – which is
akin to saying think or live twice as much
from the same energy, and a hundredth the
temperature, they get 100 times the lifespan.
Since the current preferred model of the fate
of the Universe holds that we will get colder
and colder as entropy marches on, saving your
materials and energy for living in this cold
and efficient period is the frugal option.
It also tilts toward slow living since the
colder you run, the longer you need to wait
between each switch-flip – or thought to
moment of personal subjective time – for
the switches to cool again.
It takes an object way longer to cool from
10 Kelvin to 9 Kelvin than it does to cool
from 1000 Kelvin to 999 Kelvin.
Now that does assume that the Universe is
going to end in that Heat Death scenario,
and it also assumes they have discovered new
ways around entropy or of escaping our Universe
by then.
It also represents a very different survival
strategy than we would see in a case like
the Big Rip, which we’ll be looking at as
we return to the Civilization at the End of
Time series later this Month.
All right, so those scenarios aside, why might
a civilization opt for Hibernation?
Well, one set of scenarios is that they are
mission-focused and that can include things
beyond waiting for the stars to burn out or
trying to wipe out nascent rivals on the galactic
stage.
We also should keep in mind that civilization,
in our modern context, is not necessarily
universal.
We kind of have to stuff all our rival ideologies
and goals into the same geographic locations
these days because we share countries but
often don’t share opinions and perspectives.
However, immortal empires of spacefarers might
tend to cluster by goals and missions to the
point that they do become the Planet of Hats
or Space Elves tropes we often mock in this
series, where we encounter a species of singular
motivation or total enlightenment with no
rebels or throwbacks.
Which is to say, we wouldn’t really expect,
based off Earth, to go visit aliens and find
them terribly unified in behavior or goal,
but there could be a tendency for civilizations
to factionalize once no longer bound by any
shared need or biological kinship or enforced
cooperation of sharing territory.
We arguably see some examples of that in the
social groups allowed by modern social media.
In such a case, they are essentially undergoing
speciation and that might include their societal
stability.
For contemplation, a civilization that breaks
into two chunks, one obsessed with creating
enduring legacies and one focused on enjoying
current times and pleasures, the Enduring
faction and the YOLO faction, as it were,
it would seem like a time-skip into the future
would find one of these more numerous than
the other, which might even be extinct and
if it weren’t, would probably classify as
a periodically or constantly replenished sub-faction
of the Endurers that broke off to YOLO.
Which I suppose is also a good reminder that
concepts and ideologies are not really great
analogies for species.
Still a lot of speciation is about two halves
of a species mutating to pursue different
survival strategies, all the way back to when
one set of microbes opted to begin focusing
on eating their cousins and started the predator-prey
cycle.
What are some possible motivations or missions
requiring hibernation though?
Well, research is one.
Hollywood and scifi often give folks weird
ideas about how scientific progress is made
but two things that help a lot are more resources
and more time, and often throwing more people
or money at a scientific or technological
hurdle either doesn’t help or helps minimally
or even sometimes harms by clogging a field
with a lot of half-interested or second rate
minds with other priorities.
There’s often an assumption that a sufficiently
powerful computer, if built, would know all
the answers to Life, the Universe, and Everything
within a mere moment of being turned on, simply
by internal computation and contemplation.
But a lot of science is about data collection
and building the experiment to provide that
data and it's likely that might not be an
option for solving many problems.
And presumably after a while all the problems
your civilization has left are the kind that
can’t be solved by throwing money or manpower
at them.
As an example, if you need to nail some figure
down that revolves around an event like a
Supernova, and you need a million of them
to get your sample and margin of errors down
low enough, then you just have to wait till
you get a million of them to happen.
Or not.
You might go ahead and build a million giant
stars so you can observe each cook off and
go bang or come up with more trustworthy models
or bigger telescopes or portals to look into
the past or future or alternate Universes.
You’re an ancient spacefaring empire, you
are presumably bound by the laws of physics
but inside those you’re not very limited
in what you can do or what you can dream up.
Still the concept remains, they may need to
wait things out.
They also may be all that remains of their
civilization, just those focused on waiting
things out.
Maybe they had the job of maintaining their
archives and history till the end of time
or similar and so a faction of them noticed
they tend to hemorrhage volunteers to other
life pursuits and opts to adopt a long hibernation
strategy to delay that.
I’ve heard some suggest that one way to
keep a civilization coherent over many light
years in a non-FTL Universe would basically
be just to periodically have the whole thing
enter hibernation and exit.
I can think of many reasons why this isn’t
a great idea and few that extol the virtues
of the approach, but there are a lot of dangers
to any world on which life has arisen to going
out and seeding the galaxy without maintaining
unity.
Your children of tomorrow can become your
mutant alien invaders of next millenia.
Such being the case I could envision Earth
opting to insist all of its colonies, out
to however many light years, all go on a staggered
freeze-wake cycle to allow messages to travel
faster to Earth and back, in subjective time,
then would normally happen.
Like some big pulse out from Earth, rippling
like a pond you threw a stone in, sleeping
between ripple peaks.
Of course if someone rebels and decides not
to go on ice again, they have the advantage
of effectively living in fast time to prepare
their defenses or attacks.
Though another option, and one that works
well if the civilization is really just trying
to mine new systems and bring resources back
to a growing Dyson Swarm or Birch Planet back
at their Home world, is just to have everyone
else go slow but not their home system.
We also shouldn’t limit ourselves only to
contemplating galactic empires and civilizations.
As another example, if our planet got ejected
from our solar system by something like a
rogue planet, gas giant, or black hole passing
nearby, we are not required to just lie down
and die.
There’s a good chance we will discover a
method of making fusion work as a power supply
for our civilization in the next generation
or two, in which case our own oceans would
provide us all the fuel we need to keep our
world warm and lit in interstellar space and
even to help push it to a new stable orbit
around some other star one day.
However, in the absence of fusion, all is
not lost, as we have vast supplies of uranium
and thorium and could keep some cities running
in deep underground insulated caverns for
many millions of years.
That is essentially a hibernating civilization,
one waiting till it arrives around a new sun
or discovers a new technology or their world
comes near some other rogue interstellar body
they might mine for some new fissile material.
All at the same time, we could potentially
freeze that population.
It’s fairly cheap to keep folks on ice when
your entire planetary surface is down to Pluto
temperatures or lower, and you could maintain
even low temperatures there fairly easily
if you needed to be even colder.
Things do decay when frozen but the colder
the slower.
You need some way to bring folks back but
the great thing about freezing people is you
do not need to know how to bring them back
when you freeze them, so long as you don’t
freeze everyone so research can continue.
Your big limitation on time is that eventually,
after a few thousand years, people will get
radiation poisoning from all the isotopes
in their body like Potassium-40, but that
can be countered by just putting a big effort
into extracting those radioactive isotopes
from your soil or hydroponic nutrients, via
centrifuge.
You can probably also repair that degree of
radiation damage with the same technology
and effort needed for restoring the dead corpsicle
to life in the first place.
This is an interesting scenario because one
can imagine a world finding out a perturbing
rogue object like a nomad planet was entering
their solar system and was likely to eject
their planet from their Sun, and opting to
tell folks all their effort was going to be
on preparing those underground cities, huge
archives of data and DNA, stockpiles of uranium
and thorium, and then big freezer banks to
put people in and keep them cold as the planet
froze until the surface was cold enough not
to require that effort.
In such a case you would have an entire civilization
waiting on ice, hibernating till it lived
again one day.
We might even imagine civilizations attempting
similar efforts to avoid or defeat entropy,
going to sleep until their remaining experts
either abandoned the effort or succeeded.
Either waking them to a new dawn or waking
them for one final one perhaps, to let them
know they tried their best but it was time
to say their goodbyes.
Though many might ask they not be awakened
unless there was success, after all they will
likely know going under that such an effort,
just as it is in nature, is at best a course
of desperation that fails as often as not.
Still I suspect we would try that if such
a scenario occurred, and such being the case,
it makes one wonder if out there in all the
cold space of the Universe there are any frozen
worlds hibernating like that.
And if there were and we found one, what should
we do with it?
What would you do?
Wake them?
Or leave them to their slumber?
Or raid their frozen tombs for plunder?
An awful lot of discussion involving possible
hibernating aliens and their slumbering tombs
is inspired by nature and the cold climates,
and gave rise to stories like the scifi film
classic, The Thing, the novella that inspired
it, John Campbell’s Who Goes There?
And of course the ancient ruins of HP Lovecraft’s
At the Mountains of Madness, and all of those
along with many other alien tales are set
in Antarctica and with good reason.
To this day it is mysterious and strange and
alien, with things like massive subsurface
lakes with life in them.
Antarctica is a mysterious place and there’s
a number of great documentaries on the topic,
like Iceman: 200 years in Antarctica, over
on Curiositystream.
We will also have an extended edition today
over on Nebula to examine that specific hibernating
alien notion, that they are hibernating here
on Earth in a place like Antarctica, and what
that might imply and how we could tell, and
it has some very interesting Fermi Paradox
implications we don’t see in other scenarios,
like aliens from elsewhere being afraid to
visit Earth or be seen by it lest they wake
the sleeping monster, and again we will be
having that as a segment over on Nebula.
If you didn't know, Nebula is our streaming
service full of awesome content from creators
focused on informative but fun content.
It’s designed to give creators more freedom
than other platforms, and all our episodes
of this show appear early and ad free on Nebula,
and we many have extended editions too like
today’s, as well as some Nebula Exclusives
like our Coexistence with Aliens Series.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos like Iceman and other Antarctic explorations,
to offer Nebula for free as a bonus if you
sign up for CuriosityStream using the link
in our episode description.
That lets you see the amazing content on Curiositystream,
and all the great content over on Nebula from
myself and many others.
Just use the link in the episode’s description.
So that will wrap us up for today but not
for the week as we’ll be having our mid-month
Scifi Sunday episode on the classic scifi
trope of Telepathy coming up on January 16th.
After that we return to Civilizations at the
End of Time Series for a look at the Big Rip,
the cosmological model that might see the
Universe torn to shreds trillions of times
sooner than we normally expect things to end.
After that we will explore the notion of using
nuclear bombs to terraform Mars or other worlds.
Then we will close out January with our Livestream
Q&A on Sunday, January 30th, at 4 pm eastern
time.
Now if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe
to the Channel and hit the notifications bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below.
You can also join in the conversation on any
of our social media forums, find our audio-only
versions of the show, or donate to support
future episodes, and all those options and
more are listed in the links in the episode
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
