This episode is sponsored by ExpressVPN. 
“Every dreamer knows that it is entirely 
possible to be homesick for a place  
you’ve never been to, perhaps more homesick 
than for familiar ground.” - Judith Thurman
 
So, last month we began a look at surveying 
habitable interstellar star systems, where  
we first focused on the astronomy side of things, 
looking for biosignatures or signs of good planets  
from light years away with telescopes. A couple 
weeks back we looked at the role of interstellar  
probes, principally flyby probes that could get 
to systems far quicker than a probe designed to  
orbit a world. Today’s episode, looking at what 
it would be like to be a planetary explorer,  
is a direct sequel to that episode, so if 
you haven’t seen it yet, you might want  
to pause and go watch that episode first.
As a quick recap though, in that episode we  
created a hypothetical example for illustrating 
the process of how we might respond to a possible  
techno-signature signal that we received from 
the Epsilon Fornacis System in the year 2100 AD.  
Epsilon Fornacis is a 12-billion year old binary 
system 100 light years from Earth, in the Fornax  
constellation of the southern hemisphere named 
by astronomer Nicolas Louis de Lacaille in 1756. 
We introduced 6 programs to pursue answers. 
The first was a signal sent to the system,  
complete with our lexicon. The second was the 
commission of a powerful telescope to indefinitely  
watch the system, named Nicolas. The third was 
an automated flyby probe, Louis, which passed  
through Epsilon Fornacis a millenia later, in the 
year 3100 AD, and detected an anomaly as well,  
when passing by a Super Earth in orbit of 
the primary star which is now designated  
Louis Epsilon Fornacis, or the planet Lef.
The fourth was the probe carrier Lacaille,  
which arrived around Lef on January 1st, 4100 AD, 
and began deploying a satellite grid to surveil  
the planet. The fifth was the scout ship Firefly, 
which also moves into orbit Lef a few days later  
and begins waking its crew from hibernation on 
January 4th. The sixth is the armed colonial fleet  
Musketeer, composed of three vessels, the Athos, 
Porthos, and Aramis, which is already decelerating  
into the system as our explorers awaken, and will 
be only a few days of communication lag time away,  
with that decreasing until Musketeer 
arrives early in July of 4100 AD. 
When we went to sleep in 2100 AD, 
hibernation was still a very new process,  
thoroughly tested on animals and simulations but 
barely tested on people, especially those in good  
health as most nations frowned on or even outlawed 
healthy individuals letting themselves be frozen,  
in an attempt to check if the process worked. 
In this case it is a process of freezing  
conducted after a lot of nanotechnology has been 
introduced and the reality is that it is revival,  
we were dead, and now we’re being thawed 
and we’re not entirely surprised our memory  
is rather hazy as we awaken, 2000 years later. 
Every cell in our body requires repairing and  
that includes our brain cells. We are also 
being cured of a disease noteworthy principally  
for being still fatal in the year 2100 AD but 
expected to be cured fairly soon at that time,  
and that turns out to be the case as we look it 
up after seeing it on our own medical readouts. 
The Firefly’s on board library and wiki apparently 
has been updating and is fully updated to the year  
4000 AD. The medical database notes that 
the disease was cured in 2122 and that the  
entire crew of the space scout Firefly, except the 
captain, had injected themselves with it in order  
to qualify for legal hibernation freezing on short 
notice, which had an exemption for those suffering  
from a disease with high lethality rates and no 
confirmed cure. Apparently, there was something  
of a show trial about it in the 22nd century, 
once the process had been proved reasonably safe,  
and the captain, which is us, was exonerated 
on the charge of conspiracy to infect others  
and leading a mass suicide. Apparently there was 
also a movie about it a few years after we left,  
and we’re a bit surprised at the choice of actors, 
particularly those playing ourselves in the movie. 
It is no rarity for pioneers and explorers 
to have problems with the law back home,  
but we’re rather glad we do not seem to, at the 
moment anyway. We also happen to have already  
had a different lethal ailment and its what 
had gotten us into being an early volunteer  
for the exoplanet exploratory service before 
the Epsilon Fornacis matter had even begun,  
when most of the volunteers for the handful of 
scout missions planned, were scooped from the  
small portion of the populace that was terminally 
ill but otherwise qualified to explore. Given that  
we had to leave behind our families and friends, 
folks who were terminally ill were generally more  
likely to volunteer for eternal exile anyway. Go 
on ice and wake up centuries later when it can  
be cured, and do some exploring too, that was 
how we and most of our pre-anomaly peers felt. 
Everyone else on this mission was picked 
quickly from expert volunteers who wanted  
to go explore this possibly inhabited system, 
but had never been off world explorers before.  
With the exception of our XO, no one else but 
us have even been off Earth before this mission. 
Recovering from being frozen for 2000 
years and having your partially thawed  
body undergoing cellular reconstruction 
is definitely a good time for reflection,  
and you do not want to make any mission 
critical decisions till you’re sure you’re  
fully restored and you have your cabin door 
locked and your message traffic silenced.  
You’re getting messages from Musketeer Fleet, 
whose crew did not hibernate and have been  
fixated on this mission for 2000 years, offering 
advice, suggestions, demands, and so forth. Your  
last message to the admiral of Musketeer Fleet, 
who had been asking, or honestly ordering you, to  
wait to go down to Lef till they arrived mid-year, 
was that the admiral didn’t pay your salary. 
The admiral’s reply was to ask who we thought was 
paying our salary right now. Which is a pretty  
good point. At the moment, we look like death 
warmed over but our medical readouts say we’re  
healing well and are now effectively an ageless 
transhuman. We were getting a salary and we did  
have some bank accounts and investments, but who 
knows if those rolled with compound interest or  
got eaten by some eventual change of government 
or culture. We could be trillionaires or paupers,  
and even our most recent update, a century old 
from signal lag, could be critically out of date. 
Someone has been making sure we get historical, 
entertainment, and technological updates  
and we have been getting correspondence. We just 
haven’t read it yet, because there’s a lot of it.  
Everyone knew about this mission for the last 2000 
years and when it would arrive and tons of message  
traffic came in just the last month, everything 
from well wishers to those demanding you not  
land on Lef, from kooks to government leaders, 
and you’re not entirely certain which is which  
and there’s a backlog of tens of thousands of 
messages. Many seem to be groups asking you to  
give them a shoutout or even to put patches on 
your uniforms with their logo, in exchange for  
considerations. This planetary exploration 
is brought to you by Jupiter Shipyards. 
There’s that big mission waiting down below 
on Lef with the now increasingly obvious signs  
intelligent life has been here before us, but you 
can’t really block out that while 2000 years ago,  
and maybe a week of personal time ago, you were 
shaking hands with the captains of the Musketeer  
Fleet in orbit of Earth, drinking champagne and 
posing for photographs with dignitaries of various  
powerful nations, corporations, and groups, and 
now you’re sitting there watching a giant desert  
of planet rotate beneath you as your ship spins 
around twice per minute to simulate gravity.  
You’re not sure if any of those great nations and 
groups remain. You’re not sure if everyone you  
know is dead or not, because life extension 
treatments were definitely becoming a thing  
before this mission was even on the radar, 
but you are betting two thousand years of  
living has at least thinned their numbers down and 
probably left them very unlike how you remembered.  
Your memory is still foggy but you think some of 
your crewmates left spouses or children behind. 
Our ship itself is pretty primitive and has 
a number of systems that could be upgraded,  
and mostly automatically, some indeed have been, 
but many require your authorization to continue.  
You can’t just say yes either, everyone knows 
where you are and what you’re doing, and your  
upgrade data could be telling the ship how to make 
itself a big bomb, and you have twenty centuries  
of spam, hacks, pranks, and well-intentioned 
but bad suggestions to screen out.  
This was anticipated as a possibility, but 
original mission planning was all built around  
colony and scout missions to systems within a 
dozen light years of Earth, and only a dozen such  
missions had been dispatched when the original 
weird signal arrived at Earth late 2099 AD. 
And it is now listed as the original signal 
because another was received in 3200 AD,  
apparently having been transmitted shortly after 
the Louis Probe passed through. That probe reports  
having been hit with what is interpreted 
to have been a Radar ping and a Lidar scan  
from Lef’s Moon, Aanwijzing, a rocky body about 
half the mass of Earth’s own Moon. The Lacaille  
Probe Carrier dispatched many probes there too, 
though in truth it sent them all over the system,  
but focus is on Lef and Aanwijzing for possible 
clues for our hypothetical courageous explorers.  
It isn’t lost on us that as the captain of 
the Firefly, originally scouting mission #13,  
slated for scouting Epsilon Indi’s 
orange and brown dwarf binary system,  
just 12 light years from Earth, that luck 
is not something we should be relying on.  
Not two thousand years in the future with 
a crew we didn’t originally train with  
for a mission that everyone now agrees is going 
to involve some sort of contact with aliens. 
So what about that crew? Well the default one was 
all about asteroid surveyors and astrogeologists,  
because that was quite a booming business in the 
late 21st century with all those asteroid mines  
opening up and folks contemplating how to build 
bases and mines throughout the system, and as  
outposts around other stars. Here though, we had 
to throw together a team and that resulted in us,  
with a background in asteroid mining, our XO, who 
ran freight and passengers to and from those mines  
and served as security on those ships. Then 
we have the others, a xenobiologist - which is  
strictly theoretical at this point, a geologist, 
an expert in cryptography and linguistics,  
ship’s archivists, ship engineer, our shuttle 
pilot who is also the ship assistant engineer,  
and some other people whose specialties 
don’t matter as they appear to have not  
properly survived hibernation. Oh, and the ship’s 
computer, which is a fairly intelligent AI though  
not at fully-human intellect, parallel to 
its sibling, the Lacaile Probe Carrier’s AI. 
So the situation on hand is that we can loosely 
pinpoint that there’s a scanner of some sort  
on or near Lef’s Moon, and that down on 
the surface, which is a thin-aired desert,  
there is a weak signal coming from down 
on the planet in the ULF band range.  
Ultra-low frequency signals being noteworthy for 
being able to penetrate even thick rock and dirt,  
it is not too surprising that the only signal 
emerging from the clearly dead world below would  
be one able to pass through layers of sandstorm 
buildup. The atmosphere is principally oxygen,  
nitrogen, and carbon dioxide, and Lacaille’s 
analysis is that atmospheric pressure is now  
down to 5% of Earth normal. This matches well 
with estimates from both Telescope Nicolas  
centuries back and Probe Louis’s flyby 
analysis. This means the team will need  
to wear spacesuits on the surface, though will be 
able to extract oxygen and nitrogen from the air. 
Lacaille’s more detailed analysis has 
found no water and the world below  
is parched worse than Arrakis. Analysis indicates 
that eons ago, as Epsilon Fornacis’s primary star  
aged and grew brighter, the oceans boiled 
away as the once cold superearth of Lef  
slowly warmed. However the current tectonic 
modeling is not producing anything reliable.  
Probably the modeling of tectonics in the 
late 21st century just wasn’t up to the task  
of handling a superearth that formed when the 
galaxy was much younger and is now boiling away. 
You signed up for this mission though, 
so you’re going to get it done,  
but you are really wondering if you want to 
be spending countless centuries leapfrogging  
through time and space to survey worlds. Most 
of which will be dead and boring planets.  
Of course, when you think on it, a team 
of a handful of you probably would need  
several lifetimes to meaningfully explore 
a planet even just to take ground samples,  
something the Musketeer Fleet’s Admiral seems to 
be making a point of in the communiques from them.  
Yours will be the first foot to step onto 
this alien world and that is awesome,  
yet at the same time, you’re not even sure you’re 
getting paid, or that your crew is getting paid,  
you’re not sure if your crew is really required 
to follow your orders anymore, and you’re not sure  
what you’d spend your money on anyway, or where.
So as we drop down to the surface of a once living  
world, we figure this at least means there 
may be other ones out there with life on them,  
not just rocky or icy balls of dead worlds. 
But this one is dead, this one is hot enough  
that we’ll be wearing cooling suits as we land in 
what ground-penetrating radar indicates is a basin  
now filled with sand 300 meters deep, above a 
rock layer and where that signal is coming from.  
It is weak, and we erect a wide reflective 
tent over the top of our base site nearby,  
as we set the machinery to excavate down at an 
angle to reach the beacon, but by late January,  
we already have some new information and 
extrapolations. Over on that moon we have  
found a simple receiver and transmitter buried in 
a crater that pokes its nose up as our own probe  
approaches and spreads solar panels to absorb 
power for a time before it emits a powerful signal  
with similar patterns on the front and rear of the 
emission, presumably identifier or header data. 
We do not approach further with drones, opting 
to leave that for Musketeer. We’re expecting  
to find that the probe contains a large amount of 
Palladium-107 and Silver-107 isotopes, the latter  
being the beta-decay product of the former, 
which has a half-life of 6.5 million years,  
a very endurable if weak power generator. 
Probe Carrier Lacaille’s infrared sensors  
picked up a flower-shaped object floating 
in a polar orbit around Lef at the edge of  
its Hill sphere that had a hotspot. We believe 
this is a telescope left there to monitor for  
anything approaching Lef and then to scan and 
transmit to the moon for louder re-broadcast.  
It has solar panels as its flower petals and drone 
camera imagery indicates micrometeor damage. It  
seems likely this is the probe that scanned our 
own probe, Louis, a thousand years back and that  
while expanded to perform its job it was damaged.
We believe it had been doing its job for  
millions of years, so it would seem both sad and 
improbable that it would be broken by our arrival.  
But it likely had been spending virtually all of 
its time as a dense package, protected by its own  
folded up power collectors and was only vulnerable 
when it popped open to scan and transmit, and this  
might have been the first time it did its job.
By early February we have dug a tunnel down to  
the beacon on Lef and removed the sand around 
what we now believe was not the ruins of an alien  
civilization, but rather, the ruins of a base of 
other off-world explorers doing as we are doing.  
The beacon is a simple device, powered by the 
beta-decay of a large amount of palladium-107,  
and on cracking it open we can easily estimate its 
age at 10 million years, roughly when humanity’s  
ancestors split from chimpanzees, indeed we can 
get much more accurate, down to nearly a century.  
It is a bit harder to nail down the exact 
date of the other beacon stored nearby  
that it seems modeled from, but we can put 
it at approximately 25 million years ago. 
Here on Lef, a world 12 billions 
year old, but gone desert long ago,  
one wonders how many times aliens have visited 
this world to unlock its secrets, only to find  
the ruins of previous explorers. Lef appears to 
have held intelligent life since before Earth even  
existed and shows many geological epochs that are 
a dead giveaway of massive artificial engineering,  
but we don’t know that life originated 
here either, maybe it came as colonists,  
just like the folk’s from Musketeer, maybe 
many times. Nor do we know what happened to  
those first inhabitants or anyone who visited 
after, indeed the world may have died and been  
recolonized or terraformed multiple times, 
not necessarily by the original civilization.  
Maybe aliens from different homeworlds or 
even long-lost colonists coming to check  
on their homeworld, or coming from their 
homeworld to check on a lost space colony? 
In the decades to follow, we will learn far more, 
though we ourselves will be back in hibernation,  
after some change in crew and upgrades, courtesy 
of Musketeer Fleet, whose colonists will be  
continuing the investigation for centuries 
to come, exploring the prior visitors relics,  
and eventually colonizing the world using 
technologies previous invented to terraform Venus.  
We are instead headed to explore not another 
planet, but rather, what we think might be a  
deep space habitat, thousands of AU out from the 
Epsilon Fornacis binary, the nearest of a large  
number of dots on an ancient map of this region of 
space, as we begin tracing this mystery of ancient  
alien Planetary Explorers, and where they went, 
which appears to be many worlds, hopefully all  
as interesting as Lef was, or more, and where 
we can get some answers to our questions. 
Including for us at least, the mystery of 
why and how they did their job as explorers. 
Okay, so a couple notes on realism. First, 
it would seem pretty likely that your first  
wave of scouts and colonists out to other 
systems would get themselves passed en route  
by upgraded spaceships, able to move far faster 
than your first ships. Though that’s hard to say.  
For a context, when Columbus traveled to 
Caribbean that first time in 1492, his ships  
took about a month, and ships more or less still 
took that timeframe for the trip for centuries.  
It would be well into the 19th century before we 
saw a big speed and cargo jump with steam ships,  
with long range airflight coming in the 20th 
century along with supersonics flight later in,  
almost 5 centuries after.
Half a millenia is a long time,  
and our flight time to this system was four 
times as long as that. We’ve gotten rather  
used to accelerating technological development 
but when it comes to traveling through space,  
barring FTL – which I don’t think we will ever 
get – there’s a ceiling on how fast you can go  
and one that most depends on your power supply. 
I don’t think our colony ships will tend to get  
overrun by faster cousins born later, but mostly 
because I expect we’ll rapidly get to the point of  
marginal improvements and that a lot of times 
we’ll be able to make those upgrades en route. 
You can’t ignore follow ups as 
a factor in things like this,  
for instance, you might have left Earth after a 
bad breakup or divorce or estrangement. It's hard  
to imagine even those who were dedicated to their 
job abandoning a happy family and home life. The  
reality is that not many people are going to be 
jumping on board a ship to the edge of forever  
if life is going great back home, and one of those 
faster follow up ships that you might rendezvous  
with might have that ex or estranged kid or parent 
on board, deciding they wanted to mend fences. 
You are leapfrogging through time as much 
as space, something we’ve seen explored  
in classics like Orson Scott Card’s Speaker for 
Dead novel, or Alastair Reynold’s House of Suns.  
Should it turn out the galaxy is full of life, 
or full of ruins of life, or full of aliens who  
go out and colonize for a bit, then die off, then 
there’s doubtlessly many chances for exploration  
but the key notion is that you’re not just going 
to land on some planet and poke into an archive  
for a few days or even years. It’s a planet. 
So to complete your xenoarchaeological mission  
is going to be a process of centuries 
and it requires a whole community.  
Your xenobiological mission, if life is still 
extant, is going to take just as long. Millions  
of species, millions of years of fossils, 
possibly total alien functioning of life  
that might not even have DNA or any real 
parallel to our own cells and biochemistry. 
So, you’re not personally going to 
visit a world then another and another.  
Even a Gardener Ship style approach, to send 
out ships that replicated along the way,  
pausing at systems for refueling and resupply to 
deposit a colony and move on to the next system,  
can only let you visit multiple worlds as an 
explorer if you’re sending clone duplicates.  
Others will beat you to the 
action and this will be true  
even if we discovered a means of faster than 
light, FTL, travel or communication. Because  
the USS Enterprise doesn’t find a new planet 
to explore every week, it stays at each planet  
for decades just to brush the surface of that 
exploration and other ships go to other worlds. 
One possible exception might be if you were 
yourself the uploaded mind serving as a von  
Neumann probe, like Bob from Dennis E. Taylor’s 
Bobiverse series. In that, the space probe with  
its original human-copied mind – Bob – gets 
to explore countless worlds with himself  
and his copies and copies of copies, and they 
have FTL communication to share information. 
And that is one case where your probes 
might be crewed by human level AI,  
in this case uploaded human minds with 
augmentation, because in theory at least,  
the flyby probe racing by or destined to be 
abandoned on some godforsaken rock ten thousand  
light years from home can transmit its last 
mental save state back with its mission data,  
before running out of juice or blowing itself up, 
as an alternative to either fate. Though maybe  
that probe goes dormant and waits millions 
of years to speak to a follow up mission,  
from home or from aliens, and truth be told 
anyone coming from home millions of years later  
is going to be pretty alien to you.
Otherwise, the planetary explorer  
probably gets one mission and one that is both 
very long and probably very classically boring,  
unless you’re a geologist or other specialization 
that could find new wonders on each iteration of  
countless barren planets. In that regard I really 
don’t expect to have a shortage of volunteers,  
it is an entirely new planet, but they are 
effectively volunteers too because I can’t  
see them getting meaningfully paid, except in 
satisfied curiosity and prestige, which might be  
valuable coin in post-scarcity civilizations. It's 
a pretty good coin nowadays and in the past too. 
Now before I spoil everyone’s dreams from 
science fiction, of exploring new worlds and  
civilizations, for boldly going where no man, or 
uploaded mind, has gone before, that’s actually  
one example where classic exploration might 
happen. Next week we’ll be exploring deep space  
habitats, more as an extension of last week’s 
episode on crawlonizing the galaxy than this  
week’s story was, but it is likely we would find 
far more abandoned deep space habs than planets,  
and places like an O’Neill Cylinder 
Habitat could be explored by a single team  
in a short time, like with the classic novel 
rendezvous with Rama by Arthur C. Clarke. 
We also need to contemplate how space really 
gets colonized if you are using uploaded minds,  
because you might be finding big computers with 
vast numbers of virtual worlds inside them for  
you to explore but which require you explore them 
using the native architecture. You can go visit  
the equivalent of Tolkien’s Middle Earth but you 
get to do it on a sailing ship, not a spaceship,  
and by foot and with pencil and paper as your 
recorder, not a pocket supercomputer. So too,  
if it turns out there is a multiverse and you 
can travel around it, then you are pretty much  
guaranteed to find countless Earth-like and 
quasi-earth-like alien worlds to explore. 
What’s really neat is, if we do find 
an abandoned alien world to explore,  
it might be one of thousands of layers of 
civilizations stacked on top of each other  
over billions of years, with millions of huge 
orbital space habitats around it, each habitat  
and each layer containing tons of classic items 
of interests to explorers and archeologists,  
but also with huge cyberspaces to explore. If 
you thought a pyramid was an impressive tomb,  
what about one a thousand time bigger containing 
a billion crypts, each of which has a durable  
power supply and virtual worlds inside it 
that the crypt’s occupant made or cared for  
or simply represented the world 
they lived in during their life,  
like a living interactive journal, kept going 
at a snail’s pace for eons. Each of which could  
be visited and explored, each possibly with their 
own physical laws, and diverging as eons moved by. 
So on the one hand, science fiction has probably 
given us some false expectations for what life  
as a planetary explorer would be like, but on 
the other, it may be those false expectations  
were not nearly grand and adventurous enough 
compared to what awaits us on alien worlds.
So in today’s episode I mentioned the 
captain being afraid that being on  
ice and a hundred light years from home might 
mean any emails were unreliable, out of date,  
containing false information, and potentially even 
viruses or intentionally flawed upgrade designs  
that could look like good improvements 
but blow the ship up when activated.  
While at the same time the captain has to 
worry about the crew’s every action getting  
armchair quarterbacked back home and protecting 
them from getting hacked or mined for data. 
Cybersecurity is going to be just as important in 
the future as it is today, where every site you  
visit, video you watch, or message you send, gets 
tracked & data mined unless you take active steps  
to protect your data and privacy. The foundation 
of that security is not letting anyone, including  
your Internet Provider, spy on your websites then 
sell that data to who knows who. Even when that’s  
allegedly protected, that just means your data is 
only as safe as their own cybersecurity measures  
and big websites get hacking attempts non-stop, 
and putting yourself into incognito mode  
doesn’t help with that at all. But a VPN, or 
Virtual Private Network, like ExpressVPN, does. 
The internet becomes more and more integrated into 
our lives in more and more ways every day. More of  
us work on it and do business and banking 
on it than ever before, both from at home  
and from riskier public wifi spots. Our kids 
use it for entertainment and their schoolwork.  
And that data is then there for advertisers to 
target you with and for hackers to get their  
hands on for nefarious use. Using ExpressVPN shuts 
that down. It's easy to use, just download the app  
on your phone or computer, tap one button, and 
you’re protected! No one in your family is too  
old—or too young—to figure out how to use 
it, and unlike other VPNs, you won’t even  
realize you have it on as ExpressVPN protects your 
privacy without slowing your internet connection,  
no matter how many users are in your household.
Your data is encrypted so others can’t see it and  
ExpressVPN has engineered all their servers to 
run only in RAM. All user data gets wiped on every  
reboot, making it impossible for their VPN servers 
to keep logs of their users – they couldn’t  
store your family’s info even if they wanted to!
With those levels of performance and safeguards,  
it's no wonder ExpressVPN has been rated 
the number-one VPN by The Verge, Mashable,  
and more. Secure your family’s online activity 
by visiting ExpressVPN.com/isaacarthur TODAY! Use  
my link, and you can get an extra three months 
FREE. Again that’s ExpressVPN.com/isaacarthur.
All right, that wraps us up for today and for 
June, but we have a lot in store for July as  
we open the month up on Thursday, July 7th with a 
look at Deep Space Habitats, those built far from  
any star to call their own. Then we’ll have our 
mid-month Scifi Sunday episode, Primitive Aliens,  
and the challenges of interacting with them, 
on July 10th. Then we’ll continue our tale of  
galactic colonization with a look at seeking to 
escape to Extragalactic Sanctuaries on July 14th,  
and we’ll see just how enormous a challenge 
that can be and what almost incomprehensible  
resources those hunting for you might have 
at their fingertips. Then we’ll return to  
the Fermi Paradox to ask where all these enormous 
habitats and megastructures we discuss on the show  
might be and what their apparent 
absence indicates about the Universe.  
After that we’ll look at two of the 
most mysterious things in our Universe,  
Black Holes and Dark Matter, and if 
dark matter might be black holes. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social media  
forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
