Sun Tzu said, “Rapidity is the essence of
war: take advantage of the enemy's unreadiness,
make your way by unexpected routes, and attack
unguarded spots.”
Imagine the strategic advantage then of being
able to get your troops anywhere on the planet
in mere minutes by dropping them from the
heavens above.
So, today we’ll be discussing dropships,
troop transports, orbital insertions, drop
pods, boarding torpedoes, and the general
notion of how you move relatively fragile
ground forces around in space and down to
planets.
This is a concept we normally think of as
not being a real-life issue outside of sci-fi
except in some distant and dystopian future,
but as we’ll see today, some of the techs
involved might be in play here on earth in
this century.
Dropships is a term that most fans of science
fiction know pretty well already, it’s one
of those concepts that pops up in sci-fi and
has picked up its own name even though it
has no widely-known existence outside of fiction.
Wikipedia mentions it as an alternative term
for a shuttlecraft in a little stub article,
much like mothership, another term everyone
knows in the sci-fi community but that isn’t
a commonly used military, maritime, or aviation
term.
But while everyone knows what both are in
sci-fi, neither is exactly well-defined.
Motherships are great big vessels out of which
fighter and enemy landing craft emerge in
terrifying quantities, something of a mix
of aircraft carrier and troop transport, dialed
up to 11.
Dropships are those landing craft, coming
down from space or maybe a very high or fast
aircraft.
They need to be able to keep their cargo safe
– soldiers and gear or robot war machines.
Safe from enemy fire and from the stresses
of ultra high-speed travel and landing.
For our purposes today we’ll loosely define
a dropship as a vessel capable of also acting
as a pickup ship, in essentially a helicopter-like
role, with a pilot and possibly able to drop
off or pick up whole platoons or armored vehicles
– or maybe even entire battalions – whereas
a drop pod is assumed to be an uncrewed vessel
in which a single soldier, vehicle, or maybe
a squad are landing, and when the pod is down
it’s down.
Your forces aren’t able to retreat back
into it and back to orbit.
Now, this might be an invasion force landing
on a planet like Earth, where those dropships
are burning through the atmosphere at several
miles or kilometers per second, experiencing
the same punishing stresses and heat that
our own spaceships encounter during atmospheric
re-entry.
An alien invader isn’t re-entering the atmosphere,
they presumably weren’t in it to begin with,
but we often use re-entry as the familiar
term for that, but atmospheric entry is better,
and for today’s topic, we also need the
term orbital insertion.
These terms often get a bit confused in sci-fi
jargon versus actual spaceflight terms, which
themselves are not always uniform either.
But we do need to contemplate re-entry for
drop pods too since a sub-orbital flight is
a very good way to get troops from one side
of a planet to another, very, very quickly.
And sub-orbital refers to speed and trajectory
as opposed to height, suborbital trajectories
often go to higher altitudes than orbital
ones.
Those folks would be re-entering the atmosphere
but not as fast, as would folks who were in
something like a quick reaction force that
orbited a friendly planet ready to deploy
troops or emergency first responders, such
as from an orbital ring, or maybe a levitating,
antigravity propelled ship if you’ve got
that tech.
And a lot of the conversation in modern spaceships
is about minimizing fuel use, so we don’t
normally contemplate certain options.
As an example, dropping down at orbital velocities
makes you a very hard target in some ways
by sheer speed, but you’re pretty predictable
in general course.
But not completely predictable since things
are bouncing around at hypersonic speeds,
hitting differing density pockets of air,
jittering around a bit randomly, so you’re
still a hard target.
This is basically what makes ICBMS hard to
intercept even though you know what the target
is almost right away.
In practice, if fuel is no longer your ultimate
constraint, you want your dropship randomly
jittering around even more, following some
random acceleration pattern from side to side
and even a little up and down on the descent,
so that nobody can be firing flak cannons
at you with utter confidence of hitting.
Especially since most explosives have a rate
of expansion or speed of shrapnel much less
than ICBM or orbital speeds.
And you need that edge since they are probably
firing a lot of stuff at you.
A flak cannon is probably cheaper than a dropship
after all, as is a one-time use missile and
its hundred siblings sitting in a launch rack.
Moreover, you don’t want to drop at only
the speed gravity gives you, faster is better,
and you don’t want to aerobrake till the
last moment.
We need to do that to save fuel but we’re
in the realm of chemical rockets.
We can’t rule out a vastly superior spaceship
drive or fuel to what we have now, as is common
in science fiction, or other options like
a dropship coming down on a superstrong and
superconducting tether that is pumping electricity
into its enormous engines.
Or even beaming it down, after all, the troop
transport or mothership can know the pattern
the dropship would be using and the dropship
can use a powered descent to make sure it’s
at the right place at the right time for intersecting
with a power transfer beam, which in turn
can probably be used to cause a lot of havoc
on the enemy sensors.
Coordination is a big deal anyway, as even
if your ships are keeping the orbital bombardment
to a minimum rather than nuking the place
till it glows in the dark, they presumably
are using targeted counter battery fire on
all the surface to air batteries firing on
your drop pods.
Don’t assume those are all getting blown
up before the drop occurs either.
Odds are they are giant cannons designed to
be withdrawn into heavily-shielded bunkers
or wads of fire-and-forget missiles stashed
under cover or mobile launchers.
It doesn’t take much to damage items moving
at high speed, so they can be small munitions
they’re firing at you.
Slamming into a handful of pea-sized metal
fragments at several kilometers per second
will scrap anything not as heavily armored
as a modern tank.
So you could have an innocuous semi-truck
or RV that moved around, but it and its hundred
thousand siblings could all burst open and
each fire ten thousand anti-ship missiles
when you begin your landing.
A billion missiles swarming up to get your
dropships does not seem an auspicious way
to begin an invasion, and unless you’re
planning to wholesale glass the surface, which
would kind of imply the ground troops were
unnecessary, you should be assuming your dropships
are getting fired on as they come in.
It sure is nice then if your own fleet is
firing back, taking out those missiles or
at least putting enough clutter and noise
in the sky that tracking systems aren’t
ultra-reliable and all the various shrapnel
around is more likely to wreck some unarmored
tiny munition than the armored drop pod it’s
aimed at.
It is entirely likely that up in orbit you
already have a Kessler Syndrome Event going
on, a cascade of debris from billions of tons
of space ships and stations blowing up, much
of which will be falling into the atmosphere
and could probably be biased in that direction.
If ground forces are firing on your landing
vessels, dropping lots of chunks of wrecked
satellites and defense platforms on them gives
them lots of other targets to deal with and
cuts down on the ones slamming into your own
fleet.
As we’ve discussed in other episodes, contrary
to what sci-fi often implies, planets are
not defenseless if some big armada shows up.
That seems to make sense when we consider
how much effort it takes to launch a rocket
to space while anything in space can just
drop unpropelled metal balls down on that
planet as hypersonic munitions.
Problem is that if we’re talking giant armadas
of interplanetary or interstellar ships, we’re
assuming they can get ships moving at faster
than orbital speeds and much easier than we
do now, so it isn’t that big an edge, especially
since the more heavily-armored your ships
are, the more mass you presumably can casually
push around at high speed.
If you can move a megaton battleship and its
hundred sisters and escorts around a solar
system at hundreds of kilometers per second,
then that giant industrialized planet you’re
headed to can also shoot hundreds of megatons
of ship-killing projectiles out of kilometer
long cannons at you at hundred of kilometers
per second.
If you can both shoot projectiles at 200 kilometers
per second, while theirs might lose ten kilometers
per second of speed climbing out of that gravity
well and yours gain that, the result is only
a 10% difference in projectile speed and a
22% difference in kinetic energy or raw damage.
Such being the case, the high ground in space
doesn’t help that much.
Quite to the contrary it’s like running
up to some militant fortress factory in pajamas
and shouting that they had better surrender
because you have the high ground on this hill
you’re standing on.
It’s not that it isn't an advantage, but
when ten thousand hatches swing open to present
anti-personnel guns, it's hard to argue the
balance of forces is on your side simply because
you have the high ground.
So the classic sci-fi case of fleets in orbit
opting to send in ground troops when they
have the enemy below at their mercy, but don’t
want to pursue a Scorched Earth strategy,
is not something we should be taking for granted.
This might be true if you have a big technological
or manpower advantage over an opponent, like
going after some small colony or lower-tech
civilization, but then your real advantages
are your quality or quantity of forces, not
their altitude.
We need to remember also that the simple existence
of big invasion fleets, outside of you having
your enemy at a huge population or resource
advantage, tends to imply that planet had
a huge orbital infrastructure and probably
not just in low orbit.
You need to be sending in forces to seize
orbital facilities and habitats, and you probably
also had to go through layers of other structures.
Outside of sci-fi we’ve no reason to expect
the norm is to pop in on the outskirts of
some star system and zip in at high speed
unopposed beyond having to engage a few enemy
system defense ships and a few orbital defense
stations.
More likely you’ve spent months plowing
through minefields and ambushes while any
of a million space habitats orbiting that
star are either shooting at you too or demanding
you acknowledge their neutrality and detour
around them.
You are not charging in at ultra-high speeds
across the landscape unopposed till you get
to the enemy’s stronghold to sit down for
protracted siege.
And when entering a hostile system, the high
ground isn’t helping much either.
The Sun is the bottom of our solar system,
you climb out of its gravity well to get to
ever more distant and colder worlds orbiting
it, and that includes millions of minor planets
in our current solar system, without even
adding in artificial space habitats and stations,
and billions of things big enough to be a
concealed multi-megaton nuclear bomb.
And if you’re running into a solar system
at some percentage of lightspeed every random
rock you hit basically is a nuclear bomb.
So it is entirely likely your future ground
forces are getting years’ worth of combat
experience while you cut your way in trying
to bribe, intimidate, or invade every minor
planet and space habitat on your attack vector
in toward that planet, and it itself might
have millions of giant mile-wide space habitats
and facilities in it’s own higher orbits
that you’d have to plow through too.
Those folks are not engaging in high-speed
drops, the various minor planets and megastructures
have too little gravity to worry much about
orbital mechanics or to give your dropships
any free speed.
I suppose these are technically boarding actions
but then they’re not really ships and you’re
not dropping a wooden board or plank across
your decks to run over and get them.
Space is not an ocean and we want to be careful
treating it like it is.
Which is irritating because all the old Age
of Sail Ship of Line, or World War 1 and 2
battleship and aircraft carrier tactics, are
easily converted into the ocean of space for
some compelling space combat in sci-fi.
The same is true of infantry tactics, or rather,
untrue.
Your dropship needs to either be able to absorb
lots of damage or evade it or move so fast
it barely has time to be shot at, preferably
all of the above, or your troops aren’t
getting to the target, except maybe as vaporized
ash.
However, it often seems like all the dropships
or drop pods or boarding missiles we see in
sci-fi are a lot more expensive and weaponized
than the troopers on board the ship.
And in the context of space, where mass is
your limiting factor, it makes us wonder about
not just why we’re even bothering to send
ground forces in those vessels, as opposed
to large bombs, but also if all that armor
and technology on the vessel is more valuable
than its cargo.
And yes, those are human lives, or alien lives,
but you’re seriously endangering them by
having them on board and dumping them into
a ground battle, and we need to justify why
that ship isn’t just an AI carrying war
robots instead of a living pilot and crew
landing to drop off living troops.
Even the classic drop pod example, where it’s
just a big cocoon with a few defense measures
like maneuvering thrusters and chaff, still
seems like it’s a lot of extra mass.
Two of the better known settings for using
dropships and drop pods, BattleTech and Warhammer
40,000 respectively, have decent handwaves
for their settings.
Those are tabletop games where you’re trying
to get your giant battlemech or superhuman
warriors into short range combat, and much
like Space is an Ocean fleet combat analogies,
it doesn’t hold water very well and exists
for the rule of cool.
That said, a drop pod needs not to be heavy,
or single-use.
By which I don’t mean reusable for another
drop at a later date, it may or may not make
sense to be hauling these back into orbit
– rather, the idea that the drop pod might
serve some function when it gets to the ground,
even if it is simply dumb metal serving as
a blast shield.
We might imagine one blowing a crater at its
landing site and then rapidly swinging its
side apart to form shield walls around that
complete with converting its point defense
guns into defense turrets on that wall.
So too, that armor, the bits not too damaged,
might be a ton of supplies instead.
It’s your drop pod armor but it’s also
your power packs for your infantry’s guns
and power armor, or food, or anything that
can serve some role as armor and doesn’t
explode when it gets hit and can then be used
groundside in some other role too.
The individual plates of armor might all unfold
into a hundred small war robots and drones
too, those not damaged on the landing.
Assuming whatever you use for fuel doesn’t
explode easily it might be that you’ve got
hundreds of armored fuel tanks on your pod
and the fuel acts as armor too, and you then
have a lot more options[a].
Your pod isn’t a dumb brick falling through
the sky.
Same if you’ve got classic sci-fi force
fields running on energy and the same pool
your thrusters use too.
You can burn mass or armor or energy to gain
speed or jink around evasively or lose speed.
Even a drop pod that’s just dropping under
gravity needs to use a lot of energy to slow
that fall, and in practice you want to get
to your target as fast as you can, meaning
faster than gravity will accelerate you.
That’s more speed to burn fuel reaching
and decelerating from.
You can save fuel by aerobraking but that’s
slowing you well before you land and once
you blow a parachute you become a fairly big
target.
It is possible you could have some sort of
weird inertial technology that lets you pull
off an instant deceleration[b], or some sort
of flash temporal stasis that lets your troops
and pod survive slamming into an enemy ship
they’re boarding or the ground – also
known as lithobraking.
However, your troops might be able to survive
very fast decelerations.
They might be robots or cyborgs – we’ll
be examining the latter next month.
They might be humans descending in a pool
of breathable liquid, as opposed to air, that’s
been kicked around as a way of allowing people
to survive higher g-forces of acceleration
for a long while and the European Space Agency
has studied it and thinks it is plausible
having people immersed in a liquid ,and breathing
it too, lets you move from surviving low tens
of gee’s to hundreds.
Of course, contemplating surviving breathing
liquid is not the same as fighting while breathing
liquid.
Any technology that widens the limits of possible
this way probably relies heavily on the professional
medical assistance at the destination, not
people who literally want to kill you.
There’s also the issue with finding a liquid
that works.
Perfluorocarbon is the substance usually <<suggested
but it has a much higher density than water,
or humans, and thus while you can do liquid
breathing with it, it wouldn’t work for
the high-acceleration application, you need
something, or some mix of somethings, that
has a density as close to water as you can
contrive for best effect.
If you can make such a substance, or modify
people so they don’t need to breathe air,
it becomes a bit of no brainer to be using
it since it will also cushion you against
impact damage from enemy fire or hitting the
ground.
And if you can survive a few seconds of, say,
500-g deceleration or jinking, that allows
a change in speed of 15 kilometers a second
– more than orbital velocity – or a change
in expected position of over 20 kilometers
in those 3 seconds.
That is a big enough shift in anticipated
coordinates that you could survive a nuke
going off where they thought you were supposed
to be.
And yes, it is entirely plausible that anti-dropship
batteries might be firing low-yield nukes
at you.
High-tech civilizations not only probably
have cures for cancer and the ability to build
vacuum-tight bunkers under everyone’s house,
but can probably contemplate using Geiger-counter
armed drones to go clean up hot spots in the
aftermath if they win.
It also means you can be using some super-material
like Graphene to deploy some micrometer-thick
parachute and tethers that is ridiculously
thin and light and strong, and that might
let you pull off a very high-g no fuel maneuver,
not just slowing your speed but whipping you
around your location and also giving you a
ridiculously big radar signature – potentially
a kilometer wide one from a chute weighing
only kilograms.
That would sound bad and the enemy can shred
that thing with weapon fire but it’s disposable
and your pod does not need to be in its center.
You can also send a first wave of duds or
redundant supplies in using such chutes to
blanket the area, literally, and make targeting
and aiming at wave two very hard.
Now, Graphene gets overhyped a bit but it
does have amazing tensile strength and may
be an amazing substance for using as a capacitor,
or battery, so while we can imagine other
super materials making a drop pod very sturdy,
one might imagine a graphene-walled pod that
was a bunch of batteries and which could blow
out as various chutes or gliders, and upon
landing could have all that chute and tether
use the remaining power to drag the pieces
back in, and hundreds of tons of dirt and
rock with it that it had anchored into on
impact, forming a nice little bunker at your
landing site.
It probably got ripped to shreds during all
that descent and impact but whatever tattered
bits are leftover could potentially get that
job done, while the whole impact site is providing
general cover and concealment from the tatters
and the debris kicked up in the landing.
But this need not be a pod at this point,
and if we’re dropping people in power armor
or exoskeletons anyway, as opposed to lightly
armored infantry, it’s entirely plausible
the drop pod would be more like a parachute
backpack strapped on before kicking the trooper
right out of the airlock.
We don’t really need all that sophisticated
materials, smart matter, or nanotech, to contemplate
a small package of material that could envelop
them for the drop and alter its shape for
best effect and maneuverability, acting as
an entry vehicle and glider, before going
parachute and ground cover.
And while this sort of thing sounds incredibly
high-tech, none of this involves technologies
that are necessarily out of reach this century.
Folks might go to battle from suborbital craft
or diving right out of low orbit space stations,
or again to non-military search or rescue
efforts, and maybe during our own lifetimes.
Also if you’re breaking at hundreds of g-force,
depending on the atmosphere and your altitude
when dropping, you might only need a few seconds
to make your deceleration and your whole drop
from a ship in low orbit might be well under
a minute, a supposed to the better part of
an hour it would take to fall at terminal
velocity from orbital altitude.
During a boarding action or drop, you might
be getting shot out of a cannon yourself,
and for that matter, that ship sending the
troops or boarding party might be firing an
actual grapple and tether that a vessel can
race down, which can also supply power to
that vessel.
We already have wire-guided missiles with
as much as a 4 kilometer range and that’s
probably scalable to a thousand or more.
If you’ve got materials that can do space
elevators, you could do that on a normal planet,
and no special super materials are needed
for ship-to-ship or for use against space
stations or minor planets.
We may be calling these drop pods or boarding
missiles, same as dropships might also include
landing craft or assault boats, many of these
terms are hazily defined even in sci-fi and
interchangeable.
As to dropships, in the strictly guided sense
and the ability to both deploy and extract
troops, many of the bits we were discussing
for drop pods apply in whole or part.
A dropship doing a drop off doesn’t need
to necessarily slow down much either, it could
be jettisoning troops in big, rapidly inflating
bubbles that aerobraked them and cushioned
them on impact like an airbag.
However, this can also apply to extraction,
a dropship might not need to come to a halt
to grab troops needing to retreat or reposition.
Tethers with a bit of springiness could maglock
onto a passing trooper and yank them up, then
winch them in, we’ve discussed some tricks
for decelerating spacecraft at destinations
by this sort of harpoon and winch technique
without ripping the target apart or whiplashing
them and this would be a harder but technically
possible adaptation of that.
Extraction can also be more metaphorical too,
like extracting a saved copy of the trooper’s
mind, a non-ideal but better-than-nothing
option if you are about to bite the bullet.
So too, most of these techniques work well
with minor modification for evacuating a spaceship
or space station, as life boats or escape
pods.
Now, we’ve spent a lot of time talking about
how to make these smaller, even one-man backpacks,
but how about bigger?
It’s often pointed out that spaceships wouldn’t
be designed for atmospheres but your dropship
might be, and assuming you’ve got the engines
for it or some cool anti-grav tech, bigger
might be better.
You might be able to land giant walking battlemechs
or entire armored battalions in one ship.
Would that make sense though?
All your eggs in one very large and easily
targetable basket?
Maybe.
As always, it depends so much on the available
tech.
Generally speaking, it’s very plausible
that reactors get more powerful and efficient
in power-to-weight ratio the bigger you go,
so it might allow stronger engines or more
powerful shields if you’ve got that tech.
Your options for defense might be limited
to sucking it up and tanking enemy fire, after
all if they are using options like lasers
or smart bullets or AI guided missiles it
may not be realistic to assume being smaller
and more maneuverable offered much tactical
advantage.
Alternatively, being big and thickly-armored
and able to boast tons of point-defense systems
might be more effective.
Meanwhile we might see dropships bringing
in commando squads or platoons, we might just
as easily have dropships the size of stadiums
that came down like a brick while exchanging
floods of fire with ground forces and just
landing like a mobile castle and unleashing
a deluge of war machines and troops.
It all depends on the technology and scale,
for instance your ground invasion force might
be a bunch of hyper-velocity darts that slam
into bunkers and unleash a swarm of nanobots
or flip on your teleporter homing beacon or
short-range hyperspace jump link, and out
pops an assault force of heavily-armored space
marines, killbots, or death commandos.
This still doesn’t answer the question of
if you would ever actually use ground forces
over just blowing a place to smithereens,
and I can offer no definitive argument for
that.
However, I would argue that we’ve had cheap
explosives longer than we’ve had nukes,
and there are few if any veterans alive these
days who would have gone to war in a time
before atomic bombs were available.
Nonetheless a ton of those veterans went to
war in helicopters or ground vehicles, and
did their job mostly as infantry, myself included,
and I think that many of those myriad and
variable reasons for that would still apply
in the future.
Not that the future is in any way homogenous,
we are likely to see lots of changes in tactics
based on available technology and resources,
not to mention ethics and worldviews, or galaxy-views.
In the end, it’s hard to say how often we
would use infantry in ground conflicts and
a rapid assault role, but if we do, the same
rule applies as always, get in fast and expect
to get hit, and if so, big armored dropships
or smaller drop pods certainly will be critical
to deciding those conflicts.
And they look cool too.
So that will wrap us up for today but this
weekend, on Sunday the 30th, we will have
our end of the month livestream Q&A.
After that we’ll head in August to look
at building a space elevator not on Earth,
but on the Moon, then we’ll head trillions
of years into the future to the end of time
and the final twilight on the Last Planet.
Then it will be time for our monthly Scifi
Sunday, on Cyborg Armies, and if you missed
last weekend’s Scifi Sunday, Robots & Warfare,
you can catch it now while you wait, along
with last week’s episode, ammonia-based
lifeforms.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and
other episodes come out, make sure to hit
the like, subscribe, and notification buttons.
You can also help support the show on Patreon,
and if you want to donate and help in other
ways, you can see those options by visiting
our website, IsaacArthur.net.
You can also catch all of SFIA’s episodes
early and ad free on our streaming service,
Nebula, along with hours of bonus content,
at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur.
As always, thanks for watching, and have a
Great Week!
[a]Fuel on drop pod should probably most be
expended while landing.
Extra fuel is extra problem to delivery safely
and should probably be delivered separately.
Actually, in case of a drop ship that has
enough fuel left to remain operational, there
is no reason to actually "drop" it, it can
drop whatever cargo, including troops and
stay in the air.
I don't buy that altitude does not matter
:P
it is always good to have something of yours
flying above your head.
[b]Painful even to imagine.
Might also have teleportation, so all you
are delivering is the teleportation gate to
deliver nerve gas through. :D
