This episode is brought to you by NordVPN.
Whether it's real spaceships or those in science
fiction, it seems like they are always breaking
down and are barely being held together by
Duct Tape.
So what do we do if our ship breaks down a
trillion miles from home?
Whether it’s crashing a flying saucer into
Roswell or Han Solo trying to jumpstart the
Millennium Falcon, broken ships are something
of a staple of space travel speculation, and
a regular plot point in Science fiction, but
they’re a very real concern in science and
engineering.
Spaceships do break a lot, even for all the
top-notch engineering we put into them, because
they are for extreme conditions and in many
ways nearly every single flight is a test
flight or prototype of something.
We don’t have thousands of routine missions
to field-test some new widget or feature until
it is ultra-reliable.
The flip side of that is that we would expect
that in the future, and so it surprising how
often things break on spaceships in scifi,
or get sabotaged, or are have a backup that’s
also broken.
A quote that comes to mind is from my favorite
Starfleet Engineer, Chief Miles O’Brien,
when he’s explaining why he had to replace
a component with a lower capacity one to make
room for a secondary backup as required by
Starfleets specs and codes.
The Cardassian he’s explaining this too
finds this absurd, asking why you need a backup
of the backup, as its unlikely both would
fail, and he says “That’s very unlikely
but in a crunch, I wouldn’t want to be caught
without a secondary backup.”
And if you’ve seen the non-stop console
explosions and other breaks that seem to happen
in every other Star Trek episode, you can
sympathize with Chief O’Brien’s point.
The backups are always failing at the same
time the original breaks, in a fashion that
even Murphy’s Law might find pessimistic.
When it rains it pours and the weather in
space is even crazier.
Now it stands to reason that since we do not
live in a science fiction episode – probably
- such convenient coincidences aren’t getting
shoehorned into our script by lazy writing
or last minute production changes.
However, on an interplanetary voyage lasting
a couple of years, like those we envision
to Mars or other places in the next few decades,
or interstellar missions in the further future
which might last decades, you don’t need
the main system and backup to fail at the
same time.
Stuff breaks for a reason and whatever circumstances
blew the primary out might still be in play
for the secondary too.
On Deep Space Nine for instance, they’re
constantly trying to MacGuyver up repairs
and improvised components for an old space
station built by another civilization for
another purpose, and if you think trying to
read instructions in a technical manual written
in another human language are tricky, an alien
one is probably way worse, as might be components
from your homeworld that were built a light
century away and imported to a colony with
hundreds of years of language and culture
drift..
So it stands to reason that we want backups
and of course the reason you don’t want
them is that they are expensive, both in terms
of cost and mass, which is the arch-enemy
of a spaceship.
More mass means more fuel.
And more maintenance too.
Such components are for fixing things but
especially for protracted storage a lot of
sensitive components would need extra efforts
or even gear for preserving them.
In my opinion it is very unlikely any manned
spaceship leaving Earth orbital space will
do so without a 3D printer, the more realistic
version of the replicator of Star Trek, and
that’s likely to cover any relatively simplistic
bulk replacement item.
More intricate stuff, including circuitry,
doesn’t store as well and might get bulky
with efforts to keep them safe for use for
long periods of years or decades or even centuries.
3D printing though, depending on how intricate
it can get, does solve a lot of these problems
and it is basically why the replicator from
Star Trek gets beaten up so much as a horrible
thing to have put in the series.
There’s no reason to bother with backups
for anything but your replicators and anything
needed to run them or which they can’t replicate.
They’re too convenient and thus too often
forgotten during episodes where they would
make the plot pointless.
Now conveniently things are always breaking
on those shows that the replicators can’t
replace and in a way that sort of makes sense
since your ships might be full of lots of
classified or brand new technology on the
cutting edge of your science and industry
and might be a pain to replicate or just not
have a template yet.
Bit of handwave there but in terms of 3D printing
it is plausible.
We don’t really care if the carrying case
for some bit of technology breaks, like your
phone’s case.
That’s definitely something you could 3D
print though, but it's not the urgent thing
needing to be fixed because it cracked, and
printing circuit boards is tricky too though
also something we do, it's just a different
device than a 3D printer, same as a paper
and ink printer.
It's debatable if an in-system ship running
between planets would need something like
that since it isn’t going to be light compared
to some backup circuit boards and a soldering
gun.
I should also note that things like nanobots
and universal assembler are potential options
for making anything, rather than having a
handful of more specialized printers or forges,
but it would generally be easier to just include
a specialized fabricator or three.
Tiny machines will be very slow, it’s sort
of the nature of that process, see our Santa
Claus Machine episode for details, though
they are likely to still play a powerful role
in self-repairing gear or ships.
Key point though, when you’re fixing stuff,
the backup doesn’t have to be the same device.
The new widget might be far better than the
design from twenty years ago but that one
will work in a pinch and probably is way easier
to find a design you can cobble together.
The real backup is a database of every component
you have on a ship that can be cross-referenced
to the devices it appears in or that parallel
components appear in, so you know where to
cannibalize from.
A very good engineer would know many of those,
or be able to inspect and find them, but that’s
exactly the sort of thing computers and AI
are wonderful at.
So, you crack open your damaged navigation
console and find the W42 is burned out and
the computer tells you if another W42 is around
the ship or if any components of the W42 are.
Now it’s hard to say if the future will
be a place that’s full of highly individualized
and tailored components or very standardized
ones, ironically new equipment tends to be
a mix of both since we try to cut down on
costs and unexpected problems by using tried
and true tech in prototypes wherever we can.
We can’t really say if the future is going
to a place where every single bit of gear
is custom-tailored to its job from the ground
floor up, but such a future is no time soon
and really something I’d only expect in
a post-science civilization, or one with technological
stagnation, as we discussed in those episodes,
where you basically are done innovating because
there’s no place to innovate or none left
where you are willing to risk going, and thus
folks have spent centuries retooling every
device to optimum performance including ripping
out trivial things like the resistor or capacitor
that’s 5.32% more massive than it needs
to be for one that’s exactly 5.32% less,
and is manufactured exclusively for this device.
The airlock door that was standardized as
10 millimeter thick steel but after long discussion
and regulation has been peeled back to 9.83
millimeters instead, saving trillions of dollars.
And of course in that sort of economy everything
is about building to last, because there’s
nothing new coming out next year that makes
something obsolete, so even fairly standardized
ship designs are going to often be heavily
customized after some individual has owned
one for decades and made custom modifications.
So you either have a future in which lots
of technological components are standardized
and shared between many devices, which are
constantly being upgraded and innovated on,
in which case you have a crazy mess of standardized
and custom like everything does nowadays,
or you have one in which everything is ultra-standardized
and individualized as a result.
Both have their pros and cons but neither
really implies you’ve got a backup of every
single device and a backup of that backup.
More likely items on the ship get ranked by
priority in an emergency, and either you pick
a device for that function where all of its
bits are easily synthesized by an on-board
manufactory or cannibalized from other things,
or else you do keep a backup and even a backup
backup.
Of course another approach is modularity,
where it's not that you have backups so much
as you just have tons of the same device doing
the job or able to retask to it.
You don’t have a backup meal, you have a
pantry full of food, reserves rather than
replacements.
You don’t have a backup captain, you have
an XO, and that XO has normal jobs to perform,
so does whoever is next in line for command
if the Captain and XO both get neutralized…
or vaporized as the case might have it.
I’ve seen cases in fiction where they had
backup crew on ice in case a member got taken
out, but the cases involved are usually where
life support is very restricted or where it’s
a sleeper ship with a dozen awake crew and
thousands of frozen colonists, so they just
thaw out an astronomer if the navigator got
killed or an engineer if the ship engineer
went nuts and had to be restrained or put
on ice.
We could see something like this in a post-human
environment of digital uploaded minds, where
you and the other crew and colonists exist
in a virtual environment or just stored on
a harddrive and have an android body or mundane
robot you pilot in the ship to do real-world
tasks.
The life support and freezing options though
raises another issue.
It isn’t really right to say that interstellar
space is cold, the temperature of interstellar
gas is often superhot, but its super thin
so it has little heat, even if its temperature
is high, so it's quite easier to keep things
cold on a ship and indeed it's pretty easy
to keep them warm too but still costs more
energy.
The actual temperature of space is not terribly
relevant, it's how thin it is since that’s
what controls cooling by anything other than
radiation as infrared photons.
With that in mind, if you’ve got a damaged
ship and a civilization able to restore frozen
people, what you do is make sure your ship
either has a printer able to make freezer
pods or contains a lot of equipment you can
cannibalize for it, and by mass that’s going
to be mostly the same stuff you make your
hull from since its serves the same purpose.
In an emergency you freeze everyone you don’t
absolutely need at that moment.
Which is eventually everyone if it's an unfixable
problem.
For that matter freezing itself, or vitrifying,
is less important in space.
Radiation shielding around your body to protect
your asphyxiated corpse from being mangled
by radiation and micrometeors is probably
sufficient to let them revive you if they
can revive you from being frozen in the first
place.
Scifi style stasis pods presumably work on
freezing time not bodies, so would probably
be harder to fabricate and run, but easier
to restore someone if kept intact, shut it
off and they’re unfrozen, they don’t need
to thaw out because time stopped, they didn’t
actually get icy.
So too you might use brain scan and mind upload
backups.
A distress beacon might be an encrypted update
to your brain’s last save state back at
home base.
Outside of colony ships and scouts, which
pretty much by definition are a rarity compared
to normal traffic over long periods of time,
everyone should be on a fairly known path
between two inhabited systems.
Having a compartment blow out will knock you
off course, and by a calculable cone of options
for search and rescue, who probably have been
getting a constant ID signal from you.
If that’s stops, its absence becomes an
SOS even if you’ve got no beacon.
Beacons are not hard to make either, and in
a situation like that, even a passive beacon
in the form of a radar-reflective object of
clearly artificial geometry is going to be
helpful.
But we also need to keep in mind that a ship
that blew out several tons of superheated
gas while traveling at a tenth of light speed
between stars several light years apart might
not even have anyone who would notice the
normal ID transmitter was gone for a few years,
and it might be decades before ships get out
there to be able to start tracking you.
In practice they probably are waiting for
your debris to arrive, or asking some ship
on a similar vector to either slow or speed
up a bit to see if they can rendezvous with
any debris.
Indeed, they probably wouldn’t ask that
ship since that ship is probably the one that
first knows of the problem, and acted on it.
Those are your survival time frames in a situation
like that though, which is why stuffing people
in freezer banks is fairly reasonable.
Or even just the heads, which would be easier
to safeguard.
Unlike the typical sci fi portrayal someone
on a spaceship going nuts, the guy running
around the ship with an ax or chainsaw trying
to cut people’s heads off might be sane
one.
You might do that even if your civilization
doesn’t really have the ability to restore
frozen people yet, since they might be able
to one day.
Otherwise you’re drifting and it really
comes down to if you still have power or not.
If you do, you can put together a beacon and
given the timelines you can even train someone
in the field of engineering from stored teaching
software, so they can make a transmitter,
because you potentially have years to burn.
Same applies for fixing almost any device,
given time, energy, and raw material, you
can make it, even if no one on your ship originally
even knew what it was.
Slow boat colony ships with centuries of journey
time can even spend a few generations breeding
back up some good engineers to fix or build
their engines to slow down on arrival.
If you don’t have power you need to get
it, and the good news is that there will almost
inevitably be something you could use to power
a transmitter because even some weak 20 watt
signal that pulses once an hour for a millisecond
is gonna be trackable once people know to
look which is probably five seconds after
your normal signal goes off line, plus light
lag.
That is also the sort of thing computers and
AI are perfect for, monitoring fifty millions
transponders simultaneously for all the ships
in a travel corridor and estimating each one’s
velocity and possible deviation for a search.
The bad news though is that putting together
a power plant if you haven’t got power is
a lot harder.
In deep space you can hypothetically use giant
thin mirrors to concentrate distant sunlight
into some sort of power supply and active
sensors looking for it later will spot that
giant mirror in an instant anyway.
But that just makes you easy to find later
and if you haven’t got power your fate is
entirely up to others, and if your civilization
is able to restore frozen bodies.
Otherwise you’re pretty much limited to
rescue by divine providence.
You are going to want to stick with that ship
too, escape pods are going to be harder to
track and are something you use if your ship
is actively being shot at, it's not an oceangoing
ship that’s ramming an iceberg and sinking,
so enemy action is the major reason you’d
abandon ship.
And they really shouldn’t have any problem
tracking those pods either.
If your enemy is the sort to take prisoners,
they can, if they would rather ignore you
and let you be someone else's problem, they
can, and if they want to target those pods,
they certainly can.
Of course being taken prisoner might be the
worst of various scenarios, but it is why
a stealthy escape pod or lifeboat isn’t
really needed, if they’ve got a hundred
rail guns and tracking systems locked on your
ship they aren’t going to miss a stealthy
little pod because that’s exactly what enemy
counterfire in the form of stealthy little
missile and torpedoes is going to look like,
whereas a clearly visible pod helps friend
or foe rescue you and be able to easily track
you so they don’t have to worry you’re
a missile.
If your enemy doesn’t take prisoners, or
doesn’t return them in good condition, so
to speak, then you shouldn’t be wasting
space and mass on lifepods that could be spent
on more armor and bigger guns.
That way you improve the odds your enemy is
relying on your sense of honor and mercy not
the other way around.
Especially as they might not have any.
Also, given the technologies we’ve been
discussing, your lifepod basically amounts
to a convenient shipping box they can pick
up and then scan your brain for everything
it has or dump you’re revived mind into
the Matrix, or a virtual nightmare that makes
a torture chamber look like a vacation resort.
Instead you stay on your ship, no matter how
damaged, because it is not drifting through
space waiting to explode at any moment and
on fire.
Anything actually capable of exploding is
a potential power source too, whereas generally
speaking things which make power aren’t
really prone to explode.
That’s more of a notion of old steam engines
blowing or early nuclear reactors melting
down.
We will leave a caveat that a ship running
on antimatter could explode if containment
was lost but that’s something that should
vaporize you instantly with no warning or
reaction time if it happens.
You’re not going to have containment slowly
break down.
And it is your power source and it is a very
easy one to tap if you’ve got safe storage
for it, so you’re not losing power to it
unless you’ve run out of the stuff.
Your magnets contain the antimatter by having
electricity flow through them, and you leak
antimatter out of those to generate power,
so it's fairly straightforward design.
Also, it's critical to always remember that
when it comes to interstellar spaceships,
the energy needed to move you up to and down
from those kinds of speeds dwarfs the amounts
of energy you need to run life support, even
on slow boat arkships.
Unless you’re going less than 1% of light
speed on a ship trying to keep a whole O’Neill
Cylinder lit for thousands of years, you didn’t
need as much energy to run life support as
to get up to speed.
That generally applies to interplanetary speeds
too, they’re smaller but the trip durations
are too.
And when it comes to very core life support
like recycling air and water and keeping the
heat going, bigger ships are better for this.
I know on the show they’ll have the Enterprise
lose power to life support and within minutes
no one can breath or they’re freezing to
death but on a ship that big they should have
days before there’s a noticeable drop in
temperature or a dangerous uptick in CO2 levels.
So the key to good ship design is making sure
you have backup power sources that are likely
to still be accessible and usable if something
blows up and which are scattered about so
as to make them hard for a single source of
damage or sabotage to get.
You get a design philosophy of making sure
lots of stuff has batteries and a protocol
for keeping them fully charged and compatible
with each other.
You definitely don’t do like they did in
Star Trek Voyager and have a holodeck power
supply that’s not compatible with the rest
of the ship, which is a great example of lazy
writing when you want to have food rationing,
remove replicators from play, and still have
side episodes on the holodeck.
Your other design philosophy becomes making
your big dumb heavy mass useful stuff.
When it comes to radiation shielding, for
example, there’s no particular reasons sheets
of metal couldn’t be made of spare parts
or feedstock for your printers or even batteries
instead of just dumb metal.
Bulletproof batteries as components of armor
has been discussed a lot in speculation for
combat body armor or exoskeletons, and this
general dual-role is always advantageous whenever
you need to keep your kit or cargo light,
even when the thing in question might not
be optimal for either role because twice as
much of it does both jobs better.
This option is better when cost is less important
than mass and when operations are far from
resupply.
It also works best when the multiple roles
are either freebies or likely to be done.
So having the hubcaps of your car built to
be used as emergency shovels or expandable
fuel drums sounds neat but it's hard to imagine
you would need that function very often and
it's likely to make for an expensive hubcap
that doesn’t do its hubcapping job as well.
Alternatively it’s pretty normal for soldiers
to replace their shoelaces with 550 parachute
cord or wrap it around the hilts of knives,
or at least it was when I was in the Army,
because it does both of those jobs well and
now you’ve got a nice, cheap, sturdy rope
able to hold 550 pounds on it and it made
for nice bootlaces and wrappings for tools.
Since you often have to carry all your gear
with you, and you want as many tools and options
as possible, anything that’s light or multi-use
is really nice, even if it’s not really
very good for a given use, since it will get
the job done with a little extra skill or
effort.
A multi-tool in your kit is great, so is Swiss
Army Knife, but a workshop with those individual
tools in large non-compact form is much better,
just not very mobile.
In this same vein of thought, you probably
try to aim to make sure that your packaging
for things is easily recyclable into feedstock
for your printers or forges.
Picking water bottles that can be converted
into airtight hull patches probably isn’t
worth paying ten times as much or using a
substance that’s much heavier or worse at
being a water bottle, but hunting for those
occasions where a dual or multi-use is viable
is what will be an important trait for a ship’s
quartermaster or the consultants or companies
designing loadouts or making gear back on
Earth.
Now that takes us to ship’s crashing on
Earth and of course we need to start by pointing
out that this is a strange case.
We don’t really expect spaceships to land
on planets themselves, though crashing on
a planet might be another story.
That’s also assuming the modern conditions
of spaceflight, and future ships might be
configured for air and space.
Or they might be highly modular and able to
restructure.
Truly, that’s quite plausible.
In the vacuum, aerodynamic shaping isn’t
very important, but those are long journeys
and plenty of time to reconfigure a ship.
Indeed a shuttle able to alter form while
in flight to optimize based on current speed
and air conditions, with something like memory
metal or parallel options, would be invaluable
to a good spaceplane.
Note that an actual saucer shape like the
classic UFO is not a good vehicle for air
travel, and we’re including it today in
discussion because flying saucers and crashes
are so often central to discussions of crashed
spaceships.
Now the saucer is not a great shape with modern
flight in mind but it would not be unfair
to rebut that something like anti-gravity
technology or abundant fuel with ultra-high
exhaust velocities or which circumvented the
rocket equation can get around this shape
issue.
Indeed we were talking about how to do that
last week when we were contemplating if you
could own your own personal spaceship.
Anti-grav or superior fuels basically lets
you casually drop through an atmosphere rather
than have to squeeze every drop of fuel for
all it can offer and break using air drag.
We don’t have these so we have to squeeze
every penny, but this is exactly what any
advanced civilization would want for its spaceships
and aircraft, and they would be researching
it if they had any plausible scientific leads
to those technologies or materials.
So if it is possible they would probably have
it.
Also, if your ship is crashing into a planet,
it might be an unplanned trip entirely, and
a saucer shape is fine for a void-craft not
planning to be in the air much.
There’s a lot of pros and cons to many different
shapes for vehicles, saucers are not generally
considered great candidates but often it would
depend on the situation.
For instance a ring is a great shape for a
ship for crew accommodations, to spin it for
artificial gravity, and that becomes a saucer
if you cover the empty middle and use it for
lower gravity facilities and storage.
And while spin-gravity implies you haven’t
got anti-gravity technology, since you’d
be using gravity plating in the ship or something
like that, it’s worth noting that such technologies
probably burn energy, while spinning a ship
doesn’t, once it's going.
Just because a civilization can manipulate
gravity doesn't mean they do it everywhere,
same as we didn’t stop using windows for
lighting just because we invented candles
and lightbulbs.
That’s a thing to remember when discussing
topics like these, and futurism in general,
sometimes a technology utterly eliminates
a problem, other times it might seem like
it would but then doesn’t.
Televisions are now comparable in price to
windows for instance, but we don’t do a
lot of TV-window swap in houses and folks
often thought we would in older scifi, same
as TV also didn’t get rid of radio or books.
On a spaceship though, windows might be rarities,
in favor of the main viewer approach we saw
on the bridges of Star Trek vessels.
Anyway, when it comes to a ship landing or
crashing, whether or not it survives atmospheric
entry is all about how good their metals and
controls are.
Folks talk about ships burning up as they
fall from orbit and being shattered if they
hit, but that’s assuming it's not a super-material,
and if your civilizations had those then that’s
probably what your ship hull is made from.
And it need not be that super of a material
either.
It's weird to imagine something that better
resembles the child of a skyscraper and mountain
than an airplane surviving a plummet from
orbit but that is not actually that weird.
Indeed most of the destruction is from decelerating
from orbital speed, not the drop itself, which
presumably ends with the object impacting
at what we call terminal velocity.
Which is badly named as folks assuming it
has to do with dying – which admittedly
often would be the case for anyone hitting
the ground at terminal speed – but rather
is just the maximum speed a given shape can
have for a given gravity and atmosphere, and
its own weight.
Where the air drag counters the pull of gravity,
as air drag increases sharply with speed.
One minor caveat on that though, not only
does an object have to slow down if its moving
at orbital speed – rather than just hovering
above the planet as sci fi spaceships often
do – but there does need to be enough air
in its path to slow it, which means an actual
solid mountain dropping on the planet is not
going to be cushioned much by the air let
alone slowed from orbital speeds – as is
the case with big asteroids.
Alternatively almost anything hollow like
a ship will be, but if one is big enough,
like a superstar destroyer, that’s should
not be taken for granted.
Regardless, terminal speeds are shape based
and not that high compared to ship speeds,
for instance bullets, which are aerodynamic
and have a high terminal velocity as a result,
often have terminal speeds of 45 to 60 meters
per second, or 100 to 134 miles per hour.
A human in belly flop attitude is generally
about 120 miles per hour and in head-dive
attitude potentially as high as 180 miles
per hour, or 80 meters per second.
You can definitely build something, even with
modern materials, that is going to survive
that, nominally, and it is worth noting that
spaceships are likely to be built with forward
collision in mind.
And if the ship had managed to slow to terminal
speed, we are in the realm where something
can be built tough enough to handle that collision.
We also have to contemplate the option for
drag chutes built from hyperstrong materials,
and the characteristic of a drag chute or
parachute made from something as strong as
graphene can let you get away with enormous
chutes for little mass, or ones with enormous
tensile strength that won’t be shredded
by the force of supersonic air.
Whether or not the crew survives that is a
lot harder to say, but an airbag and seat
belt combination could save you at that collision
speed, and it's not hard to imagine improvements
on that.
I recently rewatched the first episode of
the old “My Favorite Martian” TV show
from the 60s where Ray Walston is playing
a Martian known as “Uncle Martin” to a
local reporter who found his crashed ship
and is helping him try to get what he needs
to repair it.
He had been on Earth as an anthropologist
studying us and in practice you would think
he could just signal Mars especially as they
should be wondering what happened to him but
the thing about an unexpected UFO crashing
on Earth, saucers or whatever, is that we’re
assuming it is an authorized mission.
The joke often goes that it seems weird a
spaceship could cross trillions of kilometers
of space then break down in the last hundred
in our atmosphere, but in practice that’s
pretty plausible.
Coasting through space is certainly the most
likely time for damage as a whole, because
it is long period, but it also gives you lots
of time to fix things, and it is only more
likely because there’s so much more of it.
Slamming on the breaks in a thick atmosphere
is way more likely, meter for meter, to damage
your ship.
And that’s assuming it was in good shape.
Something we’ve often discussed in other
episodes is that the normal reasons given
for why a UFO came to Earth tend not to work
out well on contemplation.
As I like to say, if you want to collect human
DNA, you don’t abduct people, you abduct
a vending machine or postbox and take DNA
off the coins and letters instead.
Reasons that tend to make more sense are hard
but some examples we’ve come up with are
smugglers sneaking onto planets to steal unique
trade items for a collector’s market.
Which means they get down here and raid museums
or flea markets or comic book stores or garbage
heaps for memorabilia and they are probably
rather marginal operations who can’t really
expect to get repairs at the local alien navy
base.
Your Han Solo and Chewbacca sort of situation,
but they’re here to get mint-condition collectible
action figures of Han and Chewie to sell to
aliens who prize primitive world collectibles
before they’ve made contact with the wider
galaxy.
And they’re not getting shot at by anyone
because the quarantine isn’t that tight,
you get a fine and jail time if they catch
you and the sales are all black market too
so they want you for tax evasion, but unless
their monitors start picking up blatant violations
like taking over Earth or dancing around in
front of news crews in Times Square, they’re
not falling over themselves to hunt you down.
Obviously a case better suited for story than
fact, but it is a more logically plausible
reason for why an alien ship might crash on
Earth.
Their ship is poorly maintained and they’re
dodging patrols and scans, albeit half-hearted
ones that might be okay with a little bribery,
and they cut corners once too often and the
ship slams into the ground, also known as
lithobraking.
But they’re a high-tech species so even
though their ship is a relative hunk of garbage
they still have their civilizations apex tech
all over, same as some rust bucket car from
the 1980s still has the owner’s smartphone
and Bluetooth radio in it.
And I imagine in that case that the norm is
going to be a fairly impressive 3D printer,
though that might be up on the mothership
and your shuttle to the planet hasn’t got
one.
But then that ship probably has a drone that
you could order to come bring you one.
In the event of being a crashed alien on a
low-tech planet though, odds are pretty decent
you’re not entirely flesh and blood and
if you’ve been smuggling on that planet
then it's very likely you do it in some android
body designed to look human, or maybe a dog.
Your ship also probably does not have a cloaking
field to make it look like a police box, or
something locally mundane, but it wouldn’t
exactly be strange to have camo netting on
your ship or some sort of chameleon hull either.
Crashes in terms of air-going vehicles also
aren’t quick either, you’ve got minutes
worth of plummeting and failures before you
hit to make sure you’re strapped in and
your airbag is active.
Though an ejection seat is plausible too.
By default of course these aren’t supposed
to be subtle, a crashed vehicle wants to be
highly visible to get attention and help,
and a crashed spaceship ought to be ultra-visible,
or at least the mushroom cloud erupting around
it would be, but in a case like this stealthy
crashes are reasonable.
I could imagine a flying saucer for instance
was actually an ejection pod on a bigger spaceship
or shuttle and the ship itself took the crash
or detonated in a way to make it look like
an asteroid while the escape pod tried for
a stealthy landing, given the time and distance
involved this might not be at the same time
either.
Not that a saucer is a great shape for that
purpose but it's not terrible, and for the
record I’m an ultra-skeptic on aliens visiting
Earth because I don’t think there are any
in this galaxy.
I tend to take for granted, if they existed
and could visit they would, and we wouldn’t
need to debate if they had, any more than
we need to debate the existence of any foreign
nation on this planet for instance.
And if such a ship were recoverable in any
way, even if it was a garbage scow by their
civilization’s standards, that thing would
still be worth a hundreds times its weight
in gold and back-engineering its technology
would be too important and too useful to waste
time on secrecy, in my opinion.
It might make for good stories or alien theories
but it's a bad strategy to me.
So, to me that’s a reasonable case, if a
crashed ship survived we would find it a gold
mine and there’s a good chance it would
survive…
Now, as to what an alien who crashed here
and escaped their ship would do, stranded
on a primitive world without their ship or
gear, that’s another topic for another time.
One thing we didn’t really touch on today
was all the vectors that damage might come
from and some are less obvious like someone
hacking your control systems or doing a ransomware
strike on your navigation data.
It’s always hard to imagine what the internet
will look like in the future or in a multi-planet
civilization but I can’t imagine it being
any less intertwined into our existence than
nowadays and the internet and digital world
are now a sphere of our existence the same
as the ground we walk on or the atmosphere
we breathe.
And Security inside it is every bit as important
as physical security.
That’s where a virtual private network,
or VPN, like NordVPN can help, so that every
random webpage you visit, and every hacker
who visits them, doesn’t know your IP address
and other data, and use them to hurt you.
Encrypting your personal traffic makes it
harder for others to spy on or attack you,
just like having curtains on your windows
and locks on your door.
NordVPN makes it easy to encrypt your data
anywhere and send it through any of their
5400 servers in 59 different countries.
You can even double route your data through
two servers for extra encryption, and there
is an automatic kill switch to protect you
in case the connection drops.
NordVPN is also easy to use, you can turn
it on with 1-click or even automatically,
it works with on up to 6 devices and on different
platforms like Windows, Android, iOS, macOS,
Linux, and even your Android TV.
No more bandwidth throttling, no more geo-restrictions
on shopping or which videos and games you
can play based on location, and NordVPN’s
Threat Protection upgrade offers an enhanced
layer of protection against malware, intrusive
ads and web trackers.
You can check out their website to learn all
the benefits NordVPN offers, just go to NordVPN.com/isaacarthur
to get a 2-year plan plus 4 additional months
with a HUGE discount.
It’s risk-free with Nord’s 30-day money-back
guarantee!
Incidentally someone asked me recently if
I’d consider doing more current events material
for spaceships, what’s going on and what
more near term ship innovations were on the
radar, and I think we might do a deeper dive
into upcoming spaceship technologies of the
next couple decades, but for current events,
there’s already a lot of great space channels
like Marcus House, Scott Manley, Launchpad
Astronomy, or Everyday Astronaut.
And if you’ve never seen any of their episodes,
they've all got amazing catalogs of shows,
and make sure to give them a like and subscribe
while you’re at it.
Speaking of episodes, today is an example
of an episode that was inspired by another
one and which I started writing a follow up
to almost as soon as I finished writing and
recording this one, and we’ll be contemplating
the case of being stranded on an alien world,
or 4 different cases of it, in our Scifi Sunday
episode on November 13th.
Before we get to November though, we have
our livestream Q&A coming up this Sunday,
October 30th, at 4pm Eastern Time, and I hope
you’ll join me and my wife and cohost Sarah
as we answer your questions from the chat
live.
Next week though we’ll start November off
by looking at how we might extend our Sun’s
lifespan by refueling our Sun so it can continue
for many billions or even trillions of more
years, then the week after that we’ll return
to a more modern timeframe as we contemplate
what automated economies will really look
like and how that might affect unemployment.
As always, if you want alerts when those and
other episodes come out, don’t forget to
subscribe to the channel and hit the notifications
bell.
And if you enjoyed today’s episode, and
would like help support future episodes, visit
our website, or check out the links in the
episode description, for ways to support the
show or for our forums for discussing all
these awesome topics and many more.
You can also try out our audio-only versions
available on itunes, spotify, audible, amazon
music, soundcloud, and many more, or get our
extended editions and exclusive episodes on
Nebula.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
thanks for giving this show another great
year!
