This episode is brought to you by Skillshare
As we celebrate one more trip around our star,
we can look forward to traveling to many new
stars.
As we wrap up the year 2020 we are also wrapping
up our Becoming an Interplanetary Species
Series with this epilogue on Becoming an Interstellar
Species.
This is tricky for more reasons than just
the difficulty of traveling to distant stars
and making homes under alien suns, because
to become an interstellar species would also
imply you were just one species, and that’s
part of the problem.
Interstellar distances are so immense that
even objects which could cross our whole world
in a second takes years to get to the nearest
star, and our fastest man made object would
still need longer than all of recorded history
to reach that star.
Indeed our galaxy alone is so immense that
even signals, let alone spaceships, need as
long to cross the galaxy as modern humanity
has been around.
Even ignoring things like genetic engineering,
which might play a big role in humanity settling
new worlds, simple exposure to radically more
diverse environments than we see on Earth
would presumably cause species diversity faster
than ships could settle our galaxy even if
traveling at a good fraction of light speed,
while at the speeds of our fastest modern
spacecraft, an effort to colonize the galaxy
would take more like a billion years, and
a billion years is considerably more time
than it took for some common ancestor to diverge
into humans, cats, dogs, and dinosaurs.
So we’ll be asking how we can make these
trips faster, how we can make them economically,
and how we can stay unified as a species,
or if we even can or should want to.
As we move out of 2020 into 2021, we’ll
ask how we can visit our first neighboring
stars by 2121, and how we can settle the galaxy
by 202020, 200,000 years from now.
We will obviously need something far better
than simple chemical rockets like we use nowadays
to achieve that timeline, but we do have the
capability to colonize new star systems that
way if it came down to it.
This is the key notion of what is called a
“Generation Ship”, something we examined
in detail in our Generation Ships Series,
and it relies on the notion of essentially
building a small mobile planet, akin to the
O’Neill Cylinders we discussed as orbital
settlements throughout this series.
We have nuclear-powered ship designs that
while never built do work on very well grounded
principals – see our episode the Nuclear
Option for details – and which depending
on design and hurdles we might encounter when
building and deploying them offer travel speeds
of around 1% of light speed, possibly a bit
slower, maybe a bit faster, but cutting trips
to neighboring stars down to centuries rather
than tens of millennia.
Those same principals could be used to artificially
light, heat, and power the generation ship
and its people and ecology for the duration
of the trip.
This is technology we do already have, though
again would need prototyping.
Another option often considered though is
to put people to sleep or in stasis or on
ice, and we looked at that scenario in our
Sleeper Ships episode and will discuss freezing
people, or entire civilizations, in a couple
weeks.
That is one way you can ensure its modern
humans settling every world at least, as they
would experience no evolution while frozen
for the trip, but the key problem isn’t
really a problem, namely that the technologies
you need in order to restore people you’ve
frozen – and killed – are the same sorts
of technologies that permit radical life extension
as well as radical automation.
If you have little robots that can fix cells
damaged by freezing, you have little robots
that can fix cells damaged by aging, little
robots that can fix machines on your ship,
and little robots that can build machines
and organisms from blueprints on other worlds.
Similarly, if you have genetic engineering
to change people to more easily adapt to a
world, you have the technology to keep people
at their current biology too.
Indeed we can already do that.
We can make digital copies of DNA, we can
print DNA, albeit very slowly, and we can
implant a printed strand of DNA into an egg,
so our interstellar arks do not need to carry
tens of thousands of living copies of a given
organism to avoid genetic bottlenecking or
even frozen fertilized embryos.
If it's important enough to a civilization,
even with modern technology we can get humanity
to each world we settle with our modern DNA
and keep it that way, if the folks on each
of those worlds choose to.
That strikes me as unlikely, and of course
the same DNA or close enough to count as a
single species isn’t helping with language
and culture drift.
This is the origin of our joke on this Show
that if we don’t find aliens in the galaxy,
all we need to do is wait a little while and
they’ll be around every star.
Indeed only if we can achieve significant
trade between neighboring stars is there any
real chance that the folks living in your
neighboring system would be any more like
you than those clear across the galaxy.
We looked at Interstellar Trade recently and
it does seem possible, and we have also looked
at a variety of ship propulsion concepts ranging
from the near term to the really advanced
or enormous, everything from using anti-matter
or black holes to run ships up to moving entire
solar systems or even galaxies.
But what is likely to be our first interstellar
ship, and when?
A few minutes ago I said we’d ask how to
get to our neighboring stars by 2121, and
if that’s the case, given that the nearest
is over 4 light years away, and we have not
funded let alone started building an interstellar
ship, the most optimistic production timeline
would require traveling at 5% of light speed
to get a ship there by 2121.
This is a velocity that might be reachable
by fission fragment or pulsed nuclear propulsion
– shooting nukes out the back of the ship
to ride the explosion – and should be achievable
by a fusion drive if we ever get fusion working.
Indeed, given that the joke about fusion development
always hinges on it being 20 years off, were
that to be true, commercial fusion by 2140,
we probably could get a ship built within
a decade and then you only need to get to
6% of light speed to reach Proxima Centauri
in the 70 years remaining.
Fusion is great for interplanetary travel,
it makes the whole process vastly cheaper
and easier, in truth so does fission though
fusion would be better in almost every respect
and by a wide margin.
A fully developed solar economy is much easier
to reach with the nuclear options, but neither
truly permits spaceships that can reach the
nearest star in a mere generation.
At least not directly.
We might do much better with light pushing
on our spaceships, and the sun is an abundant
source of light from its own internal fusion.
We often talk on the show about using focused
light or lasers to push ships up to high speeds,
and for slowing them down too, though that
is harder especially in an uncolonized new
star system.
This offers near-light speed travel though
does not help with the interstellar debris
and collision issue much, and that requires
some explaining.
Space is pretty empty, interstellar space
even more so, but not so empty you can expect
to safely fly several trillion miles or kilometers
without encountering something the size of
a piece of gravel.
In and of itself that pebble is just a pebble,
probably containing no more energy than a
bullet, but kinetic energy and damage from
impacts has to do with relative speeds when
colliding and there’s a lot of energy involved
in those kinds of speeds we contemplate for
interstellar travel.
Now I’ve heard people say that even hitting
an atom would destroy a ship and that’s
hyperbole.
We routinely get hit by relativistic atoms
– relativistic meaning moving at a decent
fraction of light speed.
It's not healthy but more in the way radiation
isn’t healthy and even fairly thin shielding
protects you from that, and the concern is
about being hit by trillions of those per
person, not one per ship.
On the other hand, cosmic dust grains vary
in mass a lot, the ones hitting Earth range
from 10^-16 to 10^-4 Kilograms, a variation
of a trillion fold, and hitting the latter
kind would be on an order of a small nuke
at near light speeds, while the smaller kind
carries less energy than a mundane object
we might throw, like a baseball, and those
smaller dust grains are vastly more common.
Incidentally a dust grain massing 10^-16 kilograms,
small as that sounds, still contains billions
of atoms.
The faster you go the more frequently you
collide with objects, or need to detect and
avoid or destroy them, and the more energy
it takes to reach that speed, such that there
is likely to be a natural optimal speed way
lower than light speed that ships move at
between stars.
That may vary based on many factors, including
the mission’s purpose and priority, but
isn’t likely to be over half light speed
and may be as low as 1%.
At that speed you have to be hitting rocks
bigger than humans could comfortably lift
to be getting nuked by the collisions and
you have a lot more time to dodge, and much
bigger targets to detect and hit if you can’t.
But I would guess that it would be collision
avoidance and management that represent the
real limits on space travel speeds, not energy
or fuel, for the future.
One thing often ignored in science fiction
where faster than light travel is ubiquitous
is that every pebble you hit, every dust grain,
at those speeds would actually have infinite
energy.
That’s on top of other issues common with
faster than light travel, like having a black
hole behind you and a white hole in front,
or causing time travel paradoxes just from
flipping the engine on, and on generally requiring
exotic matter that probably cannot exist in
nature.
So we have a handful of plausible near term
drive methods for interstellar spaceships
that won’t take whole historical epochs
to visit nearby systems.
Fission, Fusion, Micro-Black holes, Anti-Matter,
and Focused Light Pushing on Solar Sails,
and basically that list is slowest to fastest.
The light beaming trick, be it visible light
or other spectra, has the speed advantage
because it doesn’t require carrying all
your fuel, so your speed with it depends on
how big a beam you can send, how long you
can keep it focused and on target, how much
energy your ship can handle without melting,
and how well your ship can handle space debris
and collision issues.
Micro-Black Holes and Antimatter permit much
easier ship control and braking if you can
do either but both are a lot more high tech
and require some big assumptions.
See our Episodes on Antimatter Factories or
Black Hole Ships for further discussion.
Laser propulsion on the other hand we can
do right now, it's lower tech than fusion
in that regard, since we don’t have controlled
fusion.
Emphasis on ‘controlled’ though, we have
had the ability to do fusion since even before
we invented fusion bombs in the 1950s, a hydrogen
bomb is a fusion device, and it really is
less crazy than it sounds to make a fusion
propelled ship driven by hydrogen bombs.
Almost all these ships have to be pretty big
though, whether they are manned or not.
You can make a flyby probe designed to race
through a star system at near light speeds
that you shoved up to those speeds with a
laser, but when we’re talking about stopping
the dynamics change a lot.
So our first interstellar ship is likely to
be an unmanned probe pushed by light, note
that I’m not including some of our interplanetary
probes that have left our solar system already,
they will take tens of thousands of years
to get anywhere, will have broken by then,
and I’d actually bet they won’t ever arrive
at other systems.
The final destination of Voyager 1 is probably
a museum, someone is likely to pick it up
and either bring it home or to some colony,
and I’d say there’s a pretty good chance
it will be in the Smithsonian before we have
an interstellar colony with a museum.
Or not, interstellar arks need to be big things,
especially if you’re not using various post-biological
approaches like growing your colonists on
site from databases.
Such being the case you probably would have
museums on those ships.
We often picture those as having thousands
of people and a voyage of a century or more,
and if you look at towns in that age and population
size, like my hometown of Geneva, many do
have museums, as mine does for instance.
Bit of a tangent but it's worth remembering
that these colony ships of the generation
ship variety will generally develop pretty
complex civilizations onboard even before
they actually arrive and found a colony.
What’s the fastest way to get a human colony
going though?
With the technology that is reasonably plausible
anyway?
We talk a lot about getting giant generation
ships to other stars and that tends to be
the preference because it works best for modern
humans, but if our goal is to get humans established
in other solar systems fastest, how could
we do it?
Two pivotal terms there are “Fastest”
and “Human”, and part of why we are talking
about becoming an Interplanetary Species.
That term human can be real ambiguous and
how we define it matters a lot if we’re
contemplating fastest methods.
More than just for who gets that first colony
in and on what date too.
In general whatever we do first has better
odds of being what we do most.
I don’t mean this in a militant sense though,
as we’ve discussed before, you can not ‘beat
everyone to the punch’ with something like
self-replicating spacecraft trying to claim
all the cosmos.
Any ship you send out has to slow down to
colonize, and for ships that have onboard
fuel supplies, two identical ones, one meant
to slow down and one not meant to reach maximum
speed, the latter can move twice as fast.
You need to be able to slow down to colonize
something, you do not need to slow down to
ram something, quite to the contrary you do
more damage by speeding up.
So anything obeying the rocket equation, whether
the fuel is h-bombs, fusion drives, antimatter,
or a portable black hole, can be easily detected
on launch and caught up to and destroyed by
a pursuing craft using the same propulsion
design, or several smaller ones.
There is no plausible scenario for escape,
as every time you light your engines up for
a course corrections you become visible again
and very much so, and your trajectory is easily
calculated.
The pursuit ships will always have an edge
in maneuverability as well as detectability
too, since their drives point away from you
but yours points back toward them and toward
the homeworld’s detection arrays too.
Laser pushing avoids the rocket fuel issue
but actually results in you being more detectable,
lower in maneuverability, and they can also
attack your pushing beams built here at home,
or just block them and use that energy instead,
such as for pushing their own interceptors
after you.
Such being the case you can have an interstellar
colonization race, but there has to be an
element of non-hostility involved because
if you try to grab everything for yourself
everyone else can dogpile you very easily
and wreck your ships, even with years of headstart.
There’s also plenty to choose from and divide
up too.
The nearest star may be over 4 light years
away but space is three dimensional, there’s
over a thousand stars within a volume ten
times wider than that and over a million in
an area 100 times wider, and even that is
a volume that would barely qualify as a single
tiny closet in the great city of the galaxy.
So if you try to seize them all, unless you
have such an advantage you could conquer our
system first anyway, you will lose, and there’s
so many out there that there’s no real shortage.
Who gets them then is less an issue than how
they get them.
Folks willing to send their minds by hard
drive to be inserted into an android body
on the other side can get there faster, for
instance.
So can an artificial intelligence, though
that might be a redundant statement to many
people.
But this doesn’t mean their civilization
is colonizing by sending digital people everywhere,
they don’t really need to.
You can send the great big generation ships
carrying people, regular people, almost as
fast as other follow up ships carrying less
organic materials.
Same top speed for the ship, but generation
ships have to accelerate pretty slowly, potentially
needing several years to get up to cruising
speed and back down, while something with
no organic components can probably get to
speed in mere days or weeks.
For voyages of thousands of light years that
means little but to colonize a neighboring
system it means a lot.
Now the concept of a von Neumann probe, a
computer probe that arrives in systems and
replicates, is a popular one, but how intelligent
it is depends less on your available technology
and more on your confidence in it not turning
crazy or traitor on you.
That can be an AI you’ve rigorously programmed
or an uploaded human mind or one heavy on
cyborg components and mind augmentation, and
we see examples of that in science fiction,
such as Dennis E. Taylor’s Bobiverse series
or Dust’s Chrysalis.
For that first interstellar colony, we need
a lot of robotic automation to build the ship
and laser pushing system, and we’ll need
it on the other end too, so folks are likely
to already be fairly comfortable with simple
AI.
However, again for that first set of colonies
I can’t see us trusting an entirely artificial
intelligence.
On the other hand a digitized human selected
for their devotion to the project and reliability,
or someone with a lot of modifications to
handle large accelerations and oversee robot
drones probably will be more acceptable.
The key thing is that the fastest way to another
system right now is the laser pushing system
but there’s nothing to slow you down on
the other side, and the best way to slow is
to engage in a literal crash project like
we looked at in Exodus Fleet, where some vanguard
chases forward of your fleet on a sun dive
vector with a solar sail, being slowed some
by the plummet but using the energy it receives
to power a laser beam backwards, which hits
another vanguard, who is slowed more, who
does it to another and so on until you can
actually get a stationary laser array around
that sun to slow your fleet.
That might work with sub-intelligent AI, it’s
not that complex a process, but it works best
if it’s being controlled by something intelligent
who’s reasonably close, not light months
behind.
It probably does not require human level intelligence,
either way, but might benefit from it.
Thing is, this system vanguard controller
can be vanguard for a lot of things, because
a great big mirror and transmission arrays
also is great for getting signals from home,
not just slowing incoming spaceships, and
it’s also a great power supply for early
resource harvesting robots.
Regardless of how you colonize, the vanguard
is pretty much always going to be a robot
with some construction capacity and some intelligence,
and probably as little of the latter as needed
unless the vanguard is actually an intelligence,
or intelligences, we’d classify as regular
old colonists.
If your civilization considers a human level
AI a person, then sending one as your vanguard
probe is not sending an unmanned probe, just
one lacking biology.
From there they can slow incoming ark ships
down, whether they’re generation ships or
carrying frozen people.
Or they could be receiving ships full of harddrives
with intelligence on them or building big
dishes for receiving transmitted minds, the
former process is slower but maybe much cheaper
and safer.
Or they might be 3D printing equipment, including
basic biology.
We more or less have the technology to clone
humans and raise them in vats, or bags, in
modern times, we don’t do it though for
ethical concerns so it's hard to say what
sort of challenges growing a bunch of colonists
in tanks might have, but it should be doable
too.
It might be easier to do this from entirely
frozen samples of human biological material,
same for other flora and fauna, but we can
print DNA and a basic human cell, or other
cell, isn’t beyond the bounds of doable
either especially given that you already have
self-replicating machines to be even contemplating
this as a colonization method.
The upside is that you can pretty much pick
your methods because none has a vast advantage
over the others.
A generation ship kilometers wide and long
might seem far harder than a tiny shuttle
containing harddrives and self-replicating
robots but the key component there was ‘self-replicating
robots’.
If you are launching a lot of robots to systems
to arrive and replicate more of themselves
to build your colony, then send out copies
to other systems, you can just easily make
the first stop some uninhabited asteroid in
your own system and have it build a big ship.
It will take vastly more energy to get it
moving and stopped at the other side but it’s
a one time investment either way, and an uninhabited
star system has tons of energy being wasted
already, so it only matters if you’re short
of it in your home system.
And of course you’re not in early colonization
periods since you can just tell those little
robots to build power collectors, you're many
millennia away from having enough people in
your home system to be worried about power
consumption by spaceships, as we looked at
recently in Interstellar Trade.
In such a scenario though, whether it is in
the year 2121 or the years 3131, your interstellar
ships are arriving at new systems after your
own home star systems has started down the
path to being a Kardashev-2 Civilization,
working to being a Dyson Swarm, because that
exact same technology for colonizing those
systems lets you mass produce cheap solar
collectors here too and you’d want them
for sending out your ships initially.
See last week’s episode on Kardashev-2 Civilizations
for more discussion of that notion, but the
critical idea is that you are already on your
way to being a K-2 civilization here before
your first colony ships arrive.
And there is no reason that couldn’t happen
in the next century.
It's weird to think things might move that
fast, especially after all the long delays
getting to Mars or even setting up a Moon
Base, fifty years and counting since we first
traveled to the Moon and not much less since
we last went there, but that is often the
nature of growth and expansion.
Once the tipping point is hit, the avalanche
begins, before that you crawl.
I don’t think we will have our first interstellar
colony founded by 2121, but we well might
have ships headed out by then, and the weird
thing is that it's not much harder to send
those ships out than to colonize any of the
planets in our own solar system, plus as soon
as we do have those moon and asteroid bases
and orbital settlements, we have all the ingredients
needed for interstellar travel.
All those automated constructors, power satellites
and mirrors, and giant orbital settlements
are easily modified and repurposed to create
our interstellar infrastructure.
In many ways, the jump from an Interplanetary
Species to an Interstellar One is far shorter
than our jump to becoming an Interplanetary
Species.
So Becoming an Interstellar Species will likely
follow on within the same century we become
an Interplanetary one.
At least the launch will, there’s no getting
around the timelines.
Whether you can only get those ships up to
a few percent of light speed or to within
a few percent of light speed is the difference
between colonizing our galaxy in a couple
hundred thousand years or several million,
but it still requires timelines beyond any
prior human endeavor.
When you consider though that there are hundreds
of billions of star systems out there, we
are likely to be colonizing hundreds if not
hundreds of thousands every single year once
we get rolling.
It is very likely we could send colony ships
out at half of light speed or better, especially
if most of those ships were originating from
this solar system and making the lion’s
share of the journey through regions of space
already colonized and with the travel infrastructure
in place.
In that case we may well have managed to settle
every single star in the galaxy by 202020,
two hundred thousand years from now.
That just leaves the question of if it is
worth doing and if most people will think
it is.
One key point to understand is that it doesn’t
require any sort of unity or consensus, anymore
than early human tribes spreading around our
planet did.
So in that regard it doesn’t matter if most
people’s answer to the question of if we
should colonize other worlds is indifference.
As technology improves it gets easier and
easier to do so and requires less agreement
and less hardship to the civilization to invest
in the effort.
But it is an investment, the gains of becoming
an Interplanetary Species are huge and local,
those on Earth will directly benefit from
it enormously, and migration around the solar
system will be relatively easy.
This is less so for interstellar travel but
as we discussed today, that next jump is less
difficult, if far more time consuming overall.
2020 has been a rough year, and not one that
encourages us to look to the stars with optimism,
but victory is far closer to hand than most
would think, and if there’s one thing this
year has proven, it’s that we’re a tough
species and we don’t give up easily.
They say that “the Sky is the Limit”,
but it doesn’t have to be, indeed it’s
just the gateway to limitless opportunities.
Happy New Year!
So that wraps us up for 2020 but we have 2021
just ahead and we’ll get to our upcoming
schedule along with some end year announcements
and thoughts in just a moment.
First, though, one thing 2020 has shown us
all is the importance of being able to function
online, and that’s everything from socializing
to working and learning.
It’s also taught us the importance of flexibility,
and a good contingency plan you can have in
place is to have a hobby or two you can enjoy
that might be a way to earn money.
We talk a lot about the future of humanity
here, but we all have our own individual futures
and one way to be a lot more secure and happy
in yours is to have some hobbies you enjoy
that can potentially be turned into your new
career or business.
A lot of folks are busy making their New Year’s
resolutions up and one I’d strongly advise
is to choose to find some hobby you think
you would enjoy that could also serve as that
fallback job, side income, or dream business
of working for yourself at something you love,
which I can testify to as a dream well worth
pursuing.
If you’re looking for a place to find hobbies
that have potential financial rewards, our
partners over at Skillshare have an amazing
collection of them on many topics and at many
skills levels, but I would suggest trying
out Emma Gannon’s “Discovering Success:
7 Exercises to Uncover your Purpose, Passion
& Path” as a way to help you see what interests
and talents you might already have that might
become your hobby that leads to your dream
job.
Perhaps you’re trying to adjust to working
in a new environment or just looking to pick
up some new skill or hobby, Skillshare has
a course for it, whether you’re a beginner,
a pro, a dabler, or a master, Skillshare has
thousands of classes on a wide variety of
topics from experts to help you learn.
Skillshare is an online learning community
for creatives, where millions come together
to take the next step in their creative journey,
and Members get unlimited access to thousands
of inspiring classes, with hands-on projects
and feedback from a community of millions.
If you’d like to give it a try the first
1,000 people to click the link in my episode
description will get a free trial of Skillshare
premium so you can explore your creativity.
Act now, and start learning, today.
So 2020 has been quite a year, for good and
ill, and most of us will be glad to see the
backside of it.
I tend to feel a little guilty at what a good
year it’s been for me myself.
I mentioned dream jobs earlier and 2020 has
continued to let me do mine, our show has
continued to grow and for those of you who
joined us this year, thank you for coming
on board and I hope you’ll enjoy 2021 too.
In recent years I’ve tended to write the
episodes 2-3 months out, except for the sponsor
reads and schedule at the ends of episode,
which I usually do a week before they air,
so I’m busy drafting our March 11 episode,
Killing Stars, as I write and record our schedule
here on December 21st for our December 31st
episode.
It’s my habit to show the next 2-5 episodes
on the schedule at the end of each episode,
but if you’re curious there is a spreadsheet
I do the full schedule on a few months out
and keep a chronological list of episodes
and links to them in, though episodes more
than a month out are tentative for air date
even when already written, and I will attach
a link for that in the episode’s description
if you want to see the full roster of what’s
planned for next year or go see what you might
have missed from previous years.
As I mentioned it’s been a good year for
me, the show has done well and I got married,
but one word of advice I’d offer folks is
that an awful lot of how your year goes is
about how you choose to look at it, glass
half empty, glass half full, or “yum, I
just drank a tasty drink and still have half
of it left”, or maybe even, “Hey, I have
a cool new drink I can recommend to friends
who might enjoy it and could use something
to improve their mood”.
Cheering other folks up is often good way
to cheer yourself up.
I feel like in the long term 2020 will be
a net positive for humanity, challenge often
brings innovations and solutions and helps
sweep away stagnation, but rising to challenges
is its own reward a lot too.
I ended todays’ episode with the reminder
that the Sky isn’t the Limit, and I think
that’s a good note to end the year on too,
with the reminder that challenges make us
stronger and better, so that the journey is
often as important as the destination.
I often get asked how I can stay so upbeat
about my life, the future, and about humanity
in general, and I would say it helps when
you can think of those challenges as benefits.
I wouldn’t say we should be glad for hardship
and view it as a gift, that might border on
masochism, but taking time to think about
past or current hardships and how they had
silver linings, like giving you a new skill
or bringing you closer to a friend you went
through the crisis with, does help you stay
upbeat, and it is almost always easier to
get through life with that mindset and attitude,
even if just because your stress levels are
lower and folks tend to enjoy your company
more.
Hopefully watching this show and what we see
for the future helps you do that too.
Speaking of the show and the future, this
may be the end of the year but we’re still
here every Thursday Morning, and will be again
this Thursday, January 7, to look at earlier
times and civilizations, indeed the earliest
possible times and civilizations, as we take
a look at Civilizations at the Beginning of
Time.
The week after that we will be looking at
civilizations even colder than ours is this
winter, in Cryonics: Frozen Civilizations.
For Alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to our channel
here on youtube or the audio-only versions
available on iTunes, Spotify, and Soundcloud.
And if you would like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us or become a
sponsor for the show on Patreon.
All those options, along with our social media
forums on facebook, reddit, discord, twitter,
and our website are linked in the episode
description.
Until Next Year, thanks for Watching, and
have a Happy New Year!
