This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
We often discuss terraforming Mars and other
worlds; of giving them oceans and atmospheres,
but for these worlds to keep them, we may
need to give them magnetospheres as well.
So a popular topic in science, science fiction,
and on this show is the terraforming of Mars.
This comes in two forms, para-terraforming,
which is the classic big domes with air and
life inside, and terraforming the world entirely
to have its own atmosphere and seas that can
be naturally retained and support life.
Now, you’ve probably heard theories that
Mars used to have air and seas and lost them
over time, and many culprits are suggested
but the two big ones are the low gravity on
Mars and its lack of a Magnetosphere.
These two, plus some of the others, are not
either-or cases, indeed Mars’ low-gravity
and lack of an magnetosphere are related issues,
and both doubtless contributed to it losing
an atmosphere if it used to have one and more
importantly are problems for giving it an
atmosphere in the future and keeping it on
there.
Needless to say, our big focus for today is
going to be on the Magnetosphere component,
but to explain why Mars needs one, or a substitute,
we need to explain how atmospheres leak into
space, or into the ground for that matter,
most rock is made of oxygen for instance,
and how a magnetosphere helps prevent that
leakage.Into space anyway, though a magnetosphere
generated by a molten core probably helps
with recycling the land and oxygen sequestered
into it by having higher tectonic activity.
We also need to emphasize that terraforming
is a long process of centuries, if not millenia,
but atmospheric leaking is a process over
geological periods.
Earth leaks air, about 30,000 tons a year,
and everything with an atmosphere leaks air.
30,000 tons might sound like a lot, but our
atmosphere is 150 billion times more massive
than that.
It also means if we needed to bring in or
generate all that air to some planet we’re
terraforming in just a thousands years, that’s
5 trillion tons a year, 150,000 times the
rate Earth leaks at, so even leaving just
a fraction of the original air importation
infrastructure or generation infrastructure
in place would allow you to keep up with a
leakage rate from a planet, even if it was
hundreds of times what Earth has for leakage.
In that sort of context, when folks ask if
Mars needs a magnetosphere to keep an atmosphere,
the answer is no.
No civilization able to put an atmosphere
on a planet is going to think it’s an impractical
chore to keep up with the leakage caused by
not having a magnetosphere.
That is something we need to contemplate while
we’re contemplating our options for getting
that magnetosphere or other leakage control
options, because in discussion of the topics,
there’s an impression that they’re dealing
with a life and death immediate issue.
It’s not, this is an issue of slow loss
over millions of years.
So responses or efforts like nuking their
planetary core a billion times in some weird
attempt to spin it up are not likely to be
considered preferable to continued importation
or other loss-prevention methods.
As an example, Venus has an atmosphere much
thicker than Earth’s and only a weak magnetosphere.
Venus loses about 10 trillion-trillion hydrogen
atoms a second…
though that only amounts to about 500 tons
of hydrogen a year.
Earth loses about 200 times that and is further
from the sun, which is what magnetospheres
principally protect us from, of course we
have a lot more hydrogen than Venus does and
it probably used to have more.
So what is the escape mechanism that a magnetosphere
stops or hinders?
First off, there are many ways that incoming
radiation strips atmosphere off worlds, and
many mechanisms for atmospheric escape beyond
that, but the majority of Earth’s loss is
hydrogen that presumably started off as water
vapor in the air.
We leak helium and oxygen too, but at vastly
smaller levels.
This is because particles of gas are no different
than spaceships, they can’t escape Earth
without reaching Earth’s escape velocity,
roughly 11 kilometers or 7 miles per second.
A hydrogen atom is a single proton, whereas
helium is 2 protons and 2 neutrons and oxygen
is 8 of each, 16 times heavier.
It takes a lot less kick to knock hydrogen
up to high speed, and the velocity of particles
randomly floating around our air is generally
influenced by the local temperature and the
mass of that particle, and particle might
be a lone hydrogen atom, or it might be a
molecule, like water, which is 18 times heavier,
or carbon dioxide, which is 44 times heavier.
Hotter is faster, and lighter is faster, going
with the square root of temperature and inverse
square root of mass.
As an example, a carbon dioxide molecule and
a lone hydrogen atom in the same temperature
gas mix, generally will have that hydrogen
atom moving almost 7 times faster, as the
square root of 44 is 6.6, rounding up to 7,
and an oxygen molecule and nitrogen molecule,
the main components of our atmosphere, mass
in at 32 and 28 times heavier than hydrogen,
and will move 5.7 and 5.3 times slower.
If you’re curious, that speed is about 500
meters per second, for oxygen and nitrogen
molecules at about room temperature, and a
lone hydrogen atom would be more like 2500
meters per second.
Now, this is not the actual speed of each
particle, it's what we call the root mean
square speed, and it's more like the peak
of a bell curve of speeds, with some faster
and some slower, and a far smaller outlier
of those going much faster or slower.
Generally, the bigger the particle and thicker
the gas, the tighter that bell curve will
be because it takes so much more to push a
big particle to high speed and as soon as
it gets faster, it's more likely to run into
slower peers and collide, especially in a
thick gas.
So what’s principally going on is that gas
escape is happening from Earth’s upper atmosphere,
the ionosphere, which gets the name from all
the charged particles or ions that have risen
up to the thin top of the atmosphere because
somebody has to and it's generally those lighter
and kicked particles.
That kick is often coming from ultraviolet
light, which a magnetosphere does nothing
to stop.
Now Ultraviolet impacts escape mostly in that
it can break molecular bonds, resulting in
multiple smaller particles, but Ultraviolet
photons are also powerful, as much as 12 eV
or electron volts, normal visual light is
about 2-3, and a hydrogen atom hit by one
gains a decent amount of speed, and up there
in the thin ionosphere, especially its highest
layers, things are so spread out that particles
that are able to move long distances and times
without running into each other, so they can
keep getting hit by photons or extraterrestrial
particles and build up speed, and can potentially
get up to orbital speed, which is well below
escape velocity still but means they’re
staying up there till they hit something else
and that’s very likely to be either particles
moving similarly fast or more photons that
can add speed.
Now, this mechanism – and the one that accounts
for most of Earth’s loss – is called the
Jean’s Escape Mechanism, and we do have
a magnetosphere, a very strong one.
Interestingly you get a higher amount of loss
close to the equator as Earth’s spin adds
to particle velocity in the same way it does
for spaceships, and of course there’s more
light incident on particles there too, and
also solar wind.
Now, what solar wind does is far worse, as
solar wind is principally composed of ultra-hot
ionized hydrogen particles escaping off the
Sun’s surface at hundreds of kilometers
per second, meaning when one of these particles
hits a hydrogen particle from Earth, those
collisions will generally result in both particles
still having more velocity than they need
to escape from Earth, indeed multiple collisions
could occur before that stops being the case.
And more often than not, one of them is emerging
with a vector that doesn’t bring it ramming
back into the planet, which matters as it's
about direction too, a fast rocket aimed at
Earth is not escaping from it, no matter how
fast.
Though some of its vaporized atoms might after
the collision.
After all is said and done, the particles
that hit Earth from the Sun, tend to rip atoms
off more often than they stick around, and
of course, big coronal mass ejections can
smash us with vastly more.
Now remember that Venus gets hit by way more
of this than we do and has no magnetosphere
to compare to ours, and still leaks little,
and that’s because it just doesn’t have
much hydrogen to leak.
I want to underscore that because it’s not
really atmosphere leaking away there, it’s
hydrogen.
Oxygen and nitrogen are vastly more resistant
to escape, especially in molecular format,
but a solar wind hydrogen particle hitting
a 16 times more-massive oxygen atom just isn’t
getting the same velocity kick.
So in many ways we’re not talking about
breathing gas disappearing or the nitrogen
the plants need, we’re talking about the
slow loss of water from a planet.
Our oceans mass around a thousand times more
than our atmosphere does, so it is going to
erode away a lot slower.
Though as our sun heats up and ages, this
stripping rate will increase enormously.
Now what does the Magnetosphere do?
Well, firstly, it tends to deflect particles
away.
Ions moving through a magnetic field are pulled
toward or pushed away from it.
Note that the solar wind is protons, electrons,
and some heavier particles, and they do sometimes
capture each other and thus stop being electrically
charged, thus mostly ignoring magnetic fields
and magnetospheres but still moving fast.
So again, magnetospheres alone don’t completely
protect worlds, and of course magnets don’t
directly affect photons, be they visible light
or higher-energy ultraviolet, X-ray, or gamma-ray
photons.
Charged particles trying to escape Earth can
also be knocked back or deflected, keeping
them from escaping.
Interestingly, we have another escape mechanism
called Charge Exchange Escape, which is where
a high speed ion captures an electron off
a passing slow neutral particle, turning them
into a fast neutral particle and a slow charged
one, and this fast neutral can now pass through
the magnetosphere with ease.
While natural magnetic fields by spheres are
our default perspective, it's worth noting
that we can also achieve deflection between
two big charged plates, and the protons or
ionized hydrogen would head one way and the
electrons another.
Not our main focus for today but civilizations
might be aiming to harvest these incoming
particles rather than just shield from them,
and as harvesting still achieves the protective
effect, these routes might be considered the
“waste not, want not” profitable method.
We’ll be getting to making artificial magnetospheres
shortly and we need to be mindful that some
big sphere designed solely for deflection
might be considered a very inferior approach.
It’s also not really a sphere, and indeed
Earth’s dayside magnetic field is significantly
compressed toward Earth from the constant
barrage of charged particles off the Sun.
They can also escape via ‘Polar Wind’
as near the poles of a magnetosphere the magnetic
field lines are open, allowing a pathway for
ions to escape into space.
Incidentally, not everything is going to be
coming from our Sun, although the term “Cosmic
Rays” is quite the misnomer these days.
We used to think these were principally electromagnetic
radiation, back before we could actually get
probes up in high orbits.
It’s mostly high-speed particles though
not photons.
About 1% are electrons, then 90% protons,
and about 9% alpha particles – helium atoms
minus their electrons.
About 1% are heavier ions, HZE ions as they’re
called, and the nuclei component of galactic
cosmic rays or GCRs.
Most heavier ions still come from the Sun
but we get GCRs from outside the solar system,
and they’re usually moving at near light
speed and are thought to be principally coming
from supernovae shock waves.
These are ruinous, because while the hundreds
of kilometers per second that solar wind moves
at seems fast, light speed is 300,000 kilometers
per second, a thousand times as fast, meaning
that they’ve got around a million times
the kinetic energy of the solar wind, particle
for particle.
Rare but vicious, and why we tend to discuss
nearby supernovae as dangerous to our atmosphere.
The explosion itself, while huge, is still
so far away from even the nearest neighboring
stars that the popular image of them tearing
a planet apart is ridiculous, but they could
still be a real danger to an exoplanet by
damaging its atmosphere.
With that in mind, we will discuss some types
of solar shields that are placed between the
planet and star and thus don’t help against
extrasolar cosmic rays, so when building our
artificial shielding we might be contemplating
multiple approaches simultaneously, which
also means multiple layers of protection against
failure and sabotage.
This also brings up recovery as another layer
of protection, because most of these escaped
particles have a charge and a general direction
off the planet, the big plasma sheet or trail
that all worlds with atmospheres generally
have behind them as a result of their Sun,
and much as we might put a magnetic deflector
at the planet’s L-1 point with its Sun,
we might put a catch-bag at its L-2 to absorb
it all.
And in reality, planet’s we terraform and
colonize are likely to have huge orbital infrastructures,
and many will have their own small magnetic
shields, so it might be a minor cottage industry
for them to serve as buffer, deflectors, or
absorbers of solar wind and escaping atmosphere.
Now L-1 and L-2 are short for Lagrange 1 and
Lagrange 2, the first and second of 5 Lagrange
points every planet has with its star and
every moon has with its planet.
These are spots that orbit with the planet,
or moon, where you can leave hardware and
expect it to stay stationary with minimal
help.
They are only Metastable so they do have to
have a fair amount of station-keeping anyway,
but it’s way less and for instance, one
of the ways you can potentially do station-keeping
is by surfing on solar wind and radiation
pressure.
What’s neat about L1 and L2 is that L1 is
directly between a planet and its star and
L2 is directly behind, and same for planet-moon
LaGrange points.
Earth’s L1 with the Sun is about 1.5 million
kilometers from Earth toward the Sun, about
4 times the distance from us that the Moon
is and about 1% of the distance to the Sun.
The L2 is the same distance behind us.
Now this is a great place to put a giant magnet
that will deflect particles away from a planet,
though I will take a moment to note that it
is getting shoved on by that solar wind, not
just dueling gravity from Earth, the Sun,
and a disruptive Moon, or in this case Mars
and the Sun as Mars’ moons are trivial.
As a result this giant magnet wouldn’t actually
be at the L1 point.
Similar applies to big thin shades or mirrors
we might use for warming or cooling a planet,
the force of solar wind and sunlight is just
too enormous in their case, being thin and
sail-like, to ignore, and thus they all become
examples of Lagites, or Lagging Satellites,
a concept we first detailed in our episode
Shkadov Thrusters back in 2016, and a trick
we can use with relatively big and light objects,
as opposed to heavy dense rocks like planets
and asteroids, is to create very atypical
orbital patterns, as an extension of the static
satellite or statite first proposed by Robert
Forward in 1993, and also a bit like the Halo
Orbit options for solar sails from Colin McInnes.
As we discuss sticking things at L1, these
concepts alter it from some single relatively
small point, to a vast region of space we
can put a lot of objects in, including solar
mirrors off to a side that are quartering
the sunlight to bounce some to their world
and use the rest to remain relatively stationary.
I think one objection folks have to artificial
magnetospheres in orbit or in L1 is that they
limit the use of that space for other options.
This gets around that,
Now you’re probably thinking it must take
an insane amount of energy to replicate a
planet’s magnetic field, and of course a
giant space array of solar panels at the L1
can help with that, but it’s actually not
that much energy.
See the thing is, a big molten globe of spinning
metal in a planet generating a magnetic field
may be how they are naturally generated but
this is a horribly inefficient way to make
one.
That’s why our own electromagnets here on
Earth don’t use that approach.
This is actually a case where a big piece
of planetary engineering is pretty cheap.
See, solar wind being deflected by a planet
when it's moving so fast requires a lot of
deflection as it's already pretty close.
If you’re starting a million kilometers
out – Mars’ L1 point is 1.08 million kilometers
toward the Sun – then a smaller deflection
of a particle in terms of angle will knock
it further to the side before it gets to Mars.
We can achieve a parallel level of deflection
for Mars, by knocking incoming particles about
3000 kilometers off course, a million kilometers
away, or by knocking incoming ionized particles
just 0.2 degrees of course, by running an
electromagnet out there that’s much less
powerful than we would expect, and I’ve
seen calculations as low as what we would
get out of a fairly large nuclear power plant
or hydroelectric dam, or a few square kilometers
of solar panels.
The amount of energy needed to be stored in
this electromagnet is in the range of 10^17
joules, for Mars, and while that’s not a
trivial figure, the equivalent of thousands
of Hiroshima-strength A-bombs, it’s still
tiny compared to what an industrial nation
uses for electricity in a year, and is comparable
to the total sunlight hitting Earth or Venus
or Mars in any given second, or maybe a few
seconds for cold and small Mars.
Now that energy in the magnetic field need
replenishing though the exact rate is hard
to say, a magnetic field does no work on objects,
it just bends trajectories, but everything
leaks, whether it's the atmosphere of a planet
or the magnetic field guarding it, but replenishment
times are months not minutes here, as a very
loose approximation.
This is probably the cheapest and easiest
approach and my general thinking is that something
along these lines is going to be standard
for any planet, just because a settled world
with all its orbital infrastructure has a
lot of cause to want to deflect that solar
wind around them.
Planets with magnetospheres look like giant
torches moving through space in terms of all
that ionized gas whipping around them and
leaving a wake of plasma.
They’re dangerous places too, the Van Allen
Radiation Belts around Earth include a very
large amount of orbital territory we will
want to use one day, and while we can thickly
armor and shield our infrastructure up there,
that whole area is saturated with ionized
particles held around the planet by our magnetosphere
and a good reminder that a magnetosphere does
not make everything safer in every regard.
Think of the inner and outer van Allen radiation
belts as constant sandstorms of ultrafast
charged particles and ionizing radiation.
So a big shield at L1 is handy even for Earth
because it would do a lot to bring those belts
down a couple notches and further protect
us from big solar storms and coronal mass
ejections.
It’s making it safer and easier to operate
in orbit, extending the lifetime of orbital
objects, cutting down on the shielding they
need, and also cutting down on noise.
There’s a lot of radiation in the radio
range for these belts too, and from all that
solar wind, heck you can hear the planet Jupiter
on 14-38 MHz with a decent amateur radio set.
This is the range of High Frequency radio
waves, often called skywave, because it will
bounce back down off the ionosphere, and those
ionized particles.
For that matter, we often contemplate engaging
in starlifting on our Sun, magnetically pulling
matter off the Sun as a way of mining it for
valuable metals beyond what the rest of the
solar system combined possesses, and that’s
likely to kick up a lot of solar wind.
And a highly active interplanetary civilization
running itself on ion drives, fusion torches,
or nuclear rockets, is one that might see
a lot of extra particles kicking around as
exhaust too, and many of these technologies
work not just for Mars and Earth, but also
colonies on the various asteroids, dwarf planets,
and moons.
So needless to say, there’s some good reasons
to want to setup an L1 Magnetic Deflector,
especially given that it is not high power
draw, even by modern standards, let alone
in comparison with the titanic energies needed
for terraforming or available to any civilization
contemplating that instead of paraterraforming
options like domes.
That said, this option is not exclusive nor
complete.
There is plenty of reason, for instance, to
still want to live in a dome, even if your
planet has an atmosphere, as one that you
can modify the opacity of or open at will,
offers some excellent climate control options
and also provides an extra layer of protection.
We always want layers and contingencies after
all.
I’m guessing some of you thought, when I
mentioned shielding Earth to decrease radiation
in orbital space, that if we built in that
decreased-radiation zone, then those facilities
would all be subject to danger, if accident
or sabotage – or threat of it - turned off
that L1 Deflector.
Now, first, we can have multiple in place
there and backups, and second, we’re talking
about a rise in radiation levels, not an explosion
that instantly kills folks.
The Inner Van Allen Belt is more radiation
saturated than the outer and we guess you
could do 71 days minimally shielded in that
before hitting lethal radiation doses.
Even assuming you don’t have better technology
by then for treating radiation illness, that’s
a long time to be fixing your magnetic shields
or bolting extra armor onto your facility,
and we would still expect them to have thicker
hides than modern stations and ships anyway.
Nonetheless it's always good to have more
backups.
That can and probably does include a magnetic
grid around that planet, as opposed to at
a distant L1 alone.
We often talk about Orbital Rings on this
show, huge hollow rings that stand stationary
or slowly rotating with their planet below,
while inside tons of charged matter orbit
around the world at super-orbital velocity
while magnetically contained.
This same core bit of space infrastructure
technology also allows giant space towers
or huge elliptical launch loops stretching
from a planet’s surface up to High Orbits.
And it also allows us to generate huge magnetic
fields around a planet and its orbital space
to deflect solar wind away by running a lot
of charged particles – or electricity - around
in a contained loop, a torus or even a big
wide belt of a solenoid.
You may opt for permanent magnets or electromagnets,
I would bet on the latter, though the problem
with an electromagnet is that it stops making
a magnetic field when you cut off power.
However, solar power works really well in
space, where there’s no cloudy days, especially
at lagrange points and higher orbits where
night time is short or non-existent, as they
spend less time in the planet’s shadow or
‘night’.
So a big donut is possible, indeed we’ve
even discussed megastructure orbital habitats
that are rotating rings around a planet that
people live upside down on, and such a place
might also serve as that planet’s magnetic
shield.
Or we could have arrays of individual satellites;
networked to make a shield, and this also
helps protect against GRCs from extrasolar
sources.
There have been a few papers on this topic
and more less-formal work on the science forums
down the years that we’ve discussed before,
but for those looking for a deeper dive into
the physics and calculations, there was an
excellent paper by R.A.
Bamford et al, “How to create an artificial
magnetosphere for Mars” that came out some
months back, that I thought did an excellent
job cataloging some of the Martian Magnetosphere
options and running the numbers, and I’ll
link the PDF in the episode description.
One thing I did appreciate them going into
was the Martian Core restart and the case
we’ll discuss in a moment, of magnetically
spinning it up.
Now, typically people envision this as some
massive nuking process where we bore a hole
down to the core to dump billions of H-bombs
designed to both heat up and spin the core.
This would kill everyone on the surface and
is a bad idea.
We have discussed the idea of setting up super-tall
towers up to orbital heights, with big mirrors
on them, to turn a planet into a pinwheel
you could hit with lasers to spin the planet
up faster or slower, as a way of altering
day length, and you could also run those towers
deep into the crust to dump heat energy into
the world too.
I want to emphasize that both of these ideas
are very high-energy options.
Figure on it requiring at least 10^30 joules
of energy, more than a trillion times the
energy in that magnetic shield we mentioned
earlier, and leaking out at a rate of several
trillion watts too, a lot more than that shield
took to keep running.
We’re talking about super heating around
a billion-trillion tons of rock and metal
here.
And doing this at any rate of speed means
totally cracking, tearing and warping the
crust at an epic scale, as in way off the
Richter scale.
But it could be done slower, as suggested
with those big pinwheel towers.
Just as a spinning ball of molten metal can
generate a magnetic field, it’s also subject
to magnetic fields, and we do think Mars has
a molten core, albeit a small one.
So we can build a huge magnet around it, encapsulating
Mars in a protective magnetic field powered
by huge solar power, and begin shoving on
that core to spin it up.
The extra drag and force of that spinning
effort will turn into heat, melting and expanding
that core.
And at the same time you could have good thermal
conductors drilled deep into a world that
you pumped heat down to help with that too.
This is a slow process, directing a full terawatt
of power into a world this way, and ignoring
its own heat leakage, would still take 10
trillion seconds or 317,000 years to hit that
10^30 joules minimum energy I suggested a
moment ago as needed to heat that core up.
Still that’s doable and you could even raise
that up a bit, especially given excess heat
would help to terraform cold Mars.
Done right, you could probably spike the core
with some thick rods carrying sunlight-generated
heat to the core to keep it from cooling too,
and maybe even use all that as thermopiles
to run buried electromagnets.
A magnet need not be in orbit or at L1, it
could be a huge underground cable wrapped
around the equator too.
So, for the purists out there who want a Mars
that might one day have its own natural magnetic
field, able to protect it without technology
or maintenance, yes this really is an option,
and one that you could probably pursue in
tandem with all the other easy technological
approaches we mentioned today.
I think it’s probably overkill and unnecessary,
but then I’m not planning to live there,
future Martians might feel different and more
ambitious.
Afterall, if you’ve shipped in and built
your oceans and sky, then you probably do
not feel the sky’s the limit on your ambitions
and undertakings.
Mars seems ever closer to the day where we
will first land humans there, and in between
that moment and vast engineering projects
for the red planet like we discussed today,
there will be those first colonists working
on becoming Martian, and there’s a great
3-episode series contemplating life there,
Becoming Martian, over on Curiositystream
that I highly recommend, and it's just one
of many shows looking at Mars over on Curiositystream.
Now we also mentioned Jupiter’s magnetosphere
today, which is enormously powerful, and results
in a vast amount of radiation hitting those
4 giant moons around Jupiter, Io, Callisto,
Europa, and Ganymede, which we would like
to colonize too.
I thought we would take a little time to discuss
handling that in the context of creating and
manipulating magnetospheres so we also have
an extended edition of today’s episode over
on Nebula where we will be discussing how
we can make the Jovian Moons and orbital space
safe for human habitation by manipulating
Jupiter’s Magnetosphere.
Nebula is our streaming service created to
give youtube creators more flexibility and
not be at the whim of Youtube’s algorithms
for our content, or any other platform.
It is the largest creator-owned streaming
service in existence, and all of SFIA’s
content is up there, ad and sponsor free,
and released a couple days early.
We also release an extended edition or two
every month, and have some exclusive content
like our coexistence with aliens series.
It’s a great way to help support some of
your favorite channels while getting ad free
content.
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself
but we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,
the home of thousands of great educational
videos like Becoming Martian, to offer Nebula
for free as a bonus if you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in our episode description.
That lets you see the amazing content on Curiositystream
and Nebula for less than $15 a year, just
use the link in the episode’s description.
So we’re done for today but not for the
week, as we have our Scifi Sunday episode,
Lost Space Colonies, and what would happen
on them, coming up this Sunday.
Then we’ll be launching into new miniseries
looking at finding and exploring distant worlds,
Surveying for Habitable Interstellar Star
Systems, on Thursday May 19th.
Then we’ll close out the month with a look
at Dark Sky Stations, Stratospheric Satellites,
and Ultra-Low Orbital Infrastructure.
As a reminder, our normal monthly livestream
will instead be held at the International
Space Development Conference on Sunday, May
29th, at 4pm Eastern, where I’ll be giving
a live talk on megastructures.
Then we’ll jump into June and start the
month by asking what Ancestor Simulations
are and if we are living inside one.
Now if you want alerts when those and other
episodes come out, make sure to subscribe
to the Channel and hit the notifications bell,
and if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button, share it with others, and
leave a comment below.
You can also join in the conversation on any
of our social media forums, find our audio-only
versions of the show, or donate to help support
future episodes, and all those options and
more are listed in the links in the episode
description.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
