This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula,
when you sign up for CuriosityStream using
the link in the description.
Getting rid of our trash safely and ecologically
is going to be quite a challenge in the future,
but they do say one man’s garbage is another
man’s treasure.
We recently got done with an episode discussing
potential options for Climate Change Mitigation
and some of those solutions along with thinking
on environmental concerns reminded me that
when I was a kid there was often a lot of
news about barges full of garbage wandering
along the coastline looking for places to
deposit their unwelcome cargo.
Folks often worried about where we might put
all our garbage as landfills got filled.
So I thought we’d take some time today to
look at the smellier side of the future, which
is getting rid of our trash, as well as what
some of our waste might be in the future.
We’ll also address some of the misconceptions
or dubious notions that have been suggested
over the years, and we might as well start
with the landfill issue.
Americans have a reputation as being the biggest
producers of trash per individual, which is
a debatable statement but we do generate about
a ton of waste per person per year, and we’ll
estimate that as about a cubic meter a person
and say a future and slightly more prosperous
world of about modern population might generate
10 billion cubic meters of garbage a year.
That’s rather rounded up but helps highlight
both how much garbage we might produce and
how that’s not actually a very big number.
If you stacked that in one big square 10 kilometers
on a side it would be about 100 meters tall.
That seems big but even if we piled it up
for a whole century would only result in a
single decently sized mountain - of which
we have around a million Earth.
Indeed we have around 500 million square kilometers
of surface area so that mountain full of a
century of garbage wouldn’t even take up
a millionth of the planet’s surface area.
Finding space for landfills is about keeping
the transport costs low, finding some place
near your garbage-producing areas willing
to host a landfill, and making sure it’s
nicely secured against dangerous leakage.
It’s not a space issue.
We’ve also got the common suggestion we
should dump all our waste in the Sun, which
is pretty bad idea.
It takes a ridiculous amount of energy to
get stuff into space and more to get it out
of Earth’s gravitational field.
It would be energy-cheaper to tear the stuff
down to the atomic level and centrifuge it
into raw materials you could re-use, with
the added benefit of having those materials
still, rather than losing them into the Sun.
Of course, as we’ve noted in our Starlifting
episode, you can mine a star, but it’s rather
backwards to dump material into one for later
extraction.
This is more effective incidentally if you’re
dumping it into black holes, since you can
reap huge amounts of power by throwing the
materials down there, where they obviously
are safe from leaking harmful materials elsewhere,
and they eventually give you all the objects
mass-energy back, but even then recycling
matter is probably much preferable.
To be fair, this suggestion is usually in
regard to nuclear waste, but the same still
applies, you could separate that material
down into just the radioactive isotopes and
safe material, then use both again.
Radioactive waste is mostly useless because
it isn’t radioactive enough to be good for
power generation but too radioactive to be
left lying around.
That’s all very energy intensive too, which
is part of the problem, we aren’t exactly
lavishly supplied with cheap and abundant
energy, especially energy that comes without
other environmental and economic problems.
One nice option might be dumping garbage down
volcanoes which might also be a nice place
to mine, see our episode “Accessing Earth’s
Core”, but isn’t really ideal either,
especially as one of the big costs on waste
is transport anyway and we don’t exactly
have volcanoes evenly and frequently distributed
across Earth’s surface.
Even if we made artificial ones, MoHo Mines,
it’s not the sort of thing you’d want
to close to a city, which of course is where
a lot of our trash comes from.
Ultimately though we always come back to the
notion that one’s man’s garbage is another
man’s treasure and the general idea of recycling.
That will be even more important in space,
where you need to recycle at high efficiency
everything, including your air and water.
This need to efficiently recycle is especially
the case on interstellar spaceships.
We’ve discussed the difficulty of keeping
people, cultures, ecologies, and equipment
running for centuries on board an interstellar
generation ship before, but one big restraint
we tend to bypass a lot in discussion is that
your ship will be prone to leaking and that
and recycling process tends to have losses.
If you’re losing 1% of your current mass
every year to recycling and leakage, small
as that sounds, it means in 70 years you’d
be missing half your mass.
We’ll come back to space and the more distant
future in a bit.
How about the near future though, what technologies
might come into play?
Well first is automation.
An automated garbage truck eliminates much
of the cost of transport and also means you
can get away with multiple pickups of different
types of trash to facilitate recycling efforts,
but that still has the problem of requiring
people put in effort to separate their garbage.
And it really only takes a small minority
not doing this right to cause problems with
that.
At a recycling facility someone needs to monitor
the trash and often separate it manually,
not a pleasant job and not cheap process either.
You’ve probably heard that many types of
recycling aren’t worth it and cost more
money and effort than disposing of the stuff
and harvesting new raw material would take,
and for some things that is true.
Improvements in how much energy is used for
recycling, or other things like how much water
is used, can alter this.
Many plastics aren’t recycled simply from
the large amount of energy needed for the
task, and if that can be improved, or energy
made much cheaper, the dynamic changes.
We have begun to see some major improvements
in plastics recycling in the last decade too.
Now, a quick note.
One could argue that what we call recycling
is actually rapid recycling.
Any plastic will break down in a landfill
given time and we can speed that up with various
treatment or disposal methods.
As mentioned at the beginning, we’ve no
shortage of storage space for that.
One might think simply throwing energy at
the problem if we had an abundance of it might
be a good idea, however if you can grow your
feedstock for plastics using less overall
energy and resources than by recycling, that
would be the better path.
The same applies with wood for instance.
It seems wrong somehow to dump such materials
in a landfill to decay while growing a forest
or field to use as the feedstock for paper
or bioplastics but in some cases that might
turn out the more efficient path.
For the moment at least we receive a huge
free bonus of sunlight to power such processes
and in some cases it may be more economical
and environmental to toss it in a landfill
and harvest new stock, one could think of
this as slow recycling if it’s more appealing,
since those landfills can eventually be reused,
and all the sooner if you’re sorting and
disposing safely and strategically.
Of course a lot of recycling isn’t economical
right now simply because of the manpower needed
to do that sorting, and as mentioned a moment
ago, collecting and separating trash is neither
a cheap nor pleasant job.
However, we’re getting a lot better with
both robots and identification algorithm.
For all the jokes about AI that will see pictures
of cats and identify them as dogs.
If your recycling facility has the detection
gear and robotics to sort your trash automatically
and at high speed, suddenly it becomes much
easier and cheaper to recycle by type.
Even just a capacity to recognize logos or
imprints that tell you something is a soda
can or paper coffee cup helps quite a lot,
and we’ve seen that developed in the last
few years by folks like AMP Robotics and the
Clarke robot.
Many things which aren’t economical currently
can suddenly become very economical with even
minor improvements of technology and automation
might make recycling outright profitable,
which for many things it is not, or is at
best marginal.
Ideally we’d like our trash collection and
disposition to run at no cost at all.
Right now it does, you end up paying up front
or with taxes to get garbage removed, but
if you get good enough at recycling you might
have a setup where those fees are minimal
or even negative.
If one person’s trash becomes another person’s
treasure, suddenly you get calls from trash
companies offering you bids to pick yours
up for payment to you, not the other way around.
Similarly automation is handy on the safety
and enforcement end too.
With good automation trash could be identified
and documented on pickup or at the facility
and a fine or surcharge issued to anyone who’d
improperly disposed of something, which might
discourage bad disposal habits.
If the method was able to be miniaturized
and made cheaper down the road, you might
get drones emptying your garbage at home and
sorting it into bins and calling for a pickup
of the stuff when a given bin was full.
I don’t think most of us would object to
being able to just toss garbage into a trash
can in any given room and not have to deal
with it personally anymore.
It all gets sorted and handled far more efficiently
and economically and environmentally.
That’s another type of waste of course,
Time, our most valuable commodity.
And in more ways than we tend to think too,
humans aren’t terribly efficient machines
and we use a rather specialized and inefficient
fuel source in the form of our agriculture.
People do need exercise of course but you’re
often going to be more efficient letting machines
do the work.
Particularly if it is an activity people don’t
enjoy, like picking up trash from the roadside,
something I suspect will be relegated to drones
in the next couple decades.
Quite a lot of area beautification is likely
to be automated before long and opens the
door to helping out on things like lawn waste
and many other secondary wastes like runoff
of water and soil and fertilizer and less
healthy things that often get into them.
A pretty big portion of garbage and waste
is essentially excess, the last couple bites
or bits of some piece of food or product or
things that spoiled or got overused, and that’s
where smarter technology can help a lot too.
We often have to standardize products in the
name of efficiency but better and smarter
production can often circumvent that, garbage
never generated is garbage you don’t have
to deal with and resources that never have
to be produced.
If for instance your smartphone has been tracking
your eating preferences and medical data and
you walk into a restaurant it could relay
that to the robot doing the cooking that now
knows exactly how big a sandwich and how big
a soda you want.
Smart technology is practically synonymous
with efficient technology and the more of
it that is in play, the less waste and garbage
you’re generating pretty much across the
board, in a thousand tiny little ways.
Robots are of course handy but biotechnology
might play a big role in garbage disposal
too, organisms altered to serve as natural
dumpsters and recyclers might be very handy.
We’ve had fairly good luck using certain
plants and organisms to clean up toxic sites
and may be able to expand on that to make
tailored organisms that could take shredded
garbage and break it down into components
for re-use, not simply organic and biodegradable
materials but potentially even metals, glass,
plastics and ceramics.
Though I’ll add as a caveat that gene-splicing
some micro-organism to be able to digest those
could get problematic if it got loose and
started digesting our buildings.
Mold is already a bad enough problem with
wooden buildings without having some version
of it that ate glass and steel.
There are a lot of strategies for avoiding
such problems though, and even if we limited
it to organics, being able to get those removed
and the other materials sorted for machine-recycling
would be advantageous.
How about the more distant future though?
Up in space we’ll need to good quite good
at recycling, and you can’t dump your trash
wherever you please anyway, since a ship is
usually in motion and a soda can tossed out
the airlock of an interplanetary ship is moving
fast enough to basically be a grenade if it
ever runs into anything.
Space debris is a real issue and will only
be a bigger one as we start developing an
Orbital Infrastructure.
Indeed it was one of the bigger topics in
our episode on Orbital Infrastructure a few
years back, and we addressed it more in Megastructure
Maintenance & Space Janitors, and the Space
Derelicts & Trash Worlds episodes.
One nice thing about most futuristic economies
is they do have energy abundance, especially
for things like producing simple heat, since
it’s surpassingly cheap and easy to build
a large solar kiln in space.
It’s not terribly efficient to recycle by
raw heat and centrifuge, simply breaking everything
down to the atomic level, but it gets the
job done.
This does raise another aspect of recycling
though, which is reuse.
We don’t really want to smash stuff up if
we don’t have to, certainly not the atomic
level.
You’re recycling your coffee mug whenever
you wash it, you don’t need to crush it.
Water and detergent aren’t free but they
are cheaper than rebuilding a ceramic mug
from scratch and for that matter, most of
us prefer our coffee in such a mug, not a
paper cup, even if just because it holds heat
better.
However in an increasingly computerized and
miniaturized society we have tiny little components
that are at once very valuable and very fragile
and very prone to obsolescence, all three.
It’s a truism that our ancestors tended
to use every part of an animal and repair
everything or sell or gift it to another after
using it, hand me downs to younger siblings
or kids or even grandkids, while we tend to
be prone to disposal.
But it’s very hard to recycle a lot of modern
technology for more than its scrap material,
because it is fragile micro-components, because
those can’t be easily re-purposed, and because
they are often antique after a few years.
Most households get collections of broken
or outdated electronic junk.
It’s quite probable that in the future a
lot of electronic technology will plateau
and that lots of smart and small robots might
be able to carefully harvest and repair components,
either keeping a device running or cannibalizing
those components without having to strip them
down to the raw elements.
This brings us to our last type of garbage
for discussion, and that is heat and entropy.
Show regulars know that in a futuristic context
everything you do produces heat and heat disposal
tends to be your ultimate bottleneck on civilizations.
You can have all the energy abundance you
want, but you can’t use that energy faster
than you can radiate it away or you’ll roast
yourself in the heat build-up.
It would be nice to be able to recycle heat,
it is energy after all, but this forbidden
by the laws of thermodynamics.
We can use large pockets of concentrated heat
– things at high temperature – in conjunction
with reservoirs of lower heat to produce energy
we can use but only to a point.
Entropy wins out and slowly reduces everything
to a homogenous soup of material of the same
temperature that you can’t extract more
energy from.
This is anticipated to be the eventual cause
of the End of the Universe, the Heat Death,
essentially us drowning in our own entropic
waste and garbage, and postponing or preventing
that is likely to be the ultimate goal of
recycling, true 100% efficiency, that any
advanced civilization will focus its efforts
for.
See our episode Postponing the Heat Death
of the Universe for details.
That though is the final key notion.
Recycling is all about efficiency, and garbage
is the antithesis of that, your ideal process
economically and environmentally is one in
which the minimum trash is produced and the
minimum energy needed to re-use it productively.
Efficiency is always about eliminating waste
as much as possible.
So in our ideal case, when asking what the
Future of Garbage is, the answer is that it
wouldn’t have one, that we won’t have
any garbage at all.
We were talking today about how we might be
able to use advance computation and artificial
intelligence to help us find solutions to
our waste and environmental concerns, but
of course it might turn out that artificial
intelligence, while it might solve many problems,
may represent a far bigger problems itself,
where the cure is worse than the disease,
or is perceived to be.
Whether we abandon such research or survive
some sort of machine rebellion, humanity might
find itself trying to continue afterward,
and we’ll be exploring that in our new episode
“After AI”, which is out now on Nebula.
Nebula, our new subscription streaming service,
was made as a way for education-focused independent
creators to try out new content that might
not work too well on Youtube, where algorithms
might not be too kind to some topics or demonetize
certain ones entirely, or just doesn’t fit
our usual content.
And if you’d like to get free access to
it, it does come as a free bonus with a subscription
to Curiositystream, which also has thousands
of amazing documentaries you can watch, on
top of the Nebula-exclusive content from myself,
like our Nebula-Exclusive series, Coexistence
with Aliens, and many other excellent works
by creators like CGP Grey, Minute Physics,
and Wendover.
A year of Curiosity Stream is just $19.99,
and it gets you access to thousands of documentaries,
as well as complimentary access to Nebula
for as long as you're a subscriber, and use
the link in this episode’s description,
curiositystream.com/isaacarthur.
We were speaking about how humanity might
survive after abandoning artificial intelligence
and one way we might do that is through genetic
or cybernetic enhancement, which might produce
a rather wildly diverging species of humanity,
or even new species.
It’s a popular notion in science fiction
and many authors have tried to show just how
divergent many worlds separated by many light
years can get get when you have a lot of evolution,
mutation, and cybernetics in play, albeit
not with much scientific accuracy, and this
Thursday we’ll be taking a more scientific
look at how civilizations might begin to diverge
genetically from each other out on distant
colony worlds and even back here in the solar
system, in Genetic Divergence & Civilization.
I will be getting married this coming weekend
right after that episode, but the show will
still be coming out on Thursday as I got the
episodes for our honeymoon done in advance,
so we’ll close April out with another pathway
future humanity might follow with a look at
Life as a Digital Being.
However, we will not have our usual End of
the Month livestream for April, and will do
our next one at the end of May from our new
SFIA studio.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to support future episodes,
you can donate to us at Patreon or our website,
IsaacArthur.net, linked in the episode description.
I’ll also throw in a link for Sarah and
I’s wedding registry too for those so inclined.
Until then, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
