This Episode is brought to you by Brilliant.
Empires rise and Empires fall,
but there is no cycle,
each time something new is tried for better
or worse.
What new empires might rise in the future,
and how shall they govern themselves?
So today we will be looking at Government
Types of the Future, surveying everything
from how old styles of government like feudal
kingdoms might arise again on space colonies
to how democracies might handle interstellar
colonies or voting by citizens who were transhuman
or artificial intelligence or uplifted organisms
like human intelligent animals.
We will also consider some entirely new governmental
types we have not seen before, as well as
many ways in which systems we have seen before
might emerge again with new flavors under
new technologies.
This is going to be a rather long episode
so now is probably a great time to grab a
drink and a snack.
And if you enjoy today’s episode, please
let our wise and mighty overlords know this
by hitting the Like and Subscribe buttons.
In fact it’s going to be long enough that
we will be carrying the episode into next
week too, where we’ll examine the concept
of Nomadic Fleet Based Civilizations and governments
types like the “Navarchy”, which is one
run by captains and admirals.
There are a ton of ‘archies’ and ‘ocracies’
incidentally, and I’ll mention many of the
more obscure ones as we go through today,
but we’ll focus most on democracy.
We will try to do this topic today with fun
and as food for thought, and without placing
any special favor for a given system or bias
against, though that is easier said than done.
I’m a big fan of democracy, as I’d imagine
is most of the audience, and indeed my other
professional hat outside this channel is overseeing
elections for my region of Ohio.
This does not necessarily mean it’s the
best form of government or its implementation
is always ideal, and to quote Churchill quoting
someone else, “Democracy is the worst form
of government - except for all those other
forms that have been tried from time to time.…”
When discussing types of government, it’s
important to remember that they are usually
mixed, creating a huge array of possible governing
systems.
The US for example is a democracy – rule
by the majority, and also a constitutional
republic, but it is also a kritarchy – rule
by judges, the judiciary being a coequal branch
of the government.
It is also a demarchy – rule by random selection
or sortition, as this is how we select our
juries that those judges essentially referee
to decide guilt and innocence.
And those are just the official forms.
Any given nation or group might have several
unofficial de facto forms of government.
For instance the US is also a gerontocracy
– rule by the elderly, as most of our elected
leaders are older than the average citizen,
even discounting those who are deemed too
young to vote, and of those who chose to vote,
it is disproportionately on the old side.
We are also a Plutocracy – rule by the wealthy,
in that we generally tend to elect folks whose
income and assets are well above the average,
and of course wealth can often purchase influence.
We’re also a meritocracy – rule by some
merit, skill, or talent.
These aren’t the official forms of government
but are nonetheless in play.
Their specific nature and degree can also
vary and mutate overtime.
As an example, an official gerontocracy would
be rule by the oldest specifically, like tribal
elders where the 7 oldest people made up the
tribal council, a gerontocratic oligarchy
– rule by a small group, in this case an
old one, and such a thing might develop over
time a rule where it was the 7 oldest minus
anyone who was suffering senility or extreme
poor health, or mutate to limit selection
from the oldest who had also done something
noteworthy and of merit, a gerontocratic meritocracy.
A common complaint about gerontocracies is
the senility issue, and also the vigor issue,
that as one ages you are thought by many to
lose a certain amount of fire in the belly,
and something like radical life extension
technology might have a big impact on that
and an unpredictable one too.
If you’ve got folks who are 300 years old
and yet have the mental and physical vigor
of a 30 year old, your civilization might
be far more likely to tip toward being a gerontocracy.
Of course another concern often raised about
such an approach is that it might be prone
to being stagnant and rejecting change and
lacking upward mobility for the young.
This might be even worse in such cases as
while no one is going to hold the exact same
views in their youth as they do at age 300,
it does seem reasonable to wonder if your
leaders and electorate are vastly older on
average than now, if change might be a rather
slow thing.
This extended lifespan concept takes an extra
flavor on in space colonization contexts,
especially one in which you’re building
space habitats not to just doming and terraforming
other planets, because on Earth there’s
a fixed amount of land that is not mobile,
you can’t just make more land or pick up
a country and move it - well you can but it
takes a lot of technology and effort, see
the Earth 2.0 series for examples.
In the case of space habitats you can, because
you can build a new O’Neill Cylinder, something
with an internal land area on par with a typical
county or very small country, and you can
also move the thing around if you don’t
like your neighbors.
These two things, life extension and the ability
to make and move habitats, might have truly
profound effects on how we run things in the
future and we’ll explore that more in a
bit.
However, another popular notion about how
we might run things in the future is that
we would not, that an Artificial Intelligence
would.
This would be an example of an Autocracy – absolute
rule by a single person, or in this case an
AI.
Or possible an Anocracy, a variation where
federal or national power rest with an autocrat
but the lower levels below are democratic
– the usual example being a benevolent dictator
who lets most issues be handled locally and
democratically, in this case the benevolent
dictator presumably being an AI - and indeed
this notion could be somewhat parallel to
a Constitutional system where that Constitution
places limits on the government’s powers,
such as an AI who specifically has emergency
powers or oversight to ensure a core constitution
of rights was held to.
In the US that’s nominally one of the jobs
of the judicial branch, and it’s often been
suggested we might use artificial intelligence
in this role as objective judges, an AI Kritarchy.
I feel obliged to mention though that this
notion in science fiction that a machine intelligence
is inherently objective, much like the other
common notion that an AI couldn’t lie, is
not really based on anything other than an
assumption they would be inherently logical.
We have no reason to assume that other than
because they function on logical processes…
except so do humans and animals, our internal
circuitry just happens to be far more complex
than old-style computers were, newer stuff
is way more complex and patchy and tends to
exhibit a lot of the same tendencies we see
in a meat mind.
One doing decision-making is also going to
need a lot of initial assumptions programmed
in that will occasionally come into conflict,
so there’s no particular reason to assume
an AI would be any more rational than you
or I, assuming those compartmentalized assumptions
of core ethics don’t drive it completely
insane.
Nonetheless computers and artificial intelligence
will doubtless play a role in governance in
the future and of course already do.
Indeed most modern legislative bodies have
their votes tallied by a computer, with the
officials swiping ID cards to vote yea or
nay or abstain.
This brings up a possible example of proportional
allocation of votes that wasn’t really viable
in the past.
In a representative democracy or republic
a given area has a person who votes for them,
and has a single vote so we generally try
to keep those districts about the same size.
Usually when drawing up those districts, mindful
that people often move between census counts
anyway, there’s a small percentage of variation
allowed in district size.
An average district might be 760,000 people
nationally, about what it was for the US last
census, but a given state might have 13.2
times that number and have to allocate it
to a round 13 representatives, so their districts
can’t be 760,000 people but would need to
average 772,000, and given districts might
be a few percent higher or lower than that
in an attempt to create a map that follows
existing subdivision borders – counties
and city borders.
We generally take the attitude that that is
good enough, as it means no legislator’s
vote is generally more than a few percent
more or less powerful than another’s and
again populations are fluid anyway.
This of course creates a lot of districting
and gerrymandering issues and one alternative
is just to set a wider threshold, draw the
maps up entirely with existing subdivision
borders in mind, and just say “Congressman
X’s district currently has 1.05 times the
normal district size, so X has 1.05 votes
in the legislature” and you only merge or
divide districts when one has reached a much
wider threshold like 50% above or below the
norm.
This might be more attractive down the road
too as while population divisions like metropolitan
regions do shift a lot even over a decade,
something like an O’Neill Cylinder Space
Habitat is a pretty set-sized object that
isn’t going to want chunks of it cut up
between multiple districts probably.
Of course they can also move too, as a space
station is also a spaceship, but we’ll come
back to that later.
Similarly some places have more than one representative
per district, states have two senators for
instance, and a place might decide it was
going to have a large district five times
the normal size and give the top 5 vote-getters
in an election each one vote, or alternatively,
each a vote proportional to how many votes
they picked up.
Needless to say things like real-time tracking
of your population as opposed to counting
heads every decade might alter this more,
not just in giving a much more precise and
uptodate constantly changing district vote
total, but also conceivably allowing partial
dual citizenship.
In Ohio for instance we’ve got what we call
“Snow Birds”, usually elderly folks who
downsized their house after their kids grew
up and spend their summers here and migrate
south for the winter months.
You can only claim one residence for voting
in the US and vote in that place only, meaning
you can’t vote in the elections for your
summer and winter address nor can you vote
on the property taxes for some town in which
you do not live but your family business is
at, and pays those taxes, or on the income
taxes of the city you work in, and pay taxes
in, if you reside elsewhere.
There’s a strong argument for the one person,
one place, one vote approach but probably
its biggest support is sheer practicality.
In a pre-computer age, and one which votes
are anonymous too, it is a huge hassle to
try to give a person .75 votes in their hometown
and .25 votes in the town where they spend
their winters or work at.
If a computer is handling all the specifics,
tracking folks location and issuing ballots,
and is trusted to be safe, secret, and secure,
you could conceivably let people pull ballots
for multiple residences which were just adjusted
in vote to the amount of time they spent in
that place.
Similarly you might let folks divide their
vote, if for instance in a five-way race for
two available positions, as we often do for
at-large councils like villages and schoolboards,
and they had two candidates they liked, instead
of telling them they could vote for two people
equally they could vote for one 120% and another
80% of their 200% total vote, or maybe vote
100% for their favorite and 60/40 for two
others they thought would be good.
Or conceivably gave folks more than exactly
one vote.
The default notion of democracy is that everyone
– or at least everyone allowed to vote – has
one vote as valuable as anybody else’s,
sometimes called egalitarian democracy, which
honors the notion that we all have an equal
say, but often rubs the wrong way for many
folks who are being told their vote is no
more valuable than their next door neighbor
who they consider an absolute moron.
This always brings up the idea of who is entitled
to vote, with the prevailing view these days
generally being everyone is, simply by being
an adult human of sound mind, though often
removing folks for something like committing
a felony on the grounds that they’ve proven
themselves a bad citizen.
Determining who is a good citizen obviously
gets tricky, as does figuring out who gets
to do that determining.
In Robert Heinlein’s Classic novel Starship
Troopers we’re presented with a society
where anyone could join the military or civil
service and could not be denied some position
there, but only those who had completed a
term of service got a vote, or franchise.
This raises the issue of merit-based voting
amounts too.
And I’ve heard folks suggest various schemes
for unequal voting down the years that used
parallel notions too, like everyone got a
vote when they turned 18 but got another when
they turned 30, another at 40, another at
50 and so on or got an extra vote for certain
meritorious behavior like completing 100 hours
of community service per year or serving in
the civil service or defense force.
Or that everyone got 1.00 votes if they had
an IQ of 100 but a person with an IQ of 131
got 1.31 votes.
And again, we are not interested today in
saying what is or isn’t fair just discussing
some scenarios.
Now I wouldn’t think we’d employ such
a system in the future in dealing with regular
modern days humans across the board, but it
might get more strained if you had cyborgs,
genetically-engineered geniuses, transhuman
citizens, uplifted animals, or super intelligent
AI – or sub intelligent AI for that matter
who folks wanted to give some say to but not
a whole vote.
Incidentally a system of government ruled
by the smartest or geniuses is a Geniocracy,
and would be a sub-type of meritocracy where
the only relevant merit was intelligence,
or IQ anyway which is not necessarily the
same thing.
Something like that might be more of a pressing
issue if we saw the emergence of a lot of
hive minds or more distributed or networked
intelligences.
Do 20 people in a hive mind get 1 vote, or
20 votes?
Or even 21, given that certain types of networked
intelligence would maintain a lot of individuality
but potentially have those 20 folks still
individual while there was a distinct hive
mind with its own distinctive personality
and opinions which might not exactly match
each and all of its component members.
So too, as we looked at in the Hive Minds
episode, in a more loose network a person
might be part of multiple hive minds, a variation
of dual-citizenship in a way, or a more integrated
form of group intelligence compared to, say,
being a member of a bunch of different clubs
and groups like many of us are, and which
each has its own focus and personality which
often changes as members join or leave, just
a lot more literal in this case.
That also raises an interesting approach to
representative government too that a society
big on mental augmentation might use, which
is one where everyone is networked and their
representative isn’t elected but is some
hive mind running on a tiny portion of every
voters’ brains in a cloud and it has its
own distinct mind built upon its citizens’
background thoughts and opinions.
Alternatively in a sufficiently smart society,
where the average citizen was so mentally
augmented they could perfectly recall every
moment of their life, read textbooks and absorb
them in minutes, and the average person was
both 400 years old and had a 400 IQ, there
might be no need for representation at all.
No need for someone to have the full-time
job of digging into policy and voting on behalf
of everyone who doesn’t have the time for
that.
In this setup, everything is either direct
vote on all policy decisions or uses sortition
and demarchy – which is where you randomly
select a group from the qualified pool to
research the matter and make a decision.
This is usually a draft from all eligible
citizens – as we do with a jury - but sometimes
something more specialized like a selection
from doctors to address a medical issue or
civil engineers to decide roads and infrastructure
– meritocratic demarchy.
Something like the Hive Mind Legislator of
a moment ago or the AI Autocracy from earlier
might simply emerge on its own, simply by
a legislator opting to poll people constantly
and deciding to be a perfect weathervane,
always voting as their district’s majority
preferred on every issue, and that might get
rather elaborate or official over time.
Or it could happen in the shadows, some powerful
supermind hiding out that tampered with the
vote, or people’s minds via propaganda or
direct mental alteration.
A secret government, called a Cryptarchy,
is often in place in fiction, and indeed is
prominent in Isaac Asimov’s Foundation series.
There we have the official democratic government
but also the hidden Second Foundation, a meritocratic,
oligarchic crypatarchy composed of psychologists
who help predict and shape the future.
It is also openly a Prophetocracy – rule
by a prophet – in the form of Hari Seldon,
the Psychohistorian who founded both Foundations
and appears centuries later as a hologram
recording predicting events.
The notion of various benevolent dictators,
oligarchs, or seers able to see or calculate
a better future is a popular one in sci-fi
too, you can see our episode on Psychohistory
for why this is easier said than done, but
we can expect a lot of computer modeling of
future trends to remain and grow in its use
and influence in decision-making in the future.
Though something fiction overlooks is that
even dictators and oligarchs have power-bases
they need to keep the support of, they just
accomplish it in a much less systematic and
nonviolent way than via democratic elections.
We do have a concept though called a Singleton,
which is an individual entity or group that
simply has an unbeatable control over a civilization
so that no negotiation or appeasement is needed
for rule inside or out of its realm.
Examples like accurate forecasting or mind-control
capability or simply an AI with huge thinking
and manufacturing capability might be examples
of that type of autocracy.
It is a popular notion in sci-fi that we will
blow up all our computers or go more primitive
in their use, like with the Butlerian Jihad
in Frank Herbert’s Dune series, and we looked
at some such scenarios in our episode After
AI.
In that series humanity has gone back to a
more feudal period and it is a popular trope
in science fiction, especially the Space Opera
Genre, that we might see a return of knights
and barons and dukes and kings or them by
some other name.
They probably would emerge by some other name
too, but it does not really matter, titles
shift with time and place and we have tons
of them from our history.
In the Foundation series for instance the
official leader of the Foundation is the Mayor,
dating back to when it was a single small
city on a remote and new world, but the title
is kept even when the Foundation is an empire
spanning a million worlds and trillions of
people, and a lot of our titles either meant
something very different originally or were
literally someone’s name, like Caesar and
the Czars, Tzars, and Kaisers.
Titles vary and rarely describe the position
well.
The big bad guy of the original Foundation
Trilogy, the Mule, is a mind-controlling autocrat,
who styles himself First Citizen, and would
be an example of an Anocracy, in that he only
controls things at the top by mind-controlling
existing leaders or very skilled individuals
he then promotes.
You could see a lot of new titles that tended
to be hereditary, like the CEO of a company
that built and maintained a space habitat,
effectively becoming a title equivalent to
Baron or Count.
Or on the flipside, we might just bring those
titles back, and for that matter they’re
hardly gone, there’s several hundred hereditary
barons in the UK alone in modern times and
I’d hardly be surprised if the peerage still
existed in a couple centuries and we started
building space habitats.
If the UK bankrolled a bunch of O’Neill
Cylinders and the King or Queen of England
started parceling bits of those into baronies
and dukedoms not only might that stick around
but it might catch on too, with owners or
elected leaders of those not of the UK opting
for that title.
You will need sub-division for any large nation
after all.
Where I am at we have counties, we just run
it by a board of three elected commissioners,
who are titled commissioner not ‘Count’.
The title is elected not hereditary but then
not all titles are hereditary now or in the
past.
Whoever is running the show on a cylinder
habitat, elected or by dint of owning the
thing, might be in power for a very long time.
You could get the owner or majority shareholder
passing that on to a descendant or kin, but
if you’ve got longevity treatments in play,
they might be waiting a very long time and
on their passing a millennium later they might
have hundreds of children and hundreds of
thousands of living direct descendants squabbling
over the inheritance.
Possibly a more plausible scenario, essentially
in a more post-scarcity and life-extension
capable civilization is that someone might
play a big role in founding a habitat and
end up as its first leader and just keep getting
re-elected over and over again, either in
a ceremonial role or as flat out autocrat,
elected or not.
Afterall, any colony founded by a handful
of people who just don’t die off as time
goes by is going to have their stamp on everything,
even ignoring that the majority of the population
is going to be related to them by blood or
marriage and the rest by association.
If you go to some interstellar colony founded
by a thousand colonists a thousand years later,
everyone of those millions or billions of
people is going to be able to claim direct
descent from every founder who actually had
a family and if they are still around their
influence is going to be enormous, as is their
experience, so you might have the single same
ruler over and over again or it passing around
between a handful of them because of term
limits.
And that’s not even considering the possibility
that the founder of a colony could just clone
themselves a thousand times, or create their
own subservient species whom the founder can
lord over.
Term limits in another thing you probably
want to be considering if your civilization
has radical life extension, if you’re worried
about someone becoming an institution all
on their own, but it doesn’t ensure they’re
really out of power.
You might just end up with their understudy,
their kid or someone they mentored, as the
ruler, and even if they weren’t a puppet
of that other person who might have genuinely
wanted to retire it’s pretty likely they
and others would be banging at their door
for advice or that they might re-emerge from
retirement during crises.
We tend to name places after their founders
or some prominent person, and it might be
kind of awkward to run against John Smith,
President of the John Smith Space Habitat.
Which could easily lead to a constant youth
migration too.
If you’re building new worlds and the folks
living on them tend to live for centuries
or longer, you need new habitats for their
kids unless you are engaging in population
control, but also so there’s some room for
upward mobility and you’re not 200 years
old before your boss finally thinks you’re
experienced enough to be assistant manager
at the gas station.
Outward mobility and migration is likely to
be tied to a lack of upward mobility, as if
some colony has an average citizen age of
400 and the same dozen folks have pretty much
been running the show for centuries they’re
pretty hard to unseat.
Moreso for a small colony like a cylinder
habitat because when you start complaining
about the leader to younger folks there’s
a good chance one of them is going to say
“Hey Man, that’s my great-grandma you’re
insulting, she is not a tyrant and she makes
the best chocolate chip cookies too.”
Which does raise the issue of what anyone
is actually governing.
Older societies tend to be run on custom as
much as law and it is entirely plausible that
through practice and wisdom we might get a
fairly perfected system of civil rights and
administration that is mostly static and heavily
automated.
Post-scarcity societies aren’t necessarily
Utopian, let alone genuinely perfect, but
they probably would tend to be pretty content
and likely low on crime too, and may be way
better at rehabilitation and earlier prevention
of crime or discontent.
That being the case, where everyone is monstrously
wealthy and long lived and educated compared
to nowadays, they might not have much to actually
govern.
Their titular leader might be mostly ceremonial
and mostly doing jobs like cutting ribbons
or judging contests for the best chocolate
chip cookies.
Particularly if the entire habitat’s maintenance
and administration is mostly being done by
some AI bordering on being a Genus Loci, or
spirit of the place, whose drones handle pretty
much everything.
We see something like that with the Orbital
Minds in Iain M. Banks’ Culture series.
Such an AI might be the de facto leader or
even just given the honorary title of first
citizen if it had basically been toiling in
the background for centuries playing groundskeeper
and maybe even teacher and mentor to countless
generations.
We also need to keep in mind that governments
come in all sizes and what is a government
can be kind of hazy.
An awful lot of universities are home to fairly
large populations and have governing boards
and often provide a lot of services on campus
like police and medical, and many large companies
often have that campus setup too, and we have
a history of ‘company towns’.
It is quite likely a future with lots of O’Neill
Cylinders in some solar system of quintillions
of people would have one that were pretty
specialized like a University Cylinder or
an Amusement Park Cylinder or a Nature Preserve
Cylinder.
Rule by scholars at University incidentally
is a Pedantocracy and we also see an example
of that in Asimov’s Foundation series.
This raises an interesting point because such
habitats are rather naturally configured to
be pretty autonomous and make for natural
borders, so we tend to assume they’d be
a sub-division of some larger state which
might in turn be part of larger grouping and
so on, each level presumably handling certain
governmental functions.
However, you don’t necessarily need all
your government functions coming from one
chain.
As an example, you might have a thousand habitats
who had a treaty to put their equivalent to
a supreme court on one of them, and their
equivalent to the Pentagon on another, but
maybe a few hundred didn’t want that particular
defense group but did want the legal group,
and instead contracted some mercenary group
who had contracts with thousands of other
habs for defense issues, while scattered around
the trillions of habitats any number of them
got their communications service provided
by some other group.
Much the same as you might not have the same
cell phone provider as your next door neighbor,
even though forty years ago you pretty much
had to have the same phone company, and nowadays
would have the same electric company and water
company.
And many services of government might be entirely
picked by an individual, not even a group,
as opposed to our classic idea of any given
piece of government being a monopoly.
So too, revisiting our notion from before
about how someone might have two distant residences
and split their vote between them, someone
could conceivably have dual or multi-citizenship
where they only got a partial vote in each
one.
This might be more likely because land and
territory really aren’t fixed in solar systems,
especially in something like a Dyson Swarm,
all those habitats whirl around and only specific
orbital paths would keep their neighbors the
same, and just those fore and aft of them
sharing that orbit.
What’s more, a space habitat is fundamentally
a spaceship, it can just pick up, move, and
join some other cluster.
So you might have a million different empires
all squished together, each having anywhere
from a few million folks to a few trillion,
and all at the same time they might be sharing
territory in that one habitat might get it’s
policing done only internally, get is traffic
control and space police done by some company
millions of others used, make use of the judicial
system of some empire of a billion habitats
that had other services available but which
they opted not to have, and be part of defense
treaty with some rival empire.
All of which had different policies, titles,
vote allocation, governing systems, and so
on.
And the people might be way more mobile too,
moving as they please or even living in entire
virtual realms hosted online.
Someone might easily be a citizen of a place
that existed on no earthly map, or galactic
one, because it was a simulated world, or
a nation on Earth might have its classic Earthbound
States plus various habitats in orbit that
were states or were grouped into states, plus
a colony on Mars and in ten thousand virtual
realms.
See the Virtual Worlds episode for more discussion
of that.
Folks often contemplate which sort of government
we’ll have in the future, and for my part
I tend to suspect we will have just about
every kind imaginable and more variations
of them at any given time than we’ve seen
in our entire history to date, probably including
those which are an absence or near-absence
of any traditional government, such as variations
on anarchism or voluntarism.
Especially if folks are free to come and go,
both officially and in terms of ease of movement,
you will probably see all sorts of systems
including those we’d think pretty unjust
normally.
Potentially even including those which could
only exist in fiction, like a magocracy - rule
by mages and wizards, in some virtual world.
There are many other types we didn’t cover
but there is one more I wanted to touch on,
the Navarchy, which is rulership of the sea,
which would generally be where a group of
islands which were very big on ships and trade
essentially had the title of leadership in
the hands of their Admiral or vice-versa,
and that might be a fairly parallel setup
in space too where it’s likely to be large
groups of space stations as islands, or spaceships,
or both as a space station is also a spaceship.
This has an extra meaning too because a lot
of interstellar colonies are likely to be
founded by generation ships – see the generations
ships series for details – where the crew
of that ship was running the show for a long
time and also might be founding many colonies.
In that case they might be prone to making
all the colonies they settled sign on to some
basic constitution and treaty, but there’s
another element too.
Time Lag.
Anybody running interstellar commerce doesn’t
really have a true port of home, not when
a single mission can run decades or even longer,
and it's not really practical to hold interstellar
votes.
You can do interplanetary ones, time lag of
a few hours for communication, or even many
days, is hardly a new thing in administration.
Even in this modern era of instant communication,
correspondence back and forth is often by
email with multi-day correspondence chains
on non-emergency decisions.
However, as we looked at in Interstellar Empires,
without FTL travel or communication you are
most likely to get loose knit systems who
if they had any sort of federation it would
probably be just a few basic treaties of human
rights, trade, currency, and extradition.
This may even be the case within our home
solar system.
In many ways the captain of a colony ship
is a power unto themselves, because they control
the ship and they can head off to anywhere
in the galaxy with it, and found colonies
too.
But as we said earlier every space habitat
is also a spaceship, and any virtual world
can be moved on a hardrive to a new server,
and you can even move planets if you really
want to.
Moreover it’s quite possible a lot of space
habitats would be configured to effectively
be long term docks for a spaceship equivalent
of a houseboat where folks just docked their
house where they wanted and left when they
wanted.
We often say that comparing Space to the Ocean
is not a good idea, popular though it is in
science fiction, but in this regard it might
be right.
In the future we might all be captains of
our own ships, changing ports and fleets as
we wanted.
I’m not sure if this would be the best or
most just form of government, but it has its
appeal, to be master of your own fate and
able to set whatever course you wanted to.
And we’ll be exploring that more next week
in Nomadic Space-based civilizations.
I mentioned Psychohistory today and how a
lot of future governance will rely heavily
on computers and statistics, as it already
does.
The value of a strong knowledge of statistics
is useful in just about every area of life,
and also a lot of fun.
If you’d like to enhance your own knowledge
of statistics, and have fun while you’re
at it, I’d recommend Brilliant’s course
“Probability, Statistics, and Finance”,
which will take you from the basics to interesting
topics like Casino Probabilities, Qualitative
Finance, and Cryptocurrency.
Brilliant’s thought-provoking, fun, and
interactive courses makes them a great choice
for learning, whether you’re a student,
a parent trying to enhance your kid’s education,
a professional brushing up on cutting-edge
topics, or someone who just wants to use this
time to understand the world better, you should
check out Brilliant.
Try adding some learning structure to your
day by setting a goal to improve yourself,
and then work at that goal just a little bit
every day.
Brilliant makes that possible with interactive
explorations and a mobile app that you can
take with you wherever you are.
If you are naturally curious, want to build
your problem-solving skills, or need to develop
confidence in your analytical abilities, then
get Brilliant Premium to learn something new.
Brilliant’s thought-provoking math, science,
and computer science content helps guide you
to mastery by taking complex concepts and
breaking them up into bite-sized understandable
chunks.
You'll start by having fun with their interactive
explorations, over time you'll be amazed at
what you can accomplish.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, and want to do it at
your own pace and from the comfort of your
own home, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and try it out for free.
So we’ve got quite a schedule of episodes
for September but we aren’t quite done with
August yet, and we’ll finish up the month
of August with our Monthly Livestream Q&A
on Sunday, August 30th, at 4pm Eastern time,
and you can join us then to get your questions
answered.
We’ll then head into September, and start
the month out with a look at space nomads
and nomadic fleet based civilizations.
The week after that we’ll move on to Part
2 of our new series, Becoming an Interplanetary
Species, as we look at Colonizing Cislunar
Space and the Lagrange Points.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
