This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. 
Get access to my streaming video service,  
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
When we contemplate our first 
meetings with alien civilizations  
we tend to fear they will be hostile, 
hope that will be benevolent,  
and guess they will be a mixture of both just like 
our own civilizations often are. But what if turns  
out they aren’t so much benevolent or hostile 
as just really insufferable and irritating?
 
Welcome back to Science & Futurism with 
Isaac Arthur for another mid-month Scifi  
Sundays episode, where we examine popular 
notions from science fiction and ask about  
how realistic they are, and this month we’ll be 
returning to our Alien Civilization series for  
a look at alien civilization or strategies that 
are presumably meant to be profound or clever,  
but on inspection are stupid or annoying. This 
summer is also the 25th anniversary of the Alien  
scifi Blockbuster Film Independence 
Day, which while an enjoyable film,  
is full of this sort of behavior so I thought 
we’d give it a bit of extra attention today. 
 
That film came out in the mid-90s and the 
preceding decade had been big on alien  
conspiracies and ancient aliens, indeed that 
film’s director Roland Emmerich’s previous  
film had been Stargate, the founding film of the 
Stargate Franchise which focuses a lot on ancient  
aliens. It was also when crop circles were a 
big thing and folks thought this or that big  
circle or pattern in a field indicated a UFO 
had landed or carved a message. My longtime  
reaction and sentiment to that was to wonder what 
sort of mindset would do that and the trickster  
or social malcontent came to mind. Those folks 
whose humor in type or execution is misaligned  
so that they think they’re very funny but mostly 
make the rest of us grit our teeth and try not  
to throttle them. People who are often nice 
enough but fundamentally just very annoying. 
 
That’s what always came to mind for me with crop 
circles, I just pictured some alien trying to make  
a profound or humorous point without realizing 
how inconvenient and unnecessary their medium was.  
Let me go knock some corn over as opposed 
to just burning the signs into the ground  
with my overpowered anti-meteor and collision 
lasers or just transmitting it as a pattern on  
the very active terrestrial radio stations. I 
mean if the objective is secrecy or subtlety,  
writing your name or message or ship footprint 
100 meters wide in some actively tended field is  
a pretty darned inept method at doing that.
Various science fiction satire works,  
most memorably the Hitchhiker’s Guide to Galaxy, 
have played around with the idea that the alien  
sightings and monuments are genuine but 
left as a prank. That the flying saucers,  
abductions, crop circles, and so on were the work 
of galactic pranksters or bored alien teenagers.
 
Fundamentally I suppose I mean “Annoying” for 
this episode to be annoying to us as an audience,  
especially for genre-savvy scifi veterans who 
know what a red shirt is, who Han shot first,  
why blowing up a giant mothership, be it 
hanging over Earth or in Orbit of Endor is  
likely to cause mass extinction on the planet 
below, not celebrations, and who often wonder  
why evil galactic empires with countless planets 
under their control only ever seem to be able  
to summon armies of a few hundred who seem to be 
armed with weapons no deadlier than modern ones.
 
Now of course this series, Alien Civilizations, 
is meant to be rather tongue-in-cheek,  
but at the same time we are trying to contemplate 
how realistic these scenarios are to fine tune  
what the real scenario out in the Universe is, 
since we have so little information on what aliens  
are actually like or if they even exist. We can 
examine a notion like being abducted and probed  
on an alien ship, and ask how realistic it is that 
an alien should need to do this, but what we are  
often doing instead isn’t saying if they would 
or could, but if they are, why they might do so.
 
I’m generally known as an extreme 
skeptic on alien visitations to Earth,  
though principally because I don’t think there’s 
any alien civilizations in our own galaxy. Down  
the years I’ve gotten to hear from lots of folks 
who have had sightings or abduction experience or  
been investigators on such incidents, and I’m not 
really skeptical about the witnesses themselves.  
Doubtless some are dishonest or confused or 
attention seekers but most are honest witnesses.  
I just don’t think they’re accurate and not 
because I think aliens wouldn’t visit Earth.  
Quite to the contrary, I’d find it nearly 
unbelievable that they wouldn’t visit Earth.  
It's that I tend to find the ways they 
allegedly do so don’t make sense. 
 
For any given crime there’s motives, means, and 
opportunity, and vandalizing someone’s field or  
abducting them is a crime, whether it's done by 
a prankster or an alien or an alien prankster,  
but motive and means and opportunity apply to 
most actions, not just crimes. This is how we  
try to look at any given alien sighting or popular 
scifi alien trope, not by asking so much if it is  
true or likely, as what might make it likely. 
As an example, folks will sometimes suggest  
Aliens abduct us for DNA samples, but if 
that’s all they wanted, at this point it  
would be a lot more covert and productive to rob 
a vending machine or mailbox to pull DNA samples  
off all the coins or letters in them. So that 
option doesn’t fit. That doesn’t mean there are  
no motives to abduct humans, hardly I can 
think of dozens, but often on examination  
these don’t work out too well either with our 
common assumptions of what they might want. 
 
As another example, you might abduct folks to scan 
their brains and need them conscious for that,  
since you want to study those neurons firing 
at various stimuli. You also might very limited  
options for erasing or clouding memories 
of you performing this experiment on them,  
given that the ability to cleanly wipe 
a memory without flaw or occasional  
failure would imply a very sophisticated 
knowledge of our brain which presumably  
you would not yet have if you were 
abducting folks to study their brains.  
You rarely bother expending vast effort 
studying something you have already mastered. 
 
They probably would be able to disrupt or obscure 
short term memory after even fairly limited study,  
there are some techniques that can 
seriously screw with short term memory,  
many of which are easier if you have certain 
high-tech but non-human specific tools  
like gamma knives, where you could just be 
recording which neurons fired with whatever  
you were doing and torch the ones in the memory 
areas that you saw activate during your session.
 
Such being the case it's entirely plausible 
you would need to have abducted tons of  
people and some of them came away with partial 
recollection of the event. The thing is if that  
was your specific goal, you probably started 
with corpses, they’re in plentiful supply and  
we do conveniently preserve and store them 
where grave robbing wouldn’t be too hard.  
You can get a lot from cutting into those and 
electrically stimulating them, and get plenty more  
by just downloading our own internet-available 
records of MRI and neurology in general.
 
Pre-internet, pre-MRI, this particular 
abduction theory made a bit more sense,  
but in a more modern context we would 
assume they did as I just suggested,  
accessing our available studies of it, doing 
some graverobbing, and then and only then started  
abducting real live folks to refine that beyond 
what our equipment permitted. Which is plausible  
enough but folks are often reported as abducted 
from their bedroom or vehicle. Both of those  
would be pretty ideal places to hide passive 
but impressive brain scanners, or even active  
but non-invasive ones, you could probably even 
steal power from the available supply in the car  
or bedroom to run your device and transmitter. 
Between watching the TV and watching the road,  
either is going to provide nearly every common 
human stimuli and you can be recording what those  
were too. There may be some specific stimuli you 
would still need to abduct and expose someone to,  
as being too obscure or bizarre 
to expect normal life to provide,  
but you could wait on those till you mastered 
the human brain and erasing short term memories.
 
Keep in mind at this point this wouldn’t be 
some fleeting distorted memory of the event  
that was warped by drugs, they’d probably could 
have recorded every neuron firing during that  
abduction then precisely removed them, and they 
probably would have left a chip into monitor  
you for signs of memory or reactions later 
on, that’s what I’d do anyway if I were in  
their shoes or whatever passes for footwear or its 
equivalent for aliens with no discernible feet. 
 
An obvious rebuttal might be that they genuinely 
just don’t care if they leave memories, but the  
implicit reason there is that they are unethical 
not ignorant or indifferent to the problem of it,  
and such being the case, the easiest way to keep 
an abductee from spilling the beans if you want  
them not to, is to kill them. Alternatively, I 
mentioned pranksters as an option, and that one  
fits pretty well in many ways because its easy 
to believe a small and unorganized minority of  
some bigger civilization occasionally showed up 
on planets and played those sorts of hijinks.  
They know what will generally be viewed as 
annoying or too small of crime for their own  
authorities to get involved, wrecking fields and 
scaring some folks might not be worth the trouble  
to intervene, so they limit themselves to that.
If we’re assuming small and unorganized miscreants  
as an option, it is probably worth noting 
that at least some alien abduction cases  
are thought to be confused memories of some 
more mundane if traumatic or criminal event  
and that if we’re assuming rogue elements 
of an alien civilization are in play,  
that they can be just as capable of doing 
such things. In a potential population  
pool of trillions upon trillions in even the most 
modest interstellar empire, you are going to have  
a lot of xenophiles or twisted criminals unless 
they are much better at detection and treatment  
of such behavior than we are. Of course, key 
thing there, they probably are better at that. 
 
There’s also sustainability. A race of aliens 
whose brain doesn’t even use the same chemistry  
as ours might need a long while to adapt to our 
brains or our biology or culture in general,  
but you should expect the patterns and reasons 
for sighting or abductions to change over  
time. They complete the mission, or learn what 
they need, or the pranks get old and stale.  
With over half a century of sightings, we can 
say realistically they aren’t gathering human  
DNA anymore if they ever were. They would have 
all they needed by now. On the other hand one  
could easily imagine them trying to get a full 
catalog of every species on Earth, in the many  
millions of them, especially the endangered ones 
which would be hardest to find and harvest. That  
might easily provide thousands of ships thousands 
of flights, only a handful of which ever got  
spotted due to some error of stealth systems. 
Its common to rebut sighting by pointing out that  
a civilization capable of building ships able 
to cross hundred of trillions of kilometers  
of space safely shouldn’t be having them crash 
on Earth, but realistically an atmosphere and  
gravity well would tend to be where a ship 
would have maintenance issues cropping up,  
plus we tend to assume Murphy’s Law 
still applies to high-tech civilizations.  
It certainly hasn’t stopped applying to us, our 
stuff breaks all the time and it's not hard to  
imagine some “Save the Earth Species” group, might 
be poorly funded and working with very secondhand  
equipment bought at auction that needs to stop for 
repairs more often than it needs to stop for fuel.  
If you’re running thousands of missions, 
having only a few get spotted and only  
kinda-sorta would be very impressive.
There’s also a tacit assumption about them  
getting spotted that they would go into panic mode 
if we did, and in case like this is might just be  
a policy to ‘avoid getting spotted, don’t stop and 
chat, don’t interfere’ that everybody agrees to  
but not something they get fired or prosecuted 
or vaporized for breaking on accident. 
 
This is what it comes down to though, 
some civilization shows up here and we  
observe a behavior and we try to figure out 
why they would be doing it, or alternatively,  
someone suggests a behavior or motive 
and we ask if it makes any sense.
 
In our regular episode for the week back on 
Thursday we looked at Stellar Strip Mining,  
and those aliens in the Independence Day film 
apparently went in for that too, traveling  
from system to system, clearing it out of what 
they wanted, then moving on to a new one as the  
supply ran out. This seems a weird thing since you 
have got to carry all that mass around with you,  
which is the hardest part of space travel, and 
for all that time, which is the hardest part of  
interstellar space travel. That time element tends 
to imply you are actually very good at resource  
utilization and recycling since you’re spending 
decades in between solar systems. Efficient mass  
and resource use should be your civilizations 
top priorities for research and development.
 
The ship in that film, the original, is plain 
huge, even by the standards of this channel  
where we tend not to even deem something on the 
small side of being a megastructure if it's not  
bigger than a mountain. Nonetheless it was tiny in 
size compared to a planet and even tinier in terms  
of mass. The film implies and the Independence 
Day wiki confirms that the evil alien race here,  
the Harvesters, harvest whole 
planets to refuel their ships.
 
That same wiki entry starts off by describing 
them as “a race of highly intelligent and  
incredibly technologically advanced hive-mind 
extraterrestrial beings. They are a threat of  
universal proportions that seeks to harvest and 
destroy planets to refuel their ships, to grow,  
and to perfect their technology at the expense 
of driving indigenous races to extinction.”
 
I’d really take issue with that “Highly 
Intelligent and Incredibly Technologically  
Advanced” part, especially given how easily their 
system gets hacked by humans in the original film  
and their unshielded ships are so easily shot 
down by our jet fighters. The implication there  
is that the aliens are so stupid they 
can’t even properly engineer a spaceship  
or space habitat or invest any real effort in 
learning how to properly harvest or utilize  
resources. There’s evil, ruthless, and greedy, 
and then there’s just dumb, see our episode  
Stellar Strip Mining for how to do it right. 
Anyway I enjoyed the original film but lots of  
bad science and plot holes there, the 
aliens are shown to be amazingly strong  
yet weirdly and stupidly fragile, so that 
they seem more annoying than terrifying.
 
That’s true of a lot of big-bads in science 
fiction, and particularly ones like the Daleks  
from Doctor Who or the Borg from Star Trek who 
undergo what’s known as “Villain Decay”, which  
is when an enemy that’s initially frightening in a 
story slowly seems weaker and often comedic after  
multiple encounters. Part of this is from the 
heroes having to beat them over and over again,  
you can’t really describe your villain 
as nigh-invincible and have that stick  
after they got ‘vinced’ a bunch of times, no 
matter how lucky or contrived the victory was. 
 
The other part though is that the more sequels 
something has, the more depth and explanation  
we get of the bad guy, and the more they start 
seeming not to make sense. This is also often  
true of nominal space fairies or ancient 
precursors who we often see in a franchise  
as super-powerful and old and benevolent but who 
“Don’t get involved” except for when they do.  
The more we learn of them, the less they often 
seem like wise elders, and often their motives  
seem frankly stupid, perverse, annoying, 
or downright evil. The Stargate franchise,  
especially in later series, tended to call 
that out more often, having introduced Earth  
and its heroes to lots of kind and wise alien 
races who sympathized with Earth’s plight of  
being attacked by aliens but were light on 
real assistance and heavy on platitudes.
 
Stargate’s heavy on the big-bad aliens with no 
particularly logical reason for their behavior  
and fairly irritating villainous plans too. I 
love that franchise and rank it as even better  
than the greats like Star Trek and Star Wars, but 
the original big bad is an alien species that uses  
humans as hosts, they’re a type of parasite, 
and as slaves and soldiers and worshippers too.  
The worship only feeds their ego, which appears 
to be insatiable, and they are demonstrably in  
possession of advanced automation and 
science, like cloning and robotics,  
so why they have this relation with humans is 
unclear. Later villains shown are the Ori, who are  
essentially all powerful but like being worshipped 
and apparently feed off it, and the Wraith,  
who feed on human lifeforce energy. They also have 
advanced technology which should include cloning.
 
Space vampires are a trope that is nearly 
as overused as regular old vampires.  
We don’t have life force energy you can suck 
out, unless you mean stuff like Protein or  
Fat or Adenosine Triphosphate, all of which are 
more easily available through non-human sources.  
If we’re talking about feeding on the human soul 
– which is definitely not what the Wraith do but  
is implied to be what the Ori are doing – then 
this is fine from a story angle, it's simply  
taken for granted a soul exists which science 
doesn’t have any commentary on for or against.  
So it works for scifi or sci-fantasy but isn’t a 
good one for extrapolation to contemplating actual  
real alien civilizations and their behavior or 
motives. Whether or not souls exists, it would  
seem a bit of jump to assume some alien race fed 
on them and was capable of feeding on human ones.  
Developing a taste for aliens from 
another planet would seem a peculiar  
path for evolution on a planet to take.
However farming humans is a popular trope in  
scifi, and a great story but pretty much always a 
bad execution in terms of plot holes, like in the  
Matrix where they use human as an actual source 
of electrical power. If you are going to farm  
humans for their souls, then presumably you want 
to maximize humans, so you’d probably be building  
them a dyson sphere or colonizing hundreds 
of planets to plant them on, not blowing up  
the one they live on, its bad animal husbandry. 
You would also presumably be wanting to maximize  
whatever the nutritional value or taste was that 
humans had, which if we’re assuming human better  
than animal would tend to imply options like 
smarter tasted better or more life experience did.  
Harvesting humans for their memories seems 
plausible – indeed it's not a bad reason to create  
and run a simulated Universe with them in it, 
but this probably would not be destructive.  
You just sneak a chip into their heads that 
records and transmits their lives, it need  
not even necessarily be all that sinister.
Which might make for a very irritating afterlife.  
You show up at the nominal pearly gates and some 
alien St. Peter walks up with a clipboard saying  
“This afterlife sponsored by the Aldeberan 
Realistic Games & Holograms Corporation,  
please sign this waiver for recording your 
life and uploading your mind to enter.” 
 
Certainly annoying but better than finding 
out they feed on pain and nightmares  
and find folks who lived happy and satisfying 
lives prior to that made for the best meals.  
Again we can derive possible motives for 
aliens from an apparent observed behavior  
or hypothesize motives for aliens for a story 
but often on reflection we can figure out a much  
better way to achieve that goal than what was 
suggested in a story or apparently observed. 
 
One that comes to mind is the Borg from Star 
Trek, famous for their introductory message  
on their phone calls, “We are the Borg… You 
will be assimilated… Resistance is Futile.”
 
Then they attack and blow stuff up and abduct 
folks and stick clunky hardware on them.  
They’re terrifying in that they 
are mysterious, cold, implacable,  
and unstoppable. They have no pity for your 
pleas, because not only do they not care,  
but they think you should regard them as 
doing you a favor for assimilating you.  
Great villains, especially when written 
right, which sadly was often not the case.. 
 
Pragmatically you would expect such a 
civilization might tend to follow a path  
of least resistance though, and convert people 
with better public relations. Same thing for  
the evil parasites in Stargate, you show up with 
high technology and offering folks a better life,  
having some converts talking about how awesome 
it is – even if they’re brainwashed by the alien  
puppeteer –and how its strictly voluntary. This is 
going to get you plenty of converts, and you just  
exercise patience until once you’ve got your 
numbers up. Aliens and Artificial intelligences  
should been shown as inhuman, makes for good 
stories and better realism, but should not  
be assumed to be stupid. They may be inhuman in 
thought, but they should be smart enough to know  
the value of understanding how humans think and 
having the ability to ape it or manipulate it.
 
This then, is a key take away for more serious 
contemplation of encountering aliens or some  
AI we might make, or some alien AI. 
They may not be human, and we can’t  
assume they will have human motivations 
and behaviors, but we should anticipate  
they would be smart enough to see the value in 
understanding human motivations and behaviors.
 
In that regard, while an Alien civilization 
might opt to simply brute force overwhelm us,  
and probably could, we should probably not 
assume that they would. That instead they  
would opt for the slow and patient strategies, 
given that they probably have time to spare,  
and that the alien is more likely to invade 
holding gifts than guns, offering friendship and  
smiles rather than threats of annihilation.
So this will wrap us up for another scifi Sunday  
but we’re going to be having an extended edition 
of the episode over on Nebula, where we’re going  
to a lighting round on 10 of the best known alien 
invaders of fiction and what was wrong, stupid,  
or annoying about their motives and methods, and 
we’ll try to briefly explore those alien minds.  
And if you want to explore some alien 
worlds, our sponsor, Curiositystream,  
has a great episode of Space Phenomena on Alien 
Planets that explores what some leading minds are  
contemplating for strange environments and the 
stranger life forms that might arise on them.
 
If you’d like to see that extended edition of 
today’s episode, or any of our other extended  
episodes, those are available on Nebula, our 
streaming service where all our episodes air early  
and ad and sponsor free, alongside some exclusive 
episodes like our Coexistence with Aliens series.  
There’s also many other excellent creators there 
who put out exclusive or bonus material.  
 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself 
but we have partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational 
videos, to offer Nebula for free as a bonus  
if you sign up for CuriosityStream using 
the link in our episode description.  
That lets you see content like “Alien Planets”, 
and watch all the other amazing content  
on Curiositystream, and also all the great 
content over on Nebula from myself and many  
others. And you can get all that for less than $15 
by using the link in the episode’s description.
 
So we’re done for today but not for the week, 
and this Thursday we will be discussing whether  
we should go to Mars now or return to the Moon 
and establish a base there first. The Thursday  
after that we will jump into the distant future - 
or maybe not too distant future - to look at the  
End of Earth. Two weeks from now we will have our 
Monthly Livestream Q&A, don’t forget to join us  
then to get your questions answered. Also if you 
missed our most recent episode, last Thursday’s  
Strip Mining the Galaxy, you can still check that 
out, and it’s sequel, the Galactic Laboratory,  
will finish us out for July, on the 29th.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes  
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel, 
and if you’d like to help support future episodes,  
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website, 
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode  
description below, along with all of our various 
social media forums where you can get updates  
and chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas. You can  
also follow us iTunes, Soundcloud, or Spotify 
to get our audio-only versions of the show.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
