This Episode is sponsored by Ground News
The future can sometimes seem a 
bleak place or one so strange that  
even when awesome it's not a place 
we’re sure we really want to live,  
but there’s a lot of reasons to think 
it’s a destination worth traveling to.
 
So, this episode will air on Thanksgiving and is 
being written on my birthday in late September and  
for me that day is one given mostly to quiet 
reflection on the year that’s gone by, its  
highlights, and what I am thankful for, and what I 
want the upcoming year to be about, and that’s not  
a bad way to spend a birthday or Thanksgiving. 
But it struck me that since we always have a  
Thursday episode on every Thanksgiving and 
I always write them early, sometime around  
my birthday, that it’s not coincidental that 
they tend to be more philosophical episodes. 
 
Today we’ll be looking at technologies that 
will help us solve problems like energy and  
clean water and living space and nature 
preservation and restoration and a ton  
of others impacting the human condition, and I 
hope to demonstrate there’s lots to be thankful  
for already and that what we can glimpse on the 
horizon leaves lots of reasons to be optimistic.
 
For my part I tend to think the future is hard to 
see precisely because it is so bright. On the one  
hand, we should be grateful to live in an era of 
such prosperity and technological might, standing  
on the shoulders of many billions who have lived 
harder lives in our past to help us get to this  
point. On the other hand, I truly believe that 
the breathtaking history of sapient life in the  
universe has not even properly started yet. That 
we’ve barely scratched a first stroke of the first  
letter of the first word in the first line in the 
trillion years long book, that is our story and  
our Universe’s story. That the Universe is just 
emerging from a young, fiery, chaotic beginning,  
into a vastly longer and better era that will 
likely view us with a mixture of sympathy and  
fondness, as we often have for those who went 
through critical and tough moments of history.
 
That is not the future we are looking at today 
though, some deep and nebulous time in the distant  
future. Rather, I thought today we would look 
closer to home and I would present some of the  
reasons why I’m always so optimistic about times 
coming, both in terms of technological prospects,  
which we’ll get to in a bit, and just 
humanity in general, which is a good  
starting point. After all technology is only a 
tool in humanity’s hands, and a hammer in the  
hand of one man builds homes and in another 
demolishes them, or even bashes in skulls.
 
I see humanity welding technology for all 
those ends but tend to be more optimistic  
about which we are prone to. Optimism tends to 
be a good wager to make anyway. Folks often ask  
me why I’m so upbeat about the future and 
in my predictions and discussions of it,  
and I suppose it helps that I know that if I’m 
wrong and civilization does collapse, I’m not  
likely to be called out on the mistake. Everyone 
will be too busy roaming around the radioactive  
wasteland, possibly as dust and ash themselves, or 
possibly fighting off packs of mutant cannibals,  
and in any event I’d still be upbeat about their 
future too. So long as even a tiny remnant of us  
remains, the seed for restoring us bigger and 
better than ever remains inside that remnant. 
 
So, that's the first reason to be optimistic about 
the future. Humans are very hard to kill. Nature  
is not kind. Nature is not generous. Nature is 
predators and parasites and plagues interrupted  
by forest fires, droughts, deluges, asteroids, 
volcanoes, earthquakes, climatic shifts,  
and the occasional ruinous neighboring supernova. 
Dystopian sci fi predicting a dark future paints  
us a picture of a world where every inch of the 
ground you walk on is made of garbage and corpses,  
and ignores this is already true, what did you 
think that dirt under your feet was made of?  
Humanity sits on a throne atop a mountain-high 
pyramid of skulls and catastrophes that would wipe  
a mountain away and would still leave us behind. 
So, no matter what crisis we discuss today or what  
edge we have, keep that foremost in your mind: 
there are far more humans alive nowadays than  
at any time before, and simultaneously, it would 
take fewer of us to survive and rebuild than in  
the past. Add to that, we’re harder to kill than 
we used to be, and the data shows that. Every  
calamity that used to kill tens of thousands, now 
gets hundreds at most. And the fact that it is  
technology making us more survivable in that 
regard doesn’t negate it anymore than pointing  
to some critter’s tusks or thick skin as the 
reason for their survival. But it’s not just  
technology either, it is knowledge in general, 
as well as our powerful bonds and networks. 
 
We are much more capable planners and problem 
solvers than we used to be, with vastly more  
resources and people to draw on too, and it 
shows in conjunction with that technology  
when we do face natural disasters or even man-made 
problems. Those are not trivial accomplishments,  
they have been achieved by great effort and great 
past sorrow, and by the cleverness and courage of  
many people, from the planners and innovators 
to the first responders and just the people  
in general, who have to suffer through calamities 
and personal hardships while simultaneously being  
called on to sacrifice to help others in them. 
We often see the worst of people at hard times,  
but also often their noblest and best too. 
I don’t say this merely as jingo or pep talk,  
though it makes for a good one, but rather as 
proof that we can recover from almost anything and  
we have a track record of being good at it. I will 
also take the somewhat unpopular view that at just  
about 8 billion people alive, we are now stronger 
than ever, on the very simple grounds that there  
are more of us than there used to be. We came into 
the 20th century with a terrible fear that ever  
more people would result in mass starvation and 
inhuman responses to that, we left that century  
four times as numerous but in better shape 
in so many ways, and most particularly in our  
food and health and lifespan, all up, when every 
prediction of that era was that rising population  
would lower all of those. I don’t say that wild 
unchecked growth is automatically a good thing,  
but rather that one person is one more mind and 
pair of hands to tackle problems with. I also  
feel that problems themselves are often 
good things. On a day of Thanksgiving,  
it is often good to ask if some of the problems 
we’ve faced, or at least components of them,  
individually or as a civilization, are things 
we should be thankful for, while some of who and  
what we are today is in spite of adversity, 
some of it is also a result of adversity.
 
And while it’s a bit cliche to say it, how 
we choose to view a situation, half-full or  
half-empty, problem or opportunity, really does 
often matter a lot. I’ve often found that simply  
choosing to view challenges in life that way, 
rather than letting them embitter me, made all the  
difference, and just because something is cliché 
doesn’t make it wrong, quite to the contrary,  
all the feel good advice and aphorisms and such 
that we hear over and over again get repeated for  
a reason. Often because it's true and it works.
So our ability to hit crises with overpowering  
momentum and determination and our ability to 
recover from setbacks are two fundamental things  
to keep in mind as we go through today. Now let’s 
consider some of those technological solutions.
 
It really does also matter what our end goals are 
that we want to be optimistic about, because not  
all of us want the same future. The good news is 
that a lot of the further-future options we look  
at on the show, like colonizing space and building 
megastructure space habitats, as well as options  
here at home, will let us expand humanity’s realm 
until its big enough to encompass many different  
versions of paradise and find out which work. 
And options like virtual reality let us even  
permit those that don’t work. Moral judgements 
aside, not everyone can be the king of the world,  
but VR and simulated realities can let people 
try that out, and maybe improve their genuine  
interpersonal and leadership skills while they’re 
at it, rather than just flee civilization into a  
fantasy realm as we often fear people will.
Virtual reality is definitely one of those  
half-full or half-empty situations, because 
tons of folks lazing around in VR engaging  
in various fantasy wish fulfillment is worrisome 
but we shouldn’t ignore upsides like training or  
treating people's medical conditions. There’s 
nothing like immersion and hands-on training,  
and yet we’re often limited on these by practical 
reality. Soldiers shooting guns for training is  
expensive, but shooting a rocket launcher 
or sneaking up on a tank to plant a shaped  
charge? Ruinously expensive and dangerous. Same 
for practicing medicine, even first aid. No CPR  
doll is going to leave the same impression 
and cement that training the way a realistic  
person in a realistic setting and scenario will. 
Want to train your kid to use tools, well you need  
to have them all and to have things to work on 
that will be expended in the use and then you have  
to clean up and put things away. I’m often shocked 
by how few kids these days know what to do with a  
lot of basic tools and craftmanship, whether its 
carpentry, or fixing a car, or sewing clothes,  
or cooking dinner, and a lot of that is simply 
that the materials, equipment, and teaching time  
is prohibitive while the students are actually 
at risk. Even very good VR probably won’t match  
the real deal, but it's going to get you a very 
good, cheap, and safe exposure to the basics.  
I made a big deal about how our adaptability 
and cleverness and toughness gave us cause to  
be optimistic about the future, along with our 
ability to spring back up even if our species  
were decimated, but faster and better training 
available anywhere by VR, much as how every  
house is now a library thanks to the internet, 
represents another powerful tool that should  
inspire some confidence about the future.
VR is likely to have limits where extreme  
sensations like pain are concerned, so 
I suppose a kid might not learn the full  
respect for a bandsaw that comes with accidentally 
chopping off a finger, and most of us have a few  
instructive and embarrassing scars from DIY 
efforts, but I think learning to use a tool  
in VR safely is still putting you a big leg up 
on someone who first handled a real one live. 
 
We’re also better at sewing missing digits back on 
too, and when thinking of reasons to be optimistic  
about the future, all those prior improvements 
to medicine and the ones on the horizon are  
easy checkmarks. Replantation of missing limbs is 
still a very new thing, just inside living memory,  
and people live a lot longer too. Twice as 
many folks live to 90 as when I was a kid,  
and we’re expecting it to be 10% by 2050, ignoring 
any hypothetical drastic improvements in medicine.  
Same the quality of life for seniors is way 
better than it used to be. The reality is,  
the word ‘aging’ is a bit of an inaccurate blanket 
term describing many unrelated or partially  
related processes, see our episode the Science 
of Aging for more details, so we can’t really  
say folks age slower, but a lot of the hard use 
that made people look and feel older is slowed and  
reduced, and partially repairable or manageable.
And while an awful lot of miracle treatments for  
slowing aging or curing cancer or burning fat 
or building muscle are bunk, or mostly bunk,  
we are making extraordinary and real gains in 
those areas and while we have a real issue with  
obesity in many prosperous nations these days, 
my feeling is that will be one of those crises  
that gets solved, much as how we had rampant 
tooth decay issues in the past and so on. 
 
It's hard to discuss certain things without 
stepping on toes but since I mentioned obesity,  
we should probably discuss physical appearance 
too. We tend to have some cognitive dissonance on  
what’s okay to change about ourselves versus what 
is vain, and a lot of that is probably because of  
how dangerous and irreversible a lot of body 
modification has been as it got introduced as  
an option. There’s minimal risk these days to most 
cosmetic surgery but we still tend to discourage  
that on the grounds that it is permanent and risky 
and merely for vanity’s sake, unless the person is  
horribly disfigured, in which case we’re usually 
fine with it, and all that talk about inner beauty  
and being content with our body and not judging 
books by their covers goes out the window. 
 
For my part, I think if someone doesn’t like their 
nose or cheekbones or overall shape below their  
neck, I don’t see how wanting to change that is 
inherently bad, anymore than wanting to put on  
makeup or different styles of clothes, or for that 
matter getting into better shape or changing our  
bad habits, two things we encourage each other 
not to be content with. It’s the cost, danger,  
and irreversibility that really matter, and those 
are all things technology has been addressing and  
will probably further improve on. That being the 
case I would rather expect body modification to  
get more common as time goes on and probably see 
at least one phase where the cultural mantra is  
something along the lines of “Have the body that 
fits you now” as opposed to have the perfect body,  
it's a state which instead changes as you and 
your life change. Add to that other technological  
options, like virtual reality, augmented reality, 
and even options like limited shapeshifting  
using some of the options we discussed in our 
episodes on Alien Impostors or Smart Matter. 
 
We’ve never really had a way to address people 
being upset that they felt too short or too tall,  
too wide, just didn’t like their ears or facial 
features, asymmetries, the coloring of their hair,  
skin, or eyes, shape of their hands, etc. We 
basically tell people to learn to be content  
with it, which is better than being obsessed or 
bitter about it, but still strikes me as little  
different than telling someone to be content with 
their class and station as assigned at birth or  
by standardized testing. I happen to do the job 
that my parents wanted me to do and which testing  
said I was suited for, but I had many options 
and never felt restricted, let alone confined,  
and I generally feel like that’s where we want to 
aiming humanity in most respects. Lots of options  
to choose from, some encouraged or frowned 
on, but only with reasonable justification.
 
Our history has been one filled with lots of 
castes and classes, and one of the driving  
forces for that is limited land for people to own 
and farm. We’ve made massive strides at getting  
better at bringing higher crop yields from land 
while also decreasing other ecological impacts,  
and research continues to improve that. Mobility, 
be it upward or lateral, literal or social,  
is at least partially abundant nowadays because 
of that abundance of food and arable land and  
the ability of folks to buy and sell and rent land 
and associated properties, not to mention move. 
 
It's cool to think of a house or farm being 
in a family for a dozen generations but the  
flipside of that is that it can be very hard 
for anyone to get into farming or real estate  
when everything is already owned by families with 
all the associated equipment already bought and  
lifetimes of training in running that business. 
This is hardly limited to farming and real estate  
but so much of the rest of the modern economy 
is so constantly in flux from technological  
disruption that there’s always new niches for 
folks to break in. Though the flipside of that  
is that there’s always people being displaced who 
had their skills rendered redundant and aren’t  
personally able to make a good transition 
to something else, for myriad reasons. 
 
One of the ways you can handle both problems is 
by simply adding to the available resources as  
you grow, and that’s exactly what colonization 
of space allows, along with high-tech options to  
add land; like arcologies on the ground and space 
habitats in the sky. And bigger is not the same;  
only more of it, a larger system has more 
diversity of options, a country of ten million  
people doesn’t just have 10 times as many doctors 
as one with a million, it has more specialists,  
it has more brands of cereal, more types 
of vacations and recreation, more sports  
leagues not just more teams of the same sport. 
More types of nations and sub-divisions too,  
see our episode on Future Government types 
for more discussion of all the different  
combinations and variations folks might try.
Using the midwestern model, which is generally  
town and cities and villages inside counties, 
themselves inside states, themselves inside a  
nation, we might see a future in which there’s a 
US State on the Moon, say the State of Armstrong,  
or we might see one in which a small ring habitat 
of a couple thousand is the Village of Kalpana and  
part of a loosely-tethered conglomeration of a few 
dozens other ring habs and O’Neill Cylinder’s in  
the County of Glenn, itself part of the State of 
Ohio. But the cool thing about space habitats,  
as I often say, is that they are mobile, so if 
Kalpana can’t stand the Glenn County government  
any more, they can vote to have a tug come by and 
move them to the neighboring County of Shepard or  
even the mobile US territory of Aldrin Cyclers 
between Mars and Earth, or leave the country  
entirely and join the Mamoru prefecture 
of Japan on the Shadow-side of the Moon. 
 
Mobility in a literal sense has a lot 
to do with freedom, and while it’s very  
nice to be able to put down roots and establish 
yourself inside a stable and enduring community,  
the option to leave, even if never taken, for 
both the individual and that entire community,  
seems to me a good one and another 
bright option for our future. 
 
That’s off in space and some centuries ahead 
of course, but building to such a future can  
make current hardships more endurable. So 
too, growing options for remote work give  
people much more mobility in their life. 
For all of our successes we have plenty of  
hardships though, and some of those problems are 
derived from our success. We have a shortage of  
water on a planet mostly covered kilometers 
deep in it, and a lot of that is polluted  
with islands of trash on it. So we develop ways 
to better desalinate water, driven by solar or  
nuclear energy, and to preserve or minimize that 
water usage and without deprivation. We don’t  
tell people not to irrigate with water, 
we find methods to use less to do more,  
we develop tricks to decrease erosion and our soil 
and nutrients running down rivers to spill into  
the sea. Those same tricks can keep garbage, 
not just soil, from flowing out into the sea;  
as we don’t want islands of trash, and we’ll 
develop robot drone boats to go out and  
reclaim those useful resources so they fuel our 
civilization once more rather than polluting it. 
 
We’ll get better and faster recycling with smart 
identification allowing robots to rapidly and  
accurately separate and process various types 
of waste in the best manner for them. In truth  
we probably won’t have garbage cans much longer 
as along with your robot vacuums and mops you  
will probably start having that augmented reality 
layer that lets you quickly and casually designate  
some object as garbage or a mess and a drone will 
pop by to collect it and dispose of it properly.
 
There’s another one of those less-noticed but 
awesome improvements to life. It’s ragweed season  
here in Ohio as I write this, and allergies are a 
miserable thing. I’ve been getting allergy shots  
for some months now and in fact will be pausing 
in my writing to go to my weekly appointment in  
a moment, and they and antihistamines definitely 
have made life better for me personally. So does  
the air filter I run in my office here in my 
home, so did quitting smoking two years ago  
when I turned 40, and the robot that vacuums the 
carpet in here against all those allergens and my  
very furry cat Flax definitely help too. That’s 
not just a quality of life thing, allergens and  
mold are definitely factors in making people 
sick and less resistant to other ailments,  
and we shouldn’t ignore the psychological benefits 
of a neat and tidy home. So every robot that makes  
cleaning a little easier, improves your health 
in body and mind, and gives you a bit more free  
time for other matters of your choosing. One tiny 
example among so many others, that makes life a  
bit healthier and happier, including the invention 
of the vacuum cleaner before they were robots.  
 
Robot lawn mowers will definitely be more of a 
thing this decade and we’ll see more automation  
and smart controls in homes and gardens, this 
might get into some very sophisticated lawn and  
garden maintenance being constantly updated 
against current weather and local climate  
too. The value of automation in agriculture is 
almost incalculable as well. However, robots will  
have a powerful role in nature preservation too.
Consider the drone that counts every single member  
of a species in a forest and can visually 
ID them without needing a dot or tracker,  
consider when an upgraded version of google 
maps comes out that casually lets you pull  
up how many of each type of tree or shrub or 
mammal or bird are in a given parcel of land.
 
Consider when such a drone might have pheromone 
emitters or sprayers to allow us to poke or prod  
animals toward each other or to certain behaviors. 
Consider a world in which vehicle detection and  
avoidance are so good you never see a dead animal 
along the road, because roadkill is a thing of the  
past, but you wouldn’t anyway because those 
same robots patrol the roads for damage and  
maintenance needs and garbage. Imagine a world 
in which the death of a human or animal on the  
road was a shocking rarity, not a terrible norm.
All of this I think is very plausible and in most  
cases sooner than later, and I think the one that 
worries folks the most is how do we get enough  
energy and cheaply enough and without wrecking 
our environment in the process. Many think it  
is too late, and if you do, then my advice is to 
go all in for a moon base as soon as possible,  
because industry on the Moon churning out 
orbital or L1 solar shades can mediate that  
problem a lot, no matter how far gone it is. 
That’s also a good path to power too. For my part,  
I’m a big believer in a multi-method approach to 
energy because even if some are cheaper or more  
expensive than others, if you have a modest 
amount of it out there, it not only can get  
serious technological improvement through 
real-world usage, but it helps remove the  
sorts of instabilities and jugulars we get from 
single-source energy. I’m a big fan of nuclear  
and solar as mainstays though, and because when I 
was born, solar was still nearly a hundred bucks  
a watt, down a lot from just a couple decades 
before, and since that time, the price per watt  
has dropped by 10% or more every single year. 
We are just about at the point where solar will be  
the cheapest power source on average, that is very 
debatable, and we still have issues of storage and  
weather and nighttime, which is why I love it 
with nuclear power, but that time is definitely  
approaching when it won’t be debatable anymore and 
more sunlight energy hits this planet every second  
than we use all day, so there’s plenty of room 
for expansion. Battery technology has similarly  
improved, if more modestly, and other storage 
options show continual improvement and promise. 
 
The end is in sight, I really believe that, 
and I believed it 20 years ago and reality has  
outperformed my hopes there too. Aggressive 
efforts at constantly improving the safety,  
cost, efficiency, and sustainability of all 
our possible power sources, even hydrocarbons,  
is probably the one area we fall short in, not 
because we don’t make those efforts, but because  
we often have rival interests attack other 
approaches to energy. Our approach is better,  
and their approach is therefore awful. To be fair, 
that is something we see in many other industries  
and policy areas too, where it’s a competition 
for attention and resources rather than an  
actual contradictory approach. I suspect as you’re 
hearing this, if it's when it comes out or sooner  
after, me saying energy will soon be cheaper than 
ever is going to be met with some tooth-grinding  
or rolled eyes. Energy is expensive in 2022 and 
indicators are it will be a rough winter in that  
regard, but I suspect that will only fuel the 
push for more and cheaper and better energy.
 
That’s the last area I will hit today to close out 
on, it's very easy to get pessimistic about things  
when it seems like we’re heading in the wrong 
way or forming up for circular firing squads,  
but the evidence seems to indicate we really 
are better nowadays about working together and  
reacting to possible problems. We see them sooner 
and sometimes that means we never really act with  
urgency, and I won’t say that doesn’t happen a 
lot but at the same time I would make the case  
for having a bit more trust in your fellow humans. 
They’re not apathetic, most of us have issues  
we’re very passionate about and wonder why others 
aren’t, but it's not the same 10% of us who care  
about everything. We are all spread out working 
to other problems and while that can make it feel  
like folks aren’t focusing on what matters, and 
of course some really are not, just remember that  
a lot of them are and just don’t agree on what is 
most important or how to deal with it, and that we  
can walk and chew bubblegum at the same time.
The world is anything but perfect, same for  
humanity and for you and I individually, but we’ve 
a long history of success and improvement, and  
much to be thankful for, and in contemplating that 
we can see a shadow of that future to come, and  
that shadow looks pretty impressive as that future 
casting it is a very bright one indeed. 
 
A common concern about reaching a better future 
is that while nowadays we have access to virtually  
unlimited information, when it comes to our news, 
folks often feel like they’re getting saturated  
with news that’s full of bias from one group or 
another and lacks accuracy or neutrality. And it  
isn’t just the bias, it's the constant feed of 
clickbait, hype, and sensationalized material  
that all seems built around getting views and 
appealing to one group or another’s echo chamber.
 
That’s where Ground News comes in, it's the 
world’s first news comparison platform that  
shows you how breaking news is being covered 
across the political spectrum, and gives you  
a visual breakdown of the new sources covering 
a story and where they fall on the political  
spectrum. It also shows you blindspots, like 
which new stories are being underreported  
by one side or the other. And you can watch 
how international stories are being covered  
across the globe using the interactive map.
Cofounded by Harleen Kaur, who got her start  
working for NASA on the New Horizons Spacecraft, 
Ground News is a Platform that makes it easy  
to swipe between headlines to discover 
which details are emphasized, exaggerated,  
or left out entirely, and you can even 
see your own news bias preferences. 
 
Ground News is not better news, it’s a 
better way to read the news, and you can go  
to Ground.News/IsaacArthur to try Ground News 
for free, or subscribe to get access to all the  
features you see here and support our show and a 
small team of independent media outsiders working  
to make the news more transparent. And as an extra 
bonus, Ground News has a Black Friday sale where  
you can get 40% off a Vantage subscription, 
again that’s Ground.News/IsaacArthur.
 
So we have our Livestream coming up this 
weekend, Sunday, November 27 at 4pm Eastern time,  
and that will probably be the last one for the 
year since the next one in December would fall  
on Christmas Day, which might be rather 
tricky to pull off this year, and it might  
get rescheduled or just skipped till January. As 
I’ve mentioned in passing, Sarah and I are in the  
processing of adopting 3 little kids and they 
will have moved in the day before this episode  
airs, which might make this weekend’s live stream 
tricky too, and I’ll probably make the call on  
December’s Livestream after we do November’s. 
Speaking of Livestreams though, some folks asked  
about the new piece of art behind me in the 
Studio as it looked a lot like the NASA JPL  
Visions Posters or paintings that many of us, 
myself included, have hanging up around our  
home or office. And it isn’t coincidental, they 
were commissioned with that in mind and from  
the same artist, the phenomenal Don Clark from 
Invisible Creature, who worked with the team over  
at The World Fair Co, who are on a mission 
to inspire hope for the future by reviving  
and reimagining the World's Fair. Personally I 
love that idea, and loved the posters, and was  
given that poster hanging up there by my friend 
Cameron Weise, from Build The Future Podcast,  
who was giving a talk on it I was attending. If 
you want to find out more about that or grab one  
of the posters, go to worldfair.co/gallery.
So that wraps us up on November episodes but  
we sure still have December coming up before we 
close out the year, and we’ll start the month off  
with asking what if SETI’s attempts at detecting 
alien signals succeeds and what we should do if  
it does. Then we’ll look at the opposite case, 
what if we never encounter aliens because we  
are the first civilization in this region of 
the Universe, period. Then it's onto Scifi  
Sunday for a look at the concept of Planetary 
Civil wars and fighting between worlds. 
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like to  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social  
media forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
