Force fields are a staple of science fiction,
they’re in almost every story, yet they’re
assumed to be impossible.
Today we’ll challenge that assumption.
When I was getting ready to do this episode
I started looking around for all of the discussions
I could find examining force fields in a more
scientific context, but there weren’t many
left to be considered after weeding out a
ton that were just pseudo-science click-bait
and hype.
They tend to be great examples of Betteridge’s
Law of Headlines which states that any news
article headline ending with a question mark
poses a question to which the answer is ‘No’.
Alternatively, when I reviewed classic science
fiction I couldn’t find many stories and
settings that didn’t have some sort force
field in them.
They are rather ubiquitous, for something
that hasn’t got much basis in known science.
Part of that might come from their origin,
they were popularized very early in science
fiction and once a piece of tech shows up
in a Sci-Fi classic it’s safe territory
for other writers to use.
Part of it though I’d guess is just the
sheer power of weaponry at the end of World
War II.
With atomic bombs in play you need something
stronger than armor to resist them because
nukes beat matter every time.
And of course they were just mind-blowingly
cool when portrayed in movies like “Forbidden
Planet”.
That’s worth remembering too, force fields
and energy beams are a very easy special effect
to do in pre-computer times that looks awesome,
and damage to your shield doesn’t require
smashing up the scenery or expensive spaceship
models.
Now regarding the topic of natural force fields,
they are real enough, which sometimes causes
some confusion.
We have 4 fundamental forces that control
the interaction of matter in this: Gravity,
Electromagnetism, and the Strong and Weak
Nuclear Forces.
These do have force fields, and if you can
manipulate those you can affect stuff trying
to pass through them.
Indeed, NASA and others have been looking
at how to use magnetic fields to protect spaceships
from radiation for a long time and have made
a lot of progress at using these fields to
keep out harmful particles.
This is our first big problem with forcefields,
you usually want stuff like air and light
to move through them, so you can see what’s
going on and keep breathing, but if you’ve
got a forcefield that lets light through,
it would seem like it ought to let a laser
through too.
Not a very practical shield if you can’t
see the people shooting at you, but also not
very useful if they can zap you right through
it.
In the classic Sci Fi series Dune, by Frank
Herbert, we’re introduced to personal forcefields.
He gets around the light issue by the laser
guns having a weird interaction with them
that sets off a nuclear explosion killing
both people, so no one uses the one on the
other.
He also has the shield designed so that only
slow moving objects can pass through, thus
air gets through but bullets and fast knives
do not.
In the book, the idea that “the slow knife
penetrates the shield” serves as a reminder
to be observant of where you are in time and
space, it’s a fairly deep and philosophical
book.
Plus, he presumably wanted to capture and
highlight the feudal aristocracy feel of the
series with knife and sword fights, so how
it works doesn’t actually matter but this
is common in general for personal shields
in fiction... except that in this we have
a problem...
We think of air moving rather slowly, even
a strong gust of wind moves a lot slower than
a baseball, let alone a bullet, but in fact
air particles themselves individually move
quite quickly.
Those particles are usually zipping around
a bit faster than the speed of sound, meaning
they aren’t getting through unless many
bullets would, and while we generally make
bullets that travel between Mach 2 and Mach
3, you can use a heavier bullet travelling
a bit slower to do the same damage, and all
of our favorite melee weapons like clubs,
swords, and axes are sub-sonic too.
If we try to argue that only large chunks
of matter, not small particles, actually count
toward that barrier, then we have to worry
about particle beams, or maybe just someone
just shooting us with a water gun.
One that vaporizes the water into steam on
the way out, which is perhaps not practical
as a long range weapon, but very painful and
effective at closer quarters.
The same holds for a flamethrower as well.
Now those don’t really matter for the purposes
of the story.
Dune, after all, has a ton of plot holes when
you think about the science, but it is still
one of the best science fiction series ever
written.
Still it is those kinds of issues which we
need to think about when contemplating force
fields.
We might be putting the cart in front of the
horse here though.
Before we discuss what you can use the technology
for, it’s worth pondering whether we can
actually achieve the technology one day.
However, to do so we need to first understand
what this technology is, in terms of its properties,
to discuss it.
What force is the field producing and controlling?
What goes through and what doesn’t?
The perfect classic force field stops everything,
and I think are so popular in TV and films
because beam weapons and force fields are
very easy and safe special effects compared
to bullets, explosions, point defense systems
and so on.
As I said earlier, it’s very expensive to
smash holes in your spaceship when it is a
real model someone assembled from plastic
and glue.
These days we tend to see more of each, indeed
we often see rock, paper, scissors systems
in video games.
For attack they have projectiles, beam weapons,
and missiles; for defense armor, force fields,
and point defense, with some working better
against others.
This is probably a better approach to consider
though, and I don’t mean because it is more
interesting than just beam and shields, but
because we can more easily contemplate a shield
that works against something specific.
As an example of this we have the Plasma Window,
something we discussed using in the Mass Driver
episode to keep air out of the device, which
is essentially a big long tube you want to
keep as a vacuum.
It is actually pretty simple in concept, though
harder to get working.
Plasma is one of the four basic states of
matter along with liquids, gases, and solids.
While plasma itself is electrically neutral,
just like most matter, its constituent material
is all separated and ionized.
That means it all responds strongly to magnetic
fields, so we can keep it bouncing around
inside a magnetic field that we control.
If air tries to get in there it gets pushed
away, for the same reason cold air has problems
getting into a warm room, if none of the hot
air inside can escape.
Plasma is very hot, so if you keep a pocket
of it at normal pressure or higher, other
gases won’t enter, so it acts like a force
field against them.
But large fast objects can move through easily
enough, though you wouldn’t want to stick
your arm in a plasma window unless you need
a quick tan or really want third-degree burns.
Something like this isn’t a bad personal
shield since punching folks through one isn’t
a great idea, but it won’t stop bullets
and it won’t stop lasers; it might stop
particle beams.
This type of shield, improved enough that
you could carry one around on your belt that
forms a protective cocoon around your body,
would let them walk around on an airless planet
without a spacesuit, though sunscreen would
probably be a good idea.
It would also let you have airlocks on spaceships
without needing to pump the air out or lose
it.
Flick on the plasma window, open the airlock
door, jump through.
We have the technology for this now, it’s
rather basic and energy consumptive, but it
works.
Could you ramp this up?
Use it to contain so dense a plasma that a
coherent laser couldn’t get through and
bullets and such would be incinerated?
Possibly, maybe a series of toroidal rings
around the person or object like a stack of
donuts full of dense plasma.
Such a thing ought to be a monstrous energy
hog, but we can’t rule it out, and trying
to get a field that can do just that is the
basic concept behind a Tokamak fusion reactor.
So a civilization with compact fusion reactors
that worked this way might be able to do it.
Problem is, the thing glows rather brightly,
it is superheated gas, and with a color based
on that gas, we use it for making light after
all.
Those really nice plasma TVs aren’t called
that as a marketing gimmick, they use plasma
to make the various colors.
If you are running one at high enough energy
and density to be vaporizing bullets or scattering
lasers beams you ought to be glowing like
a lighthouse, which is not what you want if
you’re the guy standing in the middle of
it, since it would probably vaporize you too.
You might stick it on a big ship with reflective
sides, which would also help against a laser,
but you’d be a pretty big target.
Of course to be fair, as we said in the Space
Warfare episode, there’s no stealth in space
anyway so it’s not like it matters if they
can see your shields.
Also hard to see outside such a thing.
We get that issue with opaque shield or cloaking
fields in sci fi a lot, the two obvious workarounds
would be a thin wire through the shield with
a camera on it, or flicking off segments very
quickly to get a look, and doing so in a random
fashion so the enemy can’t determine the
frequency and pattern you’re doing that
at to sneak something through.
That last works fine if you can turn the shield
off in places and turn it right back on again
real quick, which you can’t really do with
a plasma window for instance, since you need
to have a reservoir of gas to be the plasma,
and inject it in there and heat it up.
Shut the field off and it takes a little time
to disperse for you to see through.
The wire through the shield to a camera is
a little trickier, not because those cameras
will get blown up a lot, cameras are small,
wires are small, treat them as expendable
and send more.
Rather because that wire needs to be insulated
against the shield somehow and if you can
insulate the wire against the shield, you
can insulate a projectile slamming through
the shield too.
Which is fine if you want to send bullets
out at whoever is attacking you, so you don’t
have to flicker your shield, but presumably
they can insulate their bullets coming at
you too.
Classic problem of course, we get a technology
that makes a good weapon or defense and then
someone spends their energy trying to use
that same technology to defeat that tech,
and you often can.
Steel armor is better than bronze or leather
armor, but if you can make steel armor you
can make steel weapons, and a knife or arrowhead
uses a lot less steel than a suit of full
plate.
Regardless, the plasma shield concept has
some real possibilities, even in the near
future, but doesn’t seem a great candidate
for the classic sci fi forcefield.
It’s an option, but can we do better?
Real objects feel solid because of the Electromagnetic
Force between particles and the Pauli Exclusion
Principle that keeps them from occupying the
same place.
We saw in our discussion of active support
in the Upward Bound series that while we can
use this to provide passive support to an
object, just as a cup sits on a table or a
coat hangs from a hook, we can project particles
at something to keep it in place.
It can work as well or better in some cases
as sticking supports under something.
The idea of levitating matter kilometers up
in the air can seem a bit counter-intuitive
but it works, and you can see a real life
demonstration of this over at Cody’s Lab,
he kept a pie tin levitating quite high on
a simple stream of water.
If we can do this constantly, to replace big
metal supports, we can also do this in a very
short term and pinpoint fashion.
Something attempts to enter ‘the field’
and instead of an impenetrable wall of force,
it simply pushes back against that object
in a carefully calculated way.
Possibly using a reservoir of pushing material,
possibly a closed loop, or possibly using
material already present, like the air.
A lot of folks will remember articles a couple
years back about DARPA or Boeing having a
for-real forcefield, and it’s kind of true,
in a pretty literal way.
What kills a lot of soldiers isn’t bullets,
armor is actually quite good at stopping those,
but traditionally in modern warfare it’s
explosions that get most people.
When an explosive goes off you have a big
shock wave and shrapnel.
What this sort of force field is doing is
trying to attenuate that shockwave force,
and modern electronics and computers can move
very quickly, something that we need to consider
when looking at these concepts.
An explosion goes off near a vehicle, it is
moving very fast but not at light speed, nothing
like it.
So that explosion can be detected before it
hits, and the vehicle emits a powerful burst
to turn the air between the vehicle and the
approaching shock wave into a plasma-like
medium, disrupting the shockwave.
Conceptually, this is a lot like reactive
armor or an airbag, and we can consider airbags
a type of shield too.
We don’t live in the 1940s when sci fi was
all about rockets and rayguns, and computers
were huge things that took up buildings.
We live in an era where computers are tiny
and fast.
One where we can consider stuff like point-defense,
not just shooting missiles down, but maybe
even tiny bullets.
So instead of the classic force field, maybe
you are walking around with a ton of tiny
lasers or guns on you, each automatically
controlled.
Instead of needing a shield that lets particles
of air through, you’ve got a smart system
that only turns your protection on the instant
it needs it, and better yet, the place where
it needs it.
Someone goes to stab you and the shield only
pops up in the exact place to intercept it
or at the right spot and angle to deflect
it away.
If we don’t have that, maybe we can mimic
that with a bunch of small point defense.
It detects a bullet, it shoots the bullet
with a tiny one to deflect and fragment it.
Now it normally couldn’t intercept a laser,
but it might be able to detect that one is
aiming at you and shoot something in the way
to intercept and diffuse it.
We don’t have many laser weapons yet, we
use them with a lot of weapons, but they’re
not a great anti-personnel weapon by themselves
unless you have either a very compact and
high-power generator or some really awesome
batteries.
Lasers, even modern ones, aren’t too efficient
and batteries don’t tend to store a lot
of power nor discharge it too quickly, so
chemical based propellants, firearms, are
still a lot better.
If that changes, we’ll start seeing laser
guns.
Realistically, you kind of need stuff like
that for a forcefield too though, so if you’ve
got personal forcefields you probably have
man-portable laser and particle weapons.
We can deflect a particle stream magnetically,
but a laser is harder.
What stops a laser?
Well a laser is composed of photons, but they
are the carrier for the electromagnetic force.
And while they transmit it, they aren’t
affected by it.
No magnetic shield is going to stop a laser.
Gravity can, it bends light and can red or
blue shift it, so if you had some way to generate
gravity, or better yet, anti-gravity, you
could have a field of that which could redshift
a laser beam down so it was too weak to hurt
you.
Better yet, instead of an omnidirectional
field, maybe a beam or focused blast of it
to just redshift the area the beam is entering.
But if you do have gravity and anti-gravity,
then you also probably have a new kind of
weapon to contend with as well.
Since we don’t have any way to generate
gravity, besides raw mass, and anti-gravity
is one of those topics that occupies the hazy
area of physics, while anti-gravity would
be a massive game-changer technology, we’ll
save discussing that for another time.
In the absence of that, we can use reflective
armor, or even reactive armor that explodes
when punched.
That’s handy for stopping projectiles, an
explosion that pushes back against the incoming
projectile essentially, but those also put
lots of vaporized matter in the way that diffuses
an incoming laser beam too.
Alternatively, we have the option of shooting
that out away from us, in between the beam
and the target.
A tiny mirror that gets in the way or a pocket
of gas to disrupt and absorb the beam.
Notice though that we keep talking about focused,
smart defense, not some big dumb bubble around
you.
Partially because that seems to be what physics
allows us, but mostly because it’s smarter.
Instead of a big bubble on all the time, burning
power, something that is pinpointed in time
and space.
That’s rule number one of warfare, smart
beats dumb every time.
It doesn’t replace armor and neither should
a force field, since nothing quite replaces
the value of lots of dumb matter in the way
to absorb damage, but there’s always a cost
to that.
Walking around in body armor is exhausting,
even the modern light weight stuff that’s
flexible.
If you ever need to lose weight fast, grab
yourself a nice Kevlar vest and ballistic
plate and go jog around for a few hours, builds
muscle and burns fat, through a treadmill
is better for the back.
But whether we’re talking about body armor
or vehicle armor or armor on spaceships, it
slows you down and makes you less agile.
This is a big no-no under rule number one
of warfare, which is to avoid getting hit.
So some system, like a suit of liquid armor
that could detect an approaching impact and
flood the spot with the fluid, or a personal
point-defense system that could shoot stuff
out to block a hit like a classic shield,
would help.
And by classic shield, I mean old school,
a thing that gets in between you and the other
thing trying to kill you, not a forcefield.
So in some ways, we’re seeing that even
if a forcefield is possible, it maybe isn’t
what we ideally want anyway, not unless it
only expends energy when it gets hit.
Ultimately though, to get a real force field,
we want technology that can play with gravity
or inertia in a very significant and controllable
way.
But let’s say we have something like that?
What is it good for besides keeping you from
getting killed, an application that admittedly
is quite valuable even if you can’t use
it for anything else.
We have the obvious use, instead of using
armor you use shields, but you can take that
a step further and replace your hull entirely
with forcefields.
I mean the point of spaceship is to keep the
air in and keep the radiation out, so a bunch
of force fields do the same thing.
Unless we’re sticking to the notion of some
magic single bubble you’d presumably have
lots of individual ones and backups that could
kick in if a chunk of pseudo-hull fails.
I think you’d still want some actual hull
as an extra backup and to keep folks from
going insane at the thought of them failing,
but you could keep it to a minimum thickness.
This lets you do much better with active support
structures too; we discussed those in the
Upward Bound series and this is basically
the same concept, instead of needing a big
foundation and pylons to hold a building miles
up in there, it’s just resting on a forcefield
instead.
Fundamentally a lot of our limitations on
doing things don’t come from basic physics,
but rather from all the engineering constraints
placed on us by the fundamental limits on
material strength from chemical and atomic
bonds, or getting rid of all the heat built
up doing stuff.
That’s an issue for stuff like star lifting
for instance, the process of magnetically
scooping matter off a star that we’ve discussed
before.
You need to be close to a star to do that,
and stars tend to be rather hot.
We can use magnetic fields to deflect away
charged particles like plasma hitting stuff
near a star and make the exposed surface very
reflective so light doesn’t heat it up,
but that’s very tricky to get just right,
so you can put stuff near a star.
A force field alters that equation a bit,
though it depends on how it works.
Heat buildup tends to be a big handwave with
sci fi force fields.
If you’ve got some shield that can shrug
off atomic blasts hitting your spaceship and
energy beams that could roast cities, where
exactly is all that energy and heat going?
Is it bouncing away?
Ought to be giving your ship a big shove in
the process even if you can bounce it all.
Or are you absorbing it?
If so, where to?
Your ship?
The energy released in an atomic blast, even
if you can distribute that all evenly so it's
just heat added to your ship, would probably
be enough to roast every person on that ship.
So if we’re assuming it can deflect nuclear
blasts and their energy, you’ve got something
that can let you casually fly into a star,
or at least hover right over one.
If it’s good enough to let you go hang out
in stars, that’s a pretty neat place to
hide stuff, like entire civilizations.
Which is out topic for next week.
Force fields are a lot like replicators - the
ones from Star Trek that make stuff, not the
ones from Stargate which, actually, also make
stuff but mostly more of themselves and in
a hostile, Grey Goo fashion not a Tea, Earl
Grey fashion – but force fields are like,
replicators, the more you think it about the
more you come up with stuff it can do that’s
so awesome it kind of spoils the show when
you think about it.
Replicators are a lot like a magic lamp with
a genie, your first wish is for more wishes
and the first thing you replicate is another
replicator and the power plant that runs it…
which is more or less how the Stargate Replicators,
Grey Goo, and von Neumann machines work.
Then you tell half of them to keep replicating
and the other half to build stuff, like spaceships
with forcefields.
You can use a forcefield to make a window,
we also often consider walls with TV screen
that are so high resolution they can just
switch from showing you the news to the outdoors
just like you were looking through a window,
but you can probably tune a forcefield to
act like a TV too.
I mean if it can block light, it can presumably
do that selectively.
Or a set of speakers, after all sound is just
vibrating waves.
So maybe your personal forcefield isn’t
protecting you, it's cloaking you and making
a decoy that looks and sounds like you a few
feet away.
Gives you the option for very realistic holograms
too.
Things you can see and hear and touch, and
also lets you remotely control stuff a lot
more intuitively than piloting a robot drone.
Maybe you don’t use steel plows on farms
anymore, just run some force fields through
them to churn the Earth instead, maybe that’s
how you plow snow off the roads in the winter.
Maybe you pop them up over roads to bounce
the snow away in the first place.
You don’t carry an umbrella, one just pops
up over your head and shoulders, or over the
boulevard, all of the fun of walking in the
rain without the wet clothes.
No soft mattress or gel padding, your bed
is a forcefield that tunes to right comfort
and support, the soles in your shoes carefully
absorb the impact of your steps better than
gel or rubber.
You don’t break your ankle jogging over
a groundhog hole or your car axle driving
over a pothole because your shoes or car see
it and drop a forcefield right there, you
don’t slip on the ice because it makes that
spot have friction and tread.
Your handy personal forcefield keeps out bad
odors from your personal air from folks who
went jogging, but skipped on a shower.
You maybe don’t need sunscreen either because
it keeps ultraviolet light off you, but not
the rest, good way to heat and cool your house
too, or your planet, if you can selectively
tune what wavelengths of light can pass through
or reflect, or what speed of particles can
get through and what can’t.
Come to think of it, if you can selectively
let only certain speeds of particles through
while bouncing others back, you might be able
to tell the laws of thermodynamics to buzz
off and separate warm fluids into a hot and
cold side.
Those aren’t as awesome as a personal forcefield
that bounces off bullets or lets you walk
around on an airless planet, but at a day
to day level they are a lot more handy, especially
that last one, which is basically Maxwell’s
Demon and a perpetual motion machine.
We don’t have a roadmap to forcefield technology,
but we’ve seen some gimmicks that let us
do about the same thing and maybe that’s
another example.
It would be neat to have an invisible bridge
between two tall buildings instead of a solid
structure, but perhaps instead of a forcefield
bridge you can walk across, something that
just pushes against your feet in midair, targeting
every step to provide push back as you walk.
Micro-size something like this enough, and
with enough computer power, and maybe you
could have a holodeck like in Star Trek, but
where it’s only making stuff solid when
you’re touching, applying just enough force
by shooting stuff there at just the right
moments and locations, possibly so fine-tuned
you could feel textures and heat.
We have no way of knowing what cool new physics
might emerge in the future that maybe allow
us the classic force field, but we’ve seen
today some of the options that allow us close
equivalents or alternatives, as well as some
of cooler uses this technology might permit
that we tend to skip over when thinking about
spaceships and ray guns.
Personally I wouldn’t expect that we’d
ever get the classic force field, but it’s
not something we can rule out entirely yet
and those close equivalents and alternatives
at least are decently plausible.
Next week we will be returning the Alien Civilizations
Series, for a look at Hidden Civilizations,
in Hidden Aliens.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
