The Red Planet beckons us toward it, and 
the day draws closer when humans will walk  
on its dusty surface, and the moons of 
Mars may be our gateway to that future. 
Today we are taking a look at the 
two Martian Moons, Phobos and Deimos,  
named after the horses that drew the god of war’s 
chariot, and as we’ll see, they could potentially  
play a critical role in transport to and from 
Mars in keeping with their mythological namesakes. 
Probably the two biggest differences between Mars 
and the Moon for the purposes of visiting and  
exploring them are how long it takes to get there 
and how much harder it is to get back off it. 
The Moon is more than an order of magnitude 
further away from Earth than any place on  
Earth is from another, but Mars is two 
more beyond that, moving from a quarter of  
a million miles away to more like a hundred.
Neither has much gravity compared to Earth,  
but Mars has more. It also has a scanty 
atmosphere, just enough to make landing  
there cheaper in fuel than on an airless 
place, and also a bit of a pain to get off of. 
This is our core issue today because Mars 
is so far from Earth that any mission sent  
there is out of luck for resupply and 
needs to hang out there for many months,  
not days like the Moon Missions. But so long as 
a mission has access to power and water, it can  
basically keep going indefinitely, especially 
if it has a lot of redundancy of low-weight  
objects like medicines, tools, or seeds.
Power is probably obvious but water a bit less so  
and it's half our reason today for looking at the 
two tiny Martian Moons, Phobos and Deimos. Water  
is very easy to turn into breathable oxygen and 
the fuel, oxidizer, and propellant for a rocket  
home. Using the example of the Perseverance 
Rover we sent to Mars, getting that one-ton  
rover to the ground on Mars from the launchpad 
here on Earth took an Atlas Rocket bulking in at  
around 500 tons, and if you wanted to bring that 
home would have required launching it with return  
fuel and an initial mass of a lot more than 500 
tons, especially if you were using a single ship. 
We have no desire to be carrying the fuel for 
returning to Earth not just to Mars but down  
to the ground and back up again. Instead the 
ideas are to make fuel down on Mars or leave  
your return fuel to earth up in orbit, along with 
any parts of your spaceship that you need for the  
voyage but not for going to and from orbit.
You can absolutely make Fuel down on Mars,  
electrolyzing water into hydrogen and oxygen is 
a simple and scalable process and you can see the  
mountains of ice on the Martian Poles, but the 
problem is we don’t really want to do missions  
there and we are not going to be able to travel 
much beyond the landing site on early missions,  
especially without fuel. The good news 
is that we have good reason to believe  
there are subsurface ice deposits nearer the 
equator and that is a wonderful thing because  
it takes a lot of fuel to get off of Mars.
It’s escape velocity is more than double the  
Moon’s, and in practical terms, using our ideal 
rocket fuel of hydrogen and oxygen, a rocket  
getting off the moon needs about 7.5 tons of fuel 
for every ten tons of craft escaping the Moon’s  
gravity, while one doing that for Mars needs more 
like 20 tons of fuel for every 10 tons lifted. And  
if you’re planning on going home to Earth, most 
of that mass is going to be your fuel, so anything  
you make down on Mars is paying a toll of at least 
two-thirds (practically speaking probably more). 
Hence, if we can make fuel over at those moons, 
that’s way better, because it means that we can  
still make fuel down on Mars but a ship 
arriving from Earth only needs to carry  
the fuel to have gotten to Martian orbit, 
can re-tank to land from an orbital depot,  
and refuel on the ground to launch back to that 
depot, then refuel there for the trip home.  
Phobos and Deimos are both so pitifully tiny 
that we need not even consider their gravity;  
a person in a space suit could literally 
throw a fuel pod off Deimos, for instance. 
We often talk about generating fuel for Mars on 
the Moon but even there you are spending about  
half your fuel to get it off the Moon and 
then you have to chuck it over to Mars and  
burn more to slow it into orbit, though this is 
easier if we have a mass driver on the Moon, but  
while that’s a lot easier to setup and maintain 
there than on Mars, it's still a big piece of  
infrastructure to be contemplating this early in 
space settlement. We also enjoy the advantage of  
proximity to our existing industry when we make 
fuel down on Earth regardless of the percentage  
lost to get it into orbit, as we have an 
overwhelming amount of infrastructure, industry,  
and manpower down here already. A base on Mars 
enjoys no such advantage over its own Moons. 
So in our ideal scenario a ship launches from 
Cis-lunar space with the fuel needed to orbit  
Mars, picks up fuel for its landers in orbit 
there, lands on Mars, refuels there, launches  
back up, refuels again in orbit, and heads home.
Or alternatively we just build a base on one of  
those Moons and interplanetary ships dock there 
and landers do too. This is handy if you’re using  
an Aldrin Cycler for your journey between planets 
because the longest step of that is it looping  
around out past Mars and you could just leave the 
ship on auto-pilot for that boring and routine  
journey and jump back on board when it came back 
through if all the systems seem safely intact. 
In any event, one big caveat is that we don’t 
know that Phobos or Diemos has any ice. They  
have virtually no gravity so we can’t take that 
for granted just because Mars does and our own  
Moon does, and it's not too easy to check as what 
it would have would be under the surface. Phobos,  
being the bigger of the pair, would seem the 
better bet but the big problem is that we might  
need a manned mission to set up such a facility 
and we might find it had no ice available. 
Now the good news is that you don’t have to 
have water to make fuel, you can make it out  
of most things that have oxygen in them by 
pulling it out, which is true for most metal  
ores and rocks. And keeping iron or aluminum 
around as a fuel source is way easier than  
storing hydrogen too. Though specific versions, 
like powdered aluminum in liquid oxygen as a  
monopropellant gel, might be harder to store 
than others which might not perform as well,  
and is no easier to store that way than liquid 
oxygen and aluminum powder separately would be,  
so you might mix them shortly before use instead.
Indeed by preference we use methane or ammonia as  
our way of storing hydrogen simply because even 
though most of that mass is carbon or nitrogen  
instead of hydrogen in those cases, it’s a lot 
more stable and easier to store without leaking.  
Which matters when you want to make and store 
it for months or years at a time. What’s more,  
whatever your fuel is, be it hydrogen or 
hydrogen bonded to carbon or nitrogen,  
most of your mass is actually the oxidizer.
Burn hydrogen fuel and you end up with water,  
which is 89% oxygen by mass, compared to 
hydrogen, which is obviously 100% hydrogen  
by mass though it needs heavier tanks to store 
it, or methane which is 25% hydrogen by mass,  
or ammonia which is 18% hydrogen by mass, again as 
opposed to water, 11% hydrogen by mass. So even if  
you’re only producing your fuel down on Mars, you 
can save a lot by making your oxidizer up there. 
If the moons don’t have readily available 
ice, you get your hydrogen down on Mars,  
either as hydrogen or as methane probably as 
opposed to ammonia – carbon is plentiful on Mars,  
compared to nitrogen, on other bodies nitrogen can 
be more common and this is generally going to be a  
concept and process transferable elsewhere. Like 
the asteroid belt, where water ice might turn out  
quite uncommon but where you might be mining 
metals and refining them and using the oxygen  
leftover from that to make up the bulk of your 
rocket weight going home, even if you decided it  
was cheaper to bring some fuel in from elsewhere.
I am going to bet Phobos and Deimos do have  
ice though, but wouldn’t favor a manned 
mission there before we were confident on  
its occurrence and accessibility. The problem 
is that it generally makes way more sense to  
preposition lots of spare fuel and supplies in 
orbit of Mars before sending a Manned Mission  
there and a robot can handle a rendezvous with 
either of those moons way better. You can slowly  
rendezvous over entire days with either moon 
if you wanted and if the rocket doesn't work  
on the final burn you’re crashing at several 
miles per hour, not several miles per second. 
By default you probably want to land on one 
of the lunar poles too, they’re essentially  
in the sunlight all of the time so while solar 
is weaker out there than here, it is essentially  
constant minus when it goes into the shadow of 
Mars, which it orbits three times a day and the  
shadow is on an order of minutes, not hours 
like Earth’s night or weeks like on the Moon,  
so only very modest batteries are needed for 
operation there. Deimos is smaller and further  
out, orbiting about every 30 hours and would spend 
even less time in the shadow of the planet but may  
be further out than you’d really want your base, 
both have their pros and cons and I’d imagine  
both will eventually have their bases. I just 
tend to think we should pick one to have a  
base on it before we put one on Mars itself.
The issue that gets raised a lot is that we  
wouldn’t want to go all the way to Mars with 
some human crew and then not even land on it,  
and that’s a fair point to raise but I should note 
that we did do that with the Moon. Frank Borman,  
commander of Apollo 8, who passed on 
not long before I drafted this episode,  
orbited the Moon but never landed on it, 
as did 1 out of the 3 astronauts sent on  
those missions which did land on the Moon.
It is more attractive to imagine sending a  
ship that would park in orbit and send some folks 
down, but I’d rather see the supply built up in  
Martian orbit or on its moons first before we send 
a human millions of miles from help or resupply,  
and then from that disadvantaged position, 
have them try to get up and down from space  
to a planet too, which is even harder than 
the long flight between us and the Red Planet. 
I would make the case that we’d be wise to 
consider either moon as a place to plant some  
equipment first. For one thing, those moons are 
free shielding from radiation and micrometeors.  
If you’re planning to leave things in orbit for 
potentially months or years waiting for ships to  
arrive with people, it’s better to tuck them into 
some crater. Now the question becomes can we clap  
together a reliable module that can land itself 
on that moon’s pole, spread out some solar panels,  
and start crunching up rock to process into 
metal and oxygen or drill down for ice,  
one that’s able to produce at least a 
few times its own mass before breaking. 
To me this experiment and prototype is honestly 
more valuable than rock samples off the Red  
Planet, because it furthers space development 
and developed space can more easily get resources  
landed on Mars and other places for settlement. 
If I’ve got some simple module that can land on  
any rock or ice ball, spread its solar powered 
wings, and start pumping out fuel for a tank,  
I can now send unlimited robotic 
and human expeditions around the  
solar system and at decently faster speeds.
It might be easier to run something like that on  
a RTG instead, a radioisotope thermal generator, 
but the big issue with solar power on Mars is  
the dust and space doesn’t have that problem, 
so I like it better there. Either way, while  
producing fuel here and rendezvousing for fuel 
does add another point of failure to missions,  
which is never a good thing especially with 
robotic missions with lots of signal lag time,  
it is reducing your initial fuel burden by an 
order of magnitude. I also very much like the  
idea of having two places that can produce 
fuel on Mars, so if one of them goes bad,  
we have options. Fundamentally I don’t want 
anyone a hundred million miles from home relying  
on a static fuel supply that’s not several times 
what they need and stored in more than one spot. 
And such a device can be of fairly arbitrary 
size. I would guess one twice the weight of  
another would produce more than twice the fuel, 
so bigger might be better, but such devices might  
easily mass less than a human. Long term it 
would also be awesome if the device were able  
to make its own polished mirrors for condensing 
sunlight on its solar panels and cranking out  
air-tight pods to put its fuel or oxidizer 
in, but that’s icing on the cake, or comet. 
So given my choice I’d send these sort of solar 
or nuclear fuel generators to both moons and  
two spots on Mars and still send one with the ship 
and with the lander. That way the ship can meander  
over to Phobos after the lander deploys and make 
fuel while it waits or tanks up off the one there,  
while, enjoying lots of radiation shielding. 
But I’d also want a basic communication relay  
on anything in orbit, satellite, ship, or 
moon, so the ground team was never in comm  
blackout and still had a backup if the main one 
broke. Redundancy and backups are important,  
this message brought to you by Chief Miles O’Brien 
and the Department of Redundancy Department,  
which would like to remind you that 
redundancy and backups are important. 
This is an episode on settling both those 
moons though, not on their initial use as  
fuel producers, but that is the big initial 
reason to put infrastructure on either so  
it factors in the same way rum or tobacco 
did to settling the Caribbean or Virginia. 
Ultimately these are both fairly tiny moons so 
they aren’t eternal supplies of raw materials, not  
that anything is, but Diemos masses 1.5 Trillion 
tons, and Phobos is about 7 times that. That’s ten  
and seventy times the mass of mount Everest and 
so it's hardly a trivial amount of mass you’re  
going to exhaust, we are talking more mass than 
humanity has ever used in all our buildings and  
industrial forges combined, but Mars is a hundred 
million times as massive as both combined and at a  
certain point it gains sufficient infrastructure 
to offset the difficulty of pulling mass off it. 
Nonetheless I think both could be thought of 
as the river delta of Mars, that very valuable  
initial real estate that everything is 
going to move through. As an example,  
Phobos is a weird moon, very close as these 
things go and orbiting quicker than Mars rotates,  
so it rises in the west and sets in the east.
A non-rotating skyhook hung down from Phobos could  
be just under 6000 kilometers or 4000 miles long 
and dangle over the atmosphere at about 800 meters  
per second, or 1800 miles per hour, in comparison 
to the equatorial speed of Mars as it spins, 240  
meters per second, or the low orbit speed around 
Mars, and in some ways would work better for space  
planes to match up with than a fixed space 
elevator which also would be harder to build. 
And I should emphasize that when I talk 
about Phobos or Diemos being small, again,  
there’s enough mass in Phobos alone to build 
millions of oil supertankers or aircraft carrier  
sized vessels. When we’re getting to that sort of 
scale, you take a bunch of those and run them off  
to the outer system to grab fuel instead.
I’m not a huge fan of geostationary space  
elevators – or since this is Mars, 
Areostationary – in favor of options  
like Orbital Rings and Tethered Rings or some 
mass driver running up the side of Olympus Mons,  
but all of those options are way further down 
the line and I just don’t see building them  
unless you’ve either got very good automation 
of the clanking self-replicator variety or a  
few million folks living down on Mars, in which 
case these moons are great fuel depots and also  
great launch points. These sort of super-strong 
tether tricks can also be used for catching ships  
coming in at higher speed, to save rendezvous 
fuel for them or Mars, and to launch them too. 
But while a big chunk of rock isn’t optimal 
for fuel production compared to an iceball,  
it is very good for metal production and allows 
us to start making big orbital mirrors for  
warming up Mars or big power collectors to begin 
beaming energy down to Mars where ground solar  
might not be optimal, or even creating a big L1 
Lagrange Point magnetic deflector for shielding  
any atmosphere we bring to Mars, like we discussed 
in our episode on Making a Magnetosphere for Mars. 
As we discussed a couple months back 
in our episode on Statites and lagites,  
great big thin mirrors can hang basically anywhere 
in our solar system at an area density of about  
3 grams per square meter, thin tin foil density, 
and can have lots of atypical orbits as lagites,  
even when an order of magnitude thicker or more. 
Thus, we don’t need to get very delicate in our  
production of aluminum foil on Deimos or Phobos 
to start mass producing orbital mirrors for Mars.  
Let’s say we ended up with clunky satellites 
that had to average 100 grams per square meter,  
controls and all, to make for an orbital mirror 
around Mars, and one capable of providing its  
own stationkeeping by tilting those mirrors.
You could still produce an equal amount of  
those to the entire surface area of Mars for 
14 billion tons of metal. Around a thousandth  
the mass of Deimos, the smaller moon, and actually 
less than a quarter of current worldwide aluminum  
production here on Earth. Sounds weird but you 
can build very thin and light in space and yes,  
we could cover the whole planet, Earth I mean, in 
aluminum foil if we wanted to without bankrupting  
the economy, ignoring the damage covering 
the planet in foil would do. Though it would  
save us from the alien brainwashing satellites.
With those mirrors and shades and power collectors  
and magnetic deflectors in place, you could make 
Mars quite a nice place to live. More importantly  
in the short term, you could be manufacturing a 
lot of the bulk items for strictly space usage  
or de-orbiting, like a drop pod for atmospheric 
entry or the hull plating for Aldrin Cyclers. And  
you could be making smaller mirrors massing on an 
order of magnitude of a few tons that could focus  
on a usefully small spot and double the sunlight 
at a local base, and they might be thin and keep  
their shape by slowly spinning or they might be 
collections of rigid hexagons strapped together. 
They might be dual purpose solar reflectors and 
microwave power beamers too. I do not think you  
would want to hang these at ground-stationary 
orbit as that’s a long focus distance compared  
to lower orbits, but you could have a cloud of 
them orbiting and just switching which base they  
were flicking their light and power down to 
as they went, or even hanging over the poles  
to keep a constant beam on one place as we 
discussed in that Statite and Lagite episode. 
What would Phobos or Deimos be like? Well, in many 
ways like any other asteroid we might mine. Early  
on they have no gravity so any human-operated 
facility probably needs a rotating habitat,  
probably something small on the order of a Von 
Bruan wheel and I think you’d pick a crater to  
stick that in or even just dig it in, they’re 
loose rubble piles with an escape velocity not  
much faster than a jog, so moving material 
is easy. Indeed your big problem is losing  
material when you hit it, so you probably want a 
mesh or tarp over any site you’re mining. And one  
very easy method of transport would just be to 
use a fairly thin wire of a material of decent  
tensile strength, steel or carbon fiber would be 
sufficient, and just jam some tall spikes into the  
surface of either Moon around its circumference 
to run a tram along so you stayed bound to the  
moon. Phobos, the larger of the two, is 26 
kilometers or 16 miles across at its widest. 
Neither is particularly spherical in shape, 
and likely would eventually be reconstructed as  
something bigger and more hollow. Amusingly there 
was a theory back in the mid-20th century that  
Phobos might be hollow, but those turned out to be 
errors and better measurements confirmed it had a  
higher density than they thought at the time. 
But that probably is its fate, to get hollowed  
out or expanded into a megastructure or a few of 
them. It’s likely to have the resources to achieve  
that end too, as it’s a very valuable rock.
In theory, if we ever got artificial micro-black  
holes working, we might dump a black hole several 
hundred times its mass into its core and that  
would replicate the Martian gravity below or we 
could go about double that and replicate earth  
gravity, but that’s obviously a very distant 
horizon sort of scenario. Albeit we might have  
that technology, if it is even possible, 
in a couple centuries and long before any  
terraforming effort on Mars would have done more 
than barely gotten underway. Phobos and Deimos  
are very valuable rocks and that’s not actually 
that much mass, especially in hydrogen or helium,  
so if any place is likely to be able to 
afford such a luxury I think it might be them. 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention that Phobos 
is slowly losing altitude over Mars at a rate  
of about 2 centimeters or one inch a year, 
and we figure that if we left it to its own  
devices it would either crash into Mars in about 
fifty million years or get ripped into a new  
planetary ring. It’s a good deal bigger than 
the asteroid that hit Earth 66 million years  
ago and probably shuffled the dinosaurs off the 
evolutionary stage so that’s obviously something  
we would want to prevent. To be fair using it 
as a skyhook platform does the exact opposite  
of that but it’s fairly minimal and there are 
other ways to slowly regenerate momentum, even  
if it isn’t a great candidate for electrodynamic 
tethering the way skyhooks and rotovators orbiting  
Earth and in its powerful magnetic field are.
For comparison, I don’t think either moon could  
ever be an equal to Mars, or even on the scale our 
own Moon would be as part of a wider Earth region,  
but if we imagined Mars as the equivalent of 
Eurasia, Phobos and Deimos might be bigger players  
on their edge the way England or Japan are, but 
certainly would be on the scale some of the better  
known Mediterranean islands are and maybe the 
equivalent of Long Island in its relation to the  
US. They can be powerhouses in their own right and 
critical pieces of emerging Martian civilizations. 
I would honestly not expect Mars to ever be a 
single nation anymore than I’d expect Earth to be,  
but Phobos or Deimos probably would be and since 
they are not that big I could see countries back  
here butting heads over who got to use them, 
as they are a lot more strategically valuable  
than any other specific bits of Mars are, 
even well-known spots like Olympus Mons  
or the polar ice caps, since there’s two of 
those and probably ice elsewhere underground. 
In that respect, while science fiction 
and futuristic speculation often likes  
to contemplate battles over the Red Planet 
that gets its name from the God of War,  
I think we’d see conflict or tension arising 
on those two moons a lot sooner and easier. 
That said, I think the future of the 
Martian Moons is a pretty bright one,  
and in large part because they can first help 
fuel our explorations and settlement of Mars,  
and later perhaps very literally as they help 
forge the mirrors, collectors, and magnetic  
deflectors that will help bring sunlight to Mars 
and protect the seas and sky we might give it.
When I was a kid I always loved board games 
and puzzles, and one of my earliest futurist  
predictions from way back then was that we’d 
see more and more learning subjects get their  
own fascinating games, and one of things I’ve 
most enjoyed about being a dad is getting to  
find games like those and play them with my own 
kids. It can be pretty impressive what kids can  
learn if it's in a fun and well-designed 
format, and that was what most impressed  
me about Turing Tumble from Upper Story. 
Turing Tumble lets you build an actual,  
Turing-Complete computer that runs on marbles 
instead of electricity. It opens up the black  
box that is computing to most folks and lets you 
explore concepts like logic gates and processing  
or calculating in a hands-on fashion that you 
can do as a group, collaboratively, or solo. 
It is a real computer you build 
yourself, and which runs on Marbles,  
you could run any game or program on it if you 
had a big enough board and were patient enough,  
though you might need a board as big as Texas to 
play some newer video games. I was truly impressed  
how engaged my kids were with it, and I loved 
it too, it's just a fascinating and intuitive  
way to learn and hands-on experiment with the 
fundamentals of computing. It also comes with  
a wonderful graphic novel that gives you a 
story and presents you dozens of different  
challenges and switch diagrams to try, before 
modifying and experimenting on your own. 
Upper Story’s motto is “Endless Curiosity”, you’ve 
heard me talk about their game spintronics before,  
and Turing Tumble is just as fun. Turing Tumble 
is named after after the great Alan Turing,  
one of the fathers of computers, and a portion of 
every purchase goes to support the Turing Trust,  
who provide reused IT equipment, 
loaded with educational resources,  
and training to schools in sub-Saharan Africa, 
Learn more about the game and see it in action  
at upperstory.com/turingtumble Use the coupon 
code ISAACARTHUR for 10% off your total purchase. 
So that will wrap us up for the day but join 
us this sunday, MArch 17th, St Patrick’s Day,  
for our sci-fi sunday episode, Automated Justice, 
for a 50-minute deep dive on the role of AI in our  
courts and justice system. Then we’ll return to 
the Fermi paradox on March 21st to discuss that  
evolutionary jump from the simple to complex, and 
if that might be the solution to the big question  
of where all the alien life is. Then we’ll 
finish our discussion of last month on black  
holes by deep diving kugelblitz black holes 
and using them for power generation, before  
finishing out the month, with a bonus scifi sunday 
episode on the 31st, Multi-Planetary empires. 
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other 
episodes come out, make sure to hit the like,  
subscribe, and notification buttons. You 
can also help support the show on Patreon,  
and if you’d like to donate or help in other ways, 
you can see those options by visiting our website,  
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s 
episodes early and ad free on our streaming  
service, Nebula, along with hours of bonus content 
like Crystal Aliens, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
