Our galaxy is an enormous place with billions
of stars and doubtless billions of potentially
habitable planets.
Yet a single Dyson Sphere contains as much living space as all of those planets combined.
So today we are talking about Dyson Spheres,
giant constructs designed to take advantage
of all the light produced by a star.
This should be fairly familiar ground for
anyone who is a regular to the channel, as
we do talk about them a lot.
We’ve talked about them in terms of the
Fermi Paradox, in the Dyson Dilemma.
We’ve talked about them as the basis for
what are known as Kardashev 2 civilizations
in the Kardashev Scale episode.
We’ve talked about their individual components
in terms of other megastructures like rotating
habitats and orbital rings.
We’ve talked about special purposes they
can be put to, like moving a star via a Shkadov
Thruster, or using one to toast planets thousands
of light years away in the Nicoll-Dyson Beams
episode.
But we’ve never sat down and discussed it
in a dedicated fashion, and we’ll do that
today.
One peculiar aspect of Dyson Spheres is that
they don’t make too many appearances in
science fiction, especially Film or TV, even
though they are often considered a near-inevitable
path that advanced civilizations would pursue,
for reasons we’ll get to shortly.
Part of that avoidance in fiction is probably
their sheer scale.
These things are immense, and would dwarf
Earth the way Earth dwarfs a small village.
More in fact, a classic Dyson Sphere outfitted
for human habitation is so large that if you
randomly scattered every living human around
one, they’d each have their own continent
to themselves.
On the other hand, most fictional planets
tend to be shown to us as not much more than
one town simply because a fully populated
planet is already a thing of overwhelming
scope, and a Dyson Sphere that much more so.
They are so big that even if you only gave
one-page summary atlas entry on every continent
sized area of one, it would require several
million books and several thousand years to
read.
We are going to try to wrap our heads around
some of that immensity today, but to do that,
let’s start with the basic concept.
All life on this planet is fundamentally powered
by the Sun, with only a tiny amount of our
planetary energy budget deriving from geothermal
energy provided by our molten core or the
tidal heating the Moon generates while orbiting
us.
That sunlight provides an incredible amount
of energy, approximately 174 thousand, trillion
watts of power, or 174,000 Terawatts.
Our own energy needs in terms of electricity
are about a percent of a percent of that.
We do consume a lot of energy, but it’s
nothing compared to what the planet receives
constantly, though of course we use a lot
of that indirectly to power our biosphere
and heat our homes.
A lot of that light is wasted, bouncing back
into space or hitting barren land or sea.
Even what little actually hits photosynthetic
plants goes mostly unused, and while it does
help us stay warm, it could do that just as
well even if we used for other productive
purposes first.
Whether you plug in a light bulb or TV or
laptop or space heater, all that energy ends
as heat, which is an important point to remember
for later.
A lot of energy hits Earth, and a lot is reflected
away or blocked by clouds, plus any land devoted
to solar power panels is land you can’t
use for something else.
So folks often discuss the idea of putting
solar panels in orbit and beaming that energy
down.
That’s an ample and nigh inexhaustible supply
too; but as tremendous as the amount of energy
hitting our planet is the Sun itself produces
over 2.2 billion times the light that hits
Earth and a quadrillion times what we use
to run our technology and civilization.
You can kind of guess where this is going,
except that ‘where this is going’ seems
to vary from person to person.
What fiction tends to reference is a big solid
spherical shell where people live on the inside,
but that is not what Freeman Dyson, for whom
the object is named, actually had in mind.
In fact, he wasn’t thinking of an object
at all... and it’s also never what I’m
referring to on the channel either.
Such a construct is virtually impossible to
build, especially if you don’t have some
form of artificial gravity available, but
there are other ways and we’ll discuss them
later.
The original Dyson Sphere, typically known
as a Dyson Swarm nowadays (just to avoid any
confusion), is really just a giant cloud of
objects orbiting a star, thickly enough to
obstruct most or all of a star’s light.
It’s easier to think of it as a solid spherical
shell when contemplating the numbers.
Such a sphere would generally have a radius
of Earth’s distance from the sun, 1.5 x
10^8 kilometers, and an area of 2.8 x 10^17
square kilometers.
In terms of Earth, that is just over half
a billion times the area, but it is actually
2.2 billion times as much area, because the
Earth receives an amount of sunlight based
on its cross-section to the Sun, Pi times
the planet’s radius squared, but has a surface
area of 4 Pi R-squared.
Only half the planet is lit at any time and
most of it is angled off from the sun, not
perpendicular to its light.
If the swarm was composed entirely of O’Neill
Cylinders, large rotating habitats 4 kilometers
in radius and 20 kilometers long, with an
internal area of 800 square kilometers, it
would contain 350 trillion of them.
An O’Neill cylinder is about as big as we
can safely build a rotating habitat with modern
materials, and such a habitat might be sparsely
populated, a dedicated nature preserve, or
home to millions.
Also, while their rotation mimics gravity
internally, they have virtually no real external
gravity.
This means you could easily position hundreds
of them right near each other bound together
by cables for vacuum trains, or even long,
thin pressurized corridor-habitats just thick
enough to offer comfortable spin-gravity to
the traffic inside.
These habitats, along with thin mirrors and
solar panels to help supply them with light
and electricity, tend to be considered the
default constituents of a Dyson Sphere.
Now as I mentioned, you can connect them,
and indeed likely would, more on that in a
moment, but let’s assume each was on its
own elliptical trajectory around the Sun.
Now these are not planets, so they can maintain
temperature easier, twisting to expose more
or less surface to the sun, or maneuvering
solar shades or mirrors to block light or
add more, so they do not need to be on anything
like a normal Earth Distance, they could be
as close as Mercury or as far as Mars with
no serious impediment to maintaining their
function or climate.
But if we assume for the moment they have
to stick to within a 25 million kilometer
zone, closer or further, than Earth’s average
distance of 150 million kilometers from the
Sun, the volume these habitats are inside
would be about 10^25 cubic kilometers.
Whereas each cylinder has 1600 cubic kilometers
of volume, with some more space for various
external attachments, and with 350 trillion
of them that would be close to a quintillion
cubic kilometers or 10^18, one-ten millionth
of the total volume.
These are all constantly moving, but if we
took a quick snapshot of the system, on average
each habitat would occupy a cube 3000 kilometers
or 2000 miles to a side, with them at the
center all by themselves.
The system is essentially opaque, not because
it is densely packed, but because it is so
thick, much as fog or clouds are.
Much as galaxies appear quite thick and hard
to see through, even though stars are separated
by distances even larger than Dyson Spheres.
So collisions are not an issue because they
are not close to each other at all.
Folks tend to assume the various components
are constantly in danger of slamming together
because they are picturing something that
is densely packed, but they aren’t.
Additionally, there are three things you can
do with access to that much energy.
You can power lots of radar, lots of computers,
and lots of light-beam propulsion.
So they have no problem tracking each other,
predicting trajectories, and making sure collisions
don’t happen.
They can also vaporize any debris that wanders
their way.
A fourth thing they can do is run giant clocks.
I get asked a lot in terms of the Fermi Paradox
if one would actually expect big civilizations
to do a lot of omnidirectional broadcasts,
and the answer is no.
Even with access to tons of power you don’t
waste it, particularly since there are only
so many frequencies to broadcast on, so you
do a lot of tight-beam communication, over
actual wires or using lasers, and probably
encrypted or compressed.
But the one thing you would probably still
broadcast in a loud and omnidirectional fashion
is your positioning system.
Everybody needs to know where they are and
where everyone else is, not just your hundreds
of trillions of habitats, but all your ships
and smaller facilities as well.
So you’d want to have a few channels devoted
to just barking out the time and date constantly
just like Earth’s GPS system does.
This is not absolutely necessary, but it is
the most logical approach, and while a Dyson
can be a single mega-civilization with a unified
government, or trillions of separate individual
nations of one or more habitats, that’s
one cooperative treaty that probably would
raise little objection in being passed or
enforced.
Not that stuff would start slamming into each
other if they did not, in all probability
each habitat would be quite capable of tracking
all of its trillions of neighbors, and at
most need to coordinate with a handful of
others for total vision and tracking.
But it saves a lot of resources if everyone
is coordinating on an agreed upon system of
what to do if two habitats are on an intersecting
trajectory.
This also answers the regular question of
who would build such a thing, considering
the time and resources needed, because you
just build new components in open orbits as
needed or wanted over time.
You might build one over a decade or over
the span of a million years, depending on
your needs and capabilities, but you do have
some reasons to build it faster than your
population grows, more on that in a bit.
As I said, they could be all scattered out,
but generally probably will not be.
A given orbital path, be it a circle or ellipse,
can be thought of as a solid ring a habitat
moves along.
You can put many other habitats on that same
ring, and travel between those on that ring
becomes incredibly easy, indeed you can make
a solid ring too.
Those familiar with Larry Niven’s Ringworld
probably know that as a partial-Dyson, and
also know it’s inherently unstable and has
to spin so fast that no known material could
handle the strain.
If you did happen to have such a super-material,
you could enclose a star by just making several
of them, each cocked at a different angle.
However, those rings have to spin fast, and
are unstable, because they are trying to simulate
gravity via centrifugal force.
The bigger an object is in terms of radius,
the more quickly it must spin, and the more
force it must endure to produce the same amount
of spin-gravity.
But you can just run a wire right around a
planet or star in a big loop and it just orbits,
that’s not super-stable, but it’s decently
stable and easily corrected.
Indeed, that’s the basis of the Orbital
Ring we discussed last week, and as I mentioned
at the time, you could super-size those to
run around stars, not just planets.
We have a type of Megastructure called a Rung
World, which is like a Ring World but looks
more like a ladder wrapped around in a circle,
in this case around the sun.
The individual rungs of the ladder are rotating
habitats, each connected in that circle by
either a cable or even a full blown one-loop
Topopolis, a kind of super-long thin rotating
habitat we’ve discussed in passing before.
Such a Rungworld might be a series of a million
O’Neill Cylinders connected by a pair of
cables, one used for clockwise movement between
rungs, the other counterclockwise perhaps.
Or it might be even more upscaled, if you
have bulk graphene manufacture, and be two
Topopolises connected by thousands of McKendree
Cylinders acting as rungs.
It depends on your level of technology.
Obviously, if you can bulk produce high-quality
graphene, it lets you make much bigger habitats;
and carbon -- what graphene is made of -- is
a lot more plentiful than iron or titanium,
the two things we usually envision making
rotating habitats from.
And whereas an O’Neill cylinder is basically
a decently sized island, populated by hundreds
of thousands, a McKendree cylinder is a continent-class
megastructure that could comfortably house
a billion people.
They do not need to be connected, but this
allows for easy and cheap travel, as well
as dedicated transmission lines for power
and high-bandwidth communications among other
things.
These, rather than the cloud format, are probably
your more logical ‘basic subdivision’
of a Dyson Sphere.
In the general swarm your neighbors might
be changing a lot, here however, your neighbors
remain in the same position on that ring.
That would give you a lot more throw-weight
in local disagreements too, it takes several
million O’Neill Cylinder Rungworlds to enclose
a star, or several thousand McKendree Rungworlds,
but even for the smaller one, it is probably
better to be one of millions of larger entities
than one of a few hundred trillion lone habitats.
I usually refer to these entities as Ladder
States, I’m only guessing by assuming these
might ever exist, but whether or not they
do, it makes it easier to contemplate the
internal workings of a Dyson Sphere.
As I said, the scale of these things boggles
the mind, so anything that makes them easier
to wrap your mind around helps.
Now one hardly has to jam-pack these things
with people, but keeping to modern human densities
we’d expect the average O’Neill Ladder
State to have a population of around a trillion,
and a McKendree Ladder State to be more like
100 trillion to a quadrillion.
Don’t think of these as local super-powers
either, compared to a full Dyson sphere, even
a McKendree Ladder State is essentially a
micro-nation.
Next to each ring or ladder state would be
two more, one a little closer and one a little
further from the Sun, cocked at an angle,
probably a small one too, so they didn’t
have much relative motion to their neighbors
when intersecting them.
Each subsequent ring is tilted a little more
and you wrap around to enclose a star.
The individual rungs could be nearly touching
their neighbors or could be spaced out with
solar panels and smaller facilities in between.
Now the question always becomes where do you
get the material for all of this, and by default
the assumption is that you disassemble the
planets to do it, but you don’t actually
have to, there are other ways to get the necessary
material, as we’ll discuss in a few minutes.
Those planets also can cause a lot of orbital
perturbations in your Dyson Swarm, but those
can also be managed.
There are basically two ways you can start
a Dyson off, and both could occur simultaneously.
The first is to begin near Earth, basically
building a cloud of habitats around the planet,
the ‘Planet Cloud’ I’ve discussed before,
and begin extending that out from Earth as
a first ring.
Earth is pretty massive so you’ve got issues
with it pulling elements on the ring toward
itself, but this is manageable.
Indeed, if you’ve got bulk graphene production,
and orbital rings and space towers, you can
actually include Earth as a rung itself and
use active support to push nearer rungs away
to neutralize gravitational attraction.
Subsequent rings might spawn from other planets
like Mars or Venus, as they were terraformed,
or just near Earth, again at an angle.
These rings can be pretty wide too.
The further you get from the actual line of
orbit, the more the material is pulled toward
a different orbit.
But that can be a pretty big distance even
before conventional materials can’t handle
the strain, and materials like carbon nanotubes
or active support members widen that a lot
more.
Nor do the rungs need to be tilted perpendicular
to the sun, they could parallel sunlight or
be cocked onto the orbital path and you can
get away with structures that are more three
dimensional than just a ladder wrapped in
a circle.
Your other starting point is near the Sun.
Mercury is not classically terraformable,
we can para-terraform it, but it is usually
considered a far better candidate for raw
materials.
To create an entire sphere of mirrors and
solar panels around the Sun requires not even
a percent of Mercury’s mass, hopefully less
since ideally a power-focused early Dyson
would actually be composed of power statites,
not power satellites, and those have to be
quite thin.
A Statite, which is short for Static Satellite,
is a type of simple active-support structure.
It is a very thin object light enough to float
over the Sun.
It is pushed away by solar radiation equal
but opposite to the pull of gravity.
Essentially like floating a sheet of paper
over an air vent, or a heavy version of a
solar sail.
Since both the outward force of the sun’s
light and the pull of gravity decrease with
square of distance from the Sun, a statite
functions the same at any distance from the
Sun, and each star has a specific density
a statite must have to float.
Too light and it blows away, too heavy and
it falls into the star.
Interestingly, the bigger stars permit heavier
statites because while they have more gravity
than smaller stars, they also produce vastly
more light.
A star twice as massive has twice the gravitational
force, but will be at least ten times as bright.
Also, statites can make use of solar wind
to increase the mass they can carry, and one
can combine normal orbital methods with these
to produce something I call a Lagite, or lagging
satellite, one that orbits slower than normal
by combining the solar push with normal orbital
mechanics, allowing decently heavier objects
to orbit at a desired speed rather than the
natural one.
The exact mass density will vary from star
to star, but for ours it is 0.78 grams per
square meter, thicker and it falls down, lighter
and it flies away.
Built at Earth’s distance, a shell of statites
around the whole Sun would mass 2.2 x 10^20
kilograms, which sounds like a lot but Earth
itself is 27,000 times as massive.
Nor does it need to be that big, it’s just
mirrors so you could build it much closer
to the sun, smaller shell, less mass.
Now such panels would not just be thin mirrors,
you want to be able to expand or contract
them a little, or turn them at angles, as
the Sun does not produce exactly the same
light all the time, so they’d probably be
thin films with some wires, a small computer,
and counterbalance or gyro, so that you can
adjust their size, position, and attitude.
This makes them all able to maneuver too,
or tilt briefly out of the way to let sunlight
pass through to hit Earth for instance, as
it passed behind one.
This setup is preferable to a single massive
thin film, though that is one way to make
a classic single piece Dyson Spherical Shell.
So we now have a tons of power collectors
around the Sun, without having to totally
disassemble even Mercury.
This brings up the question of “what do
you do with all that power?”
Which is different than “what do you do
with all that space?”
I consider the answer to the latter, “what
do you do with two billion times the living
area of Earth?” to be rather obvious.
All that power though is another animal.
You can’t beam it back to Earth, it would
blow the planet up, and indeed we did an episode
discussing weaponizing a Dyson Sphere, a construct
known as a Nicoll-Dyson Beam.
So you have a huge amount of power, what do
you use it for?
We have a lot of options.
If you’ve managed to design solid gamma
ray lasers, GRASERS, you ought to be able
to create small artificial black holes by
firing tons of them at the same spot, something
known as a Kugelblitz black hole, which make
amazing batteries able to hold energy for
trillions of years or more, or power starships
capable of moving at a decent fraction of
light speed, or powering space stations and
habitats far from the Sun.
That’s pretty high-tech, but does seem permissible
under known physics if anyone can figure out
a way to reflect gamma rays the way we reflect
normal light.
You can also use all that energy to power
miniaturized Nicoll-Dyson Beams to push even
very large ships to interstellar velocities
or around your own solar system, as we discussed
in the Interstellar Highways episode.
Either way, the creation of such a power-only
Dyson, even just a partial one gathering less
than a percent of a percent of the Sun’s
light, makes you an interstellar civilization,
no new technology required.
We can also use that power to run a Star Lifting
process, we did a whole episode on that, but
to quickly recap, the Sun contains more matter
by far than everything in the solar system
combined, and that includes heavier materials
like carbon and iron.
There are thousands of Earth’s worth of
such materials in the Sun, and they are all
over the Sun, not just buried in the core.
Extracting those is quite the Herculean endeavor,
but is not super high-tech, and the Sun itself
powers the extraction process.
See that episode for details, but that is
one way to get the material you need for a
more robust Dyson, without disassembling planets.
You only have to extract from planets, asteroids,
and moons what you need to get started.
The other option is to make the heavier elements
out of lighter ones.
We have been researching fusion for some time
now and we talk a lot about how much of a
game changer practical commercial fusion would
be for our civilization.
But it doesn’t render a Dyson Sphere redundant,
nor do you need it to make one or to transmute
materials.
When you fuse lighter elements, like hydrogen
or helium, into heavier ones like carbon or
oxygen, you release a lot of energy.
Our problem isn’t doing this, fusion is
actually quite simple, it is doing it without
needing something as big as a star and breaking
even.
Right now we have to pour more energy into
matter than we get out of it if we want to
fuse lighter elements into heavier elements.
Such a civilization might just have fusion
reactors robust enough to not only fuse deuterium,
but also go as far up the chain as iron and
get a massive surplus of energy out of it.
If they can’t do that, then they can opt
to use that huge surplus of power from their
thin early Dyson to power huge particle accelerators
that run at a deficit but produce heavier
elements.
Again, not high tech, just massive.
So by this technique or by starlifting you
can get the necessary heavier elements to
build a bigger, thicker Dyson.
Indeed, any star, even one with no planets
locally, just maybe a few rocks to start the
process, can be made into an optimum Dyson.
The material needed for any Dyson is related
to the total luminosity or power of the star
it surrounds, twice as bright, twice the material
to enclose it.
If you are plucking matter from a sun and
it’s not enough for your purposes, you just
keep transmuting more hydrogen and helium
into heavier elements, drawn from that sun,
and its brightness begins to go down, decreasing
the amount of material you need for full enclosure,
until you hit the optimum balance.
You can even arrange to leave planets in orbit
around it unaffected by having your various
power collectors or habitats tilt out of the
way when they’d block it, or have some mirrors
rotate to focus more light on it, keeping
that planet to its normal daylight levels.
So you could go build one around an alien
system where intelligent critters are just
thinking about how handy fire is, and when
they developed real technology, you could
just offer them the Dyson as a gift and effective
back rent.
You’ve already gotten million of years of
use out of it, and if you did have the ability
to make Kugelblitz black holes, you’d probably
just build a small power collector Dyson to
store that energy up and carry it home.
You can also use this technique to take very
large stars and lower their mass until they
won’t go Supernova, thus killing off any
nearby life, and walk away from that with
several million planets worth of heavy matter
for construction elsewhere as a reward for
your good deeds.
It’s much more efficient getting heavy elements
this way too, rather than the essentially
tiny amount that normally forms planets.
A Supernova scatters matter out in every direction,
with much of it remaining behind, trapped
in the neutron star or black hole remnant.
Of what remains, and reaches proto-solar systems
forming, only a small fraction will end as
a rocky planet with more of it buried inside
gas giants and even more inside the new sun.
In which case you have to star lift it out,
which is hardly easy.
See the Star Lifting episode for more details
on that and other applications of that technology.
Now I am generally of the opinion that any
given Dyson will be a multi-task device, but
there are a few types that are purpose built,
a couple of which we’ve discussed in more
detail elsewhere.
The first is an obvious one, massive collections
of rotating habitats for living area, or non-rotating
ones if you’ve either adapted to zero-gravity
or invented artificial gravity.
If the latter, you can actually build a classic
Dyson Shell, and use seriously upscaled orbital
rings to keep it rigid.
You’d probably include solar panels nearer
in to power those active support rings keeping
it rigid and maneuver thrusters to keep it
from meandering off.
Thus allowing you to have night time too,
since again the shell, by default, experiences
constant noontime light.
It also has no gravity.
No spherical shell -- no matter how massive
-- generates any net gravity inside it, not
at the middle, not at the edges, that’s
just how the symmetry of spherical shells
works.
So everything would fall into the sun if you
don’t have some sort of artificial gravity.
In Niven’s Ringworld we get this by taking
a slice, a thick ring of a Dyson, and spinning
it very fast.
This doesn’t work with a Sphere though;
since besides needing impossibly strong materials,
the poles will still experience no gravity
and only at the equator would you have full
gravity.
That’s actually okay if you just want a
partial Dyson and don’t mind gravity being
weaker at some places and stronger near the
equator, you can still float a huge statite
power collector over both poles.
If you really want a rigid Dyson you can walk
around, but had no artificial gravity, you
would make such a sphere, spin it enough for
a little gravity, and then have tons of rotating
habitats connected to the skin which each
spun, so it looked like a big spiky ball.
We will talk another time about how to make
super-large spinning habitats like Ringworlds
using active support.
But that’s purpose #1, replicating Earth.
You could devote a planet’s worth of space
just to single biomes serving as nature preserves,
have a million Earths worth of such nature
preserves, and still use only a thousandth
of your available space.
You also can focus more on human living area,
by using the sunlight for more optimized plant
growth via hydroponics and have folks live
in more urban or suburban garden setups, akin
to those discussed in the Arcologies and Ecumenopolis
episodes.
This dual mix is probably more likely, nature
preserve, suburban sprawls, and urban areas
with some parks and lots of hydroponics.
You can also genetically engineer life from
the ground up to live in a vacuum environment
and just let it set up its own Dyson swarm.
Although genetic engineering might be a stretch,
since you might have to start from the ground
up, not even using DNA or carbon as your basis.
I’m not sure how practical that is, but
I’ve always found the notion rather fascinating
and may discuss it more if I ever do an episode
on space-based life, or life designed specifically
to live in space.
Emphasis on design because it’s very unlikely
to ever evolve on its own.
Of course you can also use a lot of that energy
to run totally artificial life and giant computers,
and one focused entirely on that is called
a Matrioshka Brain, see that episode.
You can also go the big laser option, the
Nicoll-Dyson Beam, or the big transmutation
version, where you are trying to extract all
the mass you can from a star and turn it into
heavier elements.
This has no official name so I just call it
a Star Mine or Dyson Mine, and its cousin,
the one that just stores power into miniature
black holes, a ‘kugelblitzer’ or Kugelblitz
Dyson.
You can also tune one in its entirety to act
as a giant transmitter, a Stellar Beacon,
converting all that energy into ultra-powerful
signals you could pick up galaxies away.
You might use a few stars for doing this,
as a sort of Galactic Positioning System,
if you had an interstellar civilization, since
a galaxy contains hundreds of billions of
stars, so you have a few to spare.
Lastly, you can use them to move stars, a
version known as a Shkadov Thruster.
That has its own episode too, but in short
form you build a half-dyson, typically of
statites, the Dyson Bubble, and cause the
sunlight to emit all in one direction, providing
thrust in the opposite direction.
The Star provides the thrust and holds onto
the satellites, including natural ones like
planets, with its own gravity.
This along with Star Lifting, are good ways
to prevent big stars blowing up near your
civilization, either by mining them down in
mass or moving them to a safe distance.
By default a Dyson Sphere would be all of
these at once, but there are advantages to
specializing in one specific ability.
Any Dyson Sphere can move itself by reflecting
its light asymmetrically or star lifting matter
off the sun to spray in one direction as a
big rocket engine.
Any of them can power rotating habitats for
people or nature preserves, any of them can
generate huge beams that can move spaceships
around locally or to interstellar distances,
or upscale them further to blow planets apart
light years away.
Any can run vast networks of computers or
transmutation farms or power storage depots
or interstellar highways.
I would tend to assume you would do all of
these simultaneously.
An early Dyson is a thin one being used mostly
for power and heavy matter creation and extraction,
as time goes on it replaces power collection
with habitats, unless you go all digital in
which case those habitats are enormous processors
and databanks.
The Matrioshka Brain, which also has its own
episode, is the classic example of this computer-focused
Dyson taken to the extreme.
Or at least the extreme using classic computing
and just one star, we’ll discuss something
using reversible computing next week.
All of these concepts work around using a
star as the central fuel source for some sort
of engine or system, which is why these are
also often called Stellar Engines.
But even if you have better methods of power
generation than a star, you still extract
that matter and energy to fuel those better
methods instead, be it controlled fusion or
raw matter to energy conversion.
You also still make the swarm because you
want to be fairly close to other people or
entities to minimize travel time on matter
and information, and that’s as close as
you can be without getting too hot.
That’s a big note, Dyson's do not absorb
energy from a star, they temporarily absorb
it, use it, and radiate it away as heat, or
light in lower frequencies like infrared.
If you didn’t you would fry everyone inside,
and the only way to avoid that is to be able
to break the laws of thermodynamics, which
also renders a Dyson unnecessary anyway.
A Dyson is just as bright as the original
star, only it will appear physically larger
and more diffuse, glowing in the infrared
range instead of the visual range of light.
They also cannot be mistaken for any natural
object.
They look identical to some gas giants in
the outer reaches of a solar system, but ‘identical’
in the same way a grapefruit looks like a
star; they are roughly the same shape and
color.
Nobody with the technology to see either would
ever mistake the one for the other, nor be
fooled even momentarily by any method I have
ever heard suggested for concealing a Dyson
that did not require technologies not permitted
under known science.
This is not a Fermi Paradox episode, but Dyson's
were inextricably linked to the Fermi Paradox
right from the get go; so they tend to always
make people wonder about it.
I’m sure folks will ask about it in the
comments, and by all means go ahead, you should
be trying to think up loopholes, but please
make sure to check the other comments first.
Odds are I will have already answered the
question and it gets a bit repetitive explaining
how they could never be made to look like
cosmic background radiation and are not a
candidate for dark matter.
Ditto how civilizations might stop growing,
and not need one, or miniaturize and not need
one, we covered all that in the Dyson Dilemma
episode and its remake in more detail anyway.
I always advise people to resort to common
sense instead though.
You generally only go out of you way to hide
out of fear, and so you only hide a Dyson
from something that is bigger or stronger
than one, and since any Dyson civilization,
a Kardashev 2 civilization, is quite capable
of monitoring every single star in a galaxy,
those contemplating building one know that
anyone who already had one or better already
knows where they live.
On top of that, building a Dyson sphere isn’t
exactly covert.
It is kind of like trying to build a deep
hidden bunker next to a town while using heavy
machinery and explosives for excavation.
Bigger, older civilizations will know you
are there, and they will see you building
it.
So you can build one of these.
More technology helps but as soon as you can
begin profitably doing any mining or construction
in space, you have the technology to make
one.
They’re not high-tech anymore than a city
is, but like a city, more technology is better,
and you can do a lot of R&D when a mere millionth
of your population is 10 trillion people,
and a millionth is about what we use for any
minor sub-discipline of the sciences, like
how many folks specifically study dolphins
full time.
You can see the Kardashev Scale episode for
more exploration of the sheer scale of a civilization
that large, and what it can do even without
super-technologies.
They could basically beat the snot out of
any classic galactic empire of millions of
planets, since they have a billion planet’s
worth of space back home.
Just one of those Ladder States, even an O’neill
Cylinder variety, keeps around the kind of
resources and population that matches most
fictional interstellar empires.
But I personally doubt they’d tend to be
monolithic, more likely hundreds of various
coalitions ranging from fairly centralized
ones to loose coalitions with self-defense
and trade treaties.
Possibly even totally independent entities
that cooperate with their neighbors no more
than agreeing not to shoot them, or block
their light, or ram into them.
Your guess is as good as mine.
Fundamentally though, this is what we expect
all technological civilizations to tend to
converge towards, barring any radical changes
in our understanding of physics.
You’d probably have tons of smaller conglomerations
of structures far out in deep space too, and
interstellar travel is an automatic ability
of a Dyson civilization so they’d probably
have colonies nearby and be sending more out
all the time.
We’d also expect each colony to eventually
do the same; again, no real need for cooperation,
even a single O’Neill cylinder could probably
manufacture a colony ark ship with just the
kind of technologies available to them that
we consider on the radar for the next century
or so.
We have reexamined material I’ve discussed
in other episodes pertaining to Dysons, but
I’ve tried to keep away from those in detail,
so those other episodes I’ve been mentioning
will answer a lot of questions you might have
on these things if you haven’t seen them
yet, but I think we can stop here for today.
Hopefully by now you have a clearer image
on what these things are and why so many of
us tend to just take their future existence
almost for granted.
There’s so many reasons to build one, the
capability appears to be there, and I’ve
never heard a good reason not to build one.
Even if your population plateaus off way short
of what you’d need to fill one of these
up, you still have reason to build one.
Just collect and store matter and energy to
preserve your civilization far longer than
the default maximum of about 4 billion years
before the Sun starts dying.
I can imagine a civilization that decides
to be zero-growth even when it doesn’t need
to be, but I’d still expect them to try
to extend their possible existence out longer.
Next week we will be looking at that concept,
in the long-awaited sequel to Civilizations
at the End of Time, where we will look beyond
the Black Hole based civilizations we looked
at there and explore continuing on past the
Dark Black Hole Era with options such as reversible
computing, Boltzmann brains, and Iron Stars.
For alerts when that and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it worth others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
