We often discuss on this show the vital roles 
black holes may play in Humanity’s Future,  
how we may even come to live around them one 
day… but what if we already live inside one,  
and the whole Universe is a black hole. 
Black holes are pretty weird and given that, 
lots of weird questions come up around black  
holes. One question that sometimes comes 
up is if we live inside a black hole and  
how would we know if we did. We’re going to 
discuss today why people think this could  
be true as well as problems with the notion. 
Since we so often discuss civilizations powered  
by black holes or living near or around them, 
we might also wonder whether it's possible for  
them to live inside one rather than just nearby.
Now there’s some good and bad reasons suggesting  
we might live in a black hole and also some 
good and bad reasons for why we can’t. One is  
that since we have black holes in this Universe, 
then the Universe itself can’t be one. I assume  
this based on the notion that reality can only 
get warped into a singularity once per location,  
like in the TV show Babylon 5 how opening a 
hyperspace jumpgate inside another jumpgate  
makes it explode and how putting a bag of 
holding from D&D inside another will rip  
a hole in reality. We don’t really know that 
black holes don’t operate that way but we have  
no particular reason to think they do either.
As for reality warping, we need to keep in  
mind that, while dead stars going supernova and 
ending up with a point-like hyper-dense center,  
called a singularity, is one way to make a 
black hole, that a black hole in the context  
of a big spherical event horizon light can’t 
escape from can be generated in other ways.  
Event horizons themselves can come from 
other events, and we definitely have event  
horizons all around us from the Universe 
expanding, as we’ll discuss in a moment. 
Now we don’t know that black holes formed from 
dying stars are point-like in their centers, we  
just know that neutron stars, the ultra-dense dead 
star remnants leftover from most Supernovae aren’t  
quite dense and big enough enough to keep light 
escaping them, and that they are kept from falling  
into an even denser ball by neutron degeneracy 
pressure, the name of the force keeping neutrons  
from scrunching up more, and vastly stronger 
than the forces preventing us from doing so. 
Adding just a little more mass would overwhelm 
that force, and we speculate that it would then  
collapse either directly into a singularity or 
possibly into a quark star or a Planck Star. A  
Planck Star is a hypothetical object from 
Quantum Loop Gravity that can collapse no  
further under its own gravity by being held 
apart by being at the Planck Energy Density,  
what we think is the maximum density energy 
could have, 10^99 grams per cubic meter. A  
Trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion-trillion  
times denser than normal matter on 
our planet, but still not infinity. 
So a few notes here. First, singularities are a 
mathematical concept for poorly defined regions,  
and aren’t in and of themselves terribly 
mysterious, just terribly inconvenient,  
the corners of cubes are singularities for 
instance. So the notion of having one in  
the Universe is undesirable and in physics they 
represent a probable paradox which we dislike, so  
we tend to seek alternatives. Planck Stars and the 
Fuzzball from String Theory are examples of that. 
Singularities are not necessary for either Black 
Holes or the Big Bang. A Black Hole is created  
whenever the energy density in a region gets 
high enough so that its escape velocity to the  
outside is higher than light speed. We usually 
call this mass, but mass is just one type of  
energy and it's actually energy that generates 
gravity. A lot of these hyper-dense objects,  
like neutrons stars and whatever is in typical 
black holes, is spinning so incredibly fast that  
much of their energy is angular momentum, for 
instance, and indeed most of the mass inside  
your typical proton or neutron is not the mass of 
its three nominally official and real quarks but  
all the binding energy gluing them together, which 
we call gluons, and the more ethereal sea quarks. 
It’s not just a matter of density though, it's 
about having a place where the escape velocity  
from a region to the outside is light speed or 
higher. For instance, our galaxy is possibly  
near 2 trillion solar masses, of which our sun 
is just one. If you packed all that into a region  
about a light year across the average density 
would still be thinner than the air on Earth,  
but that condensed region would have an escape 
velocity higher than the speed of light. You’d  
have a big black hole there around a light year 
across but inside, initially anyway, it would be  
spread out so thin you couldn’t even breathe.
Which causes a headscratcher… a long time ago,  
our galaxy used to be a lot smaller. We say 
the whole Universe used to be a dot or maybe  
a near-dot, an atom-sized blob down at Planck 
Density, again 10^99 grams per cubic meter.  
The Galaxy would have been even smaller than an 
atomic nuclei back then, which brings up some  
tough questions. Why wasn’t it a black hole? 
And if it was, why didn't it stay one? And  
why isn’t the whole Universe a black hole?
That will take some explaining but we need  
a correction first. While the more massive a 
black hole is, the less dense it needs to be,  
the present-day Observable Universe at 
its current mass, energy, and radius,  
is too big for that. But it’s really close, 
at least in terms of orders of magnitude,  
and the coincidence of that is, I’d guess, why 
folks tend to lock on to the notion that we  
might be living inside a black hole. It wouldn’t 
matter if the Universe was dense enough or not,  
as we’ll discuss in a bit, and it definitely has 
been dense enough to qualify in the past, not  
just at the Big Bang either, which does matter.
See, we don’t actually know how the Big Bang  
happened, or if it did, or how big it was, so to 
speak, the furthest back in time we can directly  
see at the moment is to when the Universe was 
already a few hundred thousand years old and had  
finally expanded and cooled enough for photons of 
light not to be instantly absorbed. The Universe  
before then, presumably, had been composed of 
ultra-hot matter like what you’d find in stars,  
and quite a good deal denser, and at a certain 
temperature and density it transitioned,  
much as water transitions into ice or steam, 
into something more transparent to photons.  
Many of these photons have never been absorbed 
in the nearly 14 billion years since then.  
Even as the Universe expanded they’re still 
basically everywhere. We pick photons of that  
age up from all directions and we call this the 
Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation, or CMB. 
Everything earlier than this is speculative, but 
we can see the Universe getting smaller and denser  
and warmer as we look further away, or further 
back in time, and we know what happens when  
matter hits a certain temperature and density 
so it's not exactly a wild guess what happened.  
But pragmatically we live at the center of a 
Universe 93 billion light years across whose  
edges are composed of ultra-dense matter and the 
redshifted light it emitted. And everything about  
that statement is kinda-sorta wrong, the topic 
is trying to explain what we can currently see,  
which is deep in the past, and what we can 
extrapolate its current state to be from that, and  
causes folks lots of headaches and misconceptions 
trying to discuss and contemplate it. 
But this is another strike against it being a 
black hole. Black Holes are places you can’t  
see inside from the outside, because the 
light can’t escape it, but you can see the  
outside from inside just fine. We talk about 
ducking inside very big event horizons to hide  
a civilization as a possible Fermi Paradox 
Solution and that’s how that works. You can  
see the Universe outside just fine, but you 
can’t leave and they can’t see you… kind of. 
That’s exactly opposite how our observable 
Universe works, we can’t see outside it,  
the Cosmological Event Horizon of expansion is 
indeed an Event Horizon but it’s opposite to a  
black hole this way. Everyone has a bubble 
of space that is expanding around them that  
expands too fast for people or events at a certain 
distance or further from ever seeing or signaling  
each other. The light is moving fast but space 
between those two objects is growing faster than  
the light can traverse it, so it never arrives, 
and most galaxies we can see now qualify as that,  
no signal from us sent today could ever reach 
them, only a smaller bubble of the Universe is  
still inside that zone. That bubble is smaller 
than the Observable Universe, and we deduce that  
because the Universe used to be smaller and 
we can still see light traveling to us from  
places back then that are too far away from us 
today for us to ever message them or vice-versa. 
Now again we don’t know that the Universe was an 
infinitely tiny dot in the past, we just know the  
portion we can see used to be way smaller, and 
you don’t have to go back much further before  
we would have been dense enough to be a black 
hole. Again, at the time the CMB was formed,  
the Observable Universe was definitely dense 
enough to be a black hole. So why wasn’t it one? 
Well that’s not something we can answer 
definitively because we don’t know what’s  
right outside the Observable Universe, but in 
all likelihood it is more of the Universe. The  
Universe might be infinite, and may have erupted 
from a smaller but infinite Big Bang of which  
our Universe was a tiny dot, and indeed would 
be even if we compared it now to that infinite  
Big Bang. Or it might have been just a little 
bigger than our Observable portion. We not only  
don’t know but don’t know any way to find out.
If it were Infinite though, then the black hole  
issue is resolved, much as the infinitely old 
steady state model pre-big-bang resolved it.  
Gravity is generated by everything so a 
big dense fog of infinite size has got  
its individual bits all equally pulling in 
every direction out to Eternity’s Edge. So  
no collapse. You could have localized collapses 
in spots that were denser than their peers,  
just as we have now, and indeed that could have 
resulted in Primordial Black Holes, but nothing  
across the entirety of things, just local bubbles.
Which would then collapse to something denser too,  
but we’ll come back to that as well.
We also need to keep dark energy in mind,  
which, as best as we can tell, is a tendency of 
the Universe to pop out tiny new little bits of  
space everywhere all the time. Presumably right 
inside you and me, and over distance of light  
years this results in everything moving apart 
from each other in a noticeable fashion but  
one easily countered by gravity. Double the 
distance, double the expansion rate though.  
Only at the extragalactic scale is this expansion 
so great that even the massive gravity of entire  
galaxies can’t bind each other together any more, 
as gravity weakens with the square of distance  
while expansion speed rises with distance. Move 
two galaxies 10 times further apart and the  
expansion speed between them from little bits of 
space time emerging from parts unknown will go up  
by a factor of 10, while the gravity fighting that 
will have dropped by 10-squared, or a hundred. So  
trying to move apart ten times faster and now with 
only a hundredth the gravity trying to bind them. 
So a black hole forming at that scale gets to be a 
pretty dubious thing, and the biggest ones known,  
like Phoenix A and Ton 618, are about a 
light month across, not a light year let  
alone millions of them. If we did hypothesize 
a mega-huge black hole of galactic scale,  
made of whole superclusters, then we might 
imagine that its event horizon would be  
smaller as Dark Energy near its edge might 
significantly cut into its gravity. So too,  
in terms of ways to escape a black hole, your best 
bet might be some way of ramping up dark energy  
expansion near you, using some unknown Clarketech.
I should also note that gravity travels at  
the speed of light. As an example of 
how that can make things unexpected,  
the force distant galaxies exert on us is 
not what it should be for their proper modern  
distance because they were closer back then, 
much as their light was. So if a black hole  
was suddenly teleported into your area, it takes 
a few moments for that effect to percolate out. 
There are other issues with our region 
of the Universe, the Observable Universe,  
being a black hole but requiring more of a deep 
dive into both General Relativity and Quantum,  
and it still doesn’t say it's impossible 
just that we’ve no real reason to think we  
do. So we’ll limit discussion to just what we 
covered and instead ask if it would actually  
matter if we were living inside a black hole.
Again we have to demystify black holes away  
from what Movie Science has portrayed them as, 
and I hate to say it but physicists are guilty  
of this too because we tend to hype them up as 
mysterious and awesome to get folks interested  
in them and physics in general. And they are 
awesome and mysterious, but it's still hyping,  
and combined with that Movie Science gives 
people the idea that black holes are dangerous  
to be nearby and may even be portals to other 
Universes. Neither is necessarily untrue but your  
typical natural black hole is an object several 
kilometers across, not several million kilometers  
across like the star that produced it, and those 
are so immensely hot that you’d be incinerated a  
billion kilometers away, whereas a black hole is 
merely dangerous in terms of radiation because  
they tend to acquire accretion discs of matter 
that hasn’t fallen in yet. Indeed, in reality,  
it is very hard to fall into a black hole.
They’re not safe, exactly, but they’re far less  
dangerous than the stars that birthed them and 
their gravity is not in any way special. It's only  
because they are very dense that it is possible 
to get so close to one that the diminishing  
gravity with distance is at such a scale that 
your head could be torn from your feet simply  
because gravity at your feet is much higher. The 
scientific term for this is Spaghettification.  
This still requires being ultra-close to one, 
far closer than you could fly to any star,  
and indeed this effect is much smaller 
on bigger black holes, very large ones  
would not have this at their event horizon.
Further down the well they still could spaghettify  
you, if they’re a singularity or ultra-dense 
anyway. Presumably. It’s impossible to really  
discuss the inside of an Event Horizon with any 
certainty since the math gets tricky and we can’t  
see inside to gather data. There’s nothing special 
about the event horizon incidentally, as they  
shift based on your speed - black hole horizons 
appear smaller if you’re moving toward them and  
bigger if you’re moving away, and time does not 
‘stop’ there, there’s just a frozen moment where  
a photon could be thought of like a spaceship 
leaving a gravity well but not fast enough,  
akin to orbiting a world. Don’t assume that means 
there’s photons stuck in one place though, anymore  
than satellites hanging static around a planet.
Which is never stable in the long term,  
part of why I’d be very dubious about building a 
stable arrangement of matter that could be massive  
enough to form a black hole and not actually 
crush itself down, but on paper at least,  
and depending on the model, you could pack 
a lot of stellar objects into really tight  
orbits of each other like a Dyson Swarm, but 
made of stars rather than around one star. 
We’re still a little unclear on the specifics 
of how two large merging objects like neutron  
stars or black holes undergo frame dragging 
and ringdown to create a single object with  
a single event horizon, but basically if two 
black holes touch event horizons they form  
a new black hole with a diameter equal to 
those two black holes’s diameters combined,  
and we would expect that if we brought a bunch of 
black holes, or neutrons stars, into an Klemperer  
Rosette or similar stable orbit that we would get 
a big black hole with no center, and in the case  
of the neutron stars, no singularity. You could 
go live there safely, kinda, but could not leave.  
For today’s purpose’s we’re going to bypass 
discussion of Naked Singularities and the  
Cosmic Censorship Hypothesis, but there 
are some potential problems with building  
a black hole from a stable ring of dense 
objects rather than a big collapsing sphere. 
Again, the necessary density of a black hole, in 
terms of event horizon, drops off quickly with  
size. A black hole ten times more massive has ten 
times the radius, but a thousand times the volume,  
so only a hundredth the density. By the time 
you get to tens of millions of solar masses,  
those bigger known black holes we find 
at the centers of galaxies like Ton 618,  
your density is down to that of your typical rocky 
planet, and at 135 million solar masses, it's down  
to the density of water, and by a billion solar 
masses you have a black hole 6 billion kilometers  
across whose density is equivalent to that inside 
something like a Niven Smoke Ring, which might be  
imagined as an asteroid belt that orbited in 
air, not space, so critters could fly around  
between islands in the sky, around their sun, or 
inside their black hole. 10 times more massive,  
100 times less dense, and even ten billion solar 
masses is less than 1% of our galaxy. Which means  
you probably could create yourself a large initial 
black hole that you built a shell around to keep  
matter from falling into and serve as a big 
black-hole powered lightbulb as a fake star,  
then pack vast amounts of artificial planets and 
habitats around until the interior disappeared and  
eventually it spread to everyone there.
Again I’d be very dubious about pulling  
this off without causing everything to fall 
down into the black hole in the basement,  
I can think of some reasoning for why it might 
be impossible and a better cosmologist might  
be able to say yea or nay, but it’s one 
possible alternative fate of the galaxy,  
in line with a Birch Planet or Supra-Self, which 
is where you build a massive spherical shell,  
or several concentric ones, around a supermassive 
black hole. See the Megastructure Compendium,  
or our episodes Mega-Earths or Colonizing Black 
Holes, for more discussion of that option. 
Going back to if we might live inside a 
black hole, I said a bit ago that modern  
cosmology doesn’t say we’re in a black hole 
but doesn’t 100% preclude it yet either,  
however that’s a bit disingenuous. We have no 
idea where the Big Bang came from and as we  
discussed in our episode on the Big Rip it is even 
possible we’re in constant Big Bang mode where  
new Universes constantly expand from older ones 
like branches on a tree, only in a Big Rip case,  
more like a new Universe for every atom that 
existed in the previous one, and there we  
suggested hiding inside black holes as one way to 
survive a Big rip scenario and one that wouldn’t  
violate the Fermi Paradox situation either, of 
wondering why a race form a prior Universe hadn’t  
colonized all the Observable Universe already.
That’s not the only cosmological model that  
results in new Universes bursting out from tiny 
points either, and gives us the whole notion of  
Black Holes and Baby Universes. Which is also 
the name of a collection of essays by Stephen  
Hawking that came out in 1993 when I was 12, and 
I remember the local librarian had reserved me a  
copy knowing I’d want it, and I remember barely 
understanding half of it. And I got the idea of  
them as portals to other universes or making 
new ones by white holes but I didn’t get where  
whole universes of new matter were coming from.
It was what I asked my first physics professor  
a few years later, along with countless other 
questions, which probably explains his somewhat  
exasperated answer of saying “I have no idea 
Isaac, most of us in this field don’t learn  
much cosmology beyond the basics.” And that was 
early 1997 so Dark Energy wasn’t even a thing yet,  
but over the years I’ve noticed it as one of those 
questions people ask that rarely gets answered for  
them either. So if you’re curious, there is no 
specific answer. Sometimes the assumption is  
just that our Universe was on the downhill side 
of a very massive black hole in a much larger  
Universe and itself spawns only smaller universes 
the mass of that black hole, which would then  
presumably slowly evaporate back up as Hawking 
radiation lowered the mass of that black hole  
and that baby universe, essentially spitting a 
new universe out then sucking its matter back in. 
Others argue that once created, the connection 
is lost and under General Relativity energy,  
and mass, is not required to be conserved at 
that scale anyway. Plus in a very real way a  
black hole is a separate Universe, at least as 
much as an Observable Universe or Hubble Volume  
is. And here’s a key point, the Universe 
is gaining in energy, we don’t know where  
Dark Energy comes from and it could be spilling 
from some other universe like ours just bigger,  
and might eventually slow or stop, or it could 
be from some place very different and be an  
effective infinite or accelerating well. Nor 
does it necessarily need to come from anywhere.  
We tend to view the Big bang differently these 
days, less of a single moment of a singularity  
suddenly expanding and more the beginning 
of a rapid and constant state of inflation. 
There’s also multiple versions of black holes 
making new universes in terms of how it might  
operate. Legendary Physicist Lee Smolin put 
forward a hypothesis of cosmological natural  
selection where new universes spawn inside black 
holes with slightly different values of physical  
constants, like a higher or lower speed of 
light or gravitational constant. Universes  
whose parameters are optimal for generating black 
holes then dominate the multiverse. Hence the  
analogy with natural selection in biology. Smolin 
proposed the idea as a falsifiable alternative  
to the anthropic principle and it did result in 
some strong predictions for things like maximum  
neutron star mass where observed values were on 
the edge of the prediction. The hypothesis has  
seen some revival since its first publication 
in 1992 and the jury is still out, and honestly  
probably will be for a long time, as I mentioned 
earlier, many of these ideas are next to  
impossible to test, and maybe outright impossible.
A singularity might spawn a New Universe less in  
the sense of a bridge forming to the prior one 
to drain matter and energy across and more as  
forming a new node or poke in reality or 
balloon in which inflation driven from  
some greater elsewhere can begin, like a big rip.
In that context it is entirely possible that we do  
live inside a black hole, though the term ‘inside’ 
gets rather iffy, as it's inside another and that  
one is inside another and that one is inside still 
another. Once you officially put infinity on the  
table there’s no real need to waste time worrying 
about conservation of matter or space or time or  
energy beyond local affairs. And for that matter, 
we often talk about time slowing in black holes  
and so dumping huge amounts of matter through 
one over eons on this side into a brief moment  
on the other wouldn’t be a problem either.
Don’t worry if this all feels confusing,  
it really is, to me too and I’ve friends who 
specialize in this area of physics and cosmology  
and who feel much the same after decades 
of study. It is weird and counter-intuitive  
with lots of unknowns and probably lots of 
unknown unknowns too. Ultimately the quest for  
knowledge must continue at least a little while 
longer, and it does seem like our future will  
be very dependent on what we learn about them.
I often worry that black holes will turn out  
more mundane than we expect, but for now they 
offer us a glimpse of a future where we might  
be able to power civilizations of breathtaking 
scope, maybe beat thermodynamics and entropy,  
and possibly even create our own new 
Universes or survive the death of this one. 
That’s an awful lot to expect from something 
so tiny, but then again, that is what black  
holes are best known for, getting an awful 
lot of stuff into something very tiny.
As I’ve mentioned in passing, one of the 
other hats I wear outside this Show is  
being the Chairman of the Board of Elections 
for my area, under the secretary of state,  
and we work a lot with the department of homeland 
security on cybersecurity for elections and  
election infrastructure. And it's constantly 
shocking how frequent and inventive thieves  
and hackers have gotten. Our sponsor for today’s 
episode, NordVPN, asked me if I had any personal  
experience with some of those newer attack methods 
and it reminded me when I was actually at an  
election conference where cybersecurity was one of 
the topics and someone I knew was trying to find  
a wifi connection with every wifi network at the 
hotel jam-packed and slow and probably narrowly  
avoided what is called a Man-in-the-Middle Attack.
And these are very common in hotels and coffee  
shops. Imagine going to a coffee shop and 
connecting to a free Wi-Fi named “CoffeeFreeWiFi”,  
which looks totally normal and not out of 
ordinary. However, turns out the Wi-Fi is  
actually being hosted by a random person trying to 
impersonate the free Wi-Fi access. While you enjoy  
that free Wi-Fi, he has access to your data, as he 
created that same network you are using on his own  
PC. Thus, when you connect and go into the banking 
system you usually use - the information then  
flows via the man in the middle (Impostor) device 
and he can capture the information you entered.  
To protect yourself, always check for “Lock and 
HTTPS” near the destination URL and use NordVPN  
as it will encrypt your data flow no matter if 
the destination connection is secure or not. 
NordVPN has tons of alert and protection features 
to help protect you from attacks like phishing or  
ransomware or Malvertsing and warn you of 
the clever tricks thieves use these days,  
along with education materials to help you 
understand and avoid threats. That is in  
addition to having a great virtual private 
network that encrypts your data and can  
send it through any of their 5400 servers in 59 
different countries, to protect your privacy and  
keep you safe. You can check out their website to 
learn all the benefits NordVPN offers, just go to  
NordVPN.com/isaacarthur to get a 2-year plan plus 
4 additional months with a HUGE discount. It’s  
risk-free with Nord’s 30-day money-back guarantee!
So we’re almost to the end of the year now with  
Christmas this weekend and New Year’s just 9 days 
off, and we still have one more regular episode,  
looking at humanity’s future and transhumanism, 
next week. But we have also moved our livestream  
this month to Saturday, December 31st, 4pm 
Eastern Time, right before New Year’s. After  
that we’ll head into the NEw Year to look 
at Interstellar Colonization Strategies. 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like to  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social media  
forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description. 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
