This episode is sponsored by Audible.
A human floating around outside the Earth’s
gravity is very much a fish out of water.
But our distant ancestors were literally fish
out of water, and they adapted to living on
land pretty well. Maybe some of our descendants
will adapt just as well to life without gravity.
Last February, we did a well-received episode
about low-gravity planets, and the probable
effects on human physiology and evolution.
We also talked about how close to the truth
science fiction has come in its portrayals.
So taking that concept all the way to zero-g
or near-zero-g seemed like an appropriate
follow-up.
Of course, we’ll be talking mostly about
man-made habitats in this episode, because
to hold an atmosphere in place requires either
significant gravity or an airtight enclosure,
but we will talk about some other possibilities.
And while this won’t be a very heavy episode,
you might still want to go get a sealed drink
and a non-crumbling snack, and seatbelt yourself
in for a while.
The terms near-zero-g, micro-g, and microgravity
are interchangeable terms for the same thing.
What astronauts experience in space used to
be popularly called “zero-g”, but that
was a popular misnomer, because there’s
a solar system and universe around us that
make it impossible to get away from all gravity.
If you’re in a circular orbit around the
Earth, centrifugal force cancels the Earth’s
gravity, but the Sun still exerts about half
of a thousandth of a g on you and your spacecraft,
and the Moon exerts about three millionths
of a g. Your craft, crew, and cargo also have
mass and so also exert some attractive force
on each other. An average-sized adult close
enough to shake hands with exerts about one
billionth of a g on you, and if you’re the
length of the International Space Station
away from the center of the International
Space Station, it’s also exerting about
a billionth of a g on you.
For objects that are very close, tidal forces
also become a concern. The strength of gravitational
force is inversely proportional to the square
of the distance, so there’s slightly less
gravity on your head than your feet here on
Earth, but we can usually ignore that. In
microgravity, less so. The very slight gravitational
force exerted on you by the astronaut you’re
shaking hands with is several times stronger
on your hand than on your shoulder. The difference
can have a measurable effect, for example,
on current ISS experiments on micro-assembly
and micro-crystal growth.
You can mostly isolate an experiment from
all the jostling and vibration caused by astronauts
bumping around in the space station, but there
is no insulating it from their gravity and
tides. So, while the term zero-g was close
enough decades ago, more precise measurements
on more sensitive modern experiments require
us to adopt more precise terminology.
Human bodies are not very well equipped to
adjust or adapt to microgravity, and I think
that’s largely because evolution has never,
in all of life’s history on Earth, had to
deal with any changes in gravity. The temperature,
light level, day length, oxygen levels, and
most everything else about every natural habitat
vary significantly with the season, location,
and geological era. Gravity has been the one
nearly absolute constant.[a][b]
1g is by definition 9.80665 meters per second
per second, meaning that the speed of a falling
object, absent air resistance, will increase
by 9.8 meters per second every second. This
value is an estimate of the average gravity
on the Earth’s surface, but local gravity
varies over the Earth’s surface by less
than a percent, from .995g atop mountains
near the equator, to a crushing 1.003g over
the Arctic Ocean, the place where the Earth’s
surface is closest to the Earth’s core.
The gravity we experience today was the same
for our primate ancestors, our rodent, reptile,
fish, and bacteria ancestors, and every living
thing that’s ever lived on this planet along
the way.
So to call a human experiencing microgravity
a “fish out of water” is just about the
most apt figurative use of that phrase I can
think of. Taken out of the environment they
evolved to function in, our bodies start to
malfunction, and sometimes rather badly. Even
extraordinarily fit and healthy individuals,
like those selected to become astronauts,
such as Chris Hadfield or Scott Kelly, end
up having serious medical issues arise from
extended stays in microgravity—some of which
can jeopardize the mission, and some of which
don’t go away when the astronauts return
to Earth. We will have to solve or at least
address all of those problems before we dare
send humans much farther from Earth than we
already have, at least without artificial
gravity.
The first common problems that arise are nausea
and headache. The first minutes in microgravity
can be rather like car-sickness or seasickness.
The vestibular system of your inner ear uses
fluid flowing freely in your semicircular
canals to sense acceleration and determine
what direction down is in. Your brain attempts
to reconcile the orientation you sense with
what you see. And just like when you’re
in the cabin of a rocking boat or reading
in a moving car, your brain can’t do that
reconciling, but it keeps trying, and eventually
it notifies you that something is wrong here
by making you feel as awful as possible. There’s
a reason the training plane NASA uses to simulate
microgravity has been nicknamed the Vomit
Comet.
The failure of bodily fluids to move normally
is a big problem when your body is 60% water.
Long ago, astronaut Wally Schirra explained
in commercials for decongestants that sinuses
do not drain in space. So when he gave his
fellow crew members on the Apollo 7 mission
his cold, they were in real physical pain
for days and just had to work through it.
Wally also invited us to imagine what it would
be like to sneeze inside a space helmet—but
I won’t do that, in case you’re enjoying
that snack I recommended earlier, and it's
one of many examples of how normal human bodily
functions aren’t normal in spacesuits or
micro-gravity.
Cerebrospinal fluid also does not move around
in microgravity quite the way your body needs
it to. Without gravity pulling it down, it
pools in your head and exerts pressure on
your brain and the backs of your eyeballs.
This contributes to the headaches and also
deforms the eyeballs a bit. Astronauts are
screened for having perfect vision, but after
several weeks on missions they often end up
with blurry vision and nearsightedness that
doesn’t always go away when they return
to Earth. Worse, the adjustable-focus glasses
that NASA issues are so un-cool-looking that
they somehow manage to make even astronauts
look uncool.
Blood flow is a more serious issue though.
Your blood doesn’t rush to your head in
micro-g like when you hang upside down, but
it also doesn’t drain downward like normal.
That’s why astronaut’s faces always look
a bit puffy during missions—then after we
get used to seeing them like that, they look
a bit gaunt doing interviews back on Earth.
They also say they get skinny “bird legs”
in space because blood and interstitial fluid
do not pool down there like they normally
do. But these are not just aesthetic concerns,
they are indicators of blood not flowing through
the body normally, which means the heart isn’t
functioning normally either.
Blood pressure and heart rate also drop in
micro-g, and this is where things get truly
dangerous. Without gravity to overcome, your
heart simply does not pump as hard. When astronauts
are working lightly, their heart rates are
about the same as when they are lying in bed
on Earth. When the heart does not work as
hard, it atrophies, losing strength and soon
thereafter losing muscle mass. This condition
gets especially concerning when astronauts
return to Earth, because the heart must regain
that muscle mass before it can adjust to the
new heavier load. Many astronauts have passed
out on reentry after a long mission, and several
have ended up having to ingest a lot of salt
or take low blood pressure medications for
many months after their missions.
And your heart is not the only muscle that
atrophies quickly in microgravity. It probably
will not surprise anyone that when your body
doesn’t have to exert itself to lift things
or lift itself, it gets weaker. But it is
the postural muscles, the core muscles that
stabilize your back, abdomen, and pelvis,
that atrophy the most quickly because they’re
composed mainly of slow-twitch fibers. Exercise
helps a great deal, so astronauts spend two
hours a day working out, but it seems to only
slow the atrophy not stop it. Atrophy of the
muscles that hold the body stable and erect
causes another host of problems when the astronauts
return abruptly to full gravity on Earth.
We do not currently have any moon bases or
low-g rotating space habitats where astronauts
can return to gravity gradually, but as more
people spend longer times in microgravity,
such facilities will almost certainly become
necessary. And this is where rotating habitats
like O’Neill Cylinders or the Kalpana 1
space habitat would be ideal, because the
simulated gravity you experience inside one
is proportional to your distance from the
hub, so if it’s a bit too heavy for you
today, you just have to move up a floor to
where the gravity is lighter.
Your bones also deteriorate in space. When
load-bearing bones aren’t under any load,
they quickly start losing calcium, which makes
them brittle. This happens even to Earthbound
people who don’t exercise much, but in microgravity
the effect is more rapid. And calcium released
from your bones gets absorbed into your blood
and passed through your kidneys, where it
can form the jagged variety of kidney stones,
which are extremely painful and debilitating.
Staying very well hydrated reduces but doesn’t
eliminate the kidney stone problem. And just
like with muscle atrophy, exercising two hours
a day, particularly exercise with some impact
like running on a treadmill, reduces but doesn’t
eliminate the bone deterioration. I suspect
by now it is pretty clear why I so often emphasize
the importance of spin-gravity rotating habitats
in space settlement.
But as serious as these issues are, they are
clearly manageable and recoverable. In 1994-95,
Valeri Polyakov spent a continuous 437 days
or 14 months aboard the Mir space station.
He’s now 77 and still in good health according
to the Russian space agency. Gennady Padalka
spent a lifetime total of 879 days or 28 months
in microgravity, spread over 17 years and
5 missions aboard Mir and the ISS. His career
demonstrates that it’s not only possible
to recover normal health after months in microgravity,
it’s possible to remain fit enough for the
space program so you can go do it all again.
But of course, we have to remember that astronauts
are NOT ordinary people, they are among the
most extraordinarily fit and healthy specimens
their respective countries could find. So
there’s no data on how average or out-of-shape
folks will fare in space or recover from it,
and I doubt NASA is going to run that experiment
any time soon, though my fingers are crossed.
And of course the late great John Glenn, first
American to orbit Earth and long time Senator
for my own state of Ohio, did manage to get
back up into space again at age 77 in a NASA
experiment focused on the effects of the environment
on seniors, so there is hope for those who
want to get in space as a test subject for
how microgravity affects folks who aren’t
in peak health, and we do need to know those
eventually since space settlement is not intended
to rely on sending only olympic athletes to
space.
The physiological effects of extended microgravity
are a major concern for planning any manned
journey to Mars. Realistic mission plans put
the astronauts in transit for at least 18
months. The landing party would certainly
have an easier time adjusting to 1/3 g on
Mars’ surface than they would adjusting
abruptly back to a full 1g, but they wouldn’t
have the help of dedicated ground crew and
medical personnel around them, only each other.
And then after months in Mars’ 1/3 g they’ll
spend another at least 18 months traveling
back to Earth. For a deeper analysis of the
gravity-related issues our explorers and their
children might encounter on Mars, you can
check out our episode about Low-Gravity planets.
But barring any sudden medical breakthroughs
that solve all of the microgravity problems,
we’ll have to equip the spaceship with a
rotating section to travel in, what we often
call the Drum. Such a drum would add enormous
fuel costs and construction time to the mission.
The Drum would have to be quite large if the
astronauts were supposed to spend any significant
time in it. As I mentioned, centrifugal force
is proportional to the distance from the axis,
so a person standing inside a spinning drum
feels literally light headed, with lighter
simulated gravity on their head than their
feet. The only way to remedy this is to make
the drum so large their height is pretty small
compared to the radius. For example, if the
radius is twice your height, your head would
feel half as much gravity as your feet, but
if the radius is ten times your height, your
head would feel 90% as much gravity as your
feet, a big improvement at quite a cost.
And the more surface area the habitat has,
the more mass of shielding it needs. When
people and cargoes move back-and-forth between
the rotating and non-rotating sections, they
carry and transfer their angular momentum,
so you’ll need thrusters and flywheels to
keep the respective sections rotating or not-rotating
correctly and steadily, otherwise your whole
vessel will be spinning before long. Maneuvering
also gets complicated when you’re carrying
a massive gyroscope around, an issue you either
deal with or solve by having a second giant
gyroscope rotating the opposite direction.
This is turning into quite a lot of mass we’re
adding to our vehicle, that we’d currently
have to lift into orbit with rockets for about
$10,000 per kilogram. And this is the answer
to a question I frequently get, about why
the ISS doesn’t just have a rotating drum
section.
I mentioned earlier that the worst problems
associated with prolonged microgravity arise
when the astronauts return to Earth, so simply
NOT returning to Earth is an obvious way to
solve those problems.
This has actually been proposed non-jokingly
as a way to solve a lot of problems with a
Mars mission, just skip the brief jaunts,
cautious visits, and hauling along a return
vehicle. Just make the trip one way and commit
to a colony outpost founded by people prepared
to spend the rest of their lives there, paving
the way for the future arrivals. So it’s
not completely unreasonable to think this
might be a solution to the problems caused
by returning from microgravity, particularly
if someone had been stuck in space for longer
than planned and found that they were medically
unable to return.
In the early 90’s, cosmonaut Sergei Krikalev
was stranded aboard the Mir space station,
not because of any technical problem, but
because his home country the Soviet Union
dissolved. Even his intended landing site
at the Soviet cosmodrome was suddenly in a
different country, Kazakhstan. So he ended
up staying aboard Mir for 311 days, twice
what had been scheduled. Sergei was alright
and even flew several other space missions,
but his case does raise the question of what
would happen if someone were stuck in space
for much longer.
Every improbable event will happen eventually
if you wait long enough, so it’s fair to
say that someday, either by an accident in
space or a disaster on Earth, someone is going
to get stranded in microgravity for so long
they just can’t ever return to full gravity.
That would be a terribly lonely existence
if that person or crew were stranded on the
only space station in orbit, but it might
not be so terrible if it happened in an era
where there’s significant infrastructure
and permanent human presence in orbit. Then
they’d at least have company and a job where
they’ll always be the most experienced worker
around. Though unless others are remaining
permanently, it might be rather rough on them
having many short term relationships always
ending in remaining in touch by correspondence
or not at all. That may incline many folks
who work for long times in space to opt for
more expensive options allowing them to return
to gravity eventually, like a space miner
having a rotating section on their ship or
taking long vacations into gravity.
Of course, it’s also very possible that
before we build major orbital infrastructure,
we’ll establish a permanent presence on
the Moon—in fact we’d probably establish
lunar mines and factories precisely to build
our low-orbit infrastructure. And those lunar
colonies might be viable places to send our
stuck astronaut to, either to retire or to
recover more gradually, where they only have
to adjust abruptly to 1/6 g, which is probably
a lot easier than adjusting to an abrupt return
to full 1g.
And by the way, the idea of retirement homes
in space has also been kicked around, a place
where less physically able people can enjoy
mobility again, where weak bones and muscles
don’t matter so much, and where there’s
zero danger of falling in the shower. Though
we should also remember that while many might
find those attractive options now, they may
be redundant in a century as medical technology
is also likely to improve.
So now that we’ve covered involuntary permanent
residency in microgravity, let’s think about
voluntary stays. We take it more or less as
a given on this channel that someday people
will live on Mars, the Moon, and Venus. If
people live their lives there, they will adapt,
and there’s really no need to ensure they’re
able to return to 1g. Most Americans have
never visited the countries their ancestors
lived in two hundred years ago, and most humans
have never felt the need to visit the East
African grasslands where our species originated,
so there’s no reason to think most Martians
or Venusians will visit Earth ever. And with
options like virtual reality available for
visits, there’s less need to make sure they
physically can visit.
The same is true for the people who will be
farther out, mining asteroids and comets.
If you work in space, you’ll probably be
in microgravity all day long and quite accustomed
to it. Your spaceship or mining facility might
have a habitation drum providing gravity,
but that represents an extra cost and maintenance
issue so wouldn’t be a feature of a marginal
operation, and most businesses usually are
marginal operations to some degree, though
spin-gravity habitats on facilities might
also be something government mandated. So
too, full gravity is harder than low-gravity,
so spaceships and smaller facilities might
feature Martian or Lunar levels rather than
Earth-standard gravity. It might seem a major
inconvenience to have to return to the 1g
O’Neill habitat for a few months every year,
just to keep you medically able to return
to a planet you don’t care much about. And
it will certainly be inconvenient having to
either travel great distances to that habitat
or drag such a habitat around with you, paying
for it all the way.
If colonizing the Solar System plays out like
the settlement of the American West—or like
it’s depicted on The Expanse—the first
settlers in some areas might be people acting
on their own, either poor enough or enterprising
enough to set off and try to make a life or
a fortune grabbing up those resources that
are there for the taking. Folks like those
are likely to skip the time and expense of
building rotating sections for gravity, let
alone giant O’Neill cylinders. So, you’ll
have humans living and working in microgravity
for years, with no illusions about returning
to Earth. If they find they can just adapt
to that life, it is likely many will just
go on that way, one job to the next. It seems
inevitable that many space workers will simply
become permanent microgravity residents.
Of course, if you are talking about a civilization
or nation of people living permanently in
microgravity, they’ll have to be able to
reproduce, and we still don’t know if this
is harder in zero-gravity. While animal embryos
and pregnant animals have been sent into space,
there hasn’t yet been a complete animal
gestation in space, where the animals got
pregnant in space and remained there until
they gave birth, let alone multi-generational
studies. So the data on this is lacking, and
is totally absent where humans are concerned.
Animal data won’t necessarily tell us if
humans can have normal and healthy births
in space. We already gestate and give birth
rather differently than other mammals owing
to our torsos being vertical and our pelvic
canals being relatively small to keep our
guts from falling through. And if microgravity
affects the flow and pooling of blood, that
will have effects on a pregnancy. This is
probably manageable, but the rigorous scientific
answer to whether or not human beings could
actually breed in space is, “We don’t
know, no one has tried.”
I’ve talked so far about the many problems
of adapting and adjusting to microgravity.
But I am very much a science-optimist, and
I tend to believe that none of these are absolute
barriers, only problems to work through. We’ve
done episodes on genetic engineering, cybernetic
enhancement, and all sorts of ways we might
alter our bodies and minds, so problems like
bone and muscle atrophy and abnormal fluid
pooling seem pretty modest and very solvable.
And what we treat initially with drugs or
mechanical enhancement, we might eventually
address with permanent genetic grafts, so
that workers will simply be born able to remain
in microgravity indefinitely.
Indeed this is the root of the term “Cyborg”
or cybernetic organism, the word originally
meant the various biological and chemical
adaptations or treatments we might need to
make life in an off-Earth environment possible,
the concept of a cyborg as someone walking
around on mechanical limbs or sporting metallic
augmentations is a more modern development.
That version might be in the cards too, and
in many cases folks might embrace chemical,
genetic, surgical, or mechanical alterations,
treatments, or augmentations that made their
life in a specific non-Earth environment easier.
Chances are, space-dwelling humans will live
in many different levels of gravity and even
move around between them. If you colonize
a planet, you are pretty much stuck with whatever
gravity was native to it. Even if you had
something like artificial gravity generators
you presumably need power to run those, and
run them perpetually. Doing that planet-wide
would seem a far greater effort than just
adapting life to that lower gravity. The preferred
human habitat, though, will likely be the
O’Neill cylinder, and those can be constructed
and spun up to synthesize however much gravity
you’d like, there’s no upkeep cost to
that gravity beyond maintaining the structure
itself since it relies on conservation of
angular momentum, it will keep spinning in
a vacuum environment with no friction and
generate spin-gravity while it does so.
But that gravity isn’t uniform, it's proportional
to the distance from the axis of rotation,
and unless your drum is very large that difference
can be rather noticeable in multi-story buildings
or any landscaping that is more vertical than
flat grasslands. Skyscrapers or even trees
would be dealing with significant changes
to gravity along their height in any drum
not kilometers in diameter. Many would probably
be a lot smaller too, just the tens of meters
minimally necessary to avoid noticeable difference
in gravity between your head and feet.
It would seem a terrible waste of expensive
living space if everyone just lived on the
one level at the right radius to have exactly
1g. The outer levels with higher gravity probably
will not be favored as much as the lower-g
levels closer to the axis, but there’s no
good reason to leave either uninhabited.
But the folks who live in microgravity won’t
have to go to the inconvenience of building
a huge drum, making it strong enough to not
spin apart, and controlling its rate of spin.
They can pretty much just build a box of any
convenient size and shape or even inflate
a balloon, then slap on some radiation shielding,
and they are ready to move in. This will give
them quite an advantage when there’s new
territory to settle. They will also be able
to handle long remote space missions, so they
will likely be the vanguard exploring and
surveying new systems, which would usually
imply access to the choicest parts of those
new territories. This means they will settle
a lot of places the floor-bound folks haven’t
reached yet—and might not ever reach.
And this raises interesting possibilities
for human evolution. When two groups are separated
in this way, they will begin to diverge—socially,
then culturally, then genetically. We might
very well find the human species branching
into groups that find each other’s way of
living and the appearance of their bodies
quite alien.
There’s no way we can know for certain if
they’ll call each other Floaters and Sinkers,
so I’m forced to assume they will. Floaters
living in microgravity would probably tend
towards much lighter skeletons with scrawny
limbs, as they tend to be portrayed in science
fiction. One might also imagine they would
adapt away from hands and feet toward four
hands, their feet and toes shifting toward
being able to grab things, as that would be
more useful than the modern foot and leg structure,
which has to handle lots of repeated heavy
impacts. And while such a thing might take
a long while to evolve naturally, it is not
likely to be a major challenge for genetic
engineering. Indeed our entire bipedal setup
is less advantageous in zero-gravity too,
where things like floors and walls and ceilings
become rather arbitrary.
You can swim and fly through air too, and
while I’d imagine early space travelers
might opt for clothing that let them push
the air to move about, webbed fingers and
toes might develop and even wings aren't off
the table. A culture evolved – or engineered
– for micro-gravity might be a pretty alien
thing, shifting to the more aquatic or avian
formats.
While that sounds alien to us, it might seem
eccentric and reactionary to them that Sinkers
would migrate into space and then refuse to
adapt to it. Micro-g is the norm, what you’re
going to find in most of space, with gravity
only available on planets that might not be
habitable and in those inconvenient rotating
cylinders. But when your subspecies simply
adapts to conditions in space, your options
for places to inhabit are pretty much the
definition of vast.
We also have a host of megastructures focused
on low or no gravity that we discuss here
less than rotating drums because we tend to
focus on Earth-like habitats. One of those
is the Gravity Balloon. This is a structure
where you just have a big balloon full of
air whose outer surface is covered with protective
material, that might be armor and solar panels
or just rubble and spill from mining an asteroid,
or ice or some sturdy transparent material
if you wanted to see outside or let light
in. Here the pressure of the air, presumably
at one standard Earth atmosphere, is counteracted
by the weight of the outer protective layer,
thus not something that can pop from a puncture
in spite of the implication from being called
a balloon.
Given that it's the air in the balloon generating
that gravity these can get to be enormous,
one modest asteroid ground down to provide
the protective outer layer might provide a
culture’s whole living area, potentially
a whole world. Considerably larger than planets
in fact, the Edersphere, a giant hollow empty
steel shell, is several times larger than
Earth and filled with an Earth-like atmosphere.
You can also have some rather unique biology
in zero-gravity, especially when we include
low-gravity of less than a percent human normal,
floating islands held aloft by buoyancy or
trees and coral reefs stretching through kilometers
of empty air. You would still have weather
in such things even if it’s driving forces
were quite different. Those might make for
very attractive environments to visit, and
to live in, where you could fly or swim around
the sky as easily as a fish, and you could
arrange bubbles of water and land with some
careful engineering.
So, returning to the fish-out-of-water analogy
for a moment, it’s relevant to note that
while humans out of gravity have similar problems,
some fish do voluntarily venture out of water
when they have good reasons. Some found that
laying eggs on the beach was a good way to
keep them safe. And some of them spent so
much time out of water their species evolved
to land, and now they are driving cars, doing
science, and watching videos on colonizing
space. So it is worth pondering if our species’
relationship with gravity could go the same
way.
Considering how much science fiction takes
place in space, relatively little of it actually
takes place in zero-gravity, even in books
where there’s no need for expensive special
effects to simulate it. Even when we do see
it, it tends to be short scenes, and very
few authors have tackled true micro-gravity
cultures as a topic. One who did was Larry
Niven, in his 1984 novel Integral Trees, Book
two of his State Trilogy, and its sequel Smoke
Ring, which both take place in a thick gas
halo around a neutron star in which life has
evolved in a massive atmosphere halo around
that star with no gravity. The story follows
the descendants of a team of humans who arrived
to explore it and now dwell in the micro-gravity
environment, and Integral Trees is our Audible
Audiobook of the Month.
This is not Niven’s first time winning our
Audibook of the Month, and with good reason,
the author of Ringworld, The Mote in God's
Eye, Lucifer's Hammer, A World Out of Time,
and many more excellent novels and short stories
writes science fiction that is simultaneously
mind-blowingly fantastic and scientifically
realistic, and you can find them all on Audible,
just visit Audible dot com slash isaac or
text isaac to 500-500.
Audible has an incredibly library of thousands
of audiobooks, theatrical performances, original
entertainment, guided fitness and meditation,
sleep tracks, and podcasts, and now’s the
perfect time to join as they are having a
President’s Day’s Sale for 6 months of
Audible for just $9.95 a month. For a limited
time – In addition to accessing one title
from their Premium selection, you can download
and stream thousands of all-you-can-listen
audiobooks, originals and podcasts for less
than the regular membership.
Again Just visit the link in the episode description,
Audible.com/Isaac, or text “Isaac” to
500-500.
Some of you probably noticed that we had a
few changes in our schedule, swapping this
week’s episode and last week’s Colonizing
Red Dwarfs on the schedule for January and
even moving around the Monthly Livestream
Q&A, which appeared on the Schedule for Sunday
January 24 then January 31st. I’d forgotten
that I had moved it to the 24th because my
wife Sarah, who cohosts the Livestreams, was
out of town for wedding on the 31st and figured
I’d just forgotten January had 31 days,
and moved it back. I wanted to thank my longtime
friend David Thomas for being nice enough
to fill in for her this last weekend. I usually
talk about our upcoming episodes at the end
of a video and will get to the schedule in
a moment, but someone mentioned to me how
they kept missing the Livestreams and that
they didn’t realize they could still watch
them afterward, the livestreams have replays
available. So if you missed that, or last
week’s episode, Colonizing Red Dwarfs, you
can still catch them.
So today we looked at gravity, or rather civilizations
existing in an absence of it, and next week
our topic is going to be a substance we can
only detect by its gravity, as it seems to
be absent in every other respect, as we discuss
Dark Matter, what it might be, and what technologies
we might be able to develop for using it.
After that we have our mid-month bonus Sci-fi
Sunday episode, Multi-Species Civilizations
& Co-Alien Habitats on Sunday, February 14th,
and in two weeks we will be returning to the
topic of Space Warfare to look at Orbital
Bombardment, and we will finally find out
what the First Rule of Warfare is.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas. You can also follow
us itunes, Soundcloud, or Spotify to get our
audio-only versions of the show.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
[a]This is not strictly correct. First, the
moon and tides. And second, organisms that
use free fall is part of their daily routines
(birds, monkeys, squirells. I guess, fish
out of the water and tortoises, that come
out to lay eggs or is it body weight change
not the same as change in gravity for the
purpose of the discussion?) Skydivers?
[b]You're editing an episode that was marked
as recorded a month before this, need to be
careful about that, even if it was mostly
good edits I only change recorded ones for
critical edits.
