Throughout our history we have brought pieces of the unknown
into our home as a reminder of what we experienced.
Our future, however, will require us to bring
pieces of our home out into the unknown with us.
So today we will be continuing our look at
Interstellar Colonization and Generation Ships
with a look at how you go about moving whole
ecosystems to be transplanted to alien worlds.
The first and most key thing to understand
is that this inevitably requires a certain
amount of compression and loss, a lot like
compressing an image by zipping it.
Short of moving an entire planet, which is
actually possible, to another system with
a planet perfectly matching Earth, which is
also possible, you will never end up with
an exact copy of an ecosystem.
After all, such a place is not just the flora
and fauna in it, it’s the terrain inside
it too, the microorganisms there, and it’s
interactions at the edges with its neighboring
ecosystems.
Even minor changes in terrain, weather, and
sunlight can change the dynamics of an ecosystem,
as can changes to its neighbors, and of course
it is worth remembering that these changes
are always going on naturally.
There are no perfectly balanced ecosystems;
they are dynamic, evolving, and ever-changing.
So our threshold of ‘good enough’ is actually
how nature rolls anyway.
This would vary with the folks making that
decision, but recreating Earth in minute detail
isn’t really the goal of interstellar colonization.
We want similarities, but not perfect copies
complete with the same mountains and rivers
- that would be boring.
As we look at this today though, we are going
to be shooting for the most complete ecosystem
we can get, even though odds are many colonies
would opt not to go that route.
We’re showing it can be done rather completely,
not that you necessarily would.
We should also note that there is no such
thing as a closed ecosystem, even our entire
planet, if thought of as such, still relies
on the Sun and Moon in major ways, for light,
warmth, tides, and so on.
Even our biosphere is just a thin skin along
the surface, with constant interaction not
just above to the heavens, but also down deep,
as we exchange a lot of material with our
planet’s crust and mantle.
There are external inputs, so a smaller ecosystem
engineered to be fairly stable shouldn’t
be thought of as not being closed just because
it might need the occasional infusion of new
DNA.
After all, it needs light and energy from
outside too.
A complete ecosystem need not take up a lot
of space either.
And I don’t mean because DNA is so small
you could fit copies of every species on the
planet in the palm of your hand, or even digitally
store them.
For most of our planet’s history there’s
been life, but just single-celled life or
very basic multicellular types.
These tend not to be too dependent on each
other, and you can fit millions of members
of millions of species in such a volume.
Indeed you already have complete ecosystems
in the palm of your hand, or at least under
your fingernails, and scientists found something
like 1500 new species just by examining our
belly buttons, and several dozen on Mir and
the ISS.
You have more unique species in your body
than there are species of birds and beasts,
and for most of our planet’s history you
could have gotten a solid and representative
sample of our planet’s ecology by just filling
a modest box with petri dishes scraped from
random spots in, down, and around our oceans.
The other thing of course is that we can up
that diversity for a colony immensely by storing
samples, both of entire species we don’t
need yet, and members of that species left
back on Earth.
You’d have problems finding room on a ship
for 2000 elephants to provide a stable genetic
pool.
But you don’t need to.
You can just transplant a fertilized embryo
from an unrelated elephant into its future
mother.
However - and this will be important for our
next episode too - for some species you still
need a viable population for social purposes.
Humans are not the only species that pass
behavior on that is learned, not instinctive.
For some species those behaviors might be
re-learned with a few generations with zoologists
directly involved, but for others it might
not be plausible at all.
Indeed for humans, or modern human civilization
anyway, it might be that your minimum size
for that social continuity is actually much
larger than that needed to avoid genetic bottlenecking,
or making the gene pool so shallow that the
only option is inbreeding - with disastrous
consequences.
On top of that though, you’d have some species,
like the prairie dog, that not only creates
its’ own living area, but changes the entire
ecology and provides living area, food, and
habitation for many species that couldn’t
survive without it.
In ecology this is a keystone species for
an ecosystem, and you probably need to have
it even though it might not need much social
continuity.
They might not need many members, but some
other species that needs social continuity
and eats them might require you to have a
lot of them.
So this is one approach: you figure out which
species need that social continuity and the
minimum population they need for this, and
you build your colony ship habitats with that
in mind.
Whichever of those needs the most space for
a viable ecosystem represents your ship size.
As we discussed last time in Exodus Fleet,
a colony expedition to a new solar system
is likely to be a colonial fleet, not a lone
colony ship.
So if you find out that Elephants need 10,000
square kilometers for a complete elephant
pack, that’s your minimum ship size; other
ships can be smaller or more likely just contain
several ecosystems, overlapping or segregated
off.
Such a ship, as a classic rotating habitat,
might be 20 kilometers across and 150 kilometers
long.
That is a pretty big ship, and far more than
most will need, so we’d like to shrink that
and we’ll discuss some approaches in a moment.
A couple of notes, however: that may be a
big ship, but it is buildable, and on century
long missions it is nice to have lots of elbow
room for your human population.
As we discussed last time, the size of these
ships isn’t actually our bottleneck on colonization.
Even for ships this big, there is more than
enough raw material in our solar system to
construct whole fleets of such vessels to
send off to every star near enough to us that
we’d want to colonize them directly without
even putting a scratch in our Solar System’s
resources.
We will also see how this sort of path pushes
you more toward the Gardener Ship variation
of the Generation ship we’ve discussed before,
that stops at planets temporarily to restock
raw materials and sets up a colony, then moves
on, rather than staying there forever, as
it would seem to make more sense to have your
Pachyderm ship move on to the next planet
to colonize, rather than re-task or scrap
it.
Ultimately, though, smaller is better when
you can do it, so how do we go smaller?
We have several approaches.
One of those is the pygmy route which involves
breeding up some smaller elephants with the
same brain and behavior, then reverse the
process on arrival, speeding it up by using
implanted embryos on the larger side of what’s
safe for each successive pack to rear.
You might need to go rather slow with something
like elephants of course since size is a pretty
big part of their social dynamic along with
age, and they live a long time.
If the bigger and older elephants are having
to deal with younger ones who are already
much bigger than them, it might screw up the
social dynamics and render the entire process
pointless.
A human can raise an elephant after all, or
a pack of them, the idea is that we can’t
do it as well.
That’s our second approach by the way, using
humans or robots or virtual reality to cut
down on needed space or resources.
This part of the “Stow and Grow” approach
we see with seed ships or data ships, you
pack everything tight as essentially data,
DNA or Digital, and grow it on arrival.
Taken far enough, you don’t even need any
elephants alive for the trip, you just clone
them on arrival and let them get raised by
an artificial intelligence, either in a virtual
reality or in an elephant-mimicking robot.
We talk about uploading human minds a lot
on this channel, and there’s no reason you
couldn’t upload an elephant mind either.
For that matter, while a zoologist can raise
an elephant and not do as good a job as an
elephant, presumably, one can also presumably
get better at that with more technology and
research into such methods and the social
structure of the species in question.
Don’t take that as easy though.
Your animal-mimicking robots have to be very
good, and we’d have to design an equivalent
of the Turing Test for every single species
we needed to do this with, many would be simpler
than tricking a human with an android, but
would still need to incorporate everything
from behavior to appearance and smell.
In theory, we could establish entire ecosystems
in a digital substrate for the duration of
a voyage with Dumbo and all his friends blissfully
unaware that they are in a simulation.
One morning, they wake up a little dazed and
groggy on the real terraformed alien world
or space habitat at the destination, completely
unaware that they have just woken up from
being vat-grown and their digital minds downloaded
into the flesh and blood brains.
Done right, they get up and go on their merry
way, doing whatever elephants do, in the same
way that they did yesterday when they were
digital simulations.
If you want to skip all those routes, you
can just supplement the diet of those elephants.
A pack needs thousands of square kilometers
of land because they need to eat, and tend
to inhabit places that are a lot less effective
at producing food than a high-tech farm.
A typical African Elephant eats about 70,000
calories a day, but they’re pretty flexible
about where that comes from, unlike something
like a panda, so you can compress their natural
habitat quite a bit by growing food elsewhere
in dense and efficient hydroponics and having
robots drag it in, or have them simply apply
a lot of farmer techniques to enhance biomass
production inside that habitat.
If you know what you’re doing, to avoid
screwing with their behavior or health while
supplementing their diet, you can get away
with a much smaller habitat.
We’re focusing on Elephants because they
are probably the most space demanding.
The general consensus of zoologists I’ve
seen is that while the minimum for health
is a about a hectare, a few dozen productive
hectares a piece is probably the goal for
elephant packs, though more is always better.
We will say 50 hectares a piece and a pack
of 50 elephants, or 2500 hectares or 25 square
kilometers.
That’s probably overkill, but the less dense
they are, the easier it is to include other
species there to share in the environment.
That would be a rotating habitat 2 kilometers
in diameter and 4 long, more in keeping with
the ship sizes we’ve discussed before for
generation ships.
Now you need nothing like this for most species,
even most animals.
There’s around 5000 mammal species and most
are a lot smaller than people, let alone elephants.
Most of those do not really need the continuity
of society to do okay either, and even of
those, most could be guided up by zoologists.
They might be a bit weird for a few generations
then return to normal, or a new normal, keep
in mind, an elephant growing up under an alien
sky or one growing up in a cylinder habitat
where the sky is more pasture, is not going
to be quite identical in behavior.
That’s not necessarily a bad thing either,
the elephants in India are not the same as
the ones in Africa, in behavior or genetics,
so they need not be the same around Alpha
Centauri either.
When you’re building these ships, you are
aiming for the smallest size you can, based
on your knowledge and technology and the species
in question, and the biggest you can depending
on your budget and desire, and will settle
for a happy medium.
You are not building a zoo and you are not
building a natural habitat, you’re building
a colony fleet to make a colony, you can worry
about replicating things like back home and
maximizing the welfare of those critters once
you get there, the passengers are not meant
to be a complete and final system.
Now on something like a Gardener Ship or Gardener
fleet, you do need that, because you might
be doing it for millions of years; but then
that’s another reason I suspect that will
be the preferred approach to colonizing other
solar systems.
If you have a bunch of people tasked to make
new worlds, trained to care about that as
their main purpose in life and to tend to
their fellow non-human passengers, and with
those passengers living in their literal backyard,
you are going to have a rough time with crew
morale if they feel like their charges are
being neglected or abused.
I don’t think we want to discourage them
in that either, or teach them to be callous
or distant.
We are, after all, principally focused on
seeding human civilizations around the galaxy
and we’d probably prefer that to not be
done by heartless jerks.
Now we picked elephants because they are huge,
space demanding even for their size, and very
social.
While they are probably the most demanding
for land species, they aren’t the only challenge
we face.
We have smaller apex predators that need a
lot of land to support herds of the critters
they eat, for instance, and it might be rather
bizarre to have herds of robot antelope with
lab grown meat on them running around.
You can still compress that space though by
enhancing the food source for those herbivores
and letting the predators more often find
random vat-grown carcasses to scavenge.
It summons an image of the Park from Westworld
to mind, but with the robots being animals
rather than people, and with a lot of zoologists
wandering around.
We always think of the crews of spaceships
having a lot of engineers and physical scientists;
but colony ships probably would have way more
biologists, botanists, and zoologists.
But of course you’d need marine biologists
too, because we have a lot of oceanic life,
and some of those are pretty big and complex.
A shark is a pretty simple critter, they are
mostly instinctual, and they don’t raise
their young.
However, a few types are actually very social
- with each other anyway - to everything else
in nature they really are giant killing machines,
and we probably could skip them on a ship
entirely in favor of growing them at the destination
from frozen stock.
Needless to say, whales and dolphins are also
very social and do need that social continuity
and a lot of space.
Or rather water.
Water is heavy too.
It may not be as heavy as dirt, which tends
to be about twice as dense, but it’s a thousand
times denser than air.
As we discussed in the Ocean Planets and Water
Worlds episode, most life in the oceans is
pretty close to the surface and the various
pelagic zones, areas broken up by depth and
sunlight, don’t have all that much crossover
especially with the very deep parts of the
Bathypelagic or Abyssopelagic.
Except for nutrients of course, those lower
depths are just as dependent on organic material
falling from the upper regions, marine snow,
as those regions are on sunlight falling on
them.
The marine snow that feeds the deeper zones
can be replicated by just dumping organic
material from hydroponic facilities into such
environments.
But some critters do cross zones a lot and
whales for instance are a good example of
that.
Cuvier’s beaked whale can dive 3 kilometers,
near the bottom of the bathypelagic.
That is a lot of water, and a lot of depth
too, which is very rough on rotating habitat
hulls.
We have a couple of advantages though.
First, you do control the gravity in a habitat.
It varies linearly with distance from the
center, and half way from the middle the gravity
is half what it is at the edge.
We can also spin it slower or faster and the
shape of the rotating habitat is not restricted
to cylinders.
Second, we don’t know how dependent any
species is on gravity, less might be fine,
and those living in an aquatic environment
in particular might not need much gravity,
so you could possibly get away with very low
spin rates and gravity on them.
Third, those zones getting increasingly lower
in biomass density as you go deeper and all
the light goes away as the pressure rises
too.
The entire Bathypelagic Zone, everything below
a kilometer of depth, is essentially a scavenger
zone, and even the Mesopelagic, everything
under 200 meters, is pretty sparse compared
to the Epipelagic surface layer.
This would seem to indicate that you mostly
don’t need to replicate anything much more
than 200 meters in radius for that habitat,
but you can do your lighting differently,
lighting lower depths to make the epipelagic
in spots, and leaving other spots unlit to
handle the life from the lower pelagic zones.
We’ve discussed these before as vertical
reefs and will look at them more in Colonizing
the Oceans next month.
One upside is that while dolphins and whales
are probably as space intensive as elephants,
they also do well with humans, so we can get
away with smaller groups that marine zoologists
help along.
They are a problem though, and water is a
problem on spaceships - it sloshes about in
response to changes in acceleration and spin
gravity.
That’s fun in your bathtub, but a Tsunami
in an O’Neil cylinder is somewhat more terrifying.
While you are cruising through space with
your cylinders rotating, all is well enough.
But if you are accelerating or decelerating
up or down from your cruising speed, all your
water wants to go spilling toward your ship’s
drive.
Now, this isn’t too big a problem if you
are accelerating slowly.
If your maximum ship speed is about 10% of
light speed - probably about the best you
can get from fusion - then at 1-g of acceleration
you will only need about a month to hit that
speed, and if your destination is 10 light
years away, that will be a journey of 100
years with a month of acceleration and deceleration
on each end - no big deal.
If you wanted to do that though, you have
to wait until you’re up to cruising speed
to setup all your habitats and deal with some
problems during switchover, as you throttle
down the drive and spin up the drum.
You’ve got to do it again at the other end.
And you have to do all your setup with your
crew.
Which admittedly gives them something to do
during an otherwise boring mission.
But more realistically, you will want to start
that habitat long before your colonists even
board the ship, probably spending decades
in a shipyard essentially being terraformed
alongside fleets of sister ships bound for
that system or others.
And you’ll want to keep that ship when you
arrive too.
Terraforming planets isn’t a fast process,
and it’s very destructive, so you want to
live in your ship in orbit during the early
violent phases.
All of this means you want a slow acceleration
while the habitat drum is spinning, you might
even make it ever-so-slightly conical, rather
than cylindrical, so that the net gravity
will be perpendicular to the floor.
Ideally a semi-flexible floor that can be
released when the drive shuts off so it returns
to a cylinder shape.
In a spinning cone, gravity is zero at the
tip and highest at the base, and by using
a conic section, one just a little narrower
at the back near the drive, you can eliminate
some of the material migration.
When the drive is off, if it can’t expand
back to that cylinder shape, you just have
slightly lower gravity in those areas, and
not a lot.
If you were doing 10% of a gee for your thrust,
you’d take a year to get up to 10% of light
speed, and a year down, a pretty small time
delay for a century-long voyage.
That would still be quite a pain, but maybe
preferable to the delay of a mere hundredth
of a gee, which could practically be ignored,
but would add a decade to both the start and
end of your journey.
I suspect this would be the upper and lower
bounds of how fast you’d accelerate a colony
ship though.
Faster is hugely problematic for little gain,
you’re shaving off months not years to your
total voyage time, slower is just rather pointless,
you’d need fairly good measuring equipment
to even notice that gravity wasn’t quite
pointed straight down.
Just as a reminder, Earth spins too, and the
centrifugal force we experience from that
is not straight up anywhere but the equator,
so don’t think net gravity being pointed
slightly off center from spin is the kind
of thing where even small quantities can cause
problems.
Your concern is so much of it that you get
tidal waves and landslides inside your habitat
drum toward the back, and you can get around
that even for fairly high acceleration rates
by sectioning the drum up with retaining walls.
You might want to do stuff like that anyway,
gently sloping tiered walls which can blast
open and slam a bulkhead across the whole
cylinder, since a puncture could otherwise
wreck a whole habitat section.
I’d actually bet though that most of these
would have lots of sealed off sections for
individual smaller ecosystems.
Ones you could wholesale remove as wedges
at your destination.
The image of a generation ship as a single
vast cylinder you can look across doesn’t
work too well, to avoid loose material and
water slamming around under any acceleration,
you want a lot of compartmentalization, which
has other advantages too.
You would like conceal your compartments as
hills and ravines to make it look like a single
big landscape, but it would be compartmentalized.
This isn’t a very big problem though.
Even for species like elephants or whales,
that need a lot of space, or migrating birds,
it wouldn’t be that hard to have passages
in between compartments they could use, just
stick a little tracker in each critter that
opens the airlock when they’re near and
a shutdown override you can trigger if that
compartment is sealed off temporarily.
Adds a lot of safety features and makes it
easier to gather them somewhere when you need
to.
Odds are pretty good any critters you can’t
grow easily will have such trackers in them
anyway, since those are your size bottleneck
so you can help keep the space they need minimal
by monitoring them closely for problems.
This is fundamentally an artificial environment,
you are not letting nature takes it course,
and if you need to knock out a lion before
it kills one of the members of your keystone
species for that habitat section, it helps
to be able to have trackers on them all.
Ditto, if you have an otherwise valuable member
of that species who has a chronic illness
and needs medication every day snuck into
its food or injected by a robot mosquito.
This is all a lot of work obviously and is
one of the reasons why I can’t imagine anyone
would get bored on these trips.
You can decrease it by better technology,
better understanding of biology and ecology,
or by just making your ships bigger, thus
allowing more of those critters and more people
to tend to them.
It’s not even possible to be more than vaguely
in the right general area for how big the
ships need to be and how many you need, at
this time, and I would expect one of the jobs
in the future will be whole universities worth
of scientists spending generations trying
to fine-tune everything against various benchmarks
for size, cost, mission goals, acceptable
drift in ecosystem or critter behavior, and
so on.
Many critters are easy, but many are very
hard, and may require huge numbers of experts
to study all these species first and then
to properly model a viable stable habitat
for them.
Again something like migratory patterns can
depend on everything from magnetic fields
and day length by season to wind and water
flow.
Even fire, we have species that propagate
seeds that way, and if you needed them during
the trip, you’d have to torch part of your
habitat drum periodically.
This may turn out to be complex enough that
the “Stow and Grow” approach of seed and
data ships ends up being technically easier.
We skipped a lot of the other challenges too.
Gravity and air pressure vary a lot with height
inside rotating habitats, you could have problems
with birds and insects and deep sea life that
way.
Feeding deep sea life is hard too, as Plankton,
the basis of many marine food chains, is surprisingly
tricky to manage for such a simple type of
organism.
Ships may have many compartmentalized and
separate ecosystems but are likely to specialize
in certain climates.
You’ll need swamps and deserts, lakes and
oceans, forests, steamy jungles and frozen
tundra of every conceivable kind in between,
and you’ll want to keep them grouped together
to share assets and expertise as much as you
can, and to replicate the native environment
as close as you can.
Even a lot of microbes are touchy about that
and don’t grow well in captivity, something
we didn’t even notice till relatively recently.
The more we know, the smaller we can go, but
at the same time we often end up finding out
about problems we didn’t even know about
that will require extra efforts or interdependent
species we didn’t even realize had a connection.
We might find out that you need ships even
bigger than an O’Neill Cylinder and dozens
of them for each colonial fleet, although
with enough research I think that will be
unlikely.
Now you might say that’s a lot of effort
to go through when there’s a good chance
you could go the hard-tech route and just
clone everything on site, Stow and Grow, and
if needed dump in copies of uploaded animals
minds into them for when you arrive if instinct
isn’t enough.
Indeed, I suspect that might be a popular
approach, but that requires a lot of work
too and keep in mind, you will need all these
skills and experts to make the habitats and
terraformed planets at the destination too.
Moreover, you will need them to colonize our
own solar system.
So you should have the knowledge base already
there before you begin interstellar colonization,
and you will need those skills when you arrive,
and your crew does need something to do during
the trip, so there is a logic to doing things
this way.
Indeed, as mentioned previously, you probably
are starting this work before the ship even
leaves the solar system, which is a good way
to weed out unsuitable candidates.
If much of your crew is spending a year or
two getting the habitat drum ready before
it even gets loaded into the ship, they have
time to get used to what they’re doing and
who they’re doing it with, and can jump
ship if they don’t like it, rather than
in interstellar space.
Once a ship gets underway and up to speed,
you are stuck on it for the duration, which
is likely to be at least several decades and
possibly thousands of years.
That itself is another big issue and one we’ll
be addressing in our next episode of the series,
the Ark of a Million Years, where we will
see that maintaining a human civilization
on these ships is maybe harder than even maintaining
these ecologies.
After all, it needs to be one that can still
be useful, maintain the ships, and get the
mission done on arrival, while also still
being a civilization we’d actually want
to transplant, not one gone primitive or mutated
so far off basic human behavior that it might
as well be an alien colony you’ve founded,
not a human one you could get along with.
We had to skip over a lot of the complexities
of ecosystems today, like genetic bottlenecking,
and we also mentioned the idea of using robots
to colonize places.
There’s a great Computational Biology course
on Brilliant.org that covers these topics,
including a Colonizing Mars quiz where we
send robots off to do it that explains a lot
of the biological concepts in terms of simple
robots mutating and having features added,
which I have to say is probably the best explanation
of genotypes and a phylogenetic tree I’ve
ever heard.
If you’re like me and more of physical sciences
and computer person, it’s a great approach
to learning some of these biological concepts,
and also a great introduction to von Neumann
machines and some of the problems they face
that tend to get skipped in sci-fi.
If you want learn more about those and other
topics you’d need for running a generation
ship, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur and
sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription.
And I really do advise trying out that robot
course, it’s just plain fun.
So today we focused a lot on ecosystems in
interstellar missions.
Next week it will be more about post-biological
approaches to the future, as we examine the
role of artificial intelligence and robots
in warfare, in Attack of the Drones.
The week after that, we’ll be back to interplanetary
colonization in Colonizing Neptune, and we’ll
look at colonizing our most distant major
planet, along with its close cousin Uranus,
both in terms of colonizing their moons like
we did for Jupiter and Saturn, but also if
we can actually colonize these sorts of small
and cold icy giants directly, and live in
their atmosphere or even terraform them into
super planets.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you enjoyed this episode, hit the like
button and share it with others.
Until next time, thanks for watching, and
have a great week!
