This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream.
Get access to my streaming video service,
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream
using the link in the description.
The Hitchhiker’s Guide To The Galaxy tells
us that a man must walk down 42 roads
to be called a man.
But that seems like a lot of work for a rather
modest reward.
The National Space Society tells us there
are only 31 milestones to hit
to become an interplanetary species!
Becoming an interplanetary species, and eventually
an interstellar one, is not something that
is going to happen overnight.
Indeed, even discussing it isn’t going to
take just one episode, so we’ll be doing
more than one, starting today with our opening
moves.
It is important to realize though that this
won't happen overnight.
Even if we get cheap space travel tomorrow
it will be centuries before more than a small
fraction of our population lives off Earth.
I thought today we’d look at some of the
critical steps we’d expect to need to make
along the way and what it might look like
as we head out to space and make it our home.
We’ll be borrowing a fair amount from the
National Space Society’s Roadmap to the
Stars, the most recent edition of which I’ve
linked in the episode description.
The Roadmap has 31 Milestones and is a concise
but detailed and easy-to-understand look at
this topic I’d encourage you to explore.
Today we’ll be looking at the first 12 Milestones.
We’ll also be referencing many of our prior
episodes, particularly the Upward Bound series
and Outward Bound series, which have tended
to focus on specific topics like devices for
getting into orbit or how we’d colonize
a specific planet.
You can see those episodes for specifics and
I’ll mention them and put them up on the
screen as we go.
As something of a side note, as usual I’m
writing this episode sometime before it will
air, and in this case at the end of May when
I was originally going to be down in Dallas
at the International Space Development Conference
giving a talk and accepting an award from
the NSS, which had to be postponed for the
Virus, and at the same time we had a rather
historic launch from SpaceX, the first private
launch of humans into orbit.
So, it seemed a doubly appropriate time to
be looking at this topic.
If anything could be said to have dogged space
exploration and settlement in recent decades,
it is the seeming halt to it and the absence
of private companies in it.
We had the Space Race and the Apollo Missions
in the 60s and early 70s, landing folks on
the moon 6 times, then 50 years of no one
repeating that.
There are a lot of folks who think it never
happened and, in some ways, it’s hard to
mock them for that because the most obvious
rebuttal is “If this was so easy we could
do it 6 times 50 years ago, why haven’t
we done it since?
And why hasn’t anyone else?”
The rebuttal to that is basically that now
any further manned missions to the Moon wouldn’t
be worth the cost and risk.
Which for a lot of folks amounts to saying
“So it's basically a big worthless rock”.
For that not to be true, we need to be able
to go back to the Moon in a big and permanent
and profitable way and that requires a lot
of groundwork which we’ll examine today.
Same the Space Shuttle era came to an end
and was often seen as far more expensive than
it was originally expected to be or was worth,
and even though the International Space Station
has been running for a couple decades now,
we’ve no hard plans for upgrade or replacement
and no countries frantically waving their
hands asking to donate more money to it.
Many like the idea of humanity somehow doing
away with money like on Star Trek and just
exploring space for the advancement of science
and the betterment of our species.
But on the Earth, in the here and now, a good
way to jumpstart our ascent into space is
to make space profitable, so private companies
are charging ahead trying to get involved.
Eventually, hopefully, space will be the domain
of not just big corporations but even small
businesses and mom-and-pop operations.
You’re not an interplanetary species until
most of your people and business is off-world,
and that’s why SpaceX tends to be so popular
with a lot of us, because not only have they
pushed orbital launch costs down quite a lot,
the NSS’s Roadmaps Milestone 1, but also
made a big step toward their Milestone 4,
Establishing in-Space Commerce by Private
Companies.
Milestones 1-4 might be considered our baby
steps, those are respectively lowering launch
costs, having continuous occupancy of low-earth
orbit, getting space tourism going, and establishing
in-space private commerce.
Those are continuous goals though, your first
step but also something you keep pushing at
and expanding.
That first milestone, cheaper launches, is
clearly needed, but there are many ways to
address it, and we looked at some more grandiose
options in our Upward Bound series, everything
from Reusable Rockets to Space Elevators,
Skyhooks, Mass Drivers, Orbital Rings, Launch
Loops, and more.
Some, like reusable rockets, are approaches
we’re already using and improving, while
others, like the space elevator, rely on our
someday developing mass production of a material
able to handle the huge material stresses
a space elevator needs.
But space elevators could work today with
available materials in places with weaker
gravity, like the moon or smallest planets.
So too, devices like Mass Drivers might be
good for Earth but definitely work great on
low-gravity, low-or-no-atmosphere places like
the Moon.
Still other approaches like the Orbital Ring,
while probably needing a lot of prototyping
and offering some technical challenges, mostly
aren’t in use right now not because they
are hard to make but because they are major
investments and will only save us money when
we have vastly more space traffic.
It’s like building a railroad across a continent,
saves tons of money but not until you’ve
already gotten very developed, prior to that
it makes more sense to use something smaller
and self-contained.
It’s your freight train to orbit, not your
wagon, and it’s something we’d not expect
to see until we had that major demand.
Such things are not our focus for today, as
we look at early space development.
These earlier milestones are mostly focused
on the technical challenge of getting into
space and the basic appeal to people and businesses
to be up there.
But they’re all focused on Low Earth Orbit,
a space just a few hundred kilometers overhead,
not the few hundred thousand to the Moon or
the few hundred million to the Asteroid Belt
or most other planets, let alone the many
trillions of kilometers to even the nearest
stars.
One could argue these aren’t even in space.
That the various low-Earth satellites and
stations are just orbiting in our uppermost
atmosphere, where the air thins out just enough
not to drag the satellites down after a few
hundred orbits.
We would put almost all those low-earth objects
even lower if we could and I would not be
surprised if we eventually did.
Many of our scenarios for much cheaper orbital
launch might permit spacecraft that didn’t
need to be refueled to maintain orbit by taking
in air in to use as propellant and using sunlight
as a power supply for shooting that propellant
back out.
Fundamentally Low Orbit is not about getting
into space, it’s just getting out of Earth’s
atmosphere and the air drag cost to staying
in it.
Getting stations higher up is another milestone.
But we use low orbit as a testing ground because
there are some things we need to test out.
How well people do in low-gravity is one of
them – we honestly have no idea what the
health effects of low-gravity are because
only 12 men have ever experienced it and that
only for a few days on the Moon.
It might be that humans can live perfectly
well in the Moon’s gravity, and if not there
maybe Mars.
Until we check that we don’t know and the
answer will matter a lot to our future in
space.
If the answer is no, that we can’t live
healthy for long times on place with low gravity,
then we’ll probably never terraform those
places and never settle them beyond short
term workers in outposts, with everything
else being done from orbit of a given body
in rotating space habitats, and indeed probably
a lot of the work being done by remote controlled
robots.
Alternatively we might be able to genetically
or cybernetically alter people to live in
those conditions anyway, though we might have
to broaden the meaning of ‘species’ to
discuss humanity’s future as an interplanetary
species at that point.
So one of our big things to test out in low
orbit is low gravity, by creating rotating
space stations with equivalent gravity to
the Moon or Mars.
The other thing to be worked out is sustainability.
It is expensive to bring food and air and
water in, so we need to make it and recycle
it and not lose much in the process.
If the launch costs were cheap enough, we
could constantly resupply our off-world bases.
On the other hand, if launch costs remain
high, very good automation lets us circumvent
that issue by launching just a handful of
small robots to the Moon to exploit it for
resources.
They build more of themselves and other manufacturing
assets – either entirely automated or remote
controlled from Earth – and we only bring
up people, as many as we can but if that got
prohibitive we could always grow our presence
in space the alternative way of colonizing,
by having kids as opposed to mass immigration.
That’s likely to be the approach we’d
have to take with interstellar travel regardless
of whether we get cheap interplanetary travel
or orbital launch.
One of the more attractive-looking options
for getting private investment far from Earth
is Asteroid Mining for precious metals.
That often tends to conjure a Wild West image
of prospectors on jury-rigged spaceships wandering
lonely through the rocks in the Belt, avoiding
pirates, claim jumpers, and taxmen.
Right now, we’ve no clear system for permitting
anyone – if they found a bunch of gold on
some asteroid – to actually mine it and
sell it back here.
Right now, nobody has a way to stake a claim
to a crater on the Moon or Mars and build
a domed farm or mining and refining operation
there.
Without those, without some way of ensuring
they can keep what they invest and make, nobody
is going to want to develop in space.
But that raises the question of who is offering
those assurances and guarantees.
Who rules space?
Two of the more obvious options are a united
Earth Government – like the UN or something
more sovereign – or no Earth rule at all,
individual governments at this or that world
with its own sovereign government.
It tends to strike me as more likely that
we would probably only see new sovereign states
appearing in space in three cases: First,
that they had grown in number so much that
they rivaled terrestrial nations.
Second, that they were so far away that being
part of an Earth-based nation simply wasn’t
practical, like interstellar colonies or anything
out in the Oort Cloud where even routine communications
would take months or years.
And third, where some more powerful nation
was essentially sponsoring them, as has happened
often in history where some nation wanted
to spite a rival by supporting the independence
of some place they controlled or didn’t
think they were in a good position to make
a territorial claim on some place but felt
they could more easily sponsor them as a sovereign
and friendly state.
This last route seems the most likely to produce
new nations in space first.
Some outposts of tens of thousands currently
beholden to this or that nation or parallel
entity have started resenting their administration
and rival powers lean on that entity to let
it be free to run its own affairs.
I suspect you would first see them obtaining
sub-division status.
In the US for instance we have the federal
government, then beneath that the states and
territories, and beneath that more sub-divisions
like counties, townships, cities, villages,
and so on.
A colony of ten thousand people is not going
to be taken seriously as a new nation, partially
because it just lacks the capacity to support
a lot of critical government functions.
While big organizations can often be rather
slow and bureaucratic, they do tend to provide
big advantages to their members.
It’s hard to have due process and an appeals
court for instance in a nation of ten thousand,
where there’s probably only a dozen lawyers,
hard to have a university with lots of professors
in wide ranges of specialties, and so on.
You could farm that out to others, like sign
a treaty with a terrestrial nation to handle
your high crimes and appeals or send your
students to and so on, or even to be your
big gun for diplomatic and military intervention
when needed, and potentially not the same
country for all these functions, and we’ll
explore these ideas more next month in Future
Types of Government.
In the short term, you need legal and political
protections for those going into space, and
you probably need some sort of land grants
or other economic incentives to encourage
folks to head out there, Milestone 8.
Once they are there, to be safer, to feel
safer, and to operate cheaper, you need to
improve your technologies for self-sufficiency,
Milestone 9.
This doesn’t have to be total self-sufficiency
of course, only interstellar colonies would
need that and even they could be relying on
trade of information from back home, getting
tech updates and so on.
However, they do need to be self-sufficient
in the sense of not running at a deficit.
If a colony on this asteroid doesn’t grow
much food, then it needs to be able to produce
something to trade for it and at a rate sufficient
to get what they need.
There’s always a cost to trade so ideally
they should be mostly self-sufficient, especially
on food, air, water, and energy, the four
things you need constantly to keep your colony
running.
Those are your big jugular weaknesses, and
the degree of self-sufficiency is obviously
a lot different for a space hotel in low orbit
and a distant sub-surface rotating habitat
in a Kuiper Belt Object far from the Sun.
Fundamentally the same concept though, you
need to make sure your total imports are less
than or equal to your exports, and reliably
so, which is often going to mean minimizing
what you need to import, and often maximizing
the quantity and variety of things you can
produce locally.
That’s a pretty big aspect of Milestone
10, which is multi-generational survival off
Earth.
If you’re not stable, if you are essentially
running in deficit, you won’t last.
But more importantly we’re not even talking
about humans here, we don’t know how most
animals will fare in terms of being born in
low gravity or inside relatively primitive
artificial ecosystems.
Some will likely handle it better than others
but in some cases we might need entirely artificial
ecosystems of very large and diverse natures.
During this early phase we can be sending
folks off to Mars to explore, or off to the
Belt to find precious metals, or set up this
or that trial method at fuel or food or air
or water production.
But anything truly grand up in space requires
first tackling how we can establish reasonably
closed ecosystems up there, and how humans
themselves handle protracted periods in space,
both physiologically and psychologically.
Not just as adults, not just trained astronauts
picked from the best of the best, but how
you raise a kid there.
How you keep them educated, fed, comforted,
and employed… and also how you keep them
safe.
Milestone 11 is developing reliable defenses
against asteroids hitting Earth.
There are some nearer-term related concerns
we’ll have to address along the way.
For instance, our atmosphere protects Earth
from small meteors and space debris, but stations
and ships will need their own protection from
these common hazards of higher orbit.
And whatever technologies we use to adjust
asteroids trajectories away from Earth could
also be used maliciously to send them to Earth
or to other targets.
With unpredictable humans as part of the landscape,
space will need to be watched for hazards
more closely.
As we start in-space fabrication of larger
structures, milestone 12, this is a greater
concern, more things to be hit, more things
to shoot out debris to hit other things, more
things potentially losing parts or trash in
construction, maintenance, or operation.
More places for rogue or malicious elements
to hide out or exploit.
But if we can conquer all of these issues,
make it to these milestones, we’ll still
be long short of becoming an interplanetary
species, but the Egg that is Earth will finally
have hatched, and we can look onward to the
Moon and other planets and seeing a decent
fraction of the human population begin moving
into space, our mid-game, and we’ll explore
that more in the next episode.
So what does a civilization at this point
look like?
At this stage we’re probably not at the
point where anyone can fly to space as easily
as flying to another continent, or even necessarily
to point where it’s parallel to first-class
accommodations on a luxury ocean cruise ship,
but there would be folks working in space
and folks traveling there who were not either
ultra-rich or government-funded astronauts.
We would be expecting thousands of people
to be going to space every year, possibly
every week, and many for recreation or for
jobs that had nothing directly to do with
science.
We would be seeing some legal framework being
placed for nations, companies, and individuals
to stake claims to territory off Earth or
other limited resources like a band of orbital
space around Earth they leased.
And we would be seeing more and more of the
daily needs of those in space, like air, water,
and food - not to mention gravity - being
supplied on sight by recycling and limiting
waste, with an eye toward long term sustainability
and self-sufficiency.
We would be seeing the groundwork in place
for detection and protection from asteroids,
meteors, and artificial space debris getting
set up along with the personnel and government
apparatus for tending to that.
We would be seeing the beginning of orbital
industry, production, and fabrication, to
build what we need for space in space.
That’s the future we’re reaching for in
part one of our journey to becoming an interplanetary
species, and it’s a place we could reach
within a couple generations of now, and which
I believe most of us will live to see.
The beginning of a bright and bold future
out in space.
Throughout today’s episode we looked at
the first 12 milestones on the Roadmap, and
some of those milestones are ones we’ve
looked at in depth before but one we’ve
not done in spite of many requests for it
was on Asteroid Defense, and it was long overdue
and is out now on Nebula, where we’ll discuss
the realistic scenarios for an asteroid impact
and what technologies and approaches are on
the table for dealing with it.
Nebula, our subscription streaming service,
was made as a way for education-focused independent
creators to try out new content that might
not work too well on Youtube, where algorithms
might not be too kind to some topics or demonetize
certain ones entirely, or just doesn’t fit
our usual content.
And if you’d like to get free access to
it, it does come as a free bonus with a subscription
to Curiositystream, which also has thousands
of amazing documentaries you can watch, on
top of the Nebula-exclusive content from myself,
like our Nebula-Exclusive series, Coexistence
with Aliens, and many other excellent works
by creators like CGP Grey, Minute Physics,
and Real Science.
If you’re a curious person, Curiositystream
is now just $14.99, a 26% Discount, and it
gets you access to thousands of documentaries,
as well as complimentary access to Nebula
for as long as you're a subscriber, and use
the link in this episode’s description.
Last week we looked at some truly enormous
space habitats we might build in our future
as an alternative to settling new planets
and next we will take a look at how we can
go about acquiring the vast amounts of raw
materials we’ll need to construct millions
of those continent sized habitats, and ask
if we should dismantle the solar system itself
to provide them.
After that we’ll be back to the Fermi Paradox
series to consider disappearing stars and
cosmic voids, to consider if such things are
natural or might be signs of older alien civilizations
dismantling their own solar systems or even
entire galaxies.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can donate to us on Patreon,
or our website, IsaacArthur.net, which are
linked in the episode description below, along
with all of our various social media forums
where you can get updates and chat with others
about the concepts in the episodes and many
other futuristic ideas.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
