Our destiny may lie among the stars, 
billion upon billions of new worlds,  
but what strategies might we 
employ to claim that future? 
Welcome to the first episode of our ninth season 
of Science and Futurism with Isaac Arthur,  
and I am your aforementioned host, Isaac Arthur. 
Over the years our show has become known for many  
things. From my borderline jingle of “get a drink 
and snack before we begin,” to my peculiar speech  
impediment and accent, but maybe most of all 
for the topic of Space Colonization, and it  
seemed a good topic to start the year off with.
How to colonize the stars is a big topic, and the  
strategies depend a lot on your technologies as 
well as your goals and the current geopolitical,  
or intrasolar political situation. Many of these 
topics are ones we have explored in greater detail  
in other episodes so as we usually do on the 
show, we’ll put a thumbnail of the cover of the  
relevant episode or playlist up on screen and do 
an in-video card for as many as youtube lets us  
put up there. And you can watch those deeper 
dives now or at your leisure, allowing us to  
keep things reasonably brief in today’s episode.
That’s still a lot to cover, so we’ll be here for  
a bit, and so you might want to grab a drink and 
snack, and if you’re new to the show, feel free to  
turn on the closed captions for the episode, right 
down there by the like and subscribe buttons. 
Now on this show we tend to assume that 
traveling FTL, faster than light velocity,  
is not something we should expect to ever become 
a reality, and in that context every colony can be  
thought of as being abandoned from the outset. 
When the nearest gas station, grocery store,  
or hospital is trillions of miles away and 
even simple radio communications can take  
many years to travel each way, there’s 
a limit to how much real support some  
colony is getting after it gets shipped out.
Even if we did achieve FTL travel though,  
there’s likely to still be huge bottlenecks 
on colonization, especially early colonization  
which would presumably begin occurring as soon 
as it was practical rather than easy. But this  
raises a good starting point for discussion, 
because many notions folks have about space  
colonization are from science fiction and some of 
these don’t really hold up to scrutiny very well. 
For instance, a common theme in science fiction is 
for space colonization to start slowly, with great  
big ark ships traveling at a fraction of light 
speed, and for them to often be superseded by FTL  
ships later on. Given the timeline for traveling 
between stars at sublight speeds it tends to be  
assumed some or even all of these ships will get 
to their destination and find some faster vessel  
launched after them has already arrived. Or 
even come by and picked them up on the way. 
The latter could be possible as it’s an easy 
way to grab some extra colonists and cargo,  
but in such a scenario I could imagine people 
bypassing those ships or even pirating them.  
Instead of a friendly pickup of fellow colonists 
and sharing of gear, they might simply want to  
cannibalize their remaining reaction mass and 
gear and kill or brainwash the crews. After all,  
by jumping their claim on a new world, they’re 
already taking a bit of a thief or predatory role. 
Regardless of whether or not we ever 
achieve some hypothetical FTL technology,  
it is realistic to assume our first 
ships won’t be our fastest ships,  
but it’s less realistic to assume they 
would get passed by en route. For one thing,  
they wouldn’t actually be on the same course 
even when traveling to the same star, as stars  
move relative to each other and quite quickly at 
that. Tens or hundreds of kilometers per second,  
times billions of seconds given that even a 
short interstellar journey would involve decades. 
All while your own departure and arrival spots 
inside a solar system would be likely to change,  
after all even two ships launching from Earth six 
months apart are 300 million kilometers distant  
relative to the Sun, which is considerably further 
than any human has ever traveled in a spaceship.  
Space is vast and while we often contemplate 
building massive interstellar laser highways  
to speed ships between colonized systems, 
those come later than early ark ships. Your  
railroads and airports come after 
your covered wagons, so to speak. 
So you’re not on the same course and you’re not 
going the same speed, and if your ship moves  
at a quarter of light speed and the old model 
moves at around 10%, that would require a huge  
expenditure of fuel to match courses and speeds 
with them. A journey to colonize Epsilon Indi,  
a star system 10 light years away, would take that 
first ship moving a tenth of light speed an entire  
century to reach, but merely 40 years for the 
second ship moving at a quarter of light speed.  
That’s ignoring relativistic effects which would 
be fairly minimal even at that higher velocity,  
shortening your own experience of the trip 
but by just a few percent. Generally speaking,  
slowing time down internally by relativity at 
very high fractions of light speed, is not going  
to be a viable strategy for extending crew life 
to reach a destination, too much energy waste,  
and too much enhanced risk of damage, 
and we’ll discuss alternatives in a bit. 
It’s entirely plausible that in the decades 
following a colony ship launch we might  
improve the engines by that much, 10% to 25% of 
light speed, but I’m not sure we would launch  
a ship there as opposed to one of the countless 
other neighboring stars just a bit further away,  
unless it was an engine improvement 
made very soon after the first launch.  
So too, it is likely any interstellar ark would  
have the manufacturing capability to 
perform an engine upgrade while moving. 
This also tends to imply very fast engine 
improvements relative to travel times,  
so these sorts of overruns would likely be rare. 
Also any enmity is less likely to result in an act  
of piracy and more likely to be performed using a 
stealthy mass driver or missile shot to the rear.  
Killing spaceships from behind is very easy and 
made easier because a colony ship needs to slow  
down, and it takes the same fuel to reach twice 
a speed as it does to reach that speed and slow. 
Stealth in space is very hard, but a missile 
following behind you is much stealthier to you  
than the reverse, and your ship isn’t likely to 
have a massive and exceptional detector pointed  
behind you. Even with the same engine design 
as you it can run up on you at least twice  
as fast and devote its cargo to more fuel, 
guidance, tracking, and even submunitions.  
It doesn’t need to be very big compared to your 
ship either, so they can probably send thousands  
of them after you. And if it’s going 20% of light 
speed and you’re going 10%, then if your detection  
gear is so good that you could pick out this 
dark projectile at a million kilometers, which  
would be pretty amazing, you’d still only have 
about half a minute to get your countermeasures  
online and blow it away, and it probably is 
going to have some fuel remaining to engage  
in a final approach random jittering to make that 
harder, assuming it doesn’t split into a thousand  
fist sized relativistic cannonballs, each also 
possessing some guidance and maneuvering ability. 
And at that relative speed, each object carries 
more destructive potential on collision than  
a nuclear warhead of the same mass. Mind you, 
there are defensive countermeasures available,  
like leaving a trail of even smaller missiles 
in your wake or a thin sheet of material you  
tow hundreds of kilometers behind behind you 
that they’d smash against and detonate on,  
but then there’s ways around that too, 
countermeasures and counter-counter-measures  
and so on, but the core advantage lies 
with the pursuer, both from chasing you,  
and from having a planet behind them from which 
to churn out endless missiles and pursuit vessels. 
This definitely is relevant to colonization 
strategy because it means that if your home  
solar system is not unified then colonization 
needs to be negotiated, and is likely to see many  
different groups claiming various bits in disputed 
and somewhat chaotic chunks, rather than an evenly  
cut pie. That doesn’t mean those negotiations are 
particularly fair or equitable but even a smaller  
nation would be in a position to detect every 
colony ship launch and hurl missiles after them.  
That means some rogue state can’t get away with 
launching thousands of automated colony ships,  
such as Von Neumann probes, which we’ll be 
discussing insome detail next Sunday, and by  
that get a jump on everybody else, because ships 
are very easy to track from behind and moreso  
during launch and acceleration, so they will chase 
them all down and kill them before they ever reach  
another location to replicate themselves. They 
must slow down in order to rendezvous with some  
source of material like an asteroid in order to 
replicate, because rendezvousing with an asteroid  
at 10% of light speed is not an interaction 
that results in producing more interstellar  
probes, unless you count the high-speed 
interstellar dust spawned by that collission. 
This takes us to the use of artificial 
intelligence and also freezing people.  
It is generally the position of this show that 
the same technologies that let you thaw out and  
revive a frozen person from a century long trip 
also let you repair the cellular damage of aging,  
so that freezing people would be more 
about minimizing resource usage and saving  
on boredom than getting your colonists there 
alive, and the power savings for running life  
support for people for centuries is actually 
rather small compared to the energies need to  
accelerate and decelerate that ship so it's not 
super-vital to freeze people for that reason. 
It seems very likely that all ships would 
make extensive use of computers and AI,  
and we understand AI better now so we know that 
AI is as large a domain, if not larger, than the  
entire biological kingdom, from amoeba to human 
or oak tree. There’s no real reason to expect  
any human-level AI to be required in the future 
on spaceships, interstellar navigation itself  
is well inside the computational capacity of your 
smart phone for instance. There’s not any obvious  
jobs we would need them for. The general lone 
exception would be a mother-AI whose job it was  
to incubate and raise humans from frozen embryos 
at the destination, as that seems a specific case  
of needing a human-equivalent, though that’s 
not guaranteed, more an educated guess that  
seems reasonable, but so did all our assumptions 
about needing human-level AI for other jobs in  
the past, that turned out not to be required.
But in such a case a copy of a human mind,  
or several, selected for existing 
parenting and colonizing skills  
and able to remotely control robots or even 
androids would seem just as effective. Your  
mileage may vary on if such a copied and 
uploaded mind was an AI or a human or both.  
It’s a gray area we also have to view through a 
fog bank of ignorance at a distance right now,  
so while I tend to refer to a case like that 
as a human, it is just a semi-informed opinion.  
We would usually refer to that sort of colony ship 
as a Seed Ship, one with frozen or digital DNA and  
embryos on board and run by AI or uploaded human 
minds. It may be sub-human too, and only intended  
to set up the basic space infrastructure and begin 
terraforming with colonists expected to follow  
later, bringing a menagerie, while the AI plants 
microorganism and vegetation and maybe insects. 
Also a key colonization strategy, we would expect 
arriving colonial efforts to begin in space,  
building up all the satellite grids and 
asteroid or comet mining operations,  
not just land on some planet and live under 
domes. Indeed it would be more likely that the  
early focus would be on orbital habitats such as 
O’Neill Cylinders, habitats that provide gravity  
by rotation. This might be preferable to some 
alien planet very unlike Earth, especially as the  
crew and passengers would presumably already have 
been dwelling in one for decades on the journey.  
Terraforming is also an inherently devastating 
process, tearing up the terrain and altering the  
atmosphere in a way that would make a nuclear 
war look mild, so it's not really a place you  
would want to live while that process is ongoing.
Another option beside androids is to use cloned  
bodies and uploaded minds downloaded into 
them, and that gives you the option for  
reusing colonists too, as ships designed for 
bringing 10,000 colonists to new worlds can  
have near infinite unique permutations out of 
a recruitment pool only a little bit larger,  
if finding volunteers is hard. Noumenon by Marina 
J Lostetter discusses some of these themes. 
A colony founded under an alien sky a hundred 
light years from a very different world is already  
going to be massively divergent before they ever 
interact with each other or their homeworld,  
even if the crew was identical, but various 
combinations selected from a somewhat larger pool  
guarantees that, not just for the kids of those 
crew and colonists but those original colonists as  
they have changed workloads and friends circles 
influencing their life. Crewmember X has a  
different boss on one voyage, marries a different 
lass on another. They may live on the ship or be  
stored digitally or a hybrid, where they live 
in virtual reality till they arrive and are  
loaded on to clones, androids, or some equivalent.
They may have arrived frozen directly from Earth  
of course, and we would call those Sleeper Ships, 
see that episode for details, which also includes  
any version of stasis or hibernation. One note 
there is that while biology and most chemistry  
stops at ultra-low temperatures, atomic processes 
don’t, so the mild radioactive decay in your own  
body from isotopes like potassium is smashing up 
your frozen DNA without repair, so after around  
3000 years on ice, you will have absorbed a lethal 
radiation dose from your own body and bones. It's  
very likely the same technology that can revive 
you from being dead and frozen could fix that too,  
or that we could feed people diets of foods 
grown on nutrients purified of those isotopes,  
but it's one of those examples of unexpected 
problems with a given colonial strategy. 
The Methuselah Ship is one where we assume 
everybody is biologically immortal and doesn’t  
go on ice, in favor of simply using the trip 
to catch up on their colonial training and  
back reading. A colony ship is likely to be 
a town or even medium-sized nation so it's  
not likely to be boring and would probably 
still be getting books and TV from home,  
just ever more delayed as light lag increased. 
These have an overpopulation issue though,  
since we tend to assume colonists like larger 
families to begin with and have a lot of time  
on their hands on the trip, and are not dying off 
as they and their own grandkids keep having kids. 
This is also a problem on a classic 
generation ship, where folks just live  
and die normal lifetimes but inside a limited 
space with limited resources. It is far worse  
with a nigh immortal crew, and while population 
control is likely to be easy in the future as  
contraception options improve, it’s entirely 
possible it wouldn’t be necessary and takes  
us to a hybrid design we call the Gardener Ship.
We explore that more in our episode Gardening the  
Galaxy, but the basic notion is that instead of a 
ship launching from Earth and disassembling itself  
for scrap at its singular destination, this one 
instead assumes good automation and life extension  
technology, and simply parks on some resource 
rich asteroid or moon in the destination system,  
resupplies fuel and raw materials while 
building colonial gear, and then gives  
everyone the option of staying on the ship for a 
future destination or remaining at this colony.  
That layover may be days or years, but 
the next journey is likely to be many  
decades or even centuries which is a 
long time to breed up new colonists. 
If most want to stay at the new colony, the 
Gardener Ship picks its next destination with  
that in mind, one further away perhaps, giving 
people time to breed back up to a good colonial  
and crew number. Alternatively, if most opt 
to remain on the ship, they pick a nearer  
destination as their next stop, or even consider 
remaining longer in the system to help the fewer  
colonists setup while replicating their ship 
to pick two or more next destinations. This way  
a few thousands such gardener ships might leave 
Earth in the next couple centuries and colonize  
the whole galaxy in an expanding and diverging 
trail of new colonies out to the galactic rim,  
and even beyond, as we contemplated in 
our episode Intergalactic Colonization. 
Which raises a point on replacement. 
Given the timelines involved in travel,  
while backups are handy, it would seem important 
to only use equipment in your ship, or colony,  
which you could reproduce entirely on board. 
Nothing that can break and only be replaced  
by existing spares or waiting for a shipment 
from home. Though we can’t ignore the option  
that the Gardener Ship is building and deploying 
laser highway relay stations along its journey and  
shipments from home or former settlements behind 
that have developed might be trailing right behind  
them, launched later but at higher speeds.
Nonetheless, if you can’t get your on board  
or in-situ manufacturing up to the advanced level 
to make all you need during the trip or on site,  
then you need to make sure you’ve over-supplied 
like crazy, with lots of redundancy, which is only  
partially solved by resupply trailing you from 
later launches. Alternatively, making your gear  
en route might cut down on costs and keep folks 
occupied on the trip, plus be able to adapt and  
adjust as new designs arrive from back home or 
are thought up by the colonists as they find out  
more about their new home and contemplate options. 
The think tanks back on Earth likely will play a  
big role in delivering new technological designs 
and techniques to colonists but at the same time,  
light lag will put some limits on that.
A million experts back home might get a  
great solution back to you a century later, but 
one or two on-site experts might get a very good  
one much quicker. So too, the colonies can 
probably share techniques and pass them to  
neighbors or back home. As they get farther 
from Earth the shared knowledge will expand,  
as will the lag time, and if the Gardener Ship 
route was chosen those are very likely to have  
enormous amounts of institutional knowledge as 
to what does and doesn’t work best for colonies,  
so I would expect them to have an upper hand over 
colonies being launched from existing colonies  
that grew in size and dispatched their own. 
Especially as the daughters colonies of gardener  
ships likely maintain loyalty and communication 
to them for some time. Simultaneously it’s very  
likely Earth could be sending out millions of 
colonial fleets on direct paths to specific stars,  
which aren’t being slowed by stopping and 
starting every couple dozen light years,  
and which are leaving with maximum tech.
A Couple of notes on that. I said ‘fleets’,  
and I find that more plausible than lone ships 
honestly. A quartet of ships running parallel  
a few hundred kilometers from each other is 
protected by distance from any damage one acquires  
from space collisions or internal explosions, 
even of large ships full of antimatter. But  
that distance still permits unimpeded real time 
communication and can ship shuttles back and forth  
with minimal flight times and fuel expenditures, 
they could even keep a physical tether between  
each other to run ships and high density data 
lines on. For that matter these ships hardly need  
to be streamlined other than aiming for minimal 
forward cross-section, and could be expanded with  
time., even during the journey Fundamentally 
they’re just cargo holds and habitation drums  
with engines and fuel pods strapped on.
Fleets also permit separation to multiple  
locations nearer the destination, and serve as 
as a pressure valve a single ship can’t have.  
If people come to hate their leaders, a division 
is possible, and so a gardener fleet could add  
a ship every stop, or manufacture it during a 
trip, and divide whenever the fleet got a bit  
big or restless with unified leadership.
Now I said a moment ago big ships full of  
antimatter could explode at a decent desperation 
distance without hurting their neighbors and  
meant something in the gigaton range and that’s 
roughly the mass range we’d expect when we start  
talking about enormous colony ships stretching 
kilometers in length and transporting human  
communities and our terraforming zoos. This poses 
the strategy conflict of ultra small ships that  
have the minimum necessary mass and resources to 
colonize versus behemoths that can do it in-style. 
The normal notion is that there are a set number 
of places to colonize and you want to race out  
with the smallest and fastest and cheapest 
ship you can, but as I mentioned earlier,  
this requires cooperation from your neighbors. 
Your tiny colony ship is still a lot bigger and  
slower than the relativistic kill missile chasing 
behind it. So you either need to conquer the whole  
solar system first or you need to get tacit 
agreement from everyone as to who gets what.  
Neither scenario requires a rush to colonize 
after or a need for minimalist colony ships.  
Again such deals need not be equitable, it could 
be some major player basically setting the terms  
in exchange for not nuking their neighbors or 
wrecking their economies, but still isn’t a  
100% policy of claiming everything and 
needing to do it as fast as possible. 
Second, all such minimalist colony attempts tend 
to assume some robot able to make more of itself  
and colony operations. It might be some ten ton 
probe that arrives at some new system and grabs  
an asteroid and replicates more copies of itself 
to go to other systems and develop this one,  
sending on more waves of ships to other systems. 
This is the Von Neumann Probe or Chicken,  
and the Berserker Version would be where 
it replicates missiles to find and kill  
anyone without the right friend or foe 
signal. Again we’ll be discussing this  
more next sunday in our episode The Dark 
Forest, Aliens, and a Hostile Galaxy. 
Now Von Neumann or Berserker probes are fine as 
a strategy but makes you wonder why they didn’t  
start those replicators off here in this system. 
You drop it on an unused asteroid here, not around  
Alpha Centauri, and anyone of the million or 
so asteroids in the belt that are as big as  
a mountain or larger could supply you hundreds of 
millions of such probes, while many of the larger  
ones could provide enough to send hundreds of 
probes to each of the hundreds of billions of  
stars in the galaxy. Assuming they’re using fusion 
drives of some kind, they have an even easier  
access to fusion fuel in far larger amounts here 
in-system, from places like Jupiter or Saturn. 
The reality is though that building an 
enormous gigaton sized ship for each of the  
nearest billion solar systems would still only 
use up one of the largest asteroids or moons,  
and while acceleration and building times 
aren’t likely to be trivial, when measured  
across tens of thousands of light years, stopping 
occasionally for building another wave locally or  
refueling is kind of trivial. Especially if 
nearer systems can be relied on to ship some  
material home in repayment for their founding, 
which is very likely but also unnecessary,  
it just makes it profitable. Indeed, while some 
automated probe might accelerate at a rate no  
human could survive, let alone a big spinning 
cylinder habitat, the ability to accelerate  
to a cruising speed of half of light speed in a 
few days instead of a couple years really means  
nothing on a trip of a hundred thousand years, 
which is what will be needed for most stars in  
this galaxy at that speed, as opposed to stopping 
every couple light centuries to build locally. 
We don’t know how good automated building is but 
if you can trust a ship of only a few tons to  
replicate itself, one much bigger is likely 
to be more successful, and really shouldn’t  
take something like self-replicators all that 
more time, especially as we fit it out with  
human habitats and natural environments as it 
builds. So you build several thousand of those  
and launch them out, and each of them builds a 
hundred clones at stop 1 and rinse and repeat,  
or you go the big gardener ship path. Either 
way you’ve barely nicked the resources of  
this single solar system, so why go small? 
Especially when asking them to ship ten or  
even a thousand times the mass home we gave them 
for their ship is an almost trivial repayment. 
Moreover, it doesn’t matter how many gees of 
acceleration you can handle if your engine  
can’t supply them, and generally speaking 
a longer slower burn gets you more final  
speed than a rapid one. Further, we don’t have 
fusion yet but all indications are that it will  
be easier and more efficient if it's bigger. 
So bigger is likely to be faster when it comes  
to ships. It’s also superior for options 
like Hawking Radiation Black Holes Drives,  
which the laws of physics basically 
dictate need to start out no smaller  
than an aircraft carrier or supertanker, and for 
maintaining connection on something like a laser  
highway or energy beam hitting a distant 
mirror or sail, bigger is easier to hit.  
You also essentially need the same forward 
shielding to protect against radiation  
and micro collisions too, it scales with 
your cross-section, not your total mass. 
Now as to where to settle, while the default is 
to pick those systems which are nearest and which  
have a nice yellow sun like ours and an Earth-like 
planet to terraform, in practice it’s not likely  
you would ever bypass any star, even red and 
brown dwarfs, or even a rogue planet or gas giant.  
That doesn’t mean they’re your first wave 
targets though, your gardener ships might  
opt to stop at the best 1% and leave the rest for 
future colonists from behind or spreading from  
that newest and nearest seed. Same for folks 
commissioning fleets from home, and hurling  
them at better but more distant candidates first, 
which later colonize those empty stars around them  
or get filled in from expansion waves behind. It 
could go either way, hurling seeds into the wind  
to hope some take root and seed nearby them, or 
carefully seeding a field like we do in farming. 
This might favor places having a shared origin 
with those nearer them, a homeworld that’s second  
generation from earth, or further, like some 
genealogy of worlds. Terminus colonized from  
Catachan 9 from Cadia from Fenris out 
of Delta Pavonis from Alpha Centauri,  
yea even back to Terra. Realistically though 
divergence will be so high with these time lines  
and distances that your neighbors are going to 
effectively be aliens. Note we are assuming here  
we have the galaxy to ourselves and are bypassing 
other alien civilizations or primitive worlds  
with simple but alien environments and critters. 
We’ve discussed those scenarios in other episodes. 
I also said the best 1% might be colonized 
first but that’s not necessarily based on blue  
planets around yellow suns. Indeed I could make 
a good case for some very surprising candidates,  
like a red giant with a very big asteroid belt 
around it. For the speed of development nothing  
beats a vast collection of asteroids, and red 
giants make a great power supply. They may be  
in a brief and final phase of life but everything 
is relative and our Sun for instance would spend a  
billion years in its red giant phase. That’s twice 
as long as life on land has existed on Earth, and  
a hundred thousand times as long as civilization 
has been around, so ‘brief’ is kinda debatable.  
Plus as we discussed a couple months back, 
there are ways to extend stellar lifetimes,  
and some of them, like star lifting, are great 
ways to get metals and building materials while  
you’re at it, indeed far superior supplies in 
terms of quantity than anything you’d get from  
asteroids or even disassembling entire planets.
Critically though, in the absence of some cheap  
way of making antimatter and safely storing 
it, or of making artificial black holes,  
your best option for fast ships is massive energy 
beaming arrays, and indeed these circumvent the  
rocket equation and thus allow even faster 
travel than black hole drives or antimatter,  
but with less independence as you rely on 
the beam from elsewhere, though they could  
be used in tandem. You build a massive energy 
collector near a star and beam energy to the ship,  
pushing it up to speed, and at the destination 
slow it by another such beam. But they do require  
infrastructure on both ends, so they make great 
new hubs or destinations for more colonists to  
arrive once you get the terminal array built.
We have some tricks for forward deploying these  
from ships to still slow them down, like launch 
a solar shade or solar moth toward a star as you  
approach and having it slow from solar pressure 
while using that light to beam backwards to  
another one, which is more quickly slowed by 
that beam, and does the same, and so on until  
you get a beaming arrays around that star that can 
slow your approaching fleet. So too we have some  
options for slowing down like magnetic drag on the 
local interstellar medium, or even flying through  
the outer shell of a red giant for air drag, 
as they are much, much thinner than thin air,  
its not like running into volcanic 
magma as usually portrayed in scifi. 
Additionally, while red giants might be desirable 
systems, red dwarfs are far more numerous and  
dense as solar systems go and thus might make 
good places for non-planet focused colonization,  
like Dyson Swarms, while dead stars like black 
holes or neutrons stars offer some amazing  
pathways as civilization and traffic hubs. 
We’re low on time so check out the episodes  
colonizing black holes or colonizing Red Giants 
for more details on those options, and likewise  
I think we’ll save a discussion of planetary 
colonization strategies for its own episode. 
To wrap up for today though, the key take away 
does seem to be that bigger is better and not  
slower, and that colonizing the galaxy is very 
difficult to do without at least reasonably  
cooperative strategies with neighbors, or 
at least not openly hostile interactions.  
That probably is doubly true as I suspect it will 
be very hard to claim an entire planet as your own  
for a colony of under a million, as others might 
land separately years later and claim some other  
continent, and that claiming an entire solar 
system would be far harder. And help from home,  
by fleet or court, is probably centuries 
away, so the squatters claiming territory  
you aren’t even vaguely using anyway probably 
would need to be treated as new neighbors. 
And while elbow room or bad relations with 
neighbors here on Earth might motivate many  
future colonies, sending pilgrims off to 
their promised land far from persecution,  
perceived or genuine, even as big as space is,  
it is still a good strategy to learn 
how to get along with your neighbors.
So as we mentioned, today marks the start of our 
9th Season of SFIA, and it has definitely been a  
process of changes since the early days when it 
was just a hobby. One of those switch overs that  
came when we went to a weekly show was getting 
a website and I was rather lucky that I have a  
fairly uncommon name, so it wasn’t too hard to 
get our domain, IsaacArthur.net. That is not the  
norm though and whether you’re running a youtube 
channel or posting your resume or working as a  
consultant or running for office or just building 
a brand name in general, having a website and its  
accessibility are still critical to success.
Your website should show your passion,  
and that starts with something easy to 
say and remember, and that’s where Hover,  
with over 400 Domain extensions to choose from, 
can help you brand yourself or your business  
online. The .ME domain extension in particular is 
popular and appropriate for websites focusing on  
names and bios, and it's great for launching your 
portfolio showcasing who you are and what you do. 
And Hover can help you find that perfect domain 
name and their easy to use hover connect feature  
allows you to connect your domain to many website 
builders with just a few clicks, and it comes with  
a Best in Class Customer Support Team to help you 
out without trying to upsell you and personalized  
emails that match your domain to further 
support growing your online identity and brand. 
These days, who doesn’t need a domain name? 
It feels like everyone has got one, so it’s 
important that yours stands out! 
Have you never used Hover before? 
Lucky you! Get an additional 10% off any of all 
domain extensions offered for your entire first 
Year, just use the link in the 
episode’s description. It’s time to get 
your portfolio website up and running! 
So that will wrap us up for today but it's 
only the start of a New Year of SFIA and  
we’ll continue rolling out 2023 next week with the 
big question of what we will do if all our dreams  
of post-scarcity civilization turn out wrong and 
unattainable, and some reasons why I don’t think  
that will be the case. Then that weekend we’ll 
have our mid-month scifi Sunday episode, examining  
the possibility we live in a hostile galaxy and 
some of the Fermi Paradox solutions discussing  
that like Dark Forest Theory and Berserker Probes. 
Then in two weeks we’ll explore both the Big  
Crunch Cosmological model and the Omega Point, 
along with options for Eternal Intelligence, and  
some new models like Conformal Cyclic Cosmology.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and other  
episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons.  
You can also help support the show on Patreon, 
and if you want donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those by visiting our website, 
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA  
episodes early and ad free on our streaming 
service, Nebula, at nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
