To travel between the stars requires vast 
amounts of fuel and energy, but as it turns out,  
the ocean of night in deep space is full of 
fuel, if you can collect it along the way.
Welcome back to another episode of "Science and 
Futurism with Isaac Arthur." Today, we're diving  
into the realm of interstellar propulsion, 
exploring a concept that has captured the  
imaginations of science fiction enthusiasts and 
space exploration enthusiasts alike for decades:  
the Bussard Ramjet Starship Drive. We’ll 
explain what it is, why it might be broken,  
what other uses it has, and what 
work arounds might let us use it. 
The Bussard Ramjet is conceptually simple enough. 
Space is full of hydrogen gas, and if you have a  
fusion reactor, all that gas becomes fusion fuel 
for your spaceship, so you suck it in, fuse it,  
and blow it out the back, speeding up your 
ship. The Bussard Ramjet or Ramscoop is perhaps  
best-known from the classic scifi novel Tau Zero, 
which shows us a spaceship that gets stuck with  
their ramjet on and keeps accelerating closer and 
closer to light speed. This spaceship drive was  
designed by physicist Robert Bussard in 1960 and 
it seemed the magic fix for all our spaceship woes  
and the tyranny of the rocket equation.
Indeed if you ever wondered what those  
big lights or propellers on the front of 
the warp nacelles on the Enterprise are,  
they are listed as Bussard Collectors.
Now we’re not going to deep dive the concept  
of fusion today, but the idea is that once you get 
moving under normal engines or some other drive,  
and get some speed, you funnel high speed 
particles into the throat of the Bussard engine  
where they slam into other particles at 
relativistic velocities. The particles in  
the Sun’s core, at tens of millions of degrees, 
are bumping around and into each other at hundreds  
of kilometers a second, which is on an order 
of a thousandth of light speed, but even then,  
take billions of years and untold trillions 
of collisions before they typically fuse. 
The hotter and denser a star’s core, 
the exponentially faster this happens,  
so if you’re moving faster, the number of gas 
particles you’re grabbing and slamming through  
your Bussard Ramjet that actually fuse while 
passing through rises vastly, and as you get close  
to light speed you will match the conditions 
not just inside a supergiant stellar core,  
but those right about to go supernova where 
fusion fuel is not taking millions or billions of  
years to get used, but getting burnt up at rates 
like we’d expect from gasoline, only 10 million  
times more energy being emitted per gallon.
But the basic concept is that as you shove matter  
down the throat of this engine, some is fusing and 
releasing energy and the byproduct along with all  
the gas that didn’t fuse is absorbing that energy 
and blowing out the back as a propellant. You  
can also get energy to run your life support, 
maintenance, and manufacturing this way. Most  
of the interstellar medium is ionized hydrogen 
and helium, including their isotopes deuterium  
and Helium-3, all of which are decent fusion fuels 
but any ionized atom or molecule can be pulled or  
shoved by electromagnetic forces. Hence the idea 
to suck or scoop up gas as you go along from a  
wide cross-section around your ship, rather than 
a conventional physical scoop. Then, similar to  
an air-breathing ramjet, you cram all that gas 
through a tiny throat at high speed and density. 
Hydrogen and Helium are the vast majority of 
everything out there, and a lot of the remainder  
is carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen, which are all 
fusible too, particularly in the CNO cycle,  
but them and other matter floating around can 
also be scooped and diverted for collection to  
let a ship gather raw materials for building 
and repairing stuff. And for that matter,  
the small amount of heavier fusion products 
coming out the back could be reclaimed too,  
by the conceptual equivalent of a magnetic bucket 
following far behind on a tether, selectively  
grabbing those heavier elements. Critically, the 
amount any particle curves in a magnetic field  
is based on how much charge it has and how much 
mass it has. Big, ionized particles move slower  
at the same ambient temperature and curve less in 
the same magnetic field, and would make up only a  
small amount of your intake or rocket flame, 
so grabbing them wouldn’t hurt your overall  
thrust and momentum too much.
This seems like the perfect starship drive,  
infinite fuel and scooping up other handy raw 
materials when needed, so what’s the problem? 
Well, there’s a few. First, even if it 
worked as planned, you need to get moving  
at high speed to make it go. It’s a bit of a 
Catch-22, an engine that makes you go fast but  
requires you to be going fast first to use it.
This at least has an easy fix. We often talk  
about using giant laser beams, or energy or 
matter beams, or all of the above, to either  
directly bounce off a ship and push it or provide 
a power supply to superheat onboard propellant as  
higher-performance propellant than normal rocket 
fuel and so long as you have a star nearby  
and some local infrastructure of mirrors, power 
collectors, and relays, you should have no problem  
keep a pushing beam on target even a whole light 
day away and that’s enough of a runway to shove a  
ship at 1-gee of acceleration up to 7.5% of light 
speed. That’s a pretty good initial boost and as  
we’ve discussed elsewhere, that’s good enough for 
an interstellar ark ship all on its own and you  
could probably do better, see our Interstellar 
Laser Highways episode for discussion of that. 
Indeed we often imagine using the Bussard 
Ramjet with this system anyway, since one  
of the concerns with it is that calculations often 
indicate it would produce a net negative thrust,  
slowing rather than speeding the ship 
up, and you can use one to slow down,  
which is handy if you don’t have a pushing beam 
system at your destination at the other end. 
If you’re familiar with Bussard Ramjets or scoops 
you’ve probably heard about this concern they’re  
broken, and there’s a few ways in which 
this might be the case and sadly they’re  
mostly too technical to explain, though there’s 
a newer paper on it that I think did a good job,  
if still very techy There’s also a few variations 
of it and each needs discussed differently,  
including two others using black holes 
that I’ve discussed before in passing but  
have no name I’ve ever heard of so I will dub 
them the Hawking Ramjet and Penrose Ramjet,  
the latter being a lot like the Quasar Drive we’ve 
discussed before but imagined at a smaller scale. 
More on those later. Let’s start with the better 
known one, the Fishback Ramjet, which John  
Fishback proposed back in 1969. And this is the 
first detailed one, as Bussard and Carl Sagan had  
both discussed the idea before but Fishback went 
into the details on how the scoop would need to  
work. Again, those are unfortunately too technical 
to dip into here but focus on using a magnetic  
scoop and an axial solenoid. If you do want that 
deep dive, I will instead recommend the paper from  
last year written by Peter Schattschneider and 
Albert Jackson, as I feel that covers the topic,  
its problems, and possible solutions 
better than the various prior papers did. 
And a lot of this had to do with scale, and why 
‘doesn’t work’ got thrown around a lot because  
the ship needs to be very big to work, the big 
Fishback Solenoid needs to be very big and strong,  
and might need to be made of graphene or even 
use active support systems like we envision for  
orbital rings. So to be clear, we think it does 
work. There were just many who felt the numbers  
made it impractical to ever build and many 
dispute that, but with the acknowledgement  
that it’s a megaproject to build one.
They need a huge cross section to scoop from too,  
not a mile or kilometer across but more like 
an Astronomical Units. You can see why this  
gets problematic. Of course, if you’re a channel 
regular you might have just shrugged and noted  
that we do often contemplate building things 
to that scale, and that just because an object  
might need components as big as our planet’s 
orbit, doesn’t mean it needs a construction mass  
anywhere near that of a planet, but in some 
scenarios, that too would be acceptable. If  
it lets you get ships up to very high speeds and 
down from them at a new star, where you can build  
the beam pushing systems we discuss or even just 
transmit data and uploaded minds at light speed,  
then that’s good enough for first use and later 
ships can use the beaming system. It really  
doesn’t matter if your first colony ship to a new 
system uses the mass of a large moon or smaller  
planet to get there as that’s an investment that 
can be repaid thousands of times over from the  
available raw mass in that new system. And again, 
the ability to slow down this way is handy. 
You can just slow down magnetically anyway, the 
interstellar medium is full of ionized particles  
and you’re basically deploying a magnetic 
field as a parachute to slow down using them,  
and again the concern is if you are slowing 
more by gathering them than they’ll produce  
when fusing. Which if you’re only getting 1 
in a million to fuse, wouldn’t make them much  
better energy-wise than a chemical fuel but 
also means you’re constantly dragging on all  
of them and slowing while collecting them.
I won’t belabor the various workarounds too  
much. First, this whole fusion process is totally 
unrelated to any normal fusion reactor we try to  
build here on Earth, at least the default Tokamak 
type. If your ship just happens to have a regular  
old fusion reactor, whatever that looks like, then 
you don’t need to be shoved up to speed. Instead,  
you get a cruising speed equal to whenever the 
drag force of collection equals your engine  
output. The faster you go, the more kinetic energy 
you lose whenever you hit and swallow a particle  
and dump it into your reactor, and if you need 
to basically slam 100 particles to get two of  
those two fuse in your engine and the other 
98 to fly out the back superheated by fusion,  
then you’re looking at a top speed at about 
1% of light speed. If you were getting total  
fusion by all, more like 10% of light speed. 
The reason the ramjet does better is that it  
is using that collision energy to drive the fusion 
event and the particle involved, fused or failed,  
keeps that momentum rather than slowing the ship.
1% of light speed, or even 10%, isn’t really  
wowing everyone the way the Bussard Ramjet does, 
but it should be noted this can be shoved up too.  
We could imagine some Clarketech piece of 
machinery that just vaporized any passing  
particle into its constituent mass energy of 
photons but we think this is basically what  
black holes do too. We’re a bit dubious about 
creating and feeding kugelblitz black holes,  
ultra-tiny ones in the megaton or even 
kiloton range, but they produce huge  
amounts of energy by Hawking radiation and they 
run basically at 100% matter to energy efficiency.
Their ceiling might be north of 90% of light 
speed and their collection radius much lower,  
and they shouldn’t need that initial shove to 
get going though they will collect more the  
faster they go and you might need to start 
them on the heavier and lower power side,  
fueling them up at port, to ensure they had 
time enough to get to full refill rates. 
Black holes emit less Hawking radiation as they 
grow in mass, and they lose mass as they emit  
energy, quicker the smaller they grow. So you 
might need to throttle your intake at higher  
speed to avoid your black hole gaining mass and 
losing power. This is a Hawking Drive Ship, or  
a Hawking Ramscoop in this particular variation.
The Penrose Ramscoop would be a bigger black hole,  
if it turns out you can’t make or feed them below 
a certain size, like having an event horizon less  
than an atomic radius, and would rely on the 
Penrose Mechanism for Power Generation. Which  
for simplicity’s sake is just dumping matter 
toward a black hole and using all the accretion  
disc and acceleration radiation to power things. 
Here it is fine if particles just whizz by close  
to it and miss, bending in to smack each other 
and radiating a bit of energy in the process.  
Optimally, this does way better than fusion but 
isn’t 100% so your ceiling is likely to be over  
50% of light speed but not a lot more. Also, 
this is a tinier version of the Quasar Drive we  
discussed in Fleet of Stars, so see that episode 
or Black Hole Ships for a deeper discussion. 
Amusingly they would have an equivalent of 
radioactive waste since a bigger black hole  
still has Hawking Radiation – which is typically 
going to be X-Ray or Gamma for something a ship  
might be using - and still is a black hole, and 
since it would slowly gain mass this way, once it  
got too big for a ship you might have to jettison 
or box it up, or trade it to a local space station  
that doesn’t care about mass as much and will 
keep using it as a power plant. Alternatively  
smaller ones might need to be jettisoned if they 
were starving so they didn’t blow up once they  
got in the sub-kiloton range. I suppose a Gardener 
Ship might generate new black holes every stop and  
give the old one to the new colony it founded, 
and trade ships might stop and change out at  
destination, selling the old one to some local 
O’Neill Cylinder and buying a new one. But that’s  
a bit beyond the scope of today’s episode.
In the end, while there’s no getting around  
the issues with Ramscoops, they may not be as 
dreadful or fixed a barrier as we’ve been thinking  
and we do have some workarounds that follow 
similar approaches. To make truly fast ships,  
it helps if you can get around the rocket equation 
and not have to carry all your fuel with you,  
and it also relieves you from needing to 
carefully husband your fuel for centuries of  
interstellar travel against leaks or shortages 
so that you can slow down when you arrive. 
For those curious why this episode wasn’t on 
the schedule and is an outlier for length,  
this episode was originally going to be one of 
those new short form videos I’ve been trying  
out of late, but it rapidly got longer. I’ve been 
enjoying the challenge of trying to do a 60 second  
video, and doing a whole month's worth of them 
take less time than a single video like this does,  
let alone a regular episode, and at popular 
request I probably will start releasing  
compilation videos of those here and on our other 
platforms soon, but while trying for brevity is a  
fun exercise, if the content clearly won’t fit 
in that length, I won’t shove it in, and at the  
same time I didn’t see any reason to expand 
it to one of our usual deep dives especially  
with so many other topics awaiting writing.
Doing so would either take away from writing  
another episode or require waiting to put it 
out till after our episode on Zero Point and  
Vacuum Energy in a few weeks and I felt 
this one should come out first and it’s a  
quasi-prequel to our episode Have Space Suit 
– Will Travel coming out in a couple weeks,  
in regard to classic Heinlein Torch Drives which 
the Bussard Ramjet seeks to partially emulate.  
Those of course are basically your straight matter 
to energy converter and in theory could be using  
dark matter too, not just fusion fuels. As could 
our black hole drive version. We’ll discuss a dark  
energy option in that aforementioned Zero 
Point and Vacuum Energy episode next month. 
If you want to learn more about other spaceship 
drives, see our Advanced Spaceship Drive  
Compendium episode, but that will wrap us 
up for today. Thanks for joining us for this  
unscheduled episode and we’ll see you Thursday 
for our episode Interplanetary Infrastructure,  
where we will also discuss building things 
Astronomical Units wide, as well as more  
modest devices for helping explore and settle our 
solar system, and until then, have a great week!
