This episode is sponsored by Brilliant.
As futurists, we love to think about the technologies
that will enhance the lives of our distant descendants.
It’s easy to forget, though,
that there will be some pretty amazing technologies
we’ll actually live to see!
While this show tends to spend a lot of its
time in the far future, today we’ll be looking
at technologies more on the near-horizon,
from automated vehicles, to improvements in
medicine, to space technologies and many more.
Indeed, many, many more, so you’ll definitely
want to grab a drink and snack for this one
as we’ll be here for quite a while.
To cut down on a few of these topics, we’ve
discussed a few of these technologies in greater
length before, so I’ll be putting up thumbnails
of various related videos as we go.
There are going to be more than youtube lets
me add in-video card links for, so we’ll
add those we can’t include in the video
to the episode description.
We’ll also be hitting a lot of other topics
that probably deserve their own episodes,
so we’ll run a poll over on our community
tab for some of those, and see which one most
of you would like to see us cover in more
detail.
Also as we go through these, beyond discussing
what the tech is, I’ll try to give a guess
of about how far off it is, and what sort
of impacts it might have on our civilization.
It’s worth noting that big shiny awesome
technologies often don’t have as big an
impact as something much more subtle, as we
noted back in the episode Quiet Revolution.
Stuff like Amazon’s online marketplace or
Uber’s crowd-source approach to taxi cabs
isn’t the stuff of science fiction novels,
but often has far more impact on society than
a deeper theoretical knowledge of cosmology
or particle physics does.
Just to give an example, self-driving cars
seem pretty neat but it’s really more its
impact on stuff like freight vehicles that
would heavily alter our economy.
Very few folks realize what a large sector
of our economy freight is, but the job of
‘truck driver’ is the most common job
in 29 states of the United States.
Retail sales is still larger by about a million
people, but automated self checkouts and online
shopping are impacting that.
Both truckers and cashiers are quite likely
to go the way of the milkman in the next generation.
The impact that it will have on freight and
retail is vast, good and bad, as every item
we buy has to factor in the cost of paying
a driver to take the goods to the store, and
either a cashier at that store or a deliveryman
to bring the merchandise to your home.
Remove or decrease those and everything gets
cheaper, and folks can buy more things to
improve their lives, items which will also
likely have gotten cheaper.
But that’s hardly the sole impact, even
ignoring the massive job displacement.
Early automated vehicles may well have dedicated
lanes on large freeways, similar to the carpool
lane, and indeed automated vehicles are ideal
for carpooling in modern times, in an Uber-esque
way, since each person can enter their pickup
and destination time and location into a service
and computers can near instantly plot the
optimum way to have many vehicles pick up
many more people.
It will be quite some time before many folks
would be willing to abandon owning a car personally,
automated or not, depending on their preferences
and needs.
However there would be many folks who decided
such an automated pickup and transport was
a better option, and many other folks who
could rent out their car to services providing
it when not using it themselves, and far fewer
families that felt the need for multiple cars.
It also would indirectly impact residential
housing.
That attached multiple-car garage on many
houses might be less common and we might see
a lot of existing ones converted to other
uses, and large driveways may also disappear.
Garages in turn might find themselves being
converted into externally accessible delivery
bins that open on a signal from an authorized
delivery person or robot.
There’s a rising problem with folks snatching
packages off other people’s porches as we
have more and more deliveries, and secure
drop-off containers for packages, possibly
including insulated or refrigerated ones for
groceries, are things I’d expect to see
become rather common in dwellings in years
to come.
It would be very easy for each house and each
container to have its dimensions and characteristics
catalogued so all these new distribution managers
could say in advance what could be safely
delivered to them, or picked up from them.
Of course a lot of this delivery tech might
be interrupted by improvements in 3D printing,
as some products might be delivered to your
home in the form of data, and printed on the
spot, or we may even have roving printing
and delivery trucks for some items.
See the episode “The Santa Claus Machine”
for more discussion of the uses and challenges
of advanced 3D printing, or our episode “Synthetic
Meat” for a discussion of printing steaks
at home, rather than getting them delivered
from a long supply chain originating from
a cow.
Another one of those tiny techs that would
be better automated is cataloguing.
Smart phones or internal sensors would monitor
where all your junk was and tagged it, and
you just slap a barcode or RF sticker on it
from some cheap roll of stickers and scan
the object while saying what it is, assuming
most products don’t come with such things
built into them to help with inventory at
stores, which could be used at home too.
The follow up on that would be an optimizing
software that suggested and displayed ideal
packing of everything from your attic to your
refrigerator, based on minimizing space and
maximizing easy access to regularly used objects,
and potentially also telling you stuff like
“Based on attic or basement temperature
and humidity changes, this object should not
be stored here” or “The following food
items in your pantry or refrigerator are nearing
their expiration date”.
AI might even go further and recommend lifestyle
changes based on your eating, shopping, and
other habits, a problem we’re already facing
with private data collection today.
You can get tiny little impacts too, like
local charity food pantries getting an influx
of canned goods as people get alerted to things
near their shelf-life, decide they don’t
feel like eating it that week, and just toss
it into one of their delivery bins while flagging
it for donation.
The next delivery person or bot grabs it,
and then it makes its way to a food pantry.
Less waste, less cost, less hassle, a small
thing but also a big one too.
In the same way you might auto-Ebay objects
you no longer want, just stick it in the bin
and say ‘sell me’ and it goes up for remote
auction, you get part of the sale, and you
never worry about it again.
Better household robots might help with a
lot of that too, easily picking up your trash
or clothes or personal effects and disposing,
cleaning, or storing them with no further
thought.
That’s a bit more complicated than our robot
mops and vacuums we’re starting to see become
regular household appliances, but not too
much so.
Since this episode is premiering in the spring
when folks are returning to their lawn and
gardens, it’s worth a segue onto that topic.
We can expect to see a big boom in robot lawnmowers,
I suspect before 2030 you will see a huge
drop off in manual lawnmower sales, with most
remaining manual lawnmowers at households
being old or used and slowly becoming a niche
market.
You can expect the same for snowblowers, and
many other easily automated tasks like trimming,
fertilizing, edging, and aerating.
Not because every household would necessarily
need to own one either, but because one such
robot could probably serve many households.
It will be interesting to see if this sector,
of rentable automated lawn maintenance robots,
will be in the form of businesses renting
them or more of that crowd-sourced Uber approach,
of local owners and some app or company that
buys it for the downtime.
This need not necessarily be limited to robotic
equipment either, but various more expensive
tools folks need not very often.
After all, for something like a snowblower,
even in the winter they spend most of their
time shut off but if the snow is coming down
it’s nice to have first dibs on its use
by owning it personally, however you can then
rent it out to others.
Other items see even more infrequent and time-dependent
use.
20 or 30 people in a town of several hundred
might own a lawn aerator robot, something
you’d only use a few days a year, and as
the market develops you see a lot of folks
who buy it for the novelty and decide to make
some extra cash when the device isn’t in
use.
It’s also good for ecological reasons too,
healthy lawns that are maintained and fertilized
on proper and accurate schedules save a lot
of water and fertilizer, and decrease a lot
of runoff issues we have with that.
You also might see a drop off in lawns in
favor of more complex gardens if robots are
handling most of the grunt work, be they strictly
ornamental or food producing gardens.
Better digital mapping of lawns is also something
I’d expect.
It’s nice if your fertilizer robot knows
the type of tree it’s meandering by and
its mass, so it can fertilize appropriately,
but it’s also handy to homeowners and agencies
to be able to see when a tree needs to be
trimmed or brought down to minimize the risk
to houses and power lines.
Of course we’re also seeing improvements
in boring technology that might see burying
lines and many other utilities get far easier,
cheaper, and more common.
One other example of unexpected business impacts
before we move on to more technology.
Insurance companies may see a decline in claims,
and consumers in their premiums, from all
this automation.
We won’t use self-driving cars much until
they are demonstrably safer than the average
driver, let alone those who are inexperienced
or under the influence which is where a vastly
disproportionate number of car wrecks come
from.
So too, more home and lawn automation and
computerization is likely to see all sorts
of house damage decrease in frequency or severity.
An ounce of Prevention is worth a pound of
cure, as the saying goes, and we’ll be seeing
this more and more in medicine.
DNA testing is now dirt cheap and I expect
it to become near-universal by 2030, even
if it’s the insurance companies paying for
it.
There’s just so many illnesses that can
be prevented or mitigated with advance warning
when someone is predisposed to them genetically.
And many illnesses that can be cured or mitigated
by early warning through detection.
When I was a kid the MRI machine had just
been invented a few years earlier by Raymond
Damadian.
As they’ve become cheaper and better, they
have saved many, many lives, not to mention
much hardship.
With improvements to them, the software running
on them, and the cost of making them, we might
expect to see full body scans at even better
resolution than now be a routine part of an
annual physical.
However, we’ve also seen the Fitbit and
parallel devices become quite common in the
last few years, and I expect they’ll get
even more widespread in both their use and
uses.
Laser imaging, constant tracking of heart
rate and blood pressure and possibly many
other blood-related bits of data may result
in someone’s smart phone being able to build
a ridiculously accurate day-by-day or even
minute by minute medical log of those, sleep
cycles, other biological cycles, weight, body
fat, calories in and out, and an ever-growing
catalog of relevant health information that
could be automatically analyzed and forwarded
to your doctor or expert AI.
There’s another sector that might see some
drop off.
As equipment for medicine and delivery improves,
we might see a lot of medical tests performed
by technicians we often get a couple weeks
before our physicals be something done at
home.
How tricky might be a bracelet that could
image for an artery or vein and grab a quick
blood sample for pickup and transport to a
lab for analysis?
I’d not expect too much of that in the next
decade but probably within a generation, two
at most, we’d see a lot less routine trips
to the doctor for preventative medicine, while
at the same time having vastly more preventative
medicine.
That’s the sort of thing that could have
a huge impact on the health sector, when the
vast majority of ailments are detected almost
immediately and at home.
AI could also have a major impact on these
jobs, as some things like analyzing a bone
for a fracture can be performed far more accurately
by software than by a human.
Needless to say improvements of nano-technology
in medicine would be beyond helpful, as would
various types of cybernetics or mind-machine
interfaces like we’ve looked at in our Cyborgs,
Mind Augmentation, and Mind-Machine Interfaces.
And we’re seeing major developments in all
those now, not just in the pages or scripts
of science fiction anymore.
I suspect we’ll also see far more improvements
in things like gene therapy, cancer treatment,
and life extension.
Indeed, as we discussed in Life Extension
and Science of Aging episodes, all medicine
is life extension technology, a favorite quote
of mine by my friend Aubrey de Grey of SENS
Research Foundation.
As folks continue to live longer and healthier
lives, they can enjoy a far larger percentage
of their life being economically productive,
which would doubtless see some major impacts
on those sectors of the economy centered on
children or the elderly.
If you join the workforce at 25, retire at
65, and die at 80, you get 40 years of work,
50% of your life.
If you live to 100 and are as productive at
85 as at 65, then you get 60 years of work,
50% more, and can work for 60% of your life,
20% more.
But you’re gaining more skills every day.
What’s more, if we assumed a stable population
of zero growth for the moment, averaging 100
years to keep it easy, a kid in K-12 is only
spending 13% of their life getting state-funded
education and 60% of their life paying taxes
for that education, as opposed to the earlier
example where they retired at 65 and died
at 80, 16% of their life getting schooled
and 50% paying taxes for it.
That’s literally 50% more production vs
education time for the longer life meaning
you could spend 50% more on education, or
25% more for it and 25% in lower taxes or
educating people longer.
Of course that was assuming people are as
productive, but in a high-skill workforce,
more experience often means more productivity
so it’s likely even better than that 50%
increase we just calculated.
Of course you often have to retrain people
as the technology and industry changes, which
is no easy thing as we’ve found, not too
mention train them in the first place, and
education technology is the next big one we’ll
discuss.
College has become rather more common than
it was when I went, and certainly when I was
born, and even then it was pretty common compared
to the mid-20th century.
There is a feeling among many that we’ve
reached “Peak College,” about the maximum
percent of folks who are attending university,
and I kind of agree.
I will say outright I think the number of
degrees and the value of those degrees to
those getting them has dropped sharply, and
I’ve some rather pointed views on our colleges
I’ll keep to myself, but I don’t think
we’ll see a drop off in folks getting more
education, quite the opposite in fact.
I do think we will see a drop off in physical
university attendance and a slower but sharper
drop in tuition the next few decades as we
see more and more online schools arising and
being seen as more valuable than they currently
are.
But it’s also worth mentioning trade schools
or on-the-job training will likely come back
around as the need for workers specifically
oriented to maintaining robotics and AI increases.
Needless to say I’d like to see improvements
in teaching technology, we’ve discussed
before some options like a computer that monitors
a student’s interest in something they are
reading by scanning their eyes and vital data,
to switch to an alternate example or zoom
in on a topic that piqued their interest,
or sensing they are growing frustrated with
a problem and summoning a teacher.
However, the use of artificial intelligence
in learning can’t be underestimated.
If you can track a student’s progress individually
and far more accurately on each topic, or
even how they respond to certain teachers
or styles, we can better match them up and
also hopefully cut back on standardized exams
which so often leads to “teaching to the
test” which is unsurprisingly rather unpopular
with everyone, even those who view it as the
best option, or least worst, for evaluating
performance of students, teachers, and schools.
The use of Artificial Intelligence in administrative
roles and the impact of that cannot be downplayed
either.
While we principally think of robots for drudge
work or giant factories, even relatively simply
AI can do wonders for clerical and administrative
tasks.
Computerization has always seen more use in
offices than factories anyway, but just to
use that example from a moment ago of a computer
monitoring a student’s vitals to track mood
and engagement, the same software can be used
at workplaces to help allot work tasks to
those who enjoyed them and performed them
better, which tends to be synonymous.
From a managerial standpoint, if you can go
in and see who does what best and likes it
most at a very accurate and detailed level,
you know who to assign to what and who to
promote or fire.
Or who to put on shift together.
You can shift things around for ideal performance
if you have data showing folks in good or
bad moods around a given coworker, or superior.
The same applies to stuff like online dating
too, since any time you have vast amounts
of data on folks, it’s much easier to build
a true and accurate profile of what they like
or dislike.
Arguably even better than they could say themselves,
since even ignoring lying, we often aren’t
consciously aware of a lot of our preferences
and irritations.
I’d imagine few dating websites would have
a preference mark for people who can’t stand
it when someone else chews with their mouth
open or tends to click pens or tap their fingers.
But if you’re monitoring folks all their
life though, stuff like that could be included
in an algorithm that filtered folks from each
other for such minor but deal breaking quirks.
We looked at some of the more interesting,
amusing, and disturbing scenarios for the
future of dating and relationships in the
episode “Happily Ever After”.
It’s a bit disturbing, to say the least,
to think about being monitored and analyzed
all the time but it does come with many advantages
and AI opens the door to it maybe being much
more private, it’s easier to put safeguards
on an AI spilling personal data to people,
and presumably they aren’t prone to gossip
or bribes.
Telepresence deserves a quick mention too.
We’ll be seeing a lot more remote work in
years to come, but that’s not just a matter
of convenience but also safety.
Robots will be working dangerous jobs or in
space or on the moon, especially ones incorporating
a small amount of AI for mundane work and
remote access for more detailed, hazardous,
or irregular tasks.
Limited AI and Telepresence will blend together
wonderfully in robots.
We can get quite an impressive operating suite
into something ambulance sized these days
and if we’ve got remote cars we can have
remote ambulances too.
Even ignoring more high-tech robots, if a
paramedic, police officer, firefighter, or
other first responder with basic medical skills
can have a remote ambulance arriving rapidly,
they can provide very impressive care with
the aid of a telepresent doctor or surgeon.
Such things will have huge impacts on medicine,
which we just mentioned, but also on stuff
like crime.
It’s much harder to commit crimes when there
are records of pretty much everywhere someone
has been, and it’s pretty hard to mug someone
if they can summon help with a single quick
tap and police can instantly activate every
street camera nearby and potentially requisition
or subpoena feeds from other folks phones
who were identified as being in the area and
then run facial recognition on the perpetrator.
Or even just monitor them as they flee.
They might be actively pursued by drones as
well, many officers are injured by foot chases
either by accident or ambush, and of course
they might not be as fast as whoever they
are pursuing.
A drone can help a lot with that, and potentially
include a taser, see the episode “Attack
of the Drones” for more discussion of those
options.
That kind of criminal surveillance tends to
assume cameras or sensors on public roads,
but this is another thing I figure will be
ubiquitous within 10-20 years, and part of
our next technology to discuss, which is smart
cities.
This isn’t even a thing of future or modern
times, administrating cities with technology
predates even things like traffic lights.
Strictly speaking, even everyone just becoming
literate made navigating via maps and road
signs much easier in large cities.
But traffic lights that can detect how much
traffic is waiting, or even approaching, helps
a lot.
As do navigation maps and tracking systems
that can warn of traffic jams and reroute,
or simply be analyzed for what bits of road
most urgently need repair or expansion.
Cities are proverbial for their traffic jams
but advances in such things, automated vehicles,
and better public transport might make those
a thing of the past even in the most dense
cities.
Needless to say AI can help a lot with your
power, water, and communication grids too,
but we also have a lot of technology for power
on the horizon.
Fusion might genuinely be 20 years away, as
we discussed in Fusion Power, and beamed energy
might be on the horizon too, as we looked
at in Power Satellites, but photoconductive
graphene and perovskite solar panels might
allow massive cheap printing of solar panels,
ones so cheap and thin we could use them as
casually as wallpaper.
You don’t need advanced metamaterials or
hyper-efficient batteries to help with power
if you’ve got dirt cheap solar, though we’re
seeing tons of improvements in both.
The Diamond Battery is a weak nuclear battery
that runs on the beta decay of Carbon-14 and
could last thousands of years while providing
a small but safe, ultra-sturdy, and compact
power source; it may well enter regular use
before too long, meaning you’d never need
to replace batteries on many devices.
See the Metamaterials and Portable Power episodes
for all the exciting developments and options
there.
We also have classic nuclear fission too,
which is seeing tons of improvements.
We looked at space based Nuclear a lot in
our Nuclear Option episode and in our recent
episode Moon: Industrial Complex.
While Thorium is a tempting and much talked
about option, Uranium molten salt nuclear
reactors offer a lot more promise for near-term,
safe, cheap, and massive power production.
Modern nuclear reactors in general don’t
really need to be far from cities, they are
indeed quite safe, but one of the big hurdles
for nuclear power is the fear of it.
Molten salt reactors are safer, and other
types of new, safe designs like very small,
high temperature, gas-cooled Reactors could
allow for their use in every day manufacturing
plants that need lots of heat production,
like metal smelting or water desalination.
However, we’ll probably still tend to site
nuclear reactors in rural or remote areas
anyways.
Part of the problem with the power grid is
that you need to be able to carry power long
distances with little loss, and indeed a large
portion of existing power generation is lost
as heat just going through our wires.
If we can develop room-temperature superconductors,
that problem is totally eliminated, and you
can also start moving power over any distance
with little to no loss, allowing the sunny
side of the planet to power the dark side
for instance, or your deserts to power your
cold and cloudy areas, or your big wind or
hydro or geothermal plants to pick up the
slack far away from where they are.
Assuming we remain resistant to nuclear fission
and don’t get Fusion or Power Satellites,
and I’m hoping the wall will break on at
least one of those in the next couple of years
or decades because abundant safe power is
something that we need badly and that would
benefit us in a thousand economic sectors.
Room-temperature superconductors may elude
us forever, but if they can be made they likely
will be found within this generation, and
we’ve been having a lot of luck with very
recent work in 2-Dimensional materials like
Graphene and Molybdenum Diselenide, and research
on what’s called “Magic Angle” orientation
of these nanoparticles.
Superconductivity, however is a topic that
requires a bit too much discussion to go into
in any detail today, and we’re definitely
overdue to give it its own episode.
Of course advanced geothermal energy production
might get easier soon too.
Normally geothermal power relies on heating
water to turn turbines, and that might benefit
a lot from improvements in boring technology
allowing us to drill those holes and lay those
pipes deep underground for much cheaper.
However, we also have a device called a thermocouple
that is basically a metal rod that produces
electricity if one end is hotter than the
other.
These things aren’t terribly efficient,
but they are ridiculously cheap and sturdy,
so one that was basically a long rod hammered
into the ground would be nice for power if
it was simply more efficient.
And certain materials called Skutterudites
are showing promise in allowing thermocouples
that might be efficient enough to make them
a realistic option for commercial power generation.
I suspect most of us would rather like the
idea of our power and heating or cooling supply
being a big rod in our basement rather than
something that has to be brought in by wire,
pipe, or transmission from afar, so if that
did become economical it might become preferred
or at least take on the role of a backup power
generator or supplement.
Residential power production is having a major
impact on infrastructure already, along with
other technologies like water collection or
waste recycling or the like, which makes going
off-grid more tempting for many rural folks.
Of course you’d still need roads to those
places.
Or maybe not.
It’s an old complaint that people often
wonder where the jetpacks and flying cars
are that science fiction promised them way
back, and same as we might see drones doing
a lot of deliveries in the future, that is
actually technology that can be scaled up
for people too.
I should also note that one of the reasons
we don’t use a lot of blimps and dirigibles
is because it’s so hard to keep lifting
gases like hydrogen and helium from leaking
out, as they are atoms smaller than the material
containing them usually.
However, pristine graphene is impermeable
to these gases, so we may see some big improvements
in quadcopters and gas containment that might
allow some safe and affordable flying vehicles
to finally hit the commercial marketplace,
and maybe sooner than later.
We’ve talked a lot about automated supply
and manufacturing, and while the self-replicating
robot is often seen as very scifi, this is
one I’d expect we’ll have in the next
10 to 20 years too.
Probably not as the tiny nanobot, though maybe,
but more likely as what we call a clanking
self-replicator, which is more of a large
scale, automated factory.
If you’ve got enough automation in your
supply and manufacturing you arguably already
have a self-replicating machine, even if bits
and pieces of it occupy ten thousand factories
and mines and freight vehicles.
There’s also nothing special about one that
requires no human involvement.
We want such devices because of the vast amount
of production they represent and their ability
to exponentially grow that production as they
make more of themselves.
That’s not really hindered – except for
deep space or interstellar purposes – by
having humans as a small but necessary component
of that self-replication, indeed it’s arguably
a nice safeguard against various machine Rebellion
or Paperclip Maximizer scenarios.
Machines make things cheaper than people do
but are often themselves expensive to make
too.
When they are self-replicating in whole or
part, and building their own power sources
too, most of your cost is now simply design,
and so many things would become dirt cheap
at that point, much as how the cost of steel
or aluminum in the past made things like railroads
or skyscrapers impractical not because they
were great engineering hurdles, but were simply
too expensive to produce, and then suddenly
were not.
With sufficient manpower, or sufficient production,
virtually any task can be accomplished through
raw effort, even the building of vast megastructures.
If the machines do most or all of that effort,
including mostly making themselves, the game
changes on everything, and that game may change
in a mere generation, giving us unbelievably
immense production and work capacity.
As we say here on SFIA, if Brute Force isn’t
working, you’re not using enough of it,
and soon, we may have more than enough of
it.
It’s always hard to predict when new technologies
will roll out and how quickly they’d catch
on.
For instance, as usual I wrote and recorded
this script some months before it aired and
predicted how we’d see a lot more deliveries
of groceries and remote work and learning,
I was thinking the boom in that would be in
a decade or so and with the current health
crisis I’m inclined to revise that as happening
a bit faster now, every storm has its silver
lining and we might see a lot of preventative
health monitoring we mentioned today developed
sooner along with being able to use people’s
phone positioning data to help rapidly track
and contain outbreaks as we could simply compare
their time’s and positions to other folks
to see who might have been exposed, and alert
them.
Things like that raise privacy concerns that
could be addressed in many ways, both by policy
and technology, but one way to do that effectively,
rapidly, and privately might be employing
artificial intelligence using neural networks,
a rapidly growing area as neural networks
are far better at prediction and decision
making than classic computers.
If you’re interested in learning more about
Neural Networks, there’s a great course
on it from Brilliant, which offers extensive
but plain-English and interactive learning
methods for that topic and many more.
If you’d like to enhance your own understanding
of science, and do it from the comfort of
your own home and at your own pace, or have
family members who need to do the same, then
Brilliant is a great match.
Brilliant is an online learning community
with over 60 interactive courses and many
quizzes and puzzles, plus fun Daily Challenges
that help get the brain warmed up for the
day.
Those Challenges provide a context and framework
that you need to tackle, so that you learn
the concepts by applying them, which is the
best way to learn new concepts.
Brilliant makes learning fun and easier, and
their online community gives you places to
discuss the material or ask questions, and
their mobile apps offline feature lets you
take courses even when you’re not getting
a good signal.
If you’d like to learn more science, math,
and computer science, go to brilliant.org/IsaacArthur
and sign up for free.
And also, the first 200 people that go to
that link will get 20% off the annual Premium
subscription, so you can solve all the daily
challenges in the archives and access dozens
of problem solving courses.
Today we were looking at technologies coming
up in the near future and how hard it is to
predict when breakthroughs will be made, so
next week we’ll look at what might happen
if no more breakthroughs are made, in Technological
Stagnation.
The week after that we’ll be exploring the
idea of life not based on normal organic chemistry,
or even carbon at all, as we look at the idea
of non-Carbon Based life and the stranger
life that it might be and the stranger locations
we might find it.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel,
and if you’d like to help support future
episodes, you can visit our website, IsaacArthur.net,
to donate to the channel, check out our catalog
of episodes or book recommendations, or buy
some awesome SFIA merchandise.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
