This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. Get 
access to my streaming video service, Nebula,  
when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
Establishing an outpost on another world is no  
easy task, but growing it into a thriving 
new colony may turn out to be even harder.
 
We have often looked at space colonization but 
usually from the standpoint of getting our ships  
and colonists there, the raw nuts and bolts of 
setting up a colony, or the life of the crew in  
getting there, but rarely the time after landing 
or the lives of those colonists once there.  
A couple weeks back we started correcting that 
by taking a look at life as a space colonist  
and I thought we would continue that today 
by asking what happens as a newly founded  
outpost or colony grows to be a real city.
That’s a fairly critical notion too, “grows  
to be a city”, because whether we’re talking about 
a small outpost on a small asteroid growing into  
a large O’Neill Cylinder or one small domed base 
on a vast new planet, a critical part of becoming  
a true civilization is going to be the rise of 
that first true city. Whether that remains a small  
provincial town of a few thousand or grows to be 
a megalopolises, mega-cities sprawling over huge  
areas housing billions, it seems almost inevitable 
that a growing colony will have some first city,  
even if that city is some sort of virtual 
world designated for remote gatherings.
 
How it would arise depends a lot on the nature 
and purpose of the colony, and I thought we  
would walk through a trio of examples today. 
So we’re going to be following the growth of  
a base on Mars, an asteroid mining outpost, and an 
interstellar colony, through several generations.
 
One of the first things to keep in mind in any 
colony or outpost is asking why the place exists  
and the second is to ask why people are coming 
there. It’s a very different scenario for each of  
our three examples. Early Mars colonists are going 
to be going there because it’s a chance to be  
the first folks on another world, and the colony 
probably doesn’t have to be very independent and  
self-sufficient in those early days. Alternatively 
your typical asteroid mine, other than the first  
trial cases as prototypes, is likely to be all 
about raw economic motivations initially. 
 
Something similar applies to interstellar 
colonies. The first handful might be prestige  
projects by nations or groups proving it can 
be done, but that only holds interest for  
maybe a dozen interstellar colonies, and there’s 
hundreds of billions of stars in this galaxy.  
They’re not getting settled as prototypes, tests, 
or the honor of being able to say it was the first  
interstellar colony or a runner-up by some 
nation that wants to prove it can do it too.  
It also is not likely to be for economic 
gain, that might be a factor in things  
but interstellar trade, while possible as we 
looked at in our recent episode on the topic,  
is the sort of investment that takes a very long 
time to pay off. This means that your typical  
interstellar colony is motivated by something 
other than commercial gains back at home. 
 
However, that doesn’t mean they’re not interested 
in commerce. There’s obviously vast wealth in a  
new solar system and being the one to set up 
a major commodity trade or trade lane or stock  
market is obviously a big deal. I don’t think most 
folks know who Edward Jones or Charles Dow are,  
but everyone knows the Dow Jones Industrial 
Average and given light lag issues,  
every new star system is going to need their own 
local markets. This is a fairly critical concept  
to establishing distant new colonies, often 
there is likely to be a group, ideological,  
political, or religious pushing the founding of 
a new colony in terms of gathering the people,  
funds, and supplies, but there will be people 
motivated to be the first person to setup that  
new solar market, or grow the first orchard 
on a new world or climb its tallest mountain.  
They probably will be a member of 
the group pushing that colony effort,  
or comfortably aligned to it, and it may simply be 
a secondary goal, but that goal will still exist.
 
Whatever group is pushing the interstellar colony 
is likely to have an idea of what they consider  
the perfect new world, in terms of setup and 
lifestyle, but ultimately they are cloning Earth,  
just with some mutations specific either to their 
beliefs or the system or planet’s specific nature.  
If the planet is so eroded and tectonically 
dead that it has no mountains, it obviously  
isn’t going to attract people seeking to climb 
them or breed up folks dreaming of doing so.
 
We could argue something much the same 
will ultimately apply down the road to  
purely commercial ventures like an 
asteroid mine. A critical aspect of  
asteroid mining is that it's not a short process. 
Hypothetically we might take smaller asteroids,  
those the size of trucks or ships, and 
drag them back to some place for refining,  
indeed hypothetically we might tear apart even 
the largest with an array of automated miners  
ranging from ship-size down to microscopic, but 
in general an asteroid mining base on something  
the size of a mountain represents a generational 
supply. You want to sell its stock as fast as  
you can while getting a good price of course, but 
there’s a bit of a problem. You need a customer. 
 
A given cubic kilometer of an asteroid contains 
anywhere between maybe a hundred million tons of  
metal to low billions, depending on its makeup. 
There're over a million asteroids that are big  
or bigger in the solar system, and each one 
represents something akin to our entire planetary  
production of metal in a given year. So there’s 
a glut of metals once asteroid mining takes off.
 
One can imagine various trade treaties 
limiting production from any specific place  
off some interplanetary annual quota of demand, 
to encourage the settlement and acquisition  
of these objects. Keying that to worries about 
over-automation and folks having little to do,  
I could see a scenario where regulations or tax 
incentives were setup to encourage more folks  
to be at a colony. If for instance there was such 
a production quota and the allotment to a mining  
colony was tied to their total population. 
Or alternatively if they received tax incentive  
for how many colonists they had, rather than 
employees specifically. Either of those represent  
a scenario where the company owning or leasing 
the asteroid has reason to encourage migration.  
Even ignoring that though, once you have a colony 
setup focused on mining or some other business,  
the folks living there will want a better 
standard of living, which will mean other jobs for  
unrelated businesses like recreation, agriculture, 
and so on. Plus there will be a desire to expand  
to value-added products, meaning you don’t just 
ship out big ingots of iron, but instead send out  
prefabricated steel sheets to be used in orbital 
habitat construction. This growth is the kind we  
see in many commercial colony efforts in our 
own past that focused on a specific commodity,  
such as tobacco, sugar, cotton, and so on. 
We arguably see it less with commodities that  
amount more to fuel, like coal mining towns or 
oil rigs, as there’s no value added product,  
and so we might see a parallel with an 
outpost or colony dedicated to tending  
huge solar panel arrays to transmit power via 
microwave transmission to other settlements.  
Their crew size would obviously depend on their 
degree of automation, and that crew will still  
want various luxuries that need to be locally 
supplied, though that might be very limited. 
 
A solar farm handling a million square kilometers 
of panel might only need a crew of a dozen  
and they might have mostly digital luxuries, like 
virtual reality, while getting luxury items when  
a tender vessel came by to drop off replacement 
equipment for the solar farm and rotate crew.  
But even then I suspect not. If you’re stuck 
for year long contracts on a solar farm,  
you might decide your hobby is to use bits of the 
damaged solar gear to assemble a little hydroponic  
farm and grow a garden. Some of the other crew 
might decide they prefer that fresh produce,  
or maybe some fresh flowers, and trade you the 
occasional work shift for some of the supply.  
Someone else might make a still to turn some of 
your extra produce into alcohol and set up a bar  
that’s open for an hour or two each evening. 
Now it’s entirely possible the tender ship has  
its own automated hydroponics lab or carries 
plenty of coffee or alcohol for the crew,  
but the critical notion is that once people are 
there, an ecosystem, in both the ecological and  
economic senses, has been established and will 
begin producing niches. Some of those niches are  
likely to be strictly local, or easier or better 
supplied locally. Growth in both raw numbers and  
in diversification and specialization will vary 
a bit but should generally be on the rise over  
long enough times, unless someplace nearby 
is simply far more attractive for growth.  
What began as a mining colony for gold on 
some small metallic asteroid slowly shifts  
to other metals as those get exhausted and 
slowly grows in numbers as the wealth of the  
place provides attractions for immigration and 
for raising a family there if you work there.
 
A few centuries later it might still be mining 
as much or more than it was at the beginning,  
but it's no longer the main form 
of employment on that asteroid.  
So too, a solar panel farm putting out a terawatt 
of power to energy-hungry distant settlements  
or running a giant laser array for pushing 
spaceships has the energy, or money, to support  
a very comfortable existence for thousands, and 
it probably doesn’t matter much if it only needs  
a fraction of that number to run the place. Even 
if we assume there’s not much economy or money  
in the future, there still would be a tendency 
to shift to local production where you could be  
more efficient and require fewer steps that might 
waste some material, like fuel or even just time.
 
Interstellar colonies are a bit backwards, the 
only attraction to it is the opportunity for  
growth, and that is what it is selling to 
prospective colonists, either those on the  
first colonial ship or fleet or its follow ups. 
That colony can offer huge long-term prospects.  
If it is a solar system like our own, it can offer 
the first million settlers massive land deals like  
their own medium-sized asteroid or a parcel of 
land on one of its planets the size of a small  
state. But the payoff is a long way off, 
even ignoring travel time to get there,  
because it is all worthless until the overall 
colony has grown to the point it actually has  
some use for those materials or that land. 
Even if you could get a parcel of land a thousand  
square kilometers in size you could grow grain 
on, even if you got a metallic asteroid with a  
million tons of gold in it, without some market 
for that, it doesn’t really have a value, you  
can’t eat gold or really build anything out of it. 
You can eat a thousand square kilometers of grain,  
but so can a few million other people, and if you 
haven’t got that many people, it's fairly useless.  
So is ten billion tons of steel, however that you 
might be able to get rid of because it's about  
the amount needed to build an O’Neill Cylinder or 
the kind of generational ark ship that a million  
folks might reside in. What you’re essentially 
manufacturing at these places then is people,  
their environments, and new communities with 
their own internal governance and commerce,  
it's just that the supply chain 
is rather long and complex.
 
I suspect that’s part of why the feudal 
model is so popular in science fiction,  
the big attraction to someone with the funds to be 
founding or assisting in the founding of a colony  
is that they or a distant descendant will be 
getting a huge opportunity to be a major player in  
a future realm. And as we mentioned a couple weeks 
back, that even applies to someone who basically  
could only pay for their own passage there, 
because everyone is in a position to benefit from  
long-term, slow, but exponential growth, if that 
is something which appeals to them, and for that  
reason we would expect a mindset that favors that 
to be disproportionately common in colonists.
 
Taking that into account, how does 
this work at the more local level,  
in an outpost turning into a city?
Well cities tend to arise for a variety  
of reasons but a common one is sitting on a 
major commercial route, whether in terms of  
overt trade or being just down the mountain from 
the big mine. Outposts arise for similar reasons,  
and even military frontier outposts that usually 
were situated with strategic reasons in mind  
include that commerce aspect as 
one of the strategic reasons.  
Your outpost is guarding the river everyone 
tends to go up and down on for instance.  
Now barring aliens, we really shouldn’t need 
many frontier military outposts because there  
wouldn’t be any frontier to guard, as such places 
were usually only guarding a frontier for their  
civilization, and specifically from people who 
did not regard it as their frontier but their  
tribe or clan’s backyard for many generations. 
So what is the natural trade hub of a new planet?  
Well by default we tend to assume it is where the 
shuttles all came down from the big colony ship,  
and the Landing Pad, but shuttles can 
land wherever and it's not very likely  
you will feel like dumping all your cargo 
on the ground in one spot then paying the  
fuel bill to run it around that planet. 
You’re also not going in blind or quick,  
even if there weren’t already detailed studies of 
the planet or flybys before you ever left Earth,  
and there probably would be, you’d have months 
of advanced probes launched from your own ship.
 
Indeed, as we’ve discussed before, 
planetary colonization is likely to  
be the reverse process of our expansion into 
space from our own planet. You probably spat  
out dozens of smaller ships to establish outposts 
on various promising moons and asteroids as you  
headed into the system to your goldilocks zone 
planet, if it has one, and after making orbit,  
you probably deployed a satellite grid before 
any shuttle headed down to the surface. I would  
say it's entirely possible you spent months 
in orbit before doing that, but I suspect it  
would be considered a big deal to get that first 
shuttle with the colonial governor, notables,  
and flag down to plant in the dirt of that 
virgin world, and, of course, a camera crew. 
 
There’s a decent possibility that your colonists 
came in some form of stasis, in which case you  
don’t wake most of them up until you’ve some place 
to put them, and while everyone might have massive  
land stakes already proportioned or allotted and 
awaiting selection or lottery, those are those  
long-term investments. Right now, you’ve got your 
initial setup and that isn’t likely to call for  
spreading people evenly all over the world, but 
probably several key outposts and one central  
site. It also is not necessarily likely that the 
central hub is actually planetside. You are going  
to want an orbital space station and quite a 
big one, and the ship you came on might simply  
be altered to that form or jettison one of its 
rotating habitat modules to serve in that role. 
 
So the Planetary capital, which we’d expect by 
default to be that largest settlement or outpost,  
might actually be up in space. For that matter, 
on those worlds where there is a focus on mining,  
it might be at the top of the tallest mountain. 
Olympus Mons on Mars, twice as tall as anything  
we’ve got on Earth, is a very gently sloping 
mountain and ideal for something like a mass  
driver system. Your initial main settlement then 
might sprawl over a thin stretch of a thousand  
kilometers, from that mountain top launch 
point down the length of the mass driver  
which might also serve as a runway for inbound 
ships, not the driver itself but the probably  
most flattened ground around where you built it. 
That might resemble our earliest civilizations,  
built along major rivers, such as Egypt, 
which we nowadays picture as a big blocky  
nation in northeast Africa but for most of 
its history was a civilization a thousand  
kilometers long but only ten kilometers wide.
Alternatively for those worlds where gravity,  
rotational rate, and technology permit use of 
space elevators, then you probably do have that  
big central landing site and on some piece of the 
equator, and your first main outpost growing to  
being a city is effectively one tens of thousands 
of kilometers long with stations at the top and  
bottom and possibly midways points. Of course that 
might not be a top in space either. Our own Moon  
is tidally locked to Earth, as are most moons 
to their parent planet, but Pluto and its Moon  
Charon are both locked to each other, effectively 
double dwarf planets, and that might be decently  
common in the Universe, indeed dwarf planets 
doubtless vastly outnumber Earth-sized ones.  
You can run a space elevator right between a spot 
on each of them, as we looked at with the Acheron  
River in our episode Colonizing Pluto.
Critical notion there, too, you aren’t  
likely to ever colonize just one spot 
on one planet or even just one planet.  
A plan for a solar economy, modeled after 
whatever develops in our own solar system,  
is likely to have been on the drawing board 
before your ship ever gets to that new system.
 
Now we’ve been talking about interstellar 
colonies and asteroid mines, but let’s shift  
a bit to Mars to note both how it's unique and why 
it’s not likely to be the model we use elsewhere.  
First off, Mars has vast resources and possibly 
high enough gravity to live comfortably in,  
we don’t know yet, but the problem with 
those resources is that they are vast,  
and thus generate a big gravity well. Let’s 
be clear on this, the only valuable asset Mars  
has for any application off Mars is water 
ice and maybe some nitrogen, and even then  
only for its possible use as fuel to get to orbit 
or air and water for Martian orbital outposts.  
Mars has tons of minerals, far more 
than the entire asteroid belt combined,  
far more than the Jovian Moons and 
its trojan asteroids combined. 
 
But until those are all used up, they represent 
cheaper sources of raw materials for the solar  
system. What’s more, Mars has a pair of tiny 
moons that aren’t that tiny. Deimos masses 2  
Trillion Tons and Phobos 10 Trillion, they may 
well have water ice in them but they are going  
to have carbon and metals and while we don’t 
know the actual ratios and types at this time,  
either one is very likely to be able to provide 
enough building material for hundreds of massive  
orbital settlements. So early on you are 
probably building much of your Martian Orbital  
Infrastructure right into those two moons and 
using them to supply the rest, not grabbing it  
from Mars. Though, you might do that too. Mars has 
weaker gravity than Earth and no real atmosphere,  
so if you’ve got good power generation 
you could run a dedicated mass driver,  
and while the energy needs would be higher 
than getting them from the Martian Moons,  
we never want to assume watts or joules 
directly correlate to nickels and dimes. 
 
In any event, Mars offers little to the 
solar economy except as an unexceptional and  
inconvenient source of raw materials, and possibly 
as a major importer, assuming it has money to do  
so. This might not matter much though because it 
has got two things going for it, we really want  
to settle it and it's probably relatively easy to 
settle and make self-sustaining. Getting people  
to Mars is far cheaper and faster than anything 
interstellar and most other places of note in the  
solar system too. Spending months on a spaceship 
to get there on the cheap is not very attractive,  
even compared to old transatlantic colonial ships, 
but we do have the advantage that it need not be  
too cramped. Space is cheap in space, as there is 
so much of it, and the Aldrin Cycler Castle design  
we discussed in our Mars Base Episode is ideal as 
a long, slow, but cheap transportation method. 
 
You cram folks into the shuttle entering or 
leaving the Cycler from Earth and Mars Orbits,  
but you only ever pay the fuel bill 
to put a Cycler in play one time,  
so you can make them pretty hefty and lavish if 
you like, unlike most modern or historic forms of  
long distance transport. Think of a Cycler Castle 
as more of a place where you rent an apartment  
for a year than cram into a cramped passenger 
cabin or sleeper car. There’s actually a fuel  
saving per person to building big that way 
too, since the main requirement is shielding  
mass and the square-cube law helps us out. A 
cycler castle twice as big in all dimensions  
needs two-square or four times the shielding 
but has two-cubed or eight times the volume,  
and one ten times bigger had a thousand times the 
space for a hundred times the shielding mass. More  
space still costs more, but it’s not linear, so 
you can offer people fairly comfortable travel  
accommodations for the trip, except maybe a day or 
two of cramped shuttles on each end of the trip.  
Those Cycler Castles could easily be cities 
unto themselves with their own economies,  
and people move there, and possibly migrate 
off to Earth or Mars when passing them.
 
That makes migration a good deal more attractive, 
and Mars is a place where you really can walk  
around in the open air. You need a suit but hardly 
a super-thick one and rapid in-situ manufacture of  
pressurized domes to add living space shouldn’t 
be hard for the early base to accomplish. So  
Mars has the ability to grow by the millions via 
migration in a relatively short time interval,  
so long as you have the funds and means for 
transporting people and a volunteer pool,  
which is one reason why nicely-appointed and 
spacious cycler castles is a decent likelihood  
even if it costs more, because it makes folks 
a little more okay with making the trip.  
Space will not be at a premium on Mars, that will 
be a big selling point to future colonists when  
we start running low on folks willing to go 
there just because of the desire to try out a  
new planet for novelty value, or prestige, and 
I’d tend to assume the folks who are attracted  
to that notion would be even less likely 
than most people to enjoy being crammed in.
 
Such being the case though, it does make you 
wonder if you would get very many cities.  
Probably not early on, after the 
initial base and outpost stage,  
as frontier-oriented pioneers 
probably want to live on the frontier,  
not the big base-city starport, but within 
a generation or two you would expect folks  
who prefer that to start being born too and 
then your usual city dynamic of allowing vast  
diversification of specialist jobs and lifestyles 
to kick in and cause some urbanization. 
 
That is likely to also apply to interstellar 
colonies, where they land somewhere,  
in one or a handful of outposts, then ooze out 
to the frontier, then creep back in to cities,  
though might be faster there since if the 
passengers of the interstellar colony ship  
are not staying in stasis, what you instead 
have is a generation ship and the folks who  
arrive at the new world will have been born 
inside a world that’s relatively tight,  
the habitation drum of their spaceship, and might 
strongly prefer cities or even space stations.  
I mentioned earlier that the big central planetary 
capital of new colonies might tend to be in orbit,  
not groundside, and that might be doubly true 
if a lot of the colonists born on the trip  
already have a natural preference 
for living in a rotating habitat.
 
That’s a funny thing about colonizing the 
galaxy, and heading out to new worlds,  
many of those who arrive might prefer 
living in orbit of them, not on them.  
We always say our future is in space, for most 
folks, that might turn out to be rather literal.
 
Winter is coming, and if you’re looking for some 
good entertaining and educating videos to watch  
during the cold, for yourself or your friends or 
family, you can find SFIA and many other great  
shows over on Nebula, our streaming service, which 
was recently nominated for the Streamy Award.  
We show all our new episodes there a couple 
days early and without ads. If you’d like to  
catch SFIA episodes early and without ads, and 
help support the show while you’re doing it,  
you can sign up for Nebula today, and also see our 
Exclusive Coexistence with Alien Series along with  
other great content from our sibling shows.
However, we also have a deal running with  
Curiositystream, where if you sign up for them at 
the link in the episode description, you not only  
get a 26% discount, but free access to Nebula 
while you’re a Curiositystream subscriber. 
 
Curiosity Stream has excellent educational 
content of their own, like their First to the  
Moon series chronicling the race to space to the 
Moon Landing, the place that will likely be the  
site of our first space outpost and maybe our 
first off-earth city. That’s just one of many  
fun and educational videos Curiosity Stream 
offers and they are running a 26% discount if  
you use the link in the episode description. 
That’s a great deal since it means you get a  
year of both Curiositystream and Nebula for less 
than $15, and it helps support this show and a  
lot of other educational content which is what 
Curiositystream and Nebula are all about, and  
again you can get a year of both for less than $15 
by using the link in the episode’s description.
 
So today we were looking at space colonies 
growing on new worlds and this weekend we’ll  
look at how we’ll terraform those new worlds. 
Then we’ll ask how we go out about getting to  
them in Interstellar Navigation, how we 
go about building our own solar system up  
into a Kardashev-2 Civilization, and 
finally we wrap the year up on December  
31st with Becoming an Interstellar Species.
If you want alerts when those and other episodes  
come out, make sure to subscribe to the channel, 
and if you’d like to help support future episodes,  
you can donate to us on Patreon, or our website, 
IsaacArthur.net, which are linked in the episode  
description below, along with all of our various 
social media forums where you can get updates and  
chat with others about the concepts in the 
episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
