This episode is sponsored by Raycon.
The galaxy is a big place, a billion-billion
kilometers across,
so if anyone is out there trying to talk to
us, a signal would be very faint.
So how would they go about boosting the transmission?
So today we return to the Alien Civilization
series to look at the notion of talkative
aliens, aliens who actually wish to speak
with us, as well as the general notion of
interstellar communication.
We’ll be considering the available options
under known physics but also discussing some
of the more theoretical scenarios like faster
than light communication.
We’re also teaming up today with Alberto
Caballero, host of the Exoplanets Channel
and Parallax Nick, who will be looking at
Optical and Laser SETI in parts 2 and 3.
They'll explore how we might use lasers to
talk to aliens and how we might detect them
if they were trying to chat with us, as well
as why this is probably the most promising
way to search for aliens.
If you’re not already subscribed to their
shows, make sure to give them a like and a
subscribe when you head over for parts 2 and
3.
Also since this is 3-parter we’ll be here
for a bit so now is a great time for a drink
and a snack.
SETI is the acronym for the Search for ExtraTerrestrial
Intelligence, a collective term for several
loosely affiliated scientific efforts.
There is a prominent group called the SETI
Institute that is very well known for their
SETI work, but there are also several other
groups involved in the search under their
own auspices.
And strictly speaking, though the name implies
SETI only includes searches for intelligent
life, we do often use it to refer to hunting
astronomically for any signs of any alien
life, including for atmospheric traces of
oxygen-breathing microbes on exoplanets.
SETI would also include looking for both intentional
signals sent to us and general background
signals of them talking to each other, as
well as other telltales like the infrared
waste heat of Dyson swarms.
It can also include Active SETI, or METI,
Messaging Extraterrestrial Intelligences,
which is where we send messages out hoping
for a reply and that is our main focus for
part 1.
This could be by current technologies like
radio waves or lasers, or with more futuristic
options like flashing a star to emit a signal
or using some unknown method of faster than
light communication.
It is important to think outside the box when
searching for extraterrestrial intelligence
because thus far after decades of searching
the most obvious method of radio transmission
we have still come up with nothing.
At least that’s the method most obvious
to us, but that raises a key question of how
they would communicate.
Now we tend to assume it would be by their
own preferred mode of communication, and of
course if we’re discussing talkative aliens
in the sense of them just talking a lot, then
that makes sense and we have to consider alternatives
to classic omnidirectional signaling including
those outside known physics, like FTL communication.
However, if we’re saying ‘talkative’
in the context of wanting to talk to us specifically
or more broadly some relatively young species
lacking an interstellar presence, then we
probably shouldn’t assume they are employing
their standard method of communication in
favor of what they think we would receive.
If you want to talk to an uncontacted tribe
in the Amazon, you don’t use radios, let
alone try messaging them on facebook or hunting
for their phone number or email address.
If we were to assume they were trying to reach
us by radio, it implies one of three things.
First, that might just be how they communicate
still too, that it is the best method available
to them.
Electromagnetic waves are the fastest thing
we have and science fiction aside there really
is no reason to think anyone could ever do
better, quite to the contrary, I personally
don’t expect anyone will ever figure out
a way to send messages or traffic inside our
Universe faster than light and so light based
transmission, be it radio or laser or some
other type of beacon, might be the best they’ve
got.
The second option is that it is the best they
have for talking to us.
They might have some better methods for communicating
among themselves that they doubt we could
hear, like FTL messages in tachyons, but perhaps
they don’t have FTL travel or the desire
or capacity to send ships or probes.
The third is that it is the best method they
are willing to try or can be bothered to try,
which is to say they could land here or throw
a radio link through a wormhole into Earth
orbit, but they don’t want to talk to people
beneath a certain technological capacity,
either feeling it unethical in some equivalent
to the Star Trek Prime Directive or simply
not valuing that contact.
From one perspective an advanced civilization
isn’t going to learn much by chatting with
us and might not value our art or culture
beyond a minor academic interest and is just
content to get the details of our more primitive
periods from our own historical records down
the road.
They only want to talk to us once we reach
a certain point and there’s a communication
method we don’t know yet which folks generally
discover when they get to about that point.
In Star Trek for instance they don’t talk
to pre-warp civilizations, and it’s implied
not really because they think discovering
warp somehow makes folks magically ready for
chat so much as it is unavoidable they’ll
discover other civilizations at that point
anyway and are as ready as they’re gonna
get at that point.
There might be some equivalent to a galactic
internet running on FTL-ions and as soon as
you discover those you discover Galacternet
and they just wait till then.
So it might be one of those three or some
combination of the three, like it’s hard
and expensive to talk to us by one method
and they figure an extra century of waiting
to talk set against all the signal lag time
and endless millennia of evolution isn’t
worth the cost and effort.
They also might not exist or be trying to
hide or just wait for signals then send in
warships not the diplomats.
We’ve examined those options before in this
series though and for today we’re focused
on folks who want to talk to us.
Using those assumptions and three scenarios,
we should ask why it is not radio, since clearly
no one is pumping out very loud radio messages.
This of course depends a lot on their technology
and resources.
I generally tend to assume no-FTL or Laws
of thermodynamics and energy conservation
violating technologies on this channel when
discussing our potential future as an interplanetary
or interstellar species and if you’ve got
those it only makes things easier, and if
you’re a show regular you know the sorts
of titanic resources available to even a K2
civilization – one with access to most or
all of its Sun’s energy output, usually
via a Dyson Swarm, let alone the capabilities
of those who have gone interstellar.
Science fiction tends to discuss K2 civilizations
as vastly far ahead in time but realistically
you probably hit K2 status before your interstellar
colonies represent even a percent of your
population.
That’s because K2 is not a population size
or technology level, it’s just access to
most of your Sun’s power, and you can achieve
that by basically wrapping it in thin sheets
of reflective aluminum foil and that’s exactly
the sort of repetitive simple grunt work even
the simplest of clanking replicators can do.
This is basically a robot, or short chain
of robots, that can make copies of themselves
and mine aluminum and smelt it into mirrors,
and I’d be surprised if we didn’t have
that capacity in this century, at which point
you just designate it a handful of asteroids
or drop it on Mercury and tell it to get busy
making copies of itself and stacks of aluminum
foil.
Ignoring that you could put pretty minimal
guidance on those mirrors to let them all
rotate and flicker in a coordinated pattern,
turning your entire star into a big flickering
lighthouse any primitive species with eyeballs
would notice, you could take a miniscule fraction
of that power, dump it into big radio transmitters,
and still emit some hundred trillion megawatt
slow-pulse radio signal anyone in the galaxy
could pick up and recognize as artificial
even on very simple radios and through pretty
much any sort of noise and distortion you’d
generally expect even over that much space.
No one appears to be doing that though, from
which we can conclude one of few various things.
The first of course is that they might not
exist, either never existed or they died off
before they can do this for some reason, like
being eaten by their self-replicating machines
and turned into solar mirrors or paperclips.
Second they don’t want to do that big transmitter
even though they could, third they could but
they have a better option, or fourth that
they are just really frugal with their energy
and value it more than early contact.
They figure they can just wait an extra century
till our telescopes can easily pick up weaker
signals, or spot laser transmissions to us
at low total energy per broadcast.
Now the first impulse is to say if they are
chatty, especially given signal lag times,
that they want to chat as soon as possible,
but that doesn’t mean they’d opt to do
mega-loud radio over lasers, after all if
time is everything they can flicker that star
visually or just send a probe and be heard
by primitives.
That kind of energy expenditure, hundreds
of trillions of megawatts for presumably thousands
of years, is way more energy than you need
to send out whole armadas of relativistic
spaceships via light or laser propulsion.
Alternatively, if they’re frugal, well that’s
when we get into the notion laser communications
or Laser SETI, the notion that they just send
a relatively tight beam – be it in the microwave
radio band or the optical – instead of something
omnidirectional and way weaker at the receiving
end than the tight beam would be.
Frugality might matter too, because everyone
has a budget and while it’s likely a decent
chunk of their population would be in favor
of reaching out, odds are good most wouldn’t
particularly care especially in the context
of potentially transmitting indefinitely.
For context, back when SETI was getting government
funding it was to the tune of several million
dollars a year, not chump change but that
was around a ten-millionth of the global GDP
and that got pruned for budgetary reasons
fairly quickly.
If a K2 civilization was doing something parallel
in terms of its total energy budget, then
we’d be talking about transmission power
probably around 10^19 watts or 10 trillion
megawatts.
That’s still a signal you can pickup galaxy-wide
as an omnidirectional broadcast without needing
super-sensitive giant dishes but someone is
going to look at that budgetary item, nearly
a million times the power our whole civilization
uses right now, and pointedly ask if they’d
be better off just using a lot of telescopes
and computers to determine where all the plausibly
habitable planets are and where they would
be when a signal might reach them and tell
the folks doing SETI to just use a bunch of
lower power directed signals at all those
places.
This to me is the nail in the coffin of the
omnidirectional approach.
It doesn’t matter that they have the power
for massive omnidirectional perpetual signaling,
they won’t bother doing it.
Not to us and not to themselves either.
It wastes power and generates noise.
This of course raises the notion of using
lasers instead of omnidirectional signalling,
right Nick?
Absolutely right, Isaac, and on our channels,
Alberto and I will be discussing the rise
of Laser SETI, both the search for laser signals
from beyond, and employing them ourselves
to broadcast to the universe.
After decades of radio, we’ve at last come
around to the idea of optical lasers as an
effective mode of ET communication, because
they are so economical; they provide the most
bright for your buck, so to speak.
A single nanosecond pulse can outshine a star
by a thousand times, and require just 20 kW
of power.
Obviously we would be assuming that these
entities would possess such technology, but,
given that the margins of error involved in
the ages of extraterrestrial civilizations
can run to millions of years, it doesn’t
seem much of a stretch to assume they have
made the leap from radio to optical.
And given that any transmission would take
hundreds or thousands of years just to be
heard, it’s fair to assume they’ve either
crossed that particular civilizational line,
or they’re dead.
Indeed, thanks Nick.
The thing is you probably only bother transmitting
like this if intelligent life is pretty rare
and you want to talk to it, if high-tech civilizations
are a dime a dozen and millions develop independently
in any given galaxy you are going to know
about that long before you’re contemplating
giant trillion megawatt radio transmitters
because it’s equally easy to build giant
radio receivers and pick up on all that chatter.
If that’s the case you would have a focus
on talking to those friendly and more advanced,
or at least talkative and more advanced civilizations
first and would tend to expect them to be
investigating worlds nearer to them than to
you and can just ask for updates.
Alternatively if intelligent life is so rare
in frequency or duration that you need to
shout across half the galaxy to be heard by
one, then you might determine this is because
they don’t last long in many cases because
they discover some very dangerous technology
that’s very attractive and not obviously
dangerous, what we call a Suicide-Pact Technology.
They might feel some haste was justified in
contacting us, to for instance send out a
message that said “Whatever you do, do not
experiment or use Technology X, it will get
you killed.”
And obviously it helps to send that out as
soon as they can hear it, before they play
with technology X and blow their planet up
or get turned into paperclips.
Of course talkative doesn’t necessarily
mean friendly, they might just really want
to sell you a subscription to Galactanet,
or they might be very hostile, and the message
says “Hey guys, here’s the blueprints
for a lot of cool technologies, we especially
recommend technology X”.
Now what would such a signal actually look
like, in terms of content?
Math is assumed to be more or less universal
so that’s your first step for gaining notice,
you repeat some series of numbers that is
recognizably a pattern and so improbable to
occur naturally that the odds of it ever doing
so even once in the entire duration of the
Universe is unlikely.
That’s not really tricky, you pulse out
the first thousand primes numbers in binary,
then the first thousand digits of pi in binary,
then the first thousand perfect squares in
binary and even the most extreme skeptic is
going to say “Yeah, that is artificial”.
That is likely to be a universally recognized
message too, and it tells you four things
for sure.
First, someone is transmitting, second that
they are trying to get your attention, third,
roughly where you should be looking, and fourth
that binary and math is going to be the basic
language.
Essentially it is a big “Look at me, look
at me, I’m trying to say something”
But it also tells you a fifth thing, that
this signal is not the actual message, it's
just telling you to look that way for it,
because it contains nothing and very clearly
so.
You are obviously not trying to inform folks
who invented radio or telescopes what basic
math is, so either the message is contained
in that transmission to be decoded or is just
“Stare here, there is more info” and they
can hunt for a second transmission containing
less easily recognizable but more informative
information, the equivalent of a Rosetta Stone
or explanation for building a Galactanet receiver
or so on.
We discussed this in more detail in our episode
Cryptic Aliens, but even with little to go
on an intelligent and curious mind – prerequisites
for technology – is going to be able to
make educated guesses even with no shared
culture or biology about fairly abstract concepts.
As an example, if you emit a specific pulse
or pattern once an Earth Day it’s not hard
for an alien to guess that is our day length,
and if you are doing precision beaming to
planets you probably have the telescopes to
see their planet and know their day length
and include a similar pulse at their day length.
You could then do a pulse that had the same
number of peaks as your year in days and vice
versa, theirs.
That tells them your day and year length and
it also tells them you’re trying to talk
about time and it also tells them “We can
see you, specifically you” which is a pretty
good way to nudge them into replying if they’re
on the fence about the dangers of doing so
since you’re pointing a finger at their
face.
This yet another reason why Laser SETI is
probably a better approach, and to explain
why, here’s Alberto from the Exoplanets
Channel:
Thank you very much Isaac for having me on
your episode.
Indeed, Laser SETI lets you target your message.
It’s also, as Isaac discussed in Cryptic
Aliens, way easier to crack a language when
you have the equivalent of an entire library
of data and massive computers to sort through
for patterns.
One of our examples there was that if someone
is looking through a decade of our early radio
transmission they are going to notice that
words, or signal waveforms anyway, of certain
types tended to be of very high density at
certain times.
Like the words morning and evening, Tuesday
and Thursday, January and August, etc. [edit
this as needed]
Thanks Alberto!
We’ll see you over in Part 2, on the Exoplanets
Channel.
Now a computer can help you pick that sort
of thing out and is another reason you might
decide to use communication techniques that
were a bit more advanced to detect than massively
loud omnidirectional radio chatter, because
you know they’ll have pretty decent computers
to help with this style of decoding and translation
by that point.
Folks talk about not being able to decode
even human languages but context matters,
those ancient mysterious tongues suffer from
us only having a handful of examples written
over large chunks of space and time.
Languages mutate a lot, especially without
dictionaries, so some loosely knit kingdom
that existed for a few centuries and for which
you only have maybe a dozen examples of writing
that they left behind and maybe a paragraph
in length from a dozen different authors all
from different towns and different generations
does not lend itself to this sort of brute
force cracking ability.
Alternatively if you’ve got the big “Look
at me” transmission and a second that is
just a repeating sequence of core concepts
like time or physical constants or chemical
formulas for simple and common stuff and then
a third with several terrabytes of information
repeating less frequently, you’ve got a
good chance that if they’ve got the ability
to receive that and the computational capacity
to hack the data that they will figure out
your language.
And this is a great task for using lasers.
And now you can talk.
As to what you say, well hopefully it is “Hello,
we look forwarding to a friendly and mutually
beneficial relationship, here’s some handy
diagrams for useful technologies as a show
of friendship and good faith”… and hopefully
it doesn’t include a diagram for one of
those suicide-pact technologies we mentioned.
A laser signal is probably a lot cheaper than
sending an armada, plus, all your neighbors
know what you’re saying if you’re sending
a big omnidirectional signal.
If it’s a tight comm beam, they don’t
know what you sent and would have to be watching
carefully to see any scatter indicating you
sent anything, so you can’t be accused in
front of the galactic tribunal of wiping out
new civilizations.
Again, Talkative doesn’t necessarily mean
friendly.
So we were talking about listening for signals
today and the difficulty of picking out signals
from the noise, and if you’ve used many
bluetooth headsets or earbuds, you know how
often it can be hard to hear them in a crowd.
If you’re looking for a good pair of earbuds
with noise isolating features, I’d recommend
trying out Raycon’s Everyday E25 Earbuds.
They fit in snugly and discreetly for a noise-isolating
fit so you can hear them even in a crowd.
Plus they’ve got a good battery life and
a very compact charging case with its own
battery that can recharge them four times
while you’re on the go.
So if you’re looking for a good pair of
premium earbuds, and at about half the price
of other premium earbuds, try out Raycon.
Raycon was found by Ray J. and is a favorite
of folks like Snoop Dogg and Melissa Etherridge
for their wide range of stylish and fun colors
and super-comfortable fits, and if you’d
like to give them a try, you can get 15% off
today, just use the link in the episode’s
description, buyraycon.com/isaacarthur
So we were looking at aliens trying to talk
to us today and we’ll be exploring that
more in parts 2 and 3 with Alberto and Nick,
linked in the episode description and the
in-video cards.
And we saw today that advanced civilizations
have means of transmitting galaxy-wide if
they want to, but so far we’re not seeing
them.
In parts 2 and 3 will examine Laser SETI and
ask if maybe we’re just not looking harder
enough in the right place, but one alternative
is that no one is transmitting inside the
galaxy and one possible reason for that is
that maybe there was some massive galactic
disaster that either wiped out civilizations
or prevented anyone arising before us.
And we’ll be exploring that notion more
this Thursday in “The Fermi Paradox: Galactic
Disasters”
Of course another option is that their civilization
got to our point and just collapsed, and a
lot of reasons get suggested for that but
one is that their governments just are not
able to handle expansion into space and the
wider galaxy, and we’ll explore some future
types of government on Thursday, August 27.
Then two weeks from now we’ll close out
August with our monthly livestream Q&A, on
Sunday August 30th, 4pm Eastern US Time.
I hope to see you there and don’t forget
to bring your questions.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel,
and don’t forget to hop over to Alberto
and Nick’s Channels for Parts 2 and 3 and
hit the like and subscribe buttons there while
you’re at it.
Until next time, thanks for watching,
and have a great week!
