So today we finish up what I have nicknamed
the Dark Trilogy with our look at Dark Flow
& the Great Attractor.
We previously looked at Dark Matter in the
first episode and then Dark Energy, and as
I said back when we began these three phenomena
do not have too much in common besides 
the word Dark.
Also this week we are doing a collaboration
episode with fellow Youtuber Joe Scott, who
will be looking at the Great Attractor and
you can click over to that video now, this
video will just pause and open his in a new
window, or at the end of the episode when
I’ll bring the link up again.
It will also be linked down in the video description
for those of you watching from platforms that
don’t allow in-video links.
If you are visiting from Joe’s channel and
are new here, you’re encouraged to turn
on the closed captions for this episode as
my speech impediment can take a little getting
used to.
Okay, so what is Dark Flow?
As you know just about everything outside
of our galaxy and its nearest neighbors is
moving away from us, and the further away
they are the faster they are moving away.
Indeed, as we discussed in the Dark Energy
video that expansion seems to be accelerating
too, so that it looks like a trillion years
down the road almost all the Universe we can
reach will be within a million or so light
years of use even though the Observable Universe
will be trillions of light years wide and
most of what is in the currently Observable
Universe will have sailed over the horizon
leaving us alone.
The speed things move away from us from the
Hubble Expansion is proportional to their
distance from us.
Get twice as far away and the velocity is
twice as high, so anything already at galactic
distance moving away from us will just keep
moving away faster and faster.
But things do not have an exact velocity based
solely on their distance from us, much like
everything else they move relative to each
other so two galaxies nearby each other might
be moving away from us at a rate of 1000 kilometers
a second but one is only moving away at say,
990 km/s and the other at 1010 km/s.
We would expect that.
Same the moons around Mars or Jupiter keep
pace with their planets but might be moving
toward us a bit or away from us a bit while
performing their own orbits.
Galaxies tend to exist in clumps too, so it
is no surprise some might be moving toward
us or away from us, relative to their cluster
even if that cluster is receding away from
us.
Local motions, we would expect them all to
average out.
Indeed we almost have to since our main way
to determine the distance of very distant
objects is to look at how fast they are moving
away from us by their redshift.
If we saw those two galaxies form a moment
ago, we might not even realize at first they
were near each other, just in the same direction,
because we are guessing their distance from
their velocities and they’re not the same.
It can be quite difficult to look at groups
of galaxies and figure out what each one’s
velocity relative to that area is, what is
called their peculiar velocity.
In this sense we use the word peculiar not
to mean strange or odd, we’ll get to the
strange and odd motion in a moment, but in
its other meaning, of something belonging
exclusively to.
In fact that is the original meaning, and
it meaning strange or odd came later.
Much as I might say that cliff diving is a
hobby I consider peculiar to those sorts of
people who like their hobbies suicidally reckless,
and how we might say those people are a bit
strange, and so peculiar in that way too.
But I digress, we use the term peculiar velocity
to refer to a things velocities when we cut
away the component from Hubble Expansion so
we can talk about how group of galaxies move
relative to each other.
Now we would expect that to average out to
zero.
So it came as a bit of a surprise in 2008
when we noticed a lot of galaxies seemed to
be moving, in terms of peculiar velocity,
in a specific direction.
They were flowing that way for no apparent
reason, presumably form a source of gravity
we could not see.
This gave us the term Dark Flow.
Now two things came up right away.
First the motion is headed toward a place
we called the Great Attractor, having already
noticed all the way back in the 1970s that
galaxies in our supercluster were drifting
that way.
Irritatingly the Great Attractor happens to
be in the Zone of Avoidance, whose somewhat
dramatic sounding name probably helped add
the mystery value with the public.
It’s a huge chunk of the night sky taking
up fully 20% of it.
The Zone of Avoidance sounds like a place
you would expect to be where space pirates
hung out or maybe some evil galactic empire.
It used to be called the Zone of Few Nebulae
which isn’t much better because now it sounds
like some empty place Cthulu would go for
naps.
However Nebulae is what we used to call other
galaxies, as I mentioned back in the Dark
Matter episode, we confused them with Nebula
in our own galaxy and didn’t realize how
far away and huge they were.
This was a zone of the sky in which few were
found.
You could also consider the Zone of Avoidance
the second zone of avoidance, since telescopes
can rotate in which way but you usually want
to avoid pointing them down at ground.
If you don’t avoid pointing your telescope
at ground you won’t see many stars.
The Zone of Audience is just a term that refers
to the chunk of the sky our galaxy occupies
and all the stars and dust make it quite difficult
to see distant galaxies on the other side
of it.
Hence you avoid looking at that zone if you
want to study distant galaxies.
In that respect it isn’t too surprising
that the Great Attractor lies in that direction,
20% of the Universe lies in that direction
after all.
Now when this first got noticed back in the
70’s the assumption was that there was probably
a lot matter we couldn’t see over there.
Some folks took ‘We can’t see it’ to
imply it must be some giant super-colossal
black hole, but again the lack of visibility
is because our galaxy is in the way.
The main assumption was there was just a ton
of galaxies in that direction.
That was still interesting at the time because
we had still been assuming the universe was
pretty evenly spread, not all clumped together
into lines and walls and huge voids.
Whichever the case, as the years rolled by
there were arguments about the method and
how much mass was actually there, which was
kind of difficult to rigorously measure with
us not being able to see the stuff closest
to it to take measurements either.
It’s estimated to be around 200 million
light years away, which is very far away though
also quite close on the scale of the Observable
Universe.
The observable Universe is a couple hundred
times wider than the volume encompassing our
galaxy and the Great Attractor and several
million times bigger in terms of mass and
volume.
In 2008 though we got new data and we saw
that there seemed to be a much larger volume
of space moving towards this spot.
For a while some were even thinking the whole
Universe might be headed in that direction
and that the Great attractor might not be
some spot a couple hundred million light years
away but actually billions of light years
away, possibly outside the Observable Universe.
And that’s allowable too.
The Observable Universe is not the whole Universe,
just those parts we can see, and we have no
idea how big the whole Universe is, it may
indeed be infinite, it may just be a little
bigger than the Observable part, but the main
assumption is that it is at least much, much
larger than what we can see.
If the Universe didn’t start off very evenly
spread there could have been a super huge
chunk of mass just over the Cosmological horizon
in some direction causing a drift.
Now gravity does move at the speed of light,
for some reason I still hear folks so it is
instantaneous and I have no idea where that
comes from.
Though amusingly if you think of gravity as
being made of gravitons, in the same light
is made of photons, that does raise some eyebrows
about how gravity itself escapes from black
holes.
So no mass that’s already fled over the
cosmological horizon is exerting force on
us anymore.
The Cosmological Horizon is the imaginary
line where space is expanding faster than
the speed of light so no light from galaxies
beyond that every reaches us again, and also
no gravity.
That doesn’t mean it wasn’t pulling on
us in the past or isn’t pulling still on
things nearer to it, causing a net drift,
or flow.
Now this stirred a lot of speculation and
ideas but before you go off contemplating
those, not only was Dark Flow at the Universal
scale never particularly accepted, it more
or less got skewered in 2013 when we got the
data from the ESA’s Planck Space Telescope.
It should no evidence of dark flow on the
Universal scale.
This does not mean Dark Flow was debunked,
because it is just a term for large scale
flow of galaxies in some direction where that
direction can’t be seen well enough to get
too specific about the cause.
And by cause I mean the source of the gravity,
I’m not implying some weird new force or
phenomena.
It would not be limited to just our area of
the Universe and the Great Attractor but by
and large those flows at very distant location
won’t be dark to us since we won’t be
sitting in the middle of the flow with its
center obscured by our galaxy being in the
way.
At the same time I do not want to imply this
is not a mystery.
Or that it is not important.
It is both.
In fact in recent years you may have heard
the emergence of the term the Laniakea Supercluster.
This is our Supercluster of galaxies that
we live in.
You might not be familiar with it because
we used to call our Supercluster the Virgo
Supercluster, but the emerging evidence would
seem to point to it just being a decent sized
chunk of a larger construct including a few
more super cluster all center around the Great
Attractor.
The Laniakea Supercluster, our new supercluster,
centered on the Great Attractor, is half a
billion light years across and contains a
total mass of around 10,000 Trillion times
our own sun’s mass.
That’s many thousands of galaxies and many
hundreds of galaxy clusters.
The name derives from Hawaiian and means Immense
Heaven, presumably because it is impolite
to name everything in Greek, although more
likely because we are running out of Greek
words we haven’t already used for something
else.
Now when we say things are moving toward it,
they actually are not.
They are mostly moving away from it but not
as fast as they should be.
As a rule Galactic Supercluster are too far
spread out not to be ripped apart by the expansion
of the Universe, regular galactic clusters
are not, so our neighboring galaxies ought
to stay with us till the end of time and eventually
merge with us.
Which they do all the time anyway, this week’s
big science news was astronomers discovering
there were ten times as many galaxies as previously
thought and I got messaged dozens of times
about it by folks wondering if it through
dark matter and dark energy into the trash
can.
It did not, this is an example of way too
much hype in science journalism.
We already knew our galaxy like many of the
bigger modern galaxies gobbled up tons of
smaller neighbors.
Our galaxy is a big cannibal gobbling up its
neighbors, in fact it’s probably not our
galaxy as it looks like we originated with
the late Sagittarius Dwarf Galaxy.
Everybody knows about the Large and Small
Magellanic clouds, our two dwarf satellite
galaxies, but as we learn more we can see
the gutted carcasses of an awful lot of them
floating around in us or near us, over 50
that have been identified though some are
disputed and there could be more we ate so
long ago we can’t see the traces.
The big new discovery as a big discovery,
but it was of the ‘finally some proof’
variety, not ‘Oh My God our theories are
in ruins’ variety.
They found a lot of dwarf galaxies when they
looked far away in space and thus also far
back in time.
It was confirmation of what was expected,
that there were a lot of smaller dimmer galaxies
in the ancient universe most of which have
merged together in modern times.
They are going to keep merging too as the
eons meander along, till you don’t have
galactic cluster anymore, just single big
galaxies, bigger than now, floating alone
in the void with huge and ever-increasing
distances to their neighboring galaxies.
This is the confusion we see with the Great
Attractor, again it isn’t that all these
galaxies are moving toward it, as I said,
they are not.
It is probably not moving toward itself either
since it is probably just a bunch of galaxies
maybe slightly more densely packed than normal,
or maybe just in the rough center of a fairly
large supercluster.
Things are moving away from it, but slower
than they should be because there is a lot
of gravity working against the Hubble Expansion
presumably caused by Dark Energy.
It does not necessarily mean this will all
be torn apart though, just that if left to
itself it will be.
The Great Attractor has become a popular place
in science fiction to have some mega-civilization
that dwarfs even the galaxy-spanning Kardashev
3 civilizations we discussed in the recent
episode on the Kardashev scale.
As I mentioned way back in the Black Hole
Farming episode, Civilizations at the End
of Time, the way we predict the Universe to
look in a few trillion years will almost certainly
not be what it looks like if we ever get out
and start colonizing other solar systems or
anyone else has.
And as I mentioned in the Kardashev Scale
episode, you can move galaxies, same as you
can move stars, something we showed in the
Shkadov Thrusters episode was very effort
intensive but not actually very high tech
at all.
If it turns out we have not only this whole
galaxy to ourselves but the whole supercluster,
it might make sense for us to race out ahead
of the expansion and start shoving galaxies
back toward us.
We are not at the center of either our traditional
Virgo Supercluster or the larger Laniakea
Supercluster we think is centered around the
Great Attractor, but with Dark Flow helping
bind these things together it makes it a lot
easier to push them to keep them together.
So rather than a sphere of galaxies around
our own being rescued from Hubble Expansion
you might see such a sphere centered more
around the Great Attractor, especially if
there’s a handful of other civilizations
living in the area who might want to team
up and would probably be pretty evenly distributed
throughout it.
That is a case where teaming up is good since
you’d end up with a larger overall number
of galaxies than the combined number each
would get working on its own.
But if we have the place all to ourselves
we might as well grab as much as we can, and
in the same way we might expect a galactic
empire to re-center itself from Earth to some
place a bit more central to use as a capitol
you might see the same thing happen for the
supercluster and get some multi-galactic empire’s
capitol located in the Great Attractor controlling
tens of thousands of galaxies.
I don’t think that is terribly likely, especially
without at least some form of faster than
light communication if not travel, but I always
seem to be in a minority in thinking FTL is
not in the cards.
So good fuel for science fiction authors perhaps,
beyond the Zone of Avoidance, deep inside
the Great Attractor, lies the seat of an ancient
empire ruling over 10,000 galaxies.
So that’s Dark Flow, the mysterious motion
of galaxies toward the Great Attractor, and
it is still a mystery but hopefully less of
one right now.
That will also close out our look at Dark
Matter, Dark Energy, and Dark Flow.
Next week we will be coming back much closer
to home for a look at colonizing the outer
solar system and the week after that we will
be taking a look at some more astronomy to
demystify a lot of the terms and concepts
like we did today, and look at some of the
more bizarre stars, in the Stellar Compendium.
I’d like to thank Joe Scott from Answers
with Joe for teaming up with me on this topic
and if you’d like to hear some more fun
stuff about the Great Attractor you can head
on over to his channel to see that now, using
the in-video link or the one in the episode
description.
And you can also come by the Facebook Group
or sub-reddit, both titles Science and Futurism
with Isaac Arthur, to talk with others but
some of these concepts.
You can also try out any of the episodes and
playlists on this channel or over at the website,
IsaacArthur.net.
Again, next week is Colonizing the Outer Solar
System, and until then, thanks for watching,
and have a great day!
