This episode is brought to you by Brilliant
Probably two of the most common and important  
questions in astronomy are what black 
holes are and what dark matter is,  
but many wonder if dark matter and black holes 
are the same thing. Others suggest black holes  
might be the key to finally shedding 
some light on dark matter.
        
 
What are black holes? What is dark matter? And 
do they have anything to do with each other? The  
simple answer is yes, they are very related, we’re 
just not sure how much, and today we’re going  
to talk about both the notion that mysterious 
dark matter might be composed of black holes,  
and the newer idea that we might be able to use 
black holes to learn more about dark matter.
 
One thing both have in common is that they are 
seemingly invisible except by their gravitational  
effect on the outside universe and that’s probably 
a good place to begin for the entire subject  
because until the last couple decades, there was 
real doubt about if black holes actually existed,  
and many folks still wonder if dark matter 
itself is just some measuring error. 
 
Both concepts are similar in age to the term 
galaxy coming to mean one of many giant clusters  
of stars, dating to the early 20th century, 
and are very much intrinsically connected to  
that early understanding of our Universe being 
vastly bigger and distinct from our galaxy.
 
We had some suspicions about black holes 
as a possibility even before Einstein  
predicted them as a consequence of general 
relativity, and at the time, the theory of  
choice was still a Steady State Universe that 
was assumed to be infinite in size and age,  
and the notion that stars ran on fusion, 
rather than just being hot from gravitational  
contraction, was just popping up too. At the time 
we thought stars started hot and cooled with time,  
and it turned out to be the other way around. 
Either way, it was assumed that stars cooled down,  
died and went dark and that the Universe 
might be littered with all those remnants.  
We were starting to be able to calculate the mass 
of our galaxy once we understood the concept of  
galaxies, and we were guessing at the number of 
stars and seeing that, based on their mass, there  
just weren’t enough of them to cause the orbital 
rates of stars around the galactic central bulge.  
More mass means faster orbits.
There was a lot of missing mass,  
but it was generally assumed that this was dimmer 
stars, gas giants, nebulae, interstellar gas,  
dead stars and so on. And a lot of it was, but 
the problem was, as we got better and better at  
astronomy, we were able to survey many of these 
types of objects and we just kept coming up way,  
way short. For decades we could kind of handwave 
that because there were so many question marks  
and huge margins of error on those estimates 
too. Estimating the density of interstellar  
dust for instance requires knowing the distance 
to some stars so you can see how much light  
is being absorbed by gas and dust for every 
light year of distance between you and them.  
But, not only does that amount change 
significantly between various regions  
of the galaxy but we often had star distances 
that, as best guesses, were off by 50% or more. 
 
It’s also very hard to count dim objects, and 
virtually all dead stars qualify as dim compared  
to main sequence ones let alone red giants or 
hypergiants, which are not that common but seemed  
a lot more common in earlier days of astronomy 
since we could see them much easier than regular  
stars let alone stellar remnants. Indeed, we 
had problems seeing even stars like our own sun  
beyond a few thousand light years even with big 
early telescopes. So a lot of the stars we saw  
early on were giant stars, hundreds or thousands 
of times brighter than our own, resulting in us  
mislabeling our sun as a yellow dwarf, even though 
19 out of every 20 stars is smaller than our Sun,  
and that’s not even including Brown Dwarfs. 
Most stars turned out to be red dwarf stars,  
and one just a tenth our sun’s mass 
might only be a thousandth as bright. 
 
So, essentially, we knew about the weird 
paradox in galactic mass for a long time  
but since we had so many uncertainties in this 
mundane matter, looking for an entirely new type  
of matter that was also basically invisible wasn’t 
easy and we weren’t sure it was necessary yet.  
Also a lot of folks figured all this missing 
mass would just turn out to be black holes,  
old and cold white dwarfs and neutron stars, and 
a lot of Jupiter-like and Brown Dwarf objects.  
We had assumed there was really only two events 
that could form black holes at this point,  
a supernova and the immediate moments after the 
Big Bang, what we call Primordial Black Holes. 
 
Supernovae are so bright, they briefly outshine a 
galaxy and come from stars that are thousands of  
times brighter than our own, so we had a fairly 
decent guess at how often such black holes were  
formed, fairly early into our observations. It 
might have been a few times larger or smaller than  
some estimates but it just wasn’t making a dent in 
that missing mass. Even that monster black hole in  
our galactic core, possibly massing 4 million 
solar masses, is peanuts compared to galaxies  
massing in several hundred thousand times as much. 
For post-supernovae black holes, even permitting  
many to gobble other stars, which would be a very 
bright event, we couldn’t plausibly give them even  
1% of that missing mass without them gorging on 
other matter so fast we would easily notice.
 
However, we had no idea how many primordial 
black holes there might be, and given the  
insane conditions in the moments right after the 
big bang, where, even the interior of a giant  
star would seem cold and mild in comparison, 
it wasn’t too crazy to think maybe most of the  
mass of the Universe got itself squeezed into 
a lot of smaller, primordial black holes.  
Indeed, one the mass of a freight truck, say 
10,000 kilograms, would be millions of times  
smaller than an atomic nucleus and if you got hit 
by one, rather than plowing you down like being  
hit by a freight truck or sucking you into itself 
like the typical black hole in scifi, you’d never  
know it even happened. It’s statistically unlikely 
it would hit even a single atom in your body,  
any more than a baseball sized rock is likely 
to hit the Sun if it were randomly tossed into  
our solar system, and even if it did, it would 
just suck in that one atom and keep on moving.  
You wouldn’t be sucked into it anymore than you’d 
get sucked into a freight truck by its mass.
 
By the 1980s though, we had a lot more data and 
also one critical new theory about black holes,  
is one that propelled a young physicist 
by the name of Stephen Hawking into fame  
among physicists. He took quite an interest 
in primordial black holes as an option and  
studied the concept. He’d proposed that, if black 
holes exist, which was still debated at the time,  
then we should see the occasional dribble of 
thermal radiation off one, what we now call  
Hawking Radiation and which we’ve discussed 
in more detail in our black holes series.  
The amount was pitifully tiny in 
the case of supernovae remnants,  
but as they slowly radiated energy and lost mass, 
the rate of energy loss would increase. Indeed,  
it meant that that freight-truck-mass black hole 
I mentioned earlier would be radiating fully 1% as  
bright as our entire Sun, though, thankfully, it 
would be radiating so much mass energy to do that,  
it would only last a few millionths of a second. 
This of course has interesting possibilities for  
starship drives and weapons, see our black 
hole series for more discussion of those.
 
But, what this meant was that, you could predict 
the lifetime of a black hole from its mass, and  
one that was formed massing 210 billion kilograms, 
or 210 megatons, would have been getting brighter  
and brighter until expiring today, 13.8 billion 
years after it formed, assuming it hadn’t snacked  
on anything in the meantime. Any primordial 
black holes more massive than 210 megatons  
should still be around and nearly invisible.. 
That sounds great as a dark matter candidate, but  
we don’t have anything telling us that only black 
holes more massive than that could have formed. 
 
Practically speaking, any primordial black hole 
massing less than 6 megatons would have expired  
before the Surface of Last Scattering, the 
point 380,000 years after the Big Bang where  
the Universe had cooled and thinned enough to let 
neutral hydrogen form and that allowed photons to  
travel without almost instantly running into 
something else, and this is when the Cosmic  
Microwave Background radiation is from. We 
would see no evidence of black holes formed  
during the Big Bang that died before this event. 
So, the search for primordial black holes between  
6 and 210 megatons, allows us to hunt for black 
holes that may have died since the Surface of Last  
Scattering, until modern times, and there’s no 
background glow of radiation in the right ranges  
with no other known source to account for this.
This dealt a bit of blow to the idea of Primordial  
Black Holes being dark matter. However, primordial 
black holes have so much going for them as  
candidates, that there was – and indeed still 
is – a great reluctance to knock them off the  
candidates list, they’re definitely still in the 
top 10 and probably in the upper half of that.  
There are good reasons not to kick them off that 
list yet, even if the Weakly Interacting Massive  
Particle or WIMP does seem a better option for 
dark matter than the MACHO, Massive Compact Halo  
Object. Now MACHOs are not limited to black 
holes, but massive and compact could include  
a dim brown dwarf or black dwarf, or even some 
exotic options like cosmic strings I suppose. 
 
The Halo part of MACHOs comes from 
us getting better at calculating  
mass locations from orbits of stars around 
the galaxy and notice that the missing mass  
was spread out in a roughly spherical glob for 
our galaxy – which is more disc-shaped with its  
stars – and with other spiral galaxies 
too, as well as spherical galaxies. 
 
Most of that matter is dark, not giving 
off light, visible or other frequencies,  
and is in a spherical blob. Matter in our galaxy 
is mostly in a disc form for the same reason solar  
systems tend to have their planets fall into a 
roughly disc layout. Stuff tends to whack into  
each other until you get an averaging effect 
of momentum and inertia into a loose disc,  
which slowly congeals into planets and such, or 
at the galactic scale, nebulae and stars. Massive  
but compact objects though can potentially 
avoid this simply by having so much inertia  
compared to their collisions that they are still 
very close to their original orbital paths,  
which by default would have been more random 
and thus spherical in layout as a whole. 
 
Also, we know the effective temperature – which is 
essentially speed – of these Halo Objects, big or  
small, because we know what the escape velocity 
of the galaxy is. There is gas and dust still in  
a spherical blob around the galaxy too, even if 
it is mostly in the disc, and we call this the  
Galactic Corona. It is moving very fast but not 
quite fast enough to escape our galaxy’s gravity,  
this gas and dust has an effective 
temperature around a million Kelvin.  
It wouldn’t burn you because it’s so diffuse, 
but it's still hot, or rather, cold.
 
This is where we get the notion 
of “Cold Dark Matter” from,  
because Dark Matter does appear to clump up around 
galaxies, as their velocities, or temperatures,  
are not big enough to be permitting them to 
be evenly distributed around the Universe  
rather than clustering around galaxies, 
that have sucked them into orbit.  
Now, a million degrees might seem absurd 
to refer to as cold but everything is  
relative and the Big Bang was incredibly hot. 
We know dark matter is old, as we can see it as  
far back as we can see anything, to that Surface 
of Last Scattering as before that all light got  
reabsorbed by matter. We assume it was formed 
during or shortly after the Big Bang, primordial,  
the only way for primordial dark matter to have 
lost any ‘temperature’ or velocity is to hit other  
things, which would result in the more disc-like 
distribution we see of mundane matter in galaxies.  
That means it does not interact 
much and when it does hit something,  
very little of its inertia is lost, which fits 
either an object that is exceedingly weak in its  
interactions or which is just insanely compact 
and massive – like a black hole, which is not  
much slowed by running into the occasional atom.
But, this also means that dark matter isn’t ‘hot’,  
or isn’t moving at ultra-relativistic speeds like 
neutrinos do, so close to light speed as to make  
no difference. Neutrinos are common and have a 
little mass and interact with virtually nothing,  
passing through our planet as though it wasn’t 
there, but they can’t clump around a galaxy and  
orbit it because they move hundreds of times 
faster than the escape velocity of galaxies.  
They’d be an example of ‘hot dark matter’ and 
indeed, it isn’t that they aren’t dark matter  
themselves, it’s that, once we detected them and 
were able to get a mass range for them – less than  
1% of the missing mass – we excluded them from 
dark matter, same as we have with galactic dust,  
gas, brown dwarfs and so on, because dark also 
means ‘unknown’. Which is a good reminder that  
we don’t know that the remaining dark matter 
is one single thing, it could still be a range  
of options dividing up to form that mass, 
related or totally unrelated to each other.
 
Anyway, there’s reluctance to let black 
holes go as dark matter and for good cause.  
Here are some of the reasons given. First, we 
have no experimental proof that black holes give  
off Hawking Radiation, that’s why Hawking could be 
the most famous and respected physicist alive in  
decades that still hasn’t had a Nobel Prize. Those 
tend to go to experimentalists over theorists,  
because it has to be proven and the only way to 
prove Hawking Radiation would be with primordial  
black holes expiring. Post Stellar Black holes 
are so massive that their Hawking Radiation  
in its entirety is dimmer than any human eye 
could detect, even if you were close enough to be  
ripped apart by one, and the nearest known black 
hole is many hundreds of light years from us,  
and its Hawking Radiation wouldn’t 
power even the dimmest light bulb.
 
Second, we don’t know that it would 
function exactly as theorized.  
This is more important because to most of us 
in physics, the basic reasoning for Hawking  
Radiation is so sound that we can’t really see 
how it could be wrong, but, so often, some tiny  
little unexpected interaction or aspect, utterly 
alters how something functions in practice.  
Third, we know nothing about quantum gravity 
yet, that strange realm of physics of how  
gravity operates down at the atomic scale, 
and every primordial black hole we might  
hope to detect Hawking Radiation from 
is far tinier than any known particle.
 
As an example, right now, no black hole that used 
to be the interior of a star is losing any mass,  
because while they trickle out a tiny amount 
of Hawking Radiation, in theory at least,  
they also absorb bit of gas and dust in excess of 
that anywhere they would be, even in intergalactic  
space. What’s more, they would be absorbing 
that Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation,  
which would all by itself exceed what they lose to 
Hawking Radiation, and which was also far denser  
and stronger in early periods of the Universe, 
feeding them even more than now. Stellar mass  
black holes will only begin to evaporate away 
when the Universe is so old and thinned-out,  
that the Universe isn’t adding mass or 
energy faster than the black holes will  
evaporate it, trillions of years from now, when 
the Universe is colder than their Event Horizon. 
 
Primordial black holes should be an exception to 
this, being so small that they cannot even absorb  
an atom if they hit it, like a human mouth 
trying to take a bite out of a steel sphere  
the size of Earth, and which has to swallow the 
whole thing. But, again, we don’t really know how  
black holes that tiny interact with things, or if 
they can even be made to exist. Cosmic Microwave  
Background radiation has a wavelength of about 
a millimeter, a trillion times wider than your  
typical atomic nucleus, and thus, it doesn’t get 
absorbed by them nor do atomic events emit them.  
They emit gamma radiation, much more 
energetic and shorter wavelength photons.  
Very dense packets of energy. The assumption is 
that a black hole even smaller than that can’t  
absorb one either but there’s a lot of ‘ifs’ on 
that. If a subatomic-sized black hole can actually  
grab matter or energy better than we expect, then 
those 6-210 megaton primordial black holes might  
still be around. Even smaller ones might still 
be around too since they could have been fed.
 
Indeed, given that, during the period prior to 
the Surface of Last Scattering, the Universe was a  
much denser place, full of much shorter-wavelength 
photons, each baring far more energy,  
it is plausible that primordial black holes might 
have fed themselves up above a certain size and  
thus all those too tiny to eat, died before that 
period ended, leaving no footprints, and all the  
others got themselves up to some mass above 210 
Megatons, and thus are still around. Better Big  
Bang Epoch modeling might let us accurately define 
that mass range for primordial black holes, right  
now there’s a lot of question marks. Amusingly 
Dark Matter’s nature being determined, be it black  
holes or not, might help us figure that out.
We also don’t know that the forces which could  
have formed micro-black-holes in that primordial 
epoch didn’t favor discrete distributions. As  
best as we can tell, most subatomic and 
quantum things come in very specific  
masses. You don’t get a proton that’s twice as 
massive as the normal proton mass, or as best as  
we can tell, even 1% more massive. They seem to be 
all the same mass as each other, for some reason.  
Same for electrons, muons, and so forth. 
They all have a distinct or discrete mass,  
unlike photon energy packets which can range from 
the two or three electron volts you and I can see,  
to billions of times more – like gamma rays 
- or less – like ELF radio waves , and with  
no apparent cap on either side. Primordial 
black holes might come in some discrete sizes,  
one or many sweet spots of formation, and 
none in that Hawking Evaporation range.  
Or they could come in bands, we see distributions 
that are thick separated bands in nature fairly  
often too, like our asteroid belt, which is 
really multiple belts, thick bands and gaps.
 
Now, how did those primordial black holes 
potentially form? Well, we generally accept  
that the early moments after the big bang didn’t 
have nice flat or gently curved spacetime. Think  
of a sheet of aluminum foil you crunched up into 
a wad then tried to spread out, lots of crinkles  
and even some tears, then imagine you used 
it as a Jello mold for a thin layer of Jello.  
The resulting thin Jello Sheet is going to have 
thicker and thinner spots and even total gaps,  
and that’s essentially what we think 
that early Universe looked like that  
caused normal and dark matter distribution and 
possibly even primordial black hole formation.  
Over the eons this uneven distribution, plus 
dark energy, caused the clumping we see with  
galaxies and galaxy clusters and cosmic voids.
There are a number of pros and cons to primordial  
black holes as a dark matter candidate and I’m 
going to rattle through those fairly quickly,  
I just want to emphasize that, while they are 
not considered the leading candidate right now,  
they are still considered a strong contender. 
Here are some of the reasons why that’s the case.
 
Tiny black holes might not interact much with 
interstellar dust, but one passing through an  
incredibly dense object, like a white dwarf, 
could potentially reignite one and cause a runaway  
explosion or supernovae at rates which do not seem 
to occur in the Universe. Supernovae aren’t common  
enough. Based on how often we see white dwarfs 
and the necessary amount of primordial black holes  
to be dark matter, black holes between 10,000,000 
and 100,000,000 megatons can not be a significant  
portion of dark matter. Stars between 100,000,000 
and 10 billion megatons also are doubted to fit.
 
So too, the capture of black holes between 
one million and one quadrillion megatons  
by neutron stars, leading to detonation, would 
also be expected to happen often enough in dense  
old globular clusters, that we would have expected 
to have detected it. Micro-lensing of stars  
as these primordial masses pass between us 
and other stars doesn’t appear to happen as  
we would expect if they were in the mass range 
of 10 billion megatons up to low stellar mass.  
There is a lot of other good data in the last 
decade or so, pushing against the idea that  
primordial black holes of stellar mass ranges 
are around too, and we just don’t seem to be  
detecting many intermediate black holes, those 
of hundreds or thousand of solar masses that  
represent the range between normal post-supernova 
black holes and big galactic core black holes.
 
All of those leave plenty of room for debate – 
there’s more too, but they get more technical in  
their reasoning – and we also have some ranges 
of mass that aren’t accounted for as well.  
We think the primordial black holes, Planck 
Relics, could have been as small as a single  
Planck Mass, about 10 micrograms, and again we 
would expect them and anything less than 200  
or 300 megatons to have expired by now or 
be glowing hot with Hawking Radiation. 
 
Does this mean that black holes are dark 
matter? Well, possibly. For my part,  
I favor WIMPs and it doesn’t bother me that this 
requires a particle more massive than a proton or  
neutron with very little interaction. Neutrinos 
barely interact, and of the 17 known elementary  
particles in the current Standard Model, of 
which neutrinos are three, virtually every  
bit of mundane matter is made of three others, 
the up quark, the down quark, and the electron.  
Two others, the photon and gluon, have varying 
mass or energy, rather than specific discrete  
amounts. That’s 8 particles, and of the remaining 
9, only the strange quark and muon mass less than  
a whole proton, half the remaining elementary 
particles mass thousands of times as much as  
the up and down quark and hundreds of thousands of 
times as much what the electron masses. So another  
massive particle would not surprise me.
And their mass has nothing to do with  
how they interact with things except by 
gravity, which dark matter also exerts.  
So, a massive particle that just happened to be 
no more interactive than a neutrino is no weirder  
to me than a primordial black hole with some 
unexpected properties and discrete mass ranges.  
There’s too many unknown unknowns in particle 
physics to even rule out something utterly  
mundane of source, like Tau particles and top 
& bottom quarks having some non-interacting  
particles they form, or even them and antimatter 
having, for unknown reasons, been common right  
after the big bang but biased toward falling into 
each other to make primordial black holes, which  
do not have to be made of Baryonic Matter either, 
like you and I and our planet and Sun are made of.  
I’d rather doubt it but none of our contenders 
for dark matter, be it WIMPS or Primordial Black  
holes or MACHOS or another, really deserve to 
rest confidently and easy as top contender. 
 
If you’d like to find out more about some of 
those lesser-known dark matter contenders,  
we did an episode looking at many 
of them some years back, in our Dark  
Trilogy of episodes covering Dark Matter, Dark 
Energy, and Dark Flow & the Great Attractor,  
that we did as a collaboration with my 
friend Joe Scott from Answers with Joe.
 
Before we close out though, black holes represent 
a way we can learn more about dark matter,  
even if they turn out not to be dark matter 
themselves. Earlier this year, I was at a  
conference at the Rand Corporation that I’d been 
invited to by my friend Scott Harold and one of  
their physicists on staff, Christian Johnson, 
was talking to myself and another attendee,  
David Kipping, about a paper he’d co-authored 
a few years back “Search for Gamma-Ray Emission  
from Local Primordial Black Holes with the Fermi 
Large Area Telescope” and another on electrically  
charged black hole relics, “Direct detection 
of Primordial Black Hole Relics as Dark Matter”  
which I’ll link in the description. 
This was of course about the Primordial  
black hole option but the discussion led 
to the option of using the giant black hole  
in the center of our galaxy – Sagittarius A - as 
a Dark Matter Accelerator that Christian looked  
at in another of his papers and the reasoning 
goes as follows: Some types of particle-based  
dark matter options would have two particles of 
dark matter collide and annihilate, as with normal  
antimatter interactions, and this is called s-wave 
annihilation and is assumed to release a specific  
amount of radiation dominated by the mass of those 
dark matter particles, the photons have their  
mass energy plus some momentum energy from their 
collision, but not much, relatively speaking. So  
they’re energies are not really based on the speed 
of the particles for how likely it is to occur.  
And we look for that but haven’t found it yet. 
Alternatively, in some models of dark matter the  
speed of the particles would affect the energies 
and cross-section and they think this should be  
magnified near a black hole where they’re getting 
accelerated to very high speeds and densities  
and releasing radiation that would stick out from 
background noise, somewhere in the 10 to 600 GeV  
range, or gamma rays many billions of times more 
energetic than the photons we see with our eyes.  
In this case, there was no signature, adding 
evidence against that range of dark matter,  
but it is a great example of how black holes 
can be used to help do dark matter research and  
astronomy in general. And since that discussion 
inspired this episode, I wanted to make sure I  
gave Christian a shout out and my thanks for some 
very pleasant and stimulating conversations.
 
I think it also raises the point that we have 
learned a lot about both black holes and dark  
matter in the century or so since we got a hint of 
them, and while they’re mysterious objects still,  
they may turn out to be the bedrocks of 
power and technology in centuries to comes,  
something we explored more in that Black Hole 
series and our Dark Matter Technologies Episode.  
They represent virtually unimaginable 
levels of energy and resources,  
and any civilization that learns 
how to manipulate or make them  
would be staggeringly powerful.
Of course they are mysterious,  
so it might turn out that learning to tap them 
is a dangerous process that could obliterate  
a civilization, and we’ll explore that concept 
of technological time bombs, in two weeks, and  
the possibility of wrecked civilizations fleeing 
such events, next week, in Alien Refugees.
 
So we’re well into summer and while it's always 
nice to take a break from school, if you’re a  
student or parent of students it is important 
not to let what was just learned rust away over  
the summer. I like to think shows like SFIA with 
a math and science focus help keep that interest  
up but it is still important to practice and 
that’s where our friends at Brilliant can help.  
Their online and interactive learning can help you 
stay in practice and have fun while you’re at it,  
so you’re not losing the knowledge you worked 
so hard to get, indeed they can help you learn  
even more and also help discover practical 
uses of math and science in your daily life.  
Brilliant’s Everyday Math Course provides a great 
new perspective on foundational math topics like  
percentages, fractions, and basic geometry..
These topics are often thought to be hard to learn  
but they don’t have to be, they are much 
easier to learn with interactive examples,  
everything is. The best learning is hands-on and 
interactive learning, hands down, and Brilliant is  
an amazing tool for learning STEM interactively.
Brilliant makes it easier for anyone to learn,  
be it the basics or advanced materials, and is 
the perfect partner for a lifetime learner.
 
With Brilliant, you can learn at your own pace, 
learn on the go, and learn something new. To get  
started for free, visit brilliant.org/IsaacArthur 
or click on the link in the description,  
and the first 200 people will get 20% off 
Brilliant's annual premium subscription.
 
So we’ll get to the schedule of upcoming episodes 
in just a moment but if you enjoyed the music  
accompanying today’s episode, those were all from 
Stellardrone, who does some amazing and often  
haunting compositions, and like all of the music 
on this show, it is listed in our credit roll at  
the end of episodes and linked in the episode 
descriptions. Folks often ask in the comments  
who did this or that song so they can hear it 
more and more loudly and as we mostly work with  
artists who kindly let use their songs and 
are show fans, I like to make sure folks  
know where to find more of their great work.
And speaking of more, this is our last episode for  
July but we still have our livestream Q&A coming 
up this Sunday, July 31st, at 4 pm Eastern Time,  
where you can get your questions from the 
Chat answered on any of our show topics.  
Then we’re into August to examine the notion of 
survivors fleeing disasters or attacks to new  
worlds, like Earth, in Alien Refugees. The week 
after that we will look at the possibility the  
reason we don’t see any aliens is that they all 
blow themselves up with Technological Time Bombs,  
leaving no surviors. Then it will be time for our 
Scifi Sunday episode, Dumbest Alien Invasions,  
where we’ll examine the weirdest attempts 
and motives in fiction to invade Earth.
 
If you want alerts when those and other episodes 
come out, don’t forget to subscribe to the channel  
and hit the notifications bell. And if you 
enjoyed today’s episode, and would like  
help support future episodes, please visit our 
website, Isaac Arthur.net, for ways to donate,  
or become a show patron over at Patreon. Those 
and other options, like our awesome social  
media forums for discussing futuristic concepts, 
can be found in the links in the description.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
