Our reality may be but one of virtually 
infinite versions out there in the Multiverse,  
where anything which can happen will happen… 
which means if it is possible to travel to  
other parts of the Multiverse, someone is bound to 
invade eventually… over and over and over again. 
Some months back we were discussing what current 
theory and physics told us about how wars fought  
across time might happen, and about time travel 
paradoxes in general, and there were a lot of  
requests for a follow-up discussing how wars 
between universes in a multiverse might work. 
Since this weekend has the release of Quantumania, 
the newest Ant-Man and MCU film, and the big bad  
is supposed to be Kang the Conqueror, my second 
favorite comic villain after Doctor Doom,  
whose shtick is multiverse and temporal wars, it 
seemed a great place to begin that conversation,  
along with talking about some of the different 
ways Quantum Mechanics seeks to explain  
alternate universes and timelines, and some of the 
confusion and hype that often comes with Quantum,  
especially in science fiction and comics. We’ll 
try to end the day with a better understanding of  
how Quantum works, without resorting to lots of 
math, confusing examples, or wrecking some great  
scifi stories just because their science is iffy.
Now, speaking of that, while we will discuss Kang  
and other fictional examples today, and 
will actually discuss how you might fight  
wars across a multiverse, I want to emphasize 
this isn’t an episode on him or the new film,  
which I haven’t seen prior to writing the script 
for today’s episode. Like a lot of our episodes,  
the science fiction examples are just the vehicle 
we use to explain science while having some fun.  
I’m probably making the title just a touch 
clickbait to include Quantum Mania in it,  
but I couldn’t resist considering how often folks 
in physics feel Quantum gets crazily distorted  
into mumbo jumbo for stories or even philosophies.
I do love my Marvel Comics examples though;  
I got hooked on both Batman the Animated series 
and X-Men in the early 90s but started buying  
Marvel Comics rather than DC and found the breadth 
of the Universe and lore there irresistible,  
particularly the really epic villains like 
Doom, Kang, Apocalypse, Thanos, and so on.  
Even as a young teen then, I was already 
finding myself saying “Hey, Wait a Minute!”  
at a lot of bad science, but more about how 
some new technology or superpower just never  
got used in some really obvious and beneficial 
fashion, or did but got forgotten and never used  
in future stories, and how that should impact the 
way a civilization would unfold if it had them. 
Let’s take an example. If your basic many worlds 
hypothesis for quantum were true, then we have  
a near-infinite number of alternate universes 
out there. This ought to include trillions upon  
trillions of replicas of our own Earth that is 
the same or close enough to our world, only humans  
never evolved there. Maybe the first primate who 
was borderline human didn’t get born, or died off  
without having kids, or that first tribe died 
out from a plague or a meteor landing on them. 
Maybe life just started a little later on in 
that version of Earth, or maybe it is just a  
slightly younger Universe. It doesn’t matter at 
the moment, just that these many worlds without  
humans but otherwise already hospitable to human 
life exist and if it was easy to find them in the  
other universe. Then presumably we could reach 
them by some portal, that means trillions and  
trillions of new planets we could step 
through a portal and claim. That seems  
a lot easier than trying to cross the endless 
void of space to reach those planets around the  
billions and billions of stars in our cosmos.
A consequence of that is that you might never  
bother trying to colonize the galaxy because 
you have vastly more and more easily-reached  
worlds right in your backyard. Why turn all 
your civilization industry to colonizing deep  
space in order to reach planets that are 
probably more barren than any desert or  
tundra on Earth when you can just step to a new 
paradise? It would be like living on an endless  
fertile river delta which you could just travel 
a bit further down to find new land to cultivate,  
but opting to try to journey to and colonize 
the South Pole instead for some reason. 
One of our favorite topics on this show is the 
Fermi Paradox, the big problem of where all  
the aliens are in such an ancient and immense 
Universe, and this is an example of a solution  
that works better than most. Nobody colonizes or 
invades other parts of the galaxy because there’s  
so much free and easy space in the Multiverse.
However, we need to consider the consequences of  
something like that too, because a civilization 
that has access to a million linked copies of  
Earth also has insane amounts of resources 
to throw at space colonization. Or towards  
building giant beacons to say hello to aliens, 
which they might feel safer doing, considering  
how easy it is for those other civilizations 
to colonize their own empty clones rather than  
trying to invade your world. On the other hand, 
there should be multiverse copies of Earth that  
are full of aliens. Places where evolution went 
way differently, or even where Earth’s formation  
did. Remember there’s a hypothetical Earth whose 
mass is just one atom less than ours, or one more,  
or as little as Mars, or was a second Jupiter, and 
everywhere in between and more. So you presumably  
have planets as alien as anything in this 
Universe that are Earth clones in the Multiverse. 
Another aspect of this is there’s also presumably 
plenty of copies of Earth inhabited by humans,  
versions of you that just won the lottery, or 
slightly more primitive planets where Earth is  
still back in the Stone Age, building pyramids, 
or where technology progressed a bit faster  
and they’re centuries ahead of us. The same 
applies if one isn’t in a Many Worlds setting,  
but merely one where every act of 
time travel spawns a new timeline. 
And this is where Kang the Conqueror and other 
fictional cases emerge. There is that obvious  
temptation for whoever first gets their hands on 
multiverse or time travel technology to grab a  
list of winning lottery numbers or stocks, and 
get rich in a new timeline, or to get diagrams  
for great technologies of the 1960s and 70s and 
travel back and invent them and get rich and  
famous in, say, 1963. Or to travel back with some 
technology and take over a primitive civilization  
who would see you as a god-like ruler.
Indeed, Kang first appeared in comics back in 1963  
as a time traveler who took over ancient Egypt 
as the fictional Pharaoh Rama Tut before being  
defeated by the Fantastic Four, and is one of 
their early and original villains. His background  
has shifted over the years but he appeared 
again in 1964 under the name Kang, fighting  
the Avengers, and he’s had a lot of different 
identities and characterizations over the years.  
Typically if some story is considered bad it can 
later be retconned as having been a different Kang  
from a different timeline or Multiverse. We see 
something similar with Doctor Doom, both with time  
travel, and whose armored visage and mastery of 
robotics lets him make copies of himself called  
doombots, on which bad plotlines are retroactively 
blamed, and depending on the era, Kang is either a  
descendant of Doom or Reed Richards or both 
and stole his time travel tech from Doom. 
This also raises the possibility of accidentally 
ending up as your own grandfather and grandson,  
or being the architect of your own future 
problems, and Kang’s story frequently follow  
that approach. He ends up fighting himself, 
often literally when discussing multiverses. 
But what science, if any, 
is all this based off of? 
First, we need to understand that there are 
a bunch of different multiverse scenarios,  
and we detailed a lot of those options in our 
episode on Multiverses and parallel realities,  
but the two which folks are most familiar with are 
the time travel version and the quantum version.  
They’re not the only ones and they also 
get mixed up with each other a lot. Plus,  
rather appropriately, they have 
a lot of parallel versions too. 
Multiverses can range from simple versions like 
a bunch of physically neighboring universes who  
all popped out during their own big bangs and 
eventually overlap each other, to cycling versions  
of the universe, big bang to big crunch or big 
rip, regenerating and spawning a new version of  
the Universe… indeed that’s the origin story of 
another classic Fantastic Four villain, Galactus,  
Eater of Worlds, who is left over from a prior 
iteration of the Universe, and also the 5-mile  
tall Celestials from The Eternals. That’s 
another time travel and multiverse option,  
you just jump into an older or younger Universe, 
rather than earlier or later in your own.  
We also have this option in simulated Universes, 
where a civilization is actually inside a computer  
or some god-like entity’s creation or 
dream, and basically you can revert to  
your last save state or play multiple different 
outcomes from some earlier-shared save point. 
And these ideas often predate Quantum 
Mechanics, indeed the term Multiverse does too,  
first appearing in 1895 in an unrelated usage by 
William James, to essentially discuss the notion  
of if all our new and conflicting notions of the 
Universe and philosophy at the time made nature  
plastic and indifferent, a moral multiverse 
as he called it, rather than a moral Universe.  
Coincidentally that same year, Boltzmann 
and Zermelo were having their debates  
about Thermodynamics and Entropy, the idea of a 
statistical Universe in which every atom’s state  
and position is changing around like shuffling 
cards. If you shuffle a deck enough times,  
eventually it will return to a previous state.
Do not try this at home, it would take you and  
many multiverse copies of you several lifetimes 
of all day shuffling for that to become a probable  
outcome, but over a long enough time it will 
happen, effectively restoring a previous moment  
of time, from which events may once again unfold.
By this same reasoning, in an infinitely long  
lasting static Universe, which is what 
they thought our Universe was at the end  
of the 19th century, even though entropy 
would run everything down to a Universe  
of random particles fluctuations in a distant 
future, in an even more distant future those  
random fluctuations should return it to some prior 
ordered state. This is called Poincare Recurrence,  
for Henri Poincare who suggested it back 
in 1890 for closed systems like cards.  
As a trivial example, if you roll a pair dice and 
get a 2 and 4, that is a specific state and one  
that has a 1 in 36 chance of rolling, so every 
few dozen rolls it would not be surprising for  
that to repeat, and essentially reset that very 
simple system, of just two particles which each  
having 6 states they can be in. If we increase 
that to just 20 dice, the number of possible  
combinations would be 3,656,158,440,062,976. Any 
non microscopic object has trillions of particles  
it's composed of though, not 2 or 20, but it 
begins to illustrate how huge these numbers get. 
It is also where we get the notion of a 
Boltzmann Brain, as in his debates a few  
years later about this concept applied at the 
cosmic scale, Boltzmann suggested a completely  
functional brain might be able to assemble 
at random, rather than through evolution. 
You can probably see how a lot of these ideas are 
high-octane fuel for story vehicles. A few decades  
later though we would develop our basic knowledge 
of quantum mechanics, and that began by realizing  
that certain particles simply decayed into other 
particles occasionally, and with no known cause.  
Merely that while that decay might happen at any 
point with a single particle, seemingly at random,  
much like a coin flip, if you had tons of 
the same particle together, the statistical  
nature of that group made for incredibly 
predictable rates of decay. So much so that  
we use them in some of our most accurate clocks.
The field of Quantum, which has now turned into  
something of synonym for arcane and confusing, 
gets its name from the rather mundane word quanta,  
as in quantity, and the notion that to our 
surprise we were finding that there were minimum  
discrete values for things in the universe. We 
found a charged particle called an electron,  
and it seemed to only come in one type with one 
specific charge. There’s no electron with 10%  
more mass or 9% less charge. There’s no proton 
that’s just a little heavier than a neutron or  
has half the charge or 99% normal charge. Things 
are very specific and discrete, like our basic  
English alphabet of 26 specific characters with 
specific properties we combine to make words from,  
and not like real numbers in math which can be 
infinitely divided up ever smaller. There is a  
place between 1 and 2, 2 and 3, for numbers like 
1.5 or 2 and a quarter, there is no A-and-a-half,  
or D and a third of an E. Letters are discrete, 
and subatomic particles appeared to be too. 
That the world was discrete was a bit of a 
surprising thing, as was the apparent randomness  
of particle decay and the uncertainty principle, 
which held that you could only know the position  
and momentum of an object to a certain combined 
accuracy. Beyond that, if you measured something’s  
position more accurately, its momentum became less 
certain, and vice versa. The same was true with  
energy and time and some other linked quantities. 
The mechanics of how these quanta interact and how  
they behave became ‘quantum mechanics’.
This was all very weird, and yet,  
test after test, many from totally unrelated types 
of experiments, kept confirming all these results.  
Explanations were suggested but even to this day, 
not a single one has any significant proof it is  
true or more likely than other suggested 
options. The two big ones are Copenhagen  
Interpretation – which you know from Schrodinger’s 
Cat, and Many Worlds Interpretation, or MWI. 
Copenhagen is straight forward, there may be 
other universes, like other books on a shelf,  
but they’re not linked by events. There’s only one 
in which the events you’re seeing are happening,  
but at the quantum scale, events are happening 
simultaneously until an observation forces only  
one event to be true. This isn’t that arcane, 
it’s just saying that if I’ve got a closed and  
sound-proof box, with a cat inside it, that 
cat might be up to any number of things but I  
don’t know which till I open it. That is very 
normal and understandable. The weird part is  
that Copenhagen interpretation is assuming any 
of the possibly true outcomes are simultaneously  
happening in a hazy mixed state, called 
superposition, until someone opens the box,  
at which time one of those realities locks in and 
the others disappear as though they’ve never been.  
We didn’t know what happened in the box 
till we opened it, but to our surprise,  
it wasn’t our ignorance of what thing 
was happening that we couldn’t see,  
but rather that all things were actually happening 
till we opened it. That’s the weird part. 
That sounds suspiciously like someone is making 
a decision about which reality actually happened,  
and gets even weirder because we might place 
that observer in a room with a closed door.  
Now a person outside that room doesn’t know 
what’s happening in that box even after our  
first observer opens it, not till the door to that 
room gets opened and lets us know. We don’t really  
know which observer gets primacy there – is it 
the first and nearest observer for instance?  
Is an observer ten light years away going to 
trump prior observation when ten years later,  
the light of that event reaches them, and does 
that mean everything is still in a haze of  
possibilities all the way out to the cosmological 
event horizon, billions of light years away? Are  
those places beyond the cosmological event 
horizon different universes? Does an observer  
need to have a mind at all, or just be an 
event of determination, like whatever action  
your experiment took to let you measure that 
particle? Is there a hierarchy of determination  
by observers, such that something godlike 
has final say on the state of things. 
Abraham Pais writes an account of him and Albert 
Einstein talking about quantum while on a walk  
together and Einstein suddenly stopping, turning 
to him, and asking if he really believed the Moon  
only exists when he looks at it. The Copenhagen 
Interpretation of the 1920s was generally  
considered a correct physical theory, as it 
predicted outcomes of quantum events with amazing  
precision, but could not be considered a complete 
theory, because of these sorts of conundrums and  
paradoxes, along with the feeling that Copenhagen 
interpretation is saying that what cannot be  
observed does not exist, which too many just 
feels wrong even if it true in a practical sense.  
If we can not relate to or observe or interact 
with something, it really doesn’t matter if it  
exists or not, and you can never prove it does.
And perhaps most irritating is that if you’re  
trying to determine an experiment that would 
determine who determines things, which observer  
counts or if you even need an observer, you have 
the critical problem that you can not create an  
experiment in which you are not an observer. Even 
someone else running the experiment and giving you  
the results, is still an experiment ending with 
you reading those results and observing them.  
Everything is under the shadow of your observation 
as you can only know what you can know. 
Again the Copenhagen Interpretation of Quantum 
Mechanics says there just one reality, but it  
can be rather hazy at moments, indeed is always 
just a little hazy and undetermined when you zoom  
in real close to look at tiny bits of matter or 
energy, or tiny distances or tiny moments of time,  
the quantum realm, and this is all assumed to 
be genuinely random inside certain rules. At a  
macroscopic scale, all this quantum activity 
is very tight and clear, much as if you flip  
billions and billions of coins, you still 
end up with 50% head and 50% tails, even if  
you had heads come up a thousand times more than 
tails, because 500,001,000 heads and 499,999,000  
tails is still 50.0001% heads and 49.999% 
tails, and we’re not made of a billion atoms,  
but far more. Indeed, most of the cells in your 
body, of which we have billions, are themselves  
made of many billions of atoms, which can be in a 
lot more states or position than heads or tails.  
So by default, any random quantum event is 
affecting reality no more than if 1 more drop  
of rain fell on a forest during a downpour.
That of course is the point of the Butterfly  
Effect too, or the Schrodinger’s Cat experiment 
where a vial of poison is being released in the  
box by a trigger sensitive to the decay 
of a single radioactive particle. And if  
you’re curious, we can build such devices that 
are sensitive to a single particle or photon.  
We could use it to choose between two options, 
like what to have for lunch, some chicken nuggets  
or a cheeseburger, and the result should 
be unpredictable, which is one way to avoid  
precognitive tricks of super-intelligent entities 
or mega computers trying to guess your actions. 
So even some very tiny event can and does alter 
the future depending on when and how it happens,  
as we explored in both our Butterfly Effect 
Episode and our examination of the Quantum  
Cheeseburger in Infinite Improbability Issues. 
This is critical to discussing multiverses in the  
alternate timeline sense, but not the Many Worlds 
Interpretation of Quantum that came in the 1950s,  
a couple decades after the Copenhagen 
Interpretation. In this interpretation  
it is NOT necessarily that every quantum event 
with two or more outcomes creates a new universe  
for each outcome, but rather that all possible 
positions in which particles can be arranged exist  
and your measurement is just acknowledging which 
one you are in. Like every possible combination  
of a million letters has been arranged into 
various books, each a few hundred pages long,  
and you don’t know which actual book you are in.
And that is a lot of books, and that’s only  
arranging a few dozen characters into a 
million different positions. That’s every  
book ever written plus a lot of babble written 
by a finite number of monkeys, not even the  
complexity of options of a single microscopic 
cell, let alone a human, let alone a planet,  
and each of those scales adds exponentially more 
options… though still a finite number of them. 
The number of possible arrangements involved in 
a multiverse of this type, and again there are  
other version, or the alternate timelines variety 
for that matter, is so big that actually saying  
it would serve no purpose. It’s not a trillion or 
a trillion-trillion, it’s not even a 1 followed  
by a million zeroes or a number that would fill 
a whole book. It’s the sort of scale where just  
the paper needed to hold the numerical code for 
just one multiverse might require whole libraries,  
and an actual library of those codes, 
multiverse addresses or phone numbers,  
even in digital format, would collapse under its 
own mass into a black hole. Indeed if you did make  
an immense library of classic phone books holding 
those addresses, immune to gravity somehow, you  
would not have enough atoms in our whole Universe 
to print them or build the shelves they sat on. 
This version does assume every state already 
exists and bypasses the issue of universes  
dividing like amoeba every new moment in time and 
place in space, though that too is an option on  
the table. And while people might wonder where the 
energy to constantly make all those new universes  
is coming from, the answer is probably the same 
place the Universe got that energy from in the  
first place, at the Big Bang, and of course we 
don’t yet, but the problem of where you got it  
from mysteriously one time or a gajillion 
times isn’t really a different problem. 
So let’s talk about how you could fight a war 
on that scale and if you could even do so.  
First, I’m not a big believer in time travel 
or multiverse theory, be it many worlds and or  
its parallels under string theory or some of 
the other variants. I’m not alone in that,  
very few physicists are loud advocates 
for either Copenhagen or MWI and they  
are contradictory options too. You 
don’t have both being true at once,  
even if that would be rather appropriately amusing 
as an analogy for Schrodinger’s simultaneously  
alive and dead cat, all the quantum theories being 
simultaneously true until one is proven right.  
Most of us view the interpretations as 
currently untestable and possibly forever,  
and have one we tilt toward mostly as a matter of 
preference rather than science, though I suspect  
‘Interpretation we dislike least’ is probably 
more apt than ‘version we actually like’. 
If you’re looking for more on the philosophical 
problems with proving quantum interpretations or  
the philosophical repercussions of it, plenty 
have written on the topic, including a lot of  
gobbledygook. Which I’m sad to say is not just 
from non-scientists misinterpreting the science,  
but often from scientists who just don’t bother 
learning any philosophy. I’d recommend Karl  
Popper and his criticisms of Copenhagen 
as a good place to start reading on the  
topic. He’s also great for understanding the core 
concept of proof and falsifiability in science,  
and he would probably take issue with my earlier 
comments about how there are no protons with 99%  
of normal charge since I haven’t checked every 
single proton in the Universe to be sure that’s  
true. In my not very humble opinion, Popper, is 
one of if not the best philosophers of the last  
century, second only to maybe Rudolf Carnap.
Now, in order to conquer or colonize other  
multiverses you need some way to get there. 
That’s easy enough in the case of alternate  
timelines made by time travel, as you just 
travel back in time and make your change  
and live in that timeline and use that same time 
machine again if you need a new one, obviously you  
need a time machine to do this but that’s a whole 
different topic and one we’ve covered before... 
Here the notion is usually that you’re fighting 
with people because they tried to alter your  
past and wipe you out. How you persist to 
exist and seek revenge is handwaved. If I  
jump back in time to become King Arthur in the 
year 500 AD, and this makes you cease to exist,  
you can’t go back to fight me, and if it didn’t 
make you cease to exist, then you don’t have a  
motivation to be angry, your universe is fine 
I just made a new one, practically speaking. 
For story purposes we can imagine a thingamajig 
that protects you locally from the disturbance,  
in which case that should be able to be made 
bigger to cover your whole world, but we also  
might justify that under Copenhagen as something 
like the ‘force’ that keeps Schrodinger’s various  
alternate living and dead cats from merging 
together inside that unopened box. It keeps  
the box, or your bit of reality, from falling 
in on itself and being absorbed, and you might  
need a stronger truss the bigger your box is, to 
support the lid, or the more you’re protecting,  
or the longer you’re protecting it for, so 
we’ll call this type of device a Quantum  
Absorption Truss, or Q.A.T. or Qat for short.
Presumably all those times in which this or  
that time traveler has a wristband on; preventing 
them from ceasing to exist while fixing the past,  
like Bishop or Cable or Wolverine in various Days 
of Future Past stories, they are wearing a Qat,  
and we see similar Qat-space in Eternity in Isaac 
Asimov’s classic time travel story the End of  
Eternity or the world of Galifrey in Doctor Who, 
where all the Time Lords live. It’s also not that  
hard to imagine the various timelines like to 
braid together and do not just keep forking  
over and over like a tree but tend to stick to a 
fairly tight cable with frayed bits too far off  
the norm for that Universe to fall off.
Sounds cool, but I know of no science  
supporting such a notion, or the idea of 
temporal inertia, where things are prone  
to converging back together over long times. You 
could argue that changes to the timeline just get  
absorbed over very long stretches and while I 
don’t see a strong physical argument for that,  
it is specifically true in a Steady State Universe 
with the Poincare Recurrence which we discussed  
a few minutes ago, insanely long lengths of 
time where random resets occur, but this is  
far longer than people would usually mean for a 
change in the timeline getting absorbed. Beyond  
this we don’t really have any new problems or 
motivations for alternate timeline invasion. 
As we mentioned in our time wars episode though, 
if you do have far more future universes than  
past ones, because Universes divide like amoeba 
at every new moment in time and place in space,  
you could easily get folks invading back in 
time in such numbers that they destroyed their  
world by simply adding so much mass that 
it turned into a black hole. Presumably,  
every new timeline that gets created, 
eventually has someone who wants to go back  
to that same time and you just cram the place.
The same applies for many worlds style invasions,  
but only kind-of. If I can make a portal to clone 
universes, one the same except some of the atoms  
are not quite in the same position, then how 
many copies there are should change the moment  
I and my trillions of trillions of atoms step 
through, and presumably decrease if I step back  
through carrying a bunch of gold nuggets from 
some river bed in California in 1849. If every  
possible Universe which can exist does exist, then 
I can take all that gold or diamonds in the rough  
from Namibia and go buy tons of weapons from 
some super-advanced weapons shop on Earth-2099  
or 928. I can then use them to set up shop on some 
world as a conqueror, or go fight and kill another  
iteration of myself or someone else I dislike.
But there’s still a near infinite number of  
other worlds with that person still on them, and 
arguably more now that I’ve traveled to fight one,  
adding my atoms and their positions to 
the mix, including ones where he beat me.  
You can’t colonize all those Earth-clones that are 
just missing people because you just spawn more of  
them by going. In one version you step through 
and change your mind and leave a second later.  
Free will is a difficult concept in 
Multiverse theories of this type. 
Also, if we’re not adding mass and additional 
states that could exist when we travel to  
new multiverses, instead just changing 
information, like if we transformed some  
preexisting rock or air into you, switching 
the atoms around but not adding new ones,  
than it is rather debatable if two identical 
copies of you, both traveling to the same clone  
Earth at the exact place and same moment, would 
even result in two of you there or just one merged  
identical reality, or if it would matter.
The whole notion is philosophically tricky  
and to me travel between multiverses almost 
necessitates a higher layer of reality too,  
which is a theme explored in one of my favorite 
books, The Hand of Oberon. In our traveler's case,  
you both came in and added the identical 
edit to the Universe of that book, and that  
million-character long book can have more added to 
it, you add another person, or another sentence,  
so it’s a million and twenty characters long. 
There’s endless trillions of new combinations  
right there, and it still doesn’t stop us from 
adding or removing more sentences, but it does  
imply the existence of library and editing table 
for that book. And if you and I both add the  
identical sentence to two different copies of the 
same book, did we really change that book twice? 
And if there was some sort of prime reality, one 
that mattered more, a higher layer for instance,  
like we see with Amber and its reflections 
and shadows in Roger Zelazny’s Amber series,  
then presumably there’s a near infinite 
number of lesser realities where the  
ability to travel to that prime reality was 
gained and where they also chose to invade.  
This results in the same crazy scenario I 
mentioned a moment ago where the infinite  
armadas and legions marching onto this world 
from all of its branches crushes it under rising  
geological layers of dead bodies and wrecked war 
machines until it collapses into a singularity. 
It makes travel between multiverses feel 
rather nihilistic and self-defeating,  
something explored a lot with Portal Travel in 
the show Rick & Morty, and makes an interesting  
Fermi Paradox Multiverse case we examined in more 
detail, where we wonder why we don’t see alien  
visitors or conquerors from other multiverses. It 
might be that most universes do get that visit,  
but of course some don’t and we might be in 
one of those. Or it might be that it proves  
such travel is impossible, since otherwise we 
should see it all the time, just like time travel,  
if it ever gets invented it should result in 
people traveling to the past including the  
here and now. The existence of Many Worlds, 
if that interpretation of Quantum is right,  
does not imply travel between them is possible, 
incidentally, it doesn’t suggest either way. 
However, even if such travel is impossible, if 
there is a Universe for every possible state  
every atom might be in, then there already is 
one where some combination of atoms otherwise  
identical to our 6th century England had assembled 
into a Boltzmann brain complete with a body and  
fake memories of being some guy named Isaac 
Arthur from the 21st century. So a portal to  
such a multiverse I could go to might not even be 
a transport, it might just happen to be that one  
specific universe where that Boltzmann Brain 
existed. Indeed, there would be tons of them. 
If Many Worlds is correct, there are uncountable 
versions of our 6th century AD where by freak  
chance some dude named Isaac Arthur, or some 
dude named Merlin or the Doctor just popped into  
existence complete with fake memories of being 
a traveler from the future. There is also one  
where just one irrelevant atom in my toe is not 
in the same place as normal, there is another one  
where an atom in my thumb is, and another reality 
for where just one extra atom of iron was in our  
planet’s core or on Pluto but in a different spot. 
There are even realities where the whole Universe  
is full of random lifeless rocks except for a 
giant citadel on which thousands of Boltzmann  
brains named Isaac, or Rick, or Reed, all serve 
on a council and think they’re from different  
Universes and can travel through space and time 
and reality. There’s another where it’s the same  
but with one more person, one less, or even where 
the vending machine with the soda on the third  
floor has just one less can in it, or just as many 
cans but one has one less molecule of sugar in it. 
So too there’s ones where purple skinned guys 
named Nathaniel or Rama or Immortus or Kang have  
teamed up to make a council, or believe they are 
fighting wars with each other. There’s one where  
a guy has popped into existence holding a gun 
that he thinks makes portals to new worlds that  
he invented and which actually just vaporizes him, 
and his random memory includes his century-long  
battle against his evil alternate reality twins 
for control of reality. There’s also one where he  
believes that and that his name is Susan or Reed 
instead. There’s also a bunch of Universes where  
the Boltzmann Brain that assembled thinks it owns 
a chocolate factory operated by a bunch of Oompa  
Loompas, and indeed one where they really exist 
and one where they do but manufacture a highly  
addictive soda instead of chocolate. And there are 
countless more realities where no Boltzmann Brains  
exist anywhere or where the one that does is not 
human or superhuman but barely as smart as a slug. 
That is the reality of near infinite 
realities. If Many Worlds exists,  
there are people who firmly believe they travel 
them and are able to provide evidence they do,  
regardless of if it is possible or not. There is 
a Universe full of disintegration portals people  
keep walking into which by freak coincidence keep 
sending back coherent and believable messages to  
mission control for centuries of operation.
This is the craziness of numbers or  
permutations so big they would collapse 
into black holes if they were written out,  
Quantum Mania. Such realities are insanely 
unlikely, and yet the number of possible  
universes is so much insanely bigger that there 
are almost countless realities where the seemingly  
impossible appears to be happening, not because 
the rules have changed, but because every so often  
an infinite number of monkeys banging away crazily 
at a keyboard can type a coherent sentence out,  
and even more rarely, a whole script.
So yes, if Many Worlds is true, somewhere  
out there is a man who thinks he can change size 
all the way down to something smaller than an ant,  
and a girl who can too, and a purple skinned 
person who thinks he can conquer every reality.
It seems like every time I pop onto facebook 
one of my friends is either posting about  
getting hacked, or mysteriously messaging me 
hacked content, and one of the big culprits  
is people using the same password everywhere 
and then some low-security website they have  
an account on gets hacked along with their 
email and their password that they use for  
everything. The best way to avoid this is 
to turn two-factor authentication on and  
get a password manager like Nordpass, so 
you’re securely using different passwords  
everywhere but don’t have to try to memorize 
them all or write them down on post-it notes. 
With Nordpass you can quickly and easily generate 
ultra-secure passwords, store them, and change  
them, all while being able to take advantage 
of features like autofill so you can shop and  
browse faster online and keep your credits cards 
and payment details securely at your fingertips,  
and on up to 6 different devices. They can also 
let you know if your passwords are weak or getting  
reused or old, and the data breach scanner 
can alert you when leaks happen on websites  
that might have compromised your data. And it 
does all of this as a zero-knowledge password  
manager, meaning your data is safe even from 
Nordpass, because they can’t get at either. 
To get exclusive access to Nordpass’s best 
offer, go to nordpass.com/isaacnordpass and  
use code isaacnordpass at the checkout 
to get additional 1 month for FREE,  
again that’s nordpass.com/isaacnordpass 
and use code isaacnordpass
I wanted to give a quick shout out to 
Comics Explained for all their Kang Videos,  
amongst other ones, as it was a great and 
entertaining refresher and deep dive on the  
character before writing this episode, thanks Rob 
for all the endless hours of entertainment too.  
Speaking of hours of informative entertainment…. 
next Thursday we’ll take a Journey to Alpha  
Centauri and ask what our options are for 
making that voyage. And the weekend after  
that we’ll have our end of the month Livestream 
Q&A, Sunday, February 26th at 4 pm Eastern Time,  
where my lovely wife and cohost Sarah will take 
your questions live from the chat for me to  
answer. I hope to see you then. After that we’ll 
start off March with one of my favorite topics,  
Space Habitats, on Thursday March 2nd.
If you’d like to get alerts when those and  
other episodes come out, make sure to hit the 
like, subscribe, and notification buttons. You  
can also help support the show on Patreon, and 
if you want to donate and help in other ways,  
you can see those options by visiting our website, 
IsaacArthur.net. You can also catch all of SFIA’s  
episodes early and ad free on our streaming 
service, Nebula, at go.nebula.tv/isaacarthur. 
As always, thanks for watching, 
and have a Great Week!
