This video is sponsored by CuriosityStream. 
Get access to my streaming video service,  
Nebula, when you sign up for CuriosityStream 
using the link in the description.
 
Many of our ancestors risked everything to try 
to make lives for themselves far from where they  
were born, staking a claim on some unsettled bit 
of land. Perhaps our descendants will as well.
 
So it’s Scifi Sunday again here on SFIA, where 
we look at popular concepts from science fiction  
and ask how they might function in 
the real future and I thought for  
this afternoon we’d take a look at how folks 
would actually go about claiming asteroids,  
planets, whole solar systems, or even potentially 
galaxies or uninhabited Parallel Universes. 
 
And the immediate worry about that, once you’ve 
gone and staked a claim on some nice rock you’re  
going to mine for space gold, is someone sneaking 
in and jumping your claim. Or for that matter  
strolling in to serve you some official papers 
saying your rock is their rock, or just kicking  
your teeth in and taking it by force. They might 
be pirates or hired thugs or the legitimate new  
owners sending in their military – for a given 
interpretation of the word legitimate obviously.
 
It probably goes without saying that any race 
into space is likely to involve a lot of folks  
heading out hoping to make a buck or a new home or 
both, and the morality of them, their neighbors,  
their own governments, and rival governments, is 
likely to play a huge role in how this goes down.  
There’s a lot of legit reason to worry about 
equality of access to space, with the sheer entry  
cost to get a space program running, though the 
good news is space is huge compared to humanity.  
Nonetheless we are likely to see many of the 
classic dynamics of colonizing and pioneering  
arise, good and ill. New spaces open up and people 
flock to them, often even if someone’s already  
there, either having staked a claim earlier 
or even much, much earlier, like an indigenous  
group displaced by conquerors or colonists.
Again though, space is huge, and appears to  
be uninhabited for thousands if not millions of 
light years, so for the next several millennia  
we probably don’t have to worry about encountering 
natives, or even other intelligent life except for  
earlier human colonists, or human creations like 
artificial intelligence or engineered or uplifted  
lifeforms. But this could still cause issues, 
since even vastly abundant and widely available  
resources have logistical nightmares, mess-ups, 
and flat out corruption in their distribution.
 
We have plenty of historical examples of the kind 
of problems that even something seemingly minor  
such as free land grants can cause. The Homestead 
Act, signed into law by Abraham Lincoln in 1862,  
gave citizens and future citizens the ability 
to claim as much as 160 acres of public land,  
so long as they lived on it, improved it, and 
paid a small registration fee. The Homestead act  
and its siblings resulted in millions of acres 
and millions of immigrants settling new areas,  
and indeed new Homesteading policies in the 
US didn’t come until the Federal Land Policy  
and Management Act of 1976. All that 
being said, it seems like a solid basis  
to use as one of our main examples for today.
In many ways, those Homestead Acts are what made  
the US what it is today, and their history is a 
long and glorious mess of courage, corruption,  
creation, theft, honor, treachery, generosity, 
greed, dreams, and nightmares. I’m no historian  
so I’ll leave it to our better qualified 
colleagues to discuss that, but as probably  
the largest and best recorded example of this sort 
of expansion effort, it’s a good example today. 
 
It is entirely possible that future acquisition of 
space will be a tightly controlled and regulated  
effort, or a well administered one. We 
really are much better at logistics and  
administration than we used to be, especially 
with computers, and we get better every day.  
However the scale of space is to previous 
expansion efforts on this planet what this  
planet is to a single lone house on it, 
so it seems likely to be a bit of a mess,  
especially given that everything in space moves, 
constantly, not like a map. And even the annually  
shifting edges of many a river or creek has caused 
huge problems in determining who claimed what. 
 
Now there’s a lot of ways to colonize space but 
Homesteading is our main perspective for today  
because it also is common in science fiction, 
indeed an awful lot of scifi from the 20th century  
was just stories of pioneering the Wild West 
with aliens and laser pistols substituted in.  
We should probably take a moment to define what 
homesteading is though, especially since the term  
is in common use in the United States in recent 
years with a variation, as more of lifestyle  
choice inspired by that history. That lifestyle is 
of self-sufficiency, in whole or part, and in many  
different versions and flavors, and comes from 
the original attraction of these homestead grants.  
Here is a giant bit of land in the middle of 
nowhere that you may have if you go live there  
and improve it. You can buy it and not live there, 
sometimes, or pay someone else to improve it, but  
to get it free, or for some small registration fee 
or the equivalent of Earnest money, you go there  
and live there and since no one else is already 
there you need to be pretty self-sufficient.
 
Needless to say one problem with this approach 
from the outset is it only made sense in a  
subsistence farmer culture, where most folks would 
support themselves on the land. The assumption  
presumably being the fraction of folks who 
don’t farm would move to a place with many  
new farmers to serve as their local blacksmith, 
lawyer, doctor, or retail shop. Or take a claim,  
doing the bare minimum to it, then rent or 
sell the excess land to others down the road.
 
We could see this in space too, indeed a 
post-biological civilization might use the  
surface area of a solar system around its sun 
as the source of power to run their processors,  
but it would be more likely to come 
with a more three dimensional approach  
and that raises that whole scale issue again.
Grabbing up acres or hectares of a classic planet  
like Mars, or places like the Moon or Ceres, 
translates well enough, and technology will  
let us carefully survey spots in advance in ways 
pioneers didn’t get to when making claims. This  
doesn’t work as well for asteroids and we’ll come 
back to that, but for planets and bigger rocks it  
would make a lot of sense for nations to negotiate 
– or coerce – each other into having an agreed  
on region of that rock – possibly in its entirety 
but probably chunks of it – which they could then  
parcel out as they saw fit and treaty permitted.
But those rocks really are not that valuable,  
the real attraction to going and colonizing 
Mars is that in a few millennia, you’ve got a  
colonized and possibly terraformed planet. If you 
want that to happen then you need to incentivize  
people going there, and the harder the effort is, 
the harder it is to get folks to engage in it.  
You have to promise a bright new future to them – 
you can lie through your teeth to them but to get  
their butts on the boats, as it were, you either 
need them to come voluntarily or force them,  
something we looked at more in our 
Space Prison Colonies Episode. 
 
There are also many methods folks can use 
to legally abuse the various homestead acts,  
to screw their neighbors or Uncle Sam, so 
I’m betting any future-space form of them  
will involve a lot more incentives then 
160 acres of dead planet and a lot more  
registration and legal forms than in the past.
An alternative of course is a more feudal  
approach, where the entity with 
the sovereign claim sells, rents,  
or grants big parcels to a person or group 
that is expected to build the community,  
and I suspect we would see that a lot more with 
artificial space habitats like O’Neill Cylinders.
 
Anyway, odds are good the incentives for a place 
like Mars are going to need to include the cost of  
passage, and probably a lot of initial resources 
and goods too, what with it being a big dead rock.  
These would likely be the target for thieves 
more than the land itself. A hacker or conman  
might – and probably would – figure out ways to 
steal claims or forge fake applications. Indeed  
I’d bet forging a fake claim then selling bits of 
it to others might be a common headache especially  
as its hard to deal with stolen goods bought in 
good faith – or good-ish faith anyway – especially  
when your goal was to get someone to develop 
the place and that’s now happening, even though  
a big chunk of it was fueled by some fraudulent 
effort a generation back that just got uncovered.
 
How big a stake would you get? Well it 
fundamentally depends on what it takes  
to get folks there and we might be talking 
about huge tracts of land on Mars, or even  
entire planets in other solar systems. Technology 
might make such incentives easy to offer though.  
A post-scarcity civilization with good 
self-replicating robots might actually be able  
to give a colonist a spaceship of their own with a 
cargo hold full of goods and consider it a trifle,  
and thus not need to offer some huge claim of 
land. Alternatively, they might be able to send  
that person with a small suitcase of personal 
goods on a packed ship, simply because space and  
mass was at a premium and all they needed was the 
self-assembling self-replicating colonizer they  
had in their pocket that needed thrown in a sunny 
place near rock and will do the work from there. 
 
Of course, they might not need to incentivize 
it or deal with the riff-raff cultural rejects  
willing to hop on ship for the new 
world because home offers them little,  
because they might just clone or copy their 
ideal citizens with ideal ideologically loyalty.
 
We also have some stake options that aren’t 
land or are only indirectly so – mineral  
rights for asteroids is one bigger example, but 
a planet might grant certain unique resources.  
There’s an example of that in the Constitutional 
Monarchy and Aristocracy of Manticore  
from David Weber’s Honor Harrington series, 
where folks who get knighted or added to the  
peerage might get a chunk of Crown Land but also 
might get something like piece of radio spectrum,  
every TV or radio channel or cell tower using that 
band of frequencies for broadcast has to pay you  
rent on them. Something similar might apply 
to orbital space, especially that small ring  
around a planet that is the geostationary orbit 
that always hangs directly over the same spot.  
So you might get the Baron of FM Radio 
101 to 110, or the Duke of Geostationary.
 
That series has many interesting examples 
of how colonization might go down,  
but in the case of Manticore they basically 
colonized the place with three classes of folks.  
The people who could pay to help fund the 
expedition, the people who could roughly pay  
their own way, and the folks who needed subsidy 
to get there, and it plays in nicely to another  
popular scifi setting trope we see a lot besides 
Wild West, which is that neo-Feudal aristocracy  
and knights and samurais flavor. As a minor side 
note, it's probably not a coincidence that the US,  
UK, and Japan have been the biggest source 
of scifi novels and films and shows in the  
20th century and that we often see bits of 
their past adapted to future space opera,  
and as we see a lot more scifi geek culture 
emerging in others places in the last generation  
or so, it has resulted in a lot broadening of the 
prior worldbuilding cliches in science fiction,  
and fantasy for that matter too. We’re mostly 
focused on those cliches for today though.
 
And that nobility and vassalage thing is also one 
of those scifi cliches whose historical basis is  
pretty broad, so it does strike me as one of the 
more common options along with homesteading for  
future space colonization. Different flavor, 
it may or may not be hereditary and I really  
can’t imagine it will involve the regional baron 
dressing up in a suit of armor – or giant mecha,  
cool as that sounds – to go battle the 
invading hordes. They’re more likely to  
dress up in a business suit, or their culturally 
significant astronaut mining suit in the style  
worn by their ancient founders. Your barons 
might be AI, cyborgs, or transhumans too. 
 
Coming back to the cloning and copying option, 
if you could do that, and you could get on a ship  
and spend ten thousand years on ice to emerge at 
an empty solar system far away from here, around  
one of the billions of stars in our corner of the 
galaxy, we might see people do that. I don’t know  
how much it costs to buy a solar system, you can’t 
actually buy stars right now, or even their names.  
The International Astronomical Union doesn’t sell 
them, they don’t even bother naming them anymore,  
just numbering them, and it's not like they have 
any legal power backed by treaty or something.  
Those ‘name a star’ groups might be 
selling so much fluff but I hear folks say  
‘only the IAU can name stars’ and that’s 
nonsense too, the IAU is the biggest and  
most influential entirely voluntary group of 
astronomers out there but it’s got zero legal  
authority. But it does have de facto authority 
– something which really does matter in emerging  
colonial space environments I expect – 
for the same reason any non-governmental  
group does – popularity and inertia. 
Consider, to sell a planet ten thousand light  
years away, you either have to be able to make 
it easier for someone to get themselves to it,  
or make them afraid of trying to take it without 
your okay. Now that might really be doable,  
someone might say they’ve got automated fleets of 
enforcers who show up and sterilize worlds without  
suitable claim documentation – but while a colony 
getting wiped out by a robot armada for failing  
to give the proper CD-Key – Colonial Development 
– might make for good fiction, I don’t think we  
want automated extermination fleets wandering the 
galaxy… though that’s one way it might happen.
 
And might be okay with folks too. If our society 
gets good enough with automation that anyone could  
afford to buy a spaceship with a freezer, a 
loyal AI, and a 3D printer, then it's also  
one where black or gray markets might provide 
templates for cloneable or copyable slaves. Go  
hop on your spaceship, fly on ice far away, even 
to some isolated star ejected from our galaxy, and  
let the computer set you up as the immortal ruler 
of some world it’s populated with people for you,  
all brainwashed or chipped to behave properly. 
And unlike the virtual world version of this,  
it's not likely the egomaniacal god-king of the 
personal paradise is employing simulated humans  
with no sentience like a big and elaborate video 
game. In a simulated reality, using less processor  
power for simulating nameless people you’ll rarely 
encounter means cheaper worlds or bigger ones,  
in colonizing in the flesh, it does not.
In such a case, you might have a big push for  
controlling who settles what, and making sure they 
follow certain rules. Of course, concerns covering  
that might actually have the opposite of the 
intended effect, since they could serve as a means  
for an authoritarian tyrant or group to convince 
people they should be the only ones who have those  
powers. At a local level too, that’s a pretty 
decent reason for setting up a feudal state,  
it is not too hard to imagine a collection of 
asteroids or the rocks orbiting as the ring  
of a gas giant might fear predators and 
end up swearing allegiance to one of the  
tougher and more likable ones for protection, 
offering a cut of their production as payment.  
Many a pirate or brigand has ended up with 
their great-grandkids as the honored and  
respected nobles of some land under this model.
So I’m not even sure that is an extreme or weird  
case, but we need to contemplate what we’d 
actually do if we came across civilizations  
like that. It is very likely expansion of our 
civilization will fall into a slower wave than  
actual colonization of the galaxy. This is 
part of what we mean when we quip on the show  
that if there are no aliens, we only need to 
wait a few thousands years and there will be.  
If technology does evolve to allow many small 
groups or individuals to grab a speedy spaceship  
and head off to parts unknown, then given that 
civilization itself is likely to head out slower,  
we would probably find ourselves constantly 
bumping into our rogue colonies founded  
a few centuries or millennia earlier. 
And that's a bit ethically problematic  
since we’re now talking about running into human 
civilizations that are effectively indigenous. 
 
Only this isn’t Star Trek, there’s no Prime 
Directive, and there’s a big moral difference  
between not screwing with the world you’ve 
encountered that was founded centuries earlier  
and has some views or traditions you find alien 
versus coming across some place whose ruler is  
a Multiplicity Mind of ten-thousand linked clones 
of themselves so that they can enjoy dominating,  
enslaving, and violating their captive population, 
with their ten-thousand avatars. They also might  
have been using that population – or automated 
robots- to build one heck of a defensive bastion  
out of that solar system and so you might 
be needing to sacrifice a lot more than your  
principles of non-interference to deal with 
that monstrosity of a lost colony. It’s a bit  
of a reminder that the Wild Wests of the future 
might be full of a lot of scoundrels and might  
better resemble West World than Little House on 
the Prairie without some serious intervention  
and policing – which comes with its own risks.
In the absence of that, you’ve got to be able to  
hold on to what you’ve got. There’s a reason why 
there’s a gun culture in the US we don’t see as  
much elsewhere, and a lot of that is the fear the 
homesteader has that the nearest friendly sheriff  
might be days away, might not be very friendly, 
and you got to protect yourself, and that mindset  
is a fairly natural one for someone willing to go 
off to a distant land and fend for themselves too.  
Often including a dislike for authority, 
from legitimate ro paranoid reasons.  
That’s not the only way colonization can go down, 
but it is one I’d rate as highly likely to be  
common and we have to keep in mind, we’re not 
talking about a gunpowder rifle or six-shooter  
when we’re talking space colonization. We’re 
probably talking privately owned nukes or worse.
 
Consider – and also to segue into asteroid 
colonization – any ship or mass driver that  
can send resources back home can send explosives 
too, because the simple power behind such a device  
turns a ten tall ball of steel for building with 
into ten tons of hypersonic cannon slug that could  
wreck most towns, even without any payload 
of conventional or atomic explosives in it.  
You may have claimed a kilometer-wide asteroid 
in the belt to mine. This is plausible enough,  
there’s around a million of them, but now you 
need to refine your metals or ship them home,  
and power all your production and life support 
and so on. You’re probably doing this with a  
megawatt power supply or better. You probably 
got a 3D printer that can produce a lot of parts  
and you’re probably pretty technically skilled. 
You also know that if someone’s coming in to take  
your asteroid claim, they probably are doing 
it with a ship that can shoot those 10-ten  
hypersonic slugs at you, and probably follow it 
up with boarding pods full of killer death bots.  
And if you’re looking to attract workers, 
investors, family, or friends to come join  
you on your rock, your attractive amenities 
probably need to include a robust defense system.  
You probably need this even if this is all taking 
place inside a civilized and enlightened culture,  
because the law is an hour away by message 
and maybe months away by gunship and marine  
expeditionary force. Pirate stake jumpers might 
have more sophisticated options than big guns too,  
like brain washing and rewiring to make 
you cheerfully sign over your claim to them  
and tell the marines or sheriff arriving 
months later that all is indeed well.
 
Asteroids move constantly, some have families 
they stick loosely with but by and large they  
aren’t even in the same relative place 
with their neighbors from year to year,  
so your asteroid isn’t in the British Octant 
of the Asteroid Belt near the French Octant,  
where some commercial raiding might occur. Your 
asteroid is constantly changing neighbors, and  
ones who might have allies or corrupt officials 
who can show them your resource report and quietly  
delete or change the tiny little file designating 
and mapping your rock to swap it with another that  
wasn’t owned or a barren one they already owned. 
Then their thugs come in, cut your throats,  
throw you in the recycler, and nobody even knows. 
Especially in interstellar colonization contexts,  
trying to find out something like that happened 
will not only be hard, but getting justice for it  
a thousand years later when all the perpetrators 
might be long dead is tricky at best.
 
And mind you, this all assumes a state 
of play parallel to modern times,  
which are the best recorded and administered 
we’ve ever had with the longest arm of the law.  
There’s a quote from Sherlock Holmes that always 
impressed me with how things shift with time,  
having read it in the 1990s as a rural kid when 
urban areas were synonymous with high crime rates.  
He and Watson are out in the country in the 
tale “the Adventure of the Copper Beeches”  
and Watson is delighting in the rural beauty and 
homesteads but Holmes dislikes it, he says: 
 
“They always fill me with a certain horror. It 
is my belief, Watson, founded upon my experience,  
that the lowest and vilest alleys in London 
do not present a more dreadful record of sin  
than does the smiling and beautiful 
countryside. But the reason is very obvious.  
The pressure of public opinion can do in 
the town what the law cannot accomplish.  
There is no lane so vile that the scream of a 
tortured child, or the thud of a drunkard’s blow,  
does not beget sympathy and indignation among 
the neighbours, and then the whole machinery of  
justice is ever so close that a word of complaint 
can set it going, and there is but a step between  
the crime and the dock. But look at these lonely 
houses, each in its own fields, filled for the  
most part with poor ignorant folk who know little 
of the law. Think of the deeds of hellish cruelty,  
the hidden wickedness which may go on, year in, 
year out, in such places, and none the wiser.”
 
That’s a thing we need to contemplate for the 
future and whichever asteroid miner or potential  
interstellar colonist will be thinking about, 
before they head out there and certainly when  
they settle in. There is not much stopping one 
determined and wicked person from wreaking horrors  
upon their peers a trillion kilometers from the 
nearest police station. I think we can maintain  
the rule of law and order in the inner system and 
around the bigger planets, even while settling  
them, and around those first few prestigious 
colonies of Alpha Centauri or Epsilon Eridani.  
However, it would be hard to do and probably 
won’t hold out in the Oort belt or in distant  
colony worlds. Remember that space is 3D, there 
may be around ten thousand solar systems within a  
light century of us, ten times further away, 
there’s 10-cubed or a thousand times more,  
ten million solar systems await us in that 
space, not a million kilometer wide asteroids  
like in our Belt. And ten billion within 10,000 
light years of us, one for every person living  
right now. And critically, probably about 
one for every person living when the first  
interstellar colony ship is built.
It’s always hard to guess how populations  
might rise, but I would think that by the time 
humans number a hundred billion people, we will  
have claims on every rock out to the Kuiper Belt 
bigger than a kilometer across and we will have  
a few dozen well-funded interstellar colony ships 
headed to or arrived at new stars. But what then?  
Now that the technology and issues are 
well solved and available for any to use.  
Now that we have the sort of industrial might we 
picture us having in a few centuries. Anybody can  
run out to the stars and claim something. Will 
we blow up a ship headed to one? Would we even  
see them divert from an authorized trajectory, a 
couple light years out, to a new and unauthorized  
one? Who's doing the authorizing? And for that 
matter, who's protecting unauthorized colonies,  
which might be people with good and honest folks 
a few generations later, from piratic neighbors,  
who may themselves be descended from 
once honourable and law-abiding ones?
 
Sound like a good pitch for a Glorious 
Space Empire, but it’s the sorts of  
worries real people will be having when 
we’re trying to convince them to get on  
the ship to travel to dead worlds and bring 
them to life, that they may not even make it  
there or that they might get buried on that 
world after succumbing to human predators,  
not the challenges of terraforming.
Now to return to asteroids for a moment,  
and this applies to solar systems too, there 
is that higher-dimensional aspect to claims,  
like if you’re buying a wedge shaped chunk of 
asteroid rather than a spot of surface area.  
But also in the location in space AND time sense, 
that fourth dimension, because buying a distant  
Kuiper Belt Object and bringing it into the 
inner solar system might be an attractive option,  
you can smelt the thing en route into a 
big wad of solar collectors close to Sun,  
turning your cheap 1-kilometer wide metallic 
asteroid into a half dozen big O’Neill Cylinders,  
each able to house a million folks, surrounded 
by a cloud of solar collectors a millimeter thick  
and bigger than Texas, sucking in more power than 
the entire human civilization produces right now.
 
That is likely to be a big objective of a lot of 
asteroid developers and of course you presumably  
not only need ownership of that chunk of ‘Land’ 
but also the right to move it. Like owning some  
boring little chunk of Idaho you bought for a few 
hundred bucks then picked up and plopped next to  
NYC or London. So odds are ownership of asteroids 
is likely to have some limitations – like it gets  
voided or modified if it leaves a certain 
orbital path. Also there’s a good chance  
ownership in an eternal sense won’t even be 
offered, and it would be things like one-century  
leases or lease for certain uses, mineral 
extraction or building it into space habitats.
 
Speaking of higher dimensions, let’s close out by 
contemplating other types of space we might claim.  
Beyond new planets and asteroids or even the 
galaxy, it is quite possible that even without  
faster than light travel, fast hyperspace jump 
ships or warp drives, that we might see folks  
staking claims to whole galaxies. M87 is a massive 
galaxy of over a trillion stars 50 million light  
years from here, a prize if uninhabited, but a 
ship headed there, even at 90% of light speed,  
will still take 55 million years to arrive. Indeed 
a bit longer from Hubble Expansion during the  
trip. A ship moving 91% light speed instead would 
arrive more than half a million years sooner, and  
in doing so would have the time to colonize every 
single one of those trillion stars and raise them  
up to Kardashev-2 Dysons Swarms. Ones that could 
crush any lone colony ship arriving late to the  
game. So an authorized vessel making that voyage 
with top technology of their day might get passed  
en route by some rogue and cheap ship built a 
thousand years later for a hundredth the price. 
 
It raises the question of who is presuming 
to authorize intergalactic colonies,  
but how about those offering to let you colonize 
the multiverse? And as we looked at in our  
episodes on Multiverses, if they exist and can be 
traveled to, a near infinite number of worlds just  
like Earth only without humans, Earth 1 Million 
BC for instance, then the technology to reach  
them might be developed before an interstellar 
colony ship even reached Alpha Centauri. How do  
you manage claims on a trillion-trillion-trillion 
Near-Earth copies folks can step to through  
a simple portal and do you even need to?
And for that matter, what about black holes  
and baby universes, or staking claims on Universes 
someone made in their lab, or that they made on  
a computer but which is now home to thousands of 
people, some of whom are there by virtual headset,  
and some of whom were born there as 
digital people? Did creating a colony,  
or even a whole Universe, grant you authority over 
it and if so, to what degree and for how long?
 
One thing seems sure, the future is not 
likely to be short of the need for lawyers,  
in colonizing regular space or weirder space. 
Thankfully the one other thing space isn’t  
short of, is space, space for a trillion worlds 
and more, and maybe in spite of human history,  
we’ll play nice with each other and 
share when we get out there.
 
Before anyone can stake or jump claims in 
space we are going to need to survey and  
prospect those asteroid and there’s a lot of 
great videos on our early efforts to do that  
over on Curiosuity Stream, including Hayabusa 2, 
a look at the Japanese robotic probe that gave  
us direct subsurface samples of an asteroid.
Now a keystone of today’s topic is that claim  
staking of mines and resources is likely to be 
a strong motivator for space settlement, and  
I thought we would take a few minutes to discuss 
the general notion of asteroid mines being full of  
wealth and crashing commodity markets back here on 
Earth. So we’ll be doing that topic in an Extended  
Edition of today’s episode over on Nebula, and 
as usual those extended editions replace our  
normal sponsor reads and ads with typically about 
5-10 minutes of additional content, and those are  
essentially sponsored by Curiositystream.
Nebula, our streaming service, is a way  
for content creators to enjoy additional 
creative freedom and let’s folks sponsor  
our show there in exchange for getting 
those episode a couple days earlier,  
ad and sponsor free, and with those extended 
editions, and I wanted to thank everyone who's  
been helping support that as we’ve upgraded it 
and brought on tons of new features and creators.
 
Now you can subscribe to Nebula all by itself but 
we have also partnered up with CuriosityStream,  
the home of thousands of great educational videos, 
to offer Nebula for free as a bonus if you sign  
up for CuriosityStream using the link in our 
episode description. That lets you see content  
like Hayabusa 2: Asteroid Explosion, which is just 
one of the many amazing videos on Curiositystream,  
and all the great content over on 
Nebula from myself and many others.  
And you can get all that for less than $15 by 
using the link in the episode’s description.
 
Incidentally before we get to our 
schedule and finish out Scifi Sunday,  
I wanted to give a shout out to “The Teeming 
Universe: An Extraterrestrial Field Guide”  
written and illustrated by Chrisitan Cline, 
which features a bunch of hypothetical alien  
races and a discussion of each along with 
wonderful pictures and anatomical diagrams.  
Definitely a fun read full of good 
inspiration for alien biology.
 
All right, that will wrap us up for 
another Scifi Sunday here on SFIA,  
and we’ll be back for another next month where we 
will explore the concept of Telepathy. So we’re  
winding our way towards new years and only have 3 
more Thursday’s to go, starting this Thursday with  
a discussion of Vertical Farming, the technology 
that may let us nourish many billions of people  
while keeping our planet pristine. Then we’ll take 
a look at Escaping the Galaxy the week after that,  
if we need to get away from someone who has blown 
up our planet, before closing out the month and  
the year with a look at the Challenges we will be 
facing in the next 100 years. Then we will explode  
into 2022 with a look at using Nuclear Bombs to 
propel Spaceships. After that we will revisit  
our most popular series, Alien Civilizations 
& Civilizations at the End of Time, first for  
a look at hibernating alien civilizations that 
might be waiting till nearly the end of time,  
then for a look at the Big Rip, the cosmological 
model that ends the universe early and by being  
shredded, and we will ask how civilizations 
might manage that, or manage to survive that.
 
Now if you want to make sure you get 
notified when those episodes come out,  
make sure subscribe to the channel, and if you 
enjoyed the episode, don’t forget to hit the like  
button and share it with others. If you’d like to 
help support future episodes, you can donate to  
us on Patreon, or our website, IsaacArthur.net, 
and patreon and our website are linked in the  
episode description below, along with all of our 
various social media forums where you can get  
updates and chat with others about the concepts 
in the episodes and many other futuristic ideas.
 
Until next time, thanks for 
watching, and have a great week!
