So a giant asteroid is heading toward Earth
and you need to clear everybody out,
can you do it?
Today we are going to consider ways in which
you might evacuate a planet, and we might
as well begin with four notes.
First, how you do it depends entirely on how
much time and technology you have.
Second, it’s not just about getting folks
off a planet, you need some place to take
them.
Third, it’s not just about evacuating folks,
Earth is more than just people.
And fourth, you also need to ask whether or
not you should.
I don’t mean whether or not you should just
abandon a planet and its people to die, but
rather that in almost every case where you
might want to evacuate a planet, you can more
easily prevent or mitigate whatever disaster
would have caused the need to leave.
Alternatively you might not have time to evacuate
between when you find out about the danger
and when it hits.
As an example, a star might go supernova.
There are no supernova candidates close enough
to earth to wipe out all life, but if there
were, you’d only know it had gone supernova
for an instant before the killing effects
appeared.
What alerts you to this event is what kills
you, no warning.
Only if you had faster than light travel could
you detect a supernova and warn people in
time, and if you had years to prepare for
the incoming event, you could arrange to put
a shield between you and it.
Some giant gas balloon to absorb it, a heck
of a task but nowhere near as hard as evacuating
a full planet’s population and ecosystem.
Similarly, the Earth doesn’t get hit by
big asteroids very frequently, like the one
that ended the dinosaurs 65 million years
ago.
The bigger they are the less frequently they
come, and there’s a roughly inverse relationship
between size and frequency.
It takes a very big one to do enough damage
you’d want to evacuate in advance, but if
you can evacuate that means you’ve got spaceships
and you could just drop a big nuke on the
asteroid, blowing it up or nudging it onto
a new and safe trajectory.
Even if you have to use several high-yield
devices and want to send multiple ships for
redundancy, that’s still way easier than
moving billions of people on those same spaceships.
That’s all assuming you’ve got some place
to move them to.
Though the good news is that if you have the
ability to have made some other place livable
for humans you do have the potential ability
to move them there.
Even if we had a billion rockets to launch
everyone into space right now, without some
place to send them that launch is rather pointless.
That raises the triage issue because we often
look at making some bunker to move people
into during such a disaster, and doing that
here on Earth, but we could potentially move
some folks to a hastily built moonbase instead.
How you pick those allegedly lucky people
is something that’s very popular to look
at in fiction and we’ll consider it today
too, and draw different conclusions I suspect.
For my part I’m not quite sure why everyone
always figures you’d want to make sure you
got your scientists off planet or into the
bunker, that’s always struck me as missing
a key point but we’ll get to that in a bit.
In such triage disaster stories, which are
older than history, you have to remember you
are not just needing to save humans.
Noah had to bring along 2 of every animal,
and we have quite a few parallel tales out
of antiquity.
That’s a little more daunting of a task
viewed in the light of how many species of
animals, and plants, we know of nowadays,
especially since outside of a flood you need
to bring along the oceanic critters too, but
amusingly this is actually easier for us in
modern times, since you could potentially
carry all that in one briefcase, more on that
in a bit too.
Returning to our fourth point, about whether
or not evacuation is the best path, we’d
need to know what the scenario is.
The best known being the Supernova and the
Asteroid but there are plenty more.
Most of them do actually have this same problem
though, where evacuation is either not the
best approach because you can prevent the
disaster more easily or just can’t know
about it in time to act.
For example, in an alien invasion scenario,
building warships might be more effective
than building refugee ships, even though they’d
probably get wrecked by an invader, because
the problem with evacuating against an intelligent
rather than natural disaster is that when
they’re done obliterating your planet they
can pursue the survivors.
As a rule, asteroids don’t get back up to
chase fleeing ships.
It’s an amusing aspect about the difficulties
of hiding things in space that the most covert
way to send ships out is to send them in the
general direction of the oncoming enemy, since
you can at least point the engine away from
them, since that’s the easiest part to detect
and use to determine their vector.
If you send a bunch of scouts out that double
as colony ships, spread over a wide angle,
the ones that do get intercepted at least
give you intelligence on who is approaching
from what angle and how many of them there
are.
Also, unlike our intuition from down on the
ground, it’s actually way harder to chase
someone fleeing generally toward you than
away from you since you have to stop and turn
around, which takes huge amounts of time and
energy, whereas someone fleeing away from
you only requires you to tell part of your
fleet not to slow down and to alter their
heading a bit.
Space combat is often rather counter-intuitive,
as we saw in the Space Warfare episode, and
interstellar conflicts more so, as we’ll
see in the Interstellar Warfare episode next
month.
Another popular one is that a black hole hits
the planet or get made in a lab and starts
eating it.
If an actual stellar mass black hole comes
coasting into our system, and they often do,
since they frequently get ejected at high
speed from where they were made, there’s
not much you can do but evacuate.
That’s insanely improbable, space is huge
and black holes are very uncommon, and the
odds of one entering our solar system on a
direct path for Earth is ridiculously slim,
but they don’t have to hit us to wreck the
solar system or to chuck Earth right out of
the solar system.
We’ll save that case as an actual example
of an evacuation, since moving your entire
planet through interstellar space if your
star is getting ready to die is one approach
you can use.
The one made in a lab though is not really
a case for concern.
You could hypothetically make a black hole
in a lab, the most frequent method proposed
is a Kugelblitz black hole, something we’ve
discussed a lot as a possible type of powerplant
or spaceship engine.
Those who remember that discussion know that
small black holes don’t live long, and are
so tiny it’s nigh impossible to stuff matter
into them, exactly backwards of the usual
perception of them chewing everything up.
Most behavior of black holes is strictly theoretical,
but if the current preferred theories are
right, a lab-grown black hole would just oscillate
through the planet, so small it cheerfully
flew through dense rock without hitting anything,
until it died.
Even a decently big one, massing in around
a mountain, that someone maybe made in another
system and shot at us, would just fly right
through the planet, as it’s only as big
as an atomic nuclei but still carrying all
that mass and inertia.
It would kill you if hit you, that’s a lot
of gravity compacted into a tiny spot, but
it would just fly through the planet and continue
on its journey,
You need a rather massive one without much
speed relative to the planet for it to be
able to get stuck down in the core and start
chewing on things, and I don’t think we
actually have to worry about scientists accidentally
crunching an entire moon into a black hole
on Earth’s surface.
Moons are terribly hard to get into a laboratory.
Depending on the size of the black hole, if
you just teleported one in there, you could
either all be killed 20 milliseconds later
when its gravity, which travels at lightspeed,
reaches the surface of the planet and shreds
everyone from tidal forces, or it could sit
there for millions of year slowly chewing
up matter.
There are very compact and small artificial
ones, as mentioned, that are actually quite
hard to stuff matter into faster than they
spew hawking radiation out, which at just
the right size would create an equal outward
pressure causing nothing to happen.
That is an example of when you might have
a doomed planet you can do nothing about but
have plenty of time to prepare for, even if
it is absurdly improbable.
And that’s a key point, because again in
most of these scenarios if you’ve got time
to evacuate and the capacity to do so, you
typically have the ability to prevent or otherwise
remedy the disaster you are facing.
Someone lets loose a virus or organism that
is killing off your ecosystem so you need
to find a new planet and terraform it, sounds
good but it’s a lot easier to dome over
and sterilize some places to be safe from
it.
At which point you can sterilize your planet
and re-terraform it rather than do that for
another planet.
And if you can’t isolate the organism to
prevent it getting into your domes, I’m
not quite sure how’d you isolate it from
getting into your spaceships and terraforming
equipment and just infecting that new planet.
Now the episode is about evacuating the planet,
any planet not just Earth, though that’s
our main focus, and I wouldn’t consider
it much of an evacuation if you’re only
getting off a tiny seed to plant elsewhere.
If a hurricane hits some city, we don’t
evacuate it by grabbing one busload of breeding
age residents.
Still, let’s discuss that scenario and triage.
You’ve got a bunker that will survive the
impact or a spaceship that can carry off some
folks to a moonbase or space station.
Fair enough and it’s better than nothing,
but for some reason folks always want to fill
these with ‘our best and brightest’.
Which makes sense but the criteria seems a
bit weird if it’s including Nobel-prize
winning theoretical scientists, which for
some reason seems to be the folks nobody argues
about.
Maybe because it’s science fiction so folks
just figure the science is important.
Refugees don’t need theoreticians, you won’t
be getting any new science done for many generations
and they’ll need to relearn it from books
anyway, which take up a lot less resources
and space, especially digitized.
You also probably don’t need to keep such
projects secret, I’m sure you would get
a fair number of folks turned nihilistic and
causing problems but I don’t think it would
be as bad as we often see in films about such
impending disasters.
Anyway even despotic governments tend to leak
secrets like a sieve and your typical democracy
is so bad at keeping things like that quiet
I’d be impressed if they managed to keep
it hushed for more than a few days.
So you might as well take advantage of the
options presented by an informed public to
build bigger and better ships or bunkers because
it’s not like you’d have a choice.
Any form of evacuation or bunkering up is
going to involve a lot of hard choices of
course, it is fundamentally a type of triage.
You have to figure out what you can do before
deciding what you can include.
Ideally you want a nice fortified and well-stocked
fallout shelter in your basement, complete
with copies of important reference texts,
but if you’ve got an hour to prepare for
a nuclear war, building bookshelves down in
your basement isn’t a good use of time.
How do you pick people?
Lotteries are a popular option but have always
struck me as a bit cowardly, just a way to
alleviate guilt at having to come up with
a selection method and apply it, so you can
tell people who don’t get into the bunker
“Fate screwed you, not me”.
One modern advantage we do have though is
that we don’t have to select people for
their genetics or romantic preference because
we don’t have to rely on traditional means
of repopulation.
By default, under that, you want as a big
and healthy a genetic pool as you can and
preferably with most kids having half rather
than full-blooded siblings.
We can artificially inseminate women or even
implant fertilized embryos of folks who aren’t
going into the bunker.
So you are probably more interested in parenting
skills of a person than if they’ve got good
genes.
Romantic preferences or genetic defects cease
being a vital consideration.
You still have plenty of others, and expertise
in a given field is never going to be the
sole criteria.
You want to know what other skills they have,
their age matters too, what if they are married,
are you looking at their spouse’s skills
as they are essentially a package, what about
their kids?
You have to include families, not just because
you need them but because the end of the world
is going to be rough on anyone’s mind - unless
they’re a sociopath maybe but I don’t
think you want to repopulate off a bunker
full of sociopaths - and making someone face
doomsday with their spouse or children left
outside is likely to result in folks so consumed
by grief they can't function.
It’s not a choice I’d ever want to make,
so I don’t know what criteria I’d design
if it were up to me, but feel free to discuss
in the comments section below.
I’d be curious what folks come up with.
Of course it also depends on how long you
need to bunker up and what you’re bunkering
up against.
If you’ve got to last a century your profile
looks a lot different then if it's just a
few years, you’re not selecting in the former
for parenting skills because you aren’t
repopulating off those initial people, just
maintaining, it will be their great-grandchildren
doing the repopulating.
We’re not stocking a bunker on Earth of
course, but one built here is going to be
a good place to ride out any disaster that
doesn’t kill the whole planet, easier to
rebuild out of bunkers here than on the Moons
or Mars, even ignoring that building and stocking
those bunkers here is much easier.
So there’s a lot of levels to evacuation
and what you can do relies as much on your
technology and preparation times as what the
specific threat is.
To answer the obvious question though, yes
we could get enough people off Earth to the
Moon with modern technology in a fashion that
would probably let them survive.
Saving our records and even our ecology is
ironically now the easiest part of that endeavor,
it’s not Noah’s cargo that you need a
big ship to preserve nowadays, it’s enough
equipment to support Noah’s family to preserve
some working intelligence to revive stuff
later on.
We can actually store DNA digitally and print
the stuff these days, and frozen embryos don’t
take up much room, nor is that hard to keep
them frozen on the moon.
So even if a species does go extinct in such
a disaster, you have a chance to bring it
back, if you have the DNA, sort of like in
Jurassic Park, which is our Audible Book of
the Month.
We’ll be examining how you go about resurrecting
species, even if you don’t have their complete
DNA, in two weeks, along with examining some
of the concepts from that novel.
Needless to say, digital copies of all our
history, art, and literature, even including
many redundant backups and a lot of material
that probably isn’t vital to humanity’s
continuance, won’t take up much space.
Fundamentally the challenge there is making
sure you have a self-sustaining colony or
base, everything else is the same as setting
up a normal off-world colony except there’s
no one to call on from home for help with
problems or resupply or rescue.
All the stuff you need to revive humanity,
our civilization, and Earth’s ecosystem
though is pretty easy to pack along.
It would be a heck of challenge to set up
a Moon or Mars base and one big enough to
be self-sustaining, but if it is priority
#1 for the entire planet, or even just one
large nation, it’s probably doable even
amid the chaos and economic collapses you’d
expect to be going on.
Remember NASA’s budget runs about one-thousandth
of the US GDP, and we rarely bulk produce
the stuff it needs and try to gold-plate everything.
In a scenario like this you aren’t building
one or two of something, you’re milling
out thousands of them, and you don’t care
if 1 in 10 explodes on the pad if it lets
you produce twice as many with the same efforts.
I would not want to place a wager on their
success with such a venture, trying to get
a Moonbase for hundreds of people ready in
maybe a couple years, designed so that they
could support themselves and repair and expand
it too, but I wouldn’t call it hopeless
odds either, and it’s not like you have
anything to lose by trying.
As technology improves this gets easier and
you can get more ambitious too, but I would
say this is the last century where humanity
faces any risk of extinction by a non-intelligent
agency.
We’ve only just gotten into the game, so
our current hand happens to be rather poor,
but we are at least in the game nowadays,
we’d have a chance of salvaging our civilization
even if the planet was going to be destroyed,
if we had some forewarning.
Jump ahead in time maybe even just a few decades
and extinction from any sort of natural disaster
should be off the table.
As I said though, an evacuation is not the
same as evading extinction.
The goal of an evacuation is to get at least
a large percentage of your people out of any
area safely, and preferably all of them and
their stuff too.
So what would it take to achieve that?
What technologies would we need to evacuate
every single person, or nearly so, along with
a lot of our most prized trinkets and living
rather than frozen samples of our ecology?
Now if your civilization is big enough, like
if you lived inside a Dyson swarm, evacuation
is easy enough, such a civilization wouldn’t
notice or be hampered by several billion refugees
anymore than the a major modern nation would
be by a single person.
They’ve got billions of ships lying around,
actually they probably build that many every
day, and their challenges aren’t getting
people off and housed, but how to cram the
pyramids into a bulk cargo lifter and which
habitats are offering to store them.
At that scale you aren’t trying to rescue
the people, you’re trying to figure out
how to peel chunks of the planet’s crust
off and stick them in some ring habitat without
wrecking them in the process by keeping the
gravity pointing in about the right direction
and strength.
I’ll come back to that in a bit.
Also if you are surprised I’m suggesting
wholesale transport of entire strips of the
planet’s surface, welcome to SFIA, since
this is obviously your first visit here.
We don’t really know the meaning of over
the top.
As is often the case though the hidden problem
here is actually heat.
If you want to get everybody off a planet
in, say, a month, that would mean transporting
a couple hundred million people a day, not
even including any other cargo.
You might have a near endless supply of spaceships,
most of which are probably not designed for
landing on planets either, but the sheer heat
of all those things undergoing re-entry and
then blowing out millions of tons of superhot
propellant to get back to orbit might kill
everyone from the sheer heat they give off.
To avoid that, and the problem that most of
those ships probably aren’t meant for landing
on planets or leaving them, you need to be
employing one of the options we looked at
in the Upward Bound series last year, Space
Elevators or Skyhook and mass driver combinations,
or preferably Orbital rings.
The good news is anybody with an existing
fleet big enough to move a planetary population
probably has those already.
Now, you don’t necessarily need a huge ship
either, again it bears a lot of similarities
to the concepts and technologies you need
for normal space colonization.
Humans have a volume of considerably less
than a cubic meter, our density is just a
bit less than water and water is 1 kilogram
per liter or 1000 kilograms per cubic meter.
So you could potentially pack a dozen or more
people into a cubic meter, at least if you’ve
got a chainsaw on hand.
But if we had the technology to freeze people,
or rather to unfreeze and revive them, you
could presumably put people into pods of about
that volume, a couple meters long but not
a meter wide and tall, in fact your typical
casket is about a cubic meter.
So you’d need a ship that could store 7.6
billion people at the moment, and at cubic
meter each that is a cube just under 2 kilometers
on a side or 1.2 miles, and massing at least
8 billion tons.
Which is huge and massive but actually a bit
smaller and lighter than the colonial arkship
Unity we discussed in the various interstellar
travel and colonization episodes.
It’s also on size and mass range with a
lot of habitats we discuss building in other
episodes, and I mean modest ones like O’Neill
cylinders not the actual megastructures like
Bishops Rings, Banks Orbitals, or Mega Earths.
So when your civilization is at the point
that it can build stuff like an O’neill
cylinder it is at the stage where it can evacuate
the whole planetary population, if you stick
people into cryo or some other stasis.
You wouldn’t have to build much bigger to
include everyone’s pets and most priceless
heirlooms, and the ecosystem preservation
is easier.
There may be a million species but only a
small percent of that are large creatures,
you don’t need a lot of space for a sack
of redwood seeds or frozen ants or bacteria.
For most of the larger critters you do need
parents even if you’ve got artificial wombs
to gestate embryos in, but not a lot.
You don’t need a thousand frozen elephants,
just frozen embryos to implant in a few, there’s
no genetic bottlenecking if the mother isn’t
related to the infants she’s bearing and
raising nor they to each other.
Of course carting a blue whale into orbit
is likely to be an interesting exercise but
by mass and volume they are only the equivalent
of a couple thousands humans and you need
storage for 7 billion.
Needless to say you don’t freeze everyone,
the unfrozen, as many as you can support,
are going to be busy building up support structure
and habitats so we can start unfreezing people
and organisms, the former of whom will go
right to work building more structure and
habitats.
By the way, if you’re curious, the total
biomass of Earth is somewhere in the trillions
of tons region, nobody’s got a terribly
good estimate on the actual wet weight of
all total life forms but it should be on an
order of about 1000 times what humanity is,
so if you wanted to rescue every organism,
not just the species, your big frozen corpse
cube needs to be about ten times wider.
If the mega-freezer seems too big you can
also just decapitate everyone, we normally
only freeze the heads these days, and generally
speaking the tech needed to revive people
is pretty much the same needed to regrow bodies
anyway.
This is the first state at which I’d say
you could rescue all the people on Earth,
and it does require a pretty bulky orbital
ring to pull it off fast, and obviously the
technology to revive people from cryo, but
I would guess on both being on the table before
this century is out, the latter is actually
harder, but you technically only need the
technology to safely freeze those folks, and
that would be an example where you’d want
your scientists in that field to be among
the best and brightest you saved, or in this
case, did not turn into a popsicle.
You can’t store people indefinitely in cryo,
though we don’t know for how long yet and
it would depend on your technology, so building
places to put them and feed them when you
revive them and making sure you have the tech
to do so is obviously your focus after that.
Another possible route is to abandon biology
altogether, as we discussed in the Hidden
Aliens episode, if you have managed to figure
out how to scan and upload minds to live digitally,
storage of those minds is actually not a big
issue.
As we discussed with mind backups in Digital
Death some months back, we don’t know quite
how much memory is needed to store a brain,
but the lower end values make it in the affordable
zone with modern tech, and even the high-end
estimates were viable.
I discourage folks from assuming computers
and all their associated components will just
keep getting better at an exponential rate
but I’d feel pretty comfortable assuming
in a few decades we could do at least an order
of magnitude or two better and that ought
to be more than enough to cram everybody’s
brain on a hard drive a lot more compact than
a frozen body, or even a head.
That’s assuming commercial hard drives,
we can store data a lot more compact than
that already, but for this kind of operation
cheap bulk production is the important part.
Those are the early, cheap and dirty ways
to evacuate a planet, and again I’d be rather
surprised if that was outside our ability
going into the 22nd century, there are quite
a few other options if one or more of those
techs turns out to be way harder than we think,
but that strikes me as the most plausible
route.
Going further into the future, if you want
to avoid digital uploading, the key thing
is having places to put people that can support
them that already exist and can rapidly expand
their hydroponics and air and water recycling.
Keep going further ahead and people probably
will be talking not about evacuating the people
from the planet but the planet from the planet.
It’s an insane exercise in energy expenditure
to try lifting up a few square kilometers
of forest along with the dirt the roots are
in.
You’d need to dome over and under and on
the sides like a big terrarium then lift that
that thing into orbit, probably on huge super
strong tethers between orbital rings since
the heat released by whatever megarockets
you were using would roast everything nearby,
yet the actual big trick is maintaining gravity
in that area.
As you lift it up into space, though not into
orbit, gravity will drop a little from the
altitude, but it would cease entirely if you
were orbiting of course.
Then you need to take those tethers and swing
the chunk of landscape in a circle to provide
centrifugal spin, which the tethers can handle
since it’s the exact same force gravity
was previously exerting on them.
Trying to do that while keeping apparent gravity
at about the same strength and direction is
probably not going to work too well but you
ought to be able to do it without everything
falling over or flying sideways.
I’d say it’s more trouble than it’s
worth but if your civilization is actually
doing this in the first place you’ve probably
got very different relative values, and we
have gone to some pretty extreme lengths to
move large bulky human relics around safely.
Obviously a lot easier if you’ve got access
to something like artificial gravity but as
usual I’m trying to limit us to options
inside known science, or at least not banned
by it, even if that means rather extreme things
in terms of size and manpower.
Of course you might decide you just want to
move the whole planet, and that is doable.
We’ve discussed some of the techniques before
and will probably do an episode on moving
planets in the future, but the big one is
that same acceleration and gravity issue once
you start applying thrust.
Lighting the planet so it doesn’t freeze
if you need to move far from the Sun, potentially
through interstellar space, is actually not
a big concern in terms of equipment or energy
compared to what’s needed to get the planet
moving.
The issue is that a planet, especially the
biosphere, isn’t really well suited for
rapid acceleration, which as Einstein told
us is effectively the same as gravity.
Move some people on a platform at maybe a
tenth of gee and they’ll notice it but be
fine, move an ocean like that and walls of
water are going to hit your coasts and stay
there till you stop.
This is what causes our tides after all.
Now the force exerted by the moon on the earth
is probably reasonably safe to use and maybe
a bit higher, so I will say 10 microgees or
.1 millimeter per second per second.
Doesn’t sound like much, and it really isn’t,
it would take 3 hours to get up walking speed
and a thousand years of continuous acceleration
to get up to 10% of light speed, probably
about as fast as you’d ever want to move
a planet even if you wrapped it around in
shielding and point defenses systems to deal
with cosmic radiation and collisions.
The amount of energy needed to move the planet
is vastly larger than what you need to light
it if you could no longer use the Sun, unless
you are going a lot slower, making the trip
to a new solar system take a million years
rather than a few thousand.
You’d probably push it up to speed with
lasers powered by the sun and down with lasers
some colony fleet had built at the destination,
with some very shiny mirror sphere around
the planet, but alternatively you could build
a thick walled sphere around the planet to
fill with fusion fuel and provide shielding.
Hollow spheres exert no net gravity on things
inside them so it can be as massive as you
need without bothering Earth, though you would
need to use a lot of active support to keep
that sphere a sphere and transmit that pushing
force around evenly.
But that’s your final option if you want
to evacuate the whole planet in a very literal
sense, just pack up and move to another solar
system.
Everything we discussed today is pretty extreme,
even if the degree of difficulty between the
options is immense, mountains next to mole
hills, but is inside the realms of known science,
obviously other technologies might make it
much easier, but we can see that as immense
as the task is, it is actually doable, you
can evacuate Earth if you need to.
Next week we will be looking at various cosmological
theories for the Fate of the Universe, from
Heat Death to the Big Rip or Big Crunch and
many others.
As it’s a longer topic we will be doing
a two parter and will be joined by Astrophysicist
Paul Sutter, with part two over on his channel
immediately following part one.
The week after that we will explore the notion
of resurrecting dead species and some novel
approaches to ecological preservation.
For alerts when those and other episodes come
out, make sure to subscribe to the channel.
And if you enjoyed this episode, please hit
the like button and share it with others.
You can also support our content over on Patreon.
Until next time, thanks for watching and have a great week!
